The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Physics-Guided Foundation Model for Scientific Discovery:
An Application to Aquatic Science
Runlong Yu1 , Chonghao Qiu1 , Robert Ladwig2 , Paul Hanson3 , Yiqun Xie4 , Xiaowei Jia1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh
2
Department of Ecoscience, Aarhus University
3
Center for Limnology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
Department of Geographical Sciences, University of Maryland
{ruy59,chq29,xiaowei}@pitt.edu, rladwig@ecos.au.dk, pchanson@wisc.edu, xie@umd.edu
Abstract

With advances in data collection driven by improved sensor technologies, there is a growing interest in using machine
learning (ML) to extract complex data patterns for scientific
problems (Willard et al. 2022; He et al. 2023; Wang et al.
2024; Xu et al. 2024). However, most ML approaches are
only tested for isolated and simple tasks while still being
limited in applicability to complex real-world systems with
interacting and non-stationary processes. Recently, foundation models have shown great promise in tasks like vision
and natural language processing by pre-training over large
datasets (Bommasani et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2023; Ye et al.
2024). These models also offer tremendous opportunities for
scientific modeling due to their ability to harness large and
heterogeneous data and adapt to diverse downstream tasks.
However, direct application of existing foundation models
to scientific problems often leads to serious false discoveries
due to several major challenges: 1. Data requirements: Advanced ML models can often outperform traditional empirical models (e.g., regression), but these models require extensive training data, which is often scarce in real scientific
applications. 2. Effectiveness of pre-training: Unsupervised
pre-training has been shown to significantly boost the performance of many existing foundation models and mitigate
the need for large data in downstream tasks. However, traditional pre-training tasks are not well aligned with scientific
modeling tasks and thus can be less effective. The datasets
used to pre-train existing models also have little overlap with
target scientific data. 3. Physical consistency and generalizability: With the absence of physical knowledge, existing
foundation models can only learn statistical patterns from
available data. Although the model could perform well in
similar training data distribution, the patterns extracted by
ML models may significantly violate some established physical relationships (e.g., mass and energy conservation). Consequently, these models can struggle to generalize to unseen
scenarios. 4. Learning multiple tasks: Most existing foundation models for scientific problems still focus on single prediction tasks (Li et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024) while largely ignoring the dependencies among multiple physical variables.
This restricts their utility in complex systems characterized
by multiple tasks and numerous influencing features.
To address these challenges, in this paper, we propose
a Physics-Guided Foundation Model (PGFM) framework.
Instead of relying on complex model architecture, PGFM

Physics-guided machine learning (PGML) has become a
prevalent approach in studying scientific systems due to its
ability to integrate scientific theories for enhancing machine
learning (ML) models. However, most PGML approaches are
tailored to isolated and relatively simple tasks, which limits their applicability to complex systems involving multiple
interacting processes and numerous influencing features. In
this paper, we propose a Physics-Guided Foundation Model
(PGFM) that combines pre-trained ML models and physicsbased models and leverages their complementary strengths
to improve the modeling of multiple coupled processes. To
effectively conduct pre-training, we construct a simulated environmental system that encompasses a wide range of influencing features and various simulated variables generated by
physics-based models. The model is pre-trained in this system to adaptively select important feature interactions guided
by multi-task objectives. We then fine-tune the model for each
specific task using true observations, while maintaining consistency with established physical theories, such as the principles of mass and energy conservation. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this methodology in modeling water temperature and dissolved oxygen dynamics in real-world lakes. The
proposed PGFM is also broadly applicable to a range of scientific fields where physics-based models are being used.

Introduction
Physics-based models of dynamical systems are often used
to study scientific systems. For instance, scientists in aquatic
science build physics-based models to simulate different water quality variables such as water temperature and dissolved
oxygen (DO) concentrations, which are vital for assessing
ecosystem health and water security. Similar models are also
applied in agriculture (Jia et al. 2019a), geology (Reichstein et al. 2019), climate science (Faghmous and Kumar
2014), and bio-medicine (Yazdani et al. 2020). Despite their
widespread use, physics-based models face limitations due
to the simplified representations of complex physical processes and the challenges of selecting appropriate parameters (Jia et al. 2019b). Additional complexity arises when
coupling these models to perform multiple tasks due to the
dependencies amongst physical processes, e.g., DO concentrations are highly dependent on water temperature profiles.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28548

