The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Effects of Momentum in Implicit Bias of Gradient Flow for
Diagonal Linear Networks
Bochen Lyu1, 2 , He Wang3 , Zheng Wang4 , Zhanxing Zhu* 2
1

DataCanvas Lab, DataCanvas, Beijing, China
2
University of Southampton, UK
3
UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science, UK
4
University of Leeds, UK
bochen.lv@gmail.com, he wang@ucl.ac.uk, z.wang5@leeds.ac.uk, z.zhu@soton.ac.uk
Abstract

In particular, Soudry et al. (2018) pioneered the study of
implicit bias of GD and showed that GD selects the maxmargin solution for logistic regression on separable dataset.
For regression problems, the simplest setting is the linear regression problem, where GD and its stochastic variant, SGD,
are biased towards the interpolation solution that is closest
to the initialization measured by the Euclidean distance (Ali,
Dobriban, and Tibshirani 2020). In order to investigate the
implicit bias for DNNs, diagonal linear network, a simplified version of deep learning models, has been proposed. For
this model, Woodworth et al. (2020); Azulay et al. (2021);
Yun, Krishnan, and Mobahi (2021) showed that the solution selected by GD is equivalent to that of a constrained
norm minimization problem interpolating between `1 and `2
norms up to the magnitude of the initialization scale. Pesme,
Pillaud-Vivien, and Flammarion (2021) further characterized that adding stochastic noise to GD additionally induces
a regularization effect equivalent to reducing the initialization magnitude.
Besides these fruitful progresses, Gunasekar et al. (2018);
Wang et al. (2022) studied the implicit bias of momentumbased methods for one-layer linear models and showed that
they have the same implicit bias as GD. Jelassi and Li
(2022), on the other hand, revealed that momentum-based
methods have better generalization performance than GD
for a special linear CNN in classification problems. Ghosh
et al. (2023) conducted a model-agnostic analysis of O(⌘ 2 )
approximate continuous version of HB from the perspective of IGR (Barrett and Dherin 2021). Momentum methods adopt a two-step manner and can induce different dynamics compared to vanilla GD: from the perspective of
their O(⌘)-continuous approximation modelling, the approximation for GD is a first-order ODE (gradient flow, GF):
d /dt = rL( ), while, as a comparison, the approximation for momentum-based methods can be seen as a damped
second-order Hamiltonian dynamic with potential L( ):

This paper targets on the regularization effect of momentumbased methods in regression settings and analyzes the popular diagonal linear networks to precisely characterize the
implicit bias of continuous versions of heavy-ball (HB) and
Nesterov’s method of accelerated gradients (NAG). We show
that, HB and NAG exhibit different implicit bias compared to
GD for diagonal linear networks, which is different from the
one for classic linear regression problem where momentumbased methods share the same implicit bias with GD. Specifically, the role of momentum in the implicit bias of GD is
twofold: (a) HB and NAG induce extra initialization mitigation effects similar to SGD that are beneficial for generalization of sparse regression; (b) the implicit regularization
effects of HB and NAG also depend on the initialization of
gradients explicitly, which may not be benign for generalization. As a result, whether HB and NAG have better generalization properties than GD jointly depends on the aforementioned twofold effects determined by various parameters such
as learning rate, momentum factor, and integral of gradients.
Our findings highlight the potential beneficial role of momentum and can help understand its advantages in practice such
as when it will lead to better generalization performance.

1

Introduction

Extensive deep learning tasks aim to solve the optimization
problem
(1)
arg min L( )
where L is the loss function and is the parameter. Gradient descent (GD) and its variants underpin such optimization
of parameters for deep learning, thus understanding these
simple yet highly effective algorithms is crucial to unveil
the thrilling generalization performance of deep neural networks (DNNs). Recently, Soudry et al. (2018); Ji and Telgarsky (2019); Lyu and Li (2020); Pesme, Pillaud-Vivien,
and Flammarion (2021); Azulay et al. (2021); Nacson et al.
(2019) have made significant efforts in this direction to understand GD-based methods through the lens of implicit
bias, which states that GD and its variants are implicitly biased towards selecting particular solutions among all global
minimum.

d2
d
+ rL( ) = 0,
+
2
dt
dt
which was first observed by Polyak (1964). Due to the clear
difference in their dynamics, it is natural and intriguing to
ask from the theoretical point of view:
(Q): Will adding momentum to GD change its implicit bias
for DNNs?
m

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19242

