The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stable Mean Teacher for Semi-supervised Video Action Detection
Akash Kumar, Sirshapan Mitra, Yogesh Singh Rawat
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{akash.kumar, sirshapan.mitra, yogesh}@ucf.edu

Abstract

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an active research area
with two prominent approaches: iterative proxy-label (Rizve
et al. 2020) and consistency based methods (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017). Iterative proxy-label methods, although effective, are not suitable for the video domain due to their
lengthy training cycles. On the other hand, consistencybased approaches offer end-to-end solutions, requiring only
a single pass through the dataset for training. While most
of the existing research in this area has focused on image
classification (Rasmus et al. 2015; Tarvainen and Valpola
2017; Sajjadi, Javanmardi, and Tasdizen 2016; Laine and
Aila 2017) and object detection (Xu et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2022; Liu, Ma, and Kira 2022), limited efforts have been
made in the video domain with works only focusing on classification (Jing et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Kumar et al.
2023). We also observe that Mean Teacher (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017) based approaches have demonstrated superior performance among consistency-based methods. Building upon the success of student-teacher learning in the image domain, we extend it to the video domain for spatiotemporal detection tasks.
Video action detection, in contrast to classification and
object detection, poses additional challenges for semisupervised learning. It is a complex task that combines both
classification and spatio-temporal localization which suffers
performance degradation under limited availability of labels.
Moreover, the detections have to be temporally coherent
in addition to spatial correctness. Therefore, it is challenging to generate high-quality spatio-temporal pseudo-labels
for videos. To overcome these challenges, we propose Stable Mean Teacher, a simple end-to-end framework. It is an
adaptation of Mean Teacher where we study both classification and spatio-temporal consistencies to effectively utilize
the pseudo-labels generated for unlabeled videos.
Stable Mean Teacher consists of a novel ErrOr Recovery (EoR) module which learns from the student’s mistakes
on labeled samples and transfers this learning to the teacher
for improving the spatio-temporal pseudo-labels generated
on unlabeled set. EoR improves pseudo labels but ignores
temporal coherency which is important for action detection.
To overcome this, we introduce Difference of Pixels (DoP),
a simple and novel constraint that focuses on temporal coherence and helps in generating consistent spatio-temporal
pseudo-labels from unlabeled samples.

In this work, we focus on semi-supervised learning for
video action detection. Video action detection requires spatiotemporal localization in addition to classification and a limited amount of labels makes the model prone to unreliable
predictions. We present Stable Mean Teacher, a simple endto-end student-teacher based framework that benefits from
improved and temporally consistent pseudo labels. It relies on a novel ErrOr Recovery (EoR) module which learns
from students’ mistakes on labeled samples and transfers
this to the teacher to improve pseudo-labels for unlabeled
samples. Moreover, existing spatio-temporal losses does not
take temporal coherency into account and are prone to temporal inconsistencies. To overcome this, we present Difference of Pixels (DoP), a simple and novel constraint focused on temporal consistency which leads to coherent temporal detections. We evaluate our approach on four different spatio-temporal detection benchmarks, UCF101-24, JHMDB21, AVA, and Youtube-VOS. Our approach outperforms
the supervised baselines for action detection by an average
margin of 23.5% on UCF101-24, 16% on JHMDB21, and,
3.3% on AVA. Using merely 10% and 20% of data, it provides a competitive performance compared to the supervised
baseline trained on 100% annotations on UCF101-24 and JHMDB21 respectively. We further evaluate its effectiveness on
AVA for scaling to large-scale datasets and Youtube-VOS for
video object segmentation demonstrating its generalization
capability to other tasks in the video domain.

Code —
https://github.com/AKASH2907/stable-mean-teacher
Project Page — https://akash2907.github.io/smt webpage

Introduction
Video action detection is a challenging problem with several
real-world applications in security, assistive living, robotics,
and autonomous-driving. What makes the task of video
action detection challenging is the requirement of spatiotemporal localization in addition to video-level activity classification. This requires annotations on each video frame,
which can be cost and time intensive. In this work, we focus
on semi-supervised learning (SSL) to develop label efficient
method for video action detection.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4419

