The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Quantum-inspired Non-homologous Representation Constraint Mechanism
for Long-tail Senses of Word Sense Disambiguation
Junwei Zhang, Xiaolin Li*
Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
zhangjunwei@him.cas.cn, xiaolinli@ieee.org

Abstract

• LTSs are rarely used, which leads to insufficient training
samples;
• LTSs lack clear and distinguishable definitions, which
leads to inaccurate representation of word sense definitions.
Among them, training samples refer to the application scenarios of word senses, such as example sentences given
in dictionaries, which provide the context information of
target words; word sense definitions refer to the descriptions of word senses, such as glosses given in dictionaries,
which provide word sense label information. In the process
of WSD, the two jointly affect the accuracy of word sense
recognition. There are many methods to deal with the lack
of training samples of LTSs, and the solution is similar to
the classic few-shot task, so this paper focuses on improving
the inaccurate representation of word sense definitions.
Kumar et al. (Kumar et al. 2019) constructed word sense
definition representations in a continuous space to constrain unclear representations through clear ones. Blevins et
al. (Blevins and Zettlemoyer 2020) leveraged the semantic
knowledge in the training samples to enhance the word sense
definition representations through the joint training of dual
encoders (that is, the target word encoder and the definition
encoder). Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2022a) realized the enhancement of word sense definition representations by integrating example sentences and definitions of related word
senses in WordNet. It is not difficult to see from the relevant
research in recent years that the effective means of strengthening word sense definition representations is to integrate
external knowledge and impose constraint mechanisms.
Inspired by quantum theory (Nielsen and Chuang 2002),
this paper proposes a quantum-like model that can simultaneously expand external knowledge and enforce constraints.
More importantly, the constraint mechanism not only provide constraints in continuous space, but also implement geometric constraints in Hilbert space for representations of
non-homogeneous data. Specifically, firstly, we map homologous or non-homologous data into corresponding embeddings through classical language models, such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019); secondly, impose normalization constraints
on the embeddings to make them quantum states; thirdly,
combine the states into a superposition state; finally, the
quantum measurement operation is implemented to obtain
the result.

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) aims to determine the
meaning of target words according to the given context.
The recognition of high-frequency senses has reached expectations, and the current research focus is mainly on lowfrequency senses, namely Long-tail Senses (LTSs). One of
the challenges in long-tail WSD is to obtain clear and distinguishable definition representations based on limited word
sense definitions. Researchers try to mine word sense definition information from data from different sources to enhance
the representations. Inspired by quantum theory, this paper
provides a constraint mechanism for representations under
non-homogeneous data to leverage the geometric relationship
in its Hilbert space to constrain the value range of parameters,
thereby alleviating the dependence on big data and improving the accuracy of representations. We theoretically analyze
the feasibility of the constraint mechanism, and verify the
WSD system based on this mechanism on the standard evaluation framework, constructed LTS datasets and cross-lingual
datasets. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the scheme and achieve competitive performance.

Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) aims to determine the
meaning of target words according to the given context,
which belongs to the basic research topic in the field of
natural language processing (Bevilacqua et al. 2021; Navigli 2009). The accuracy of WSD is of great significance
and value to downstream tasks (Kaddoura, Ahmed, and
D. 2022), such as machine translation (Campolungo et al.
2022), information retrieval (Abderrahim and Abderrahim
2022), sentiment analysis (Farooq et al. 2015), etc. In addition, WSD, like text classification, is often used as a training
ground for new models and methods.
WSD systems have reached expectations for the recognition of high-frequency senses (that is, commonly used
word senses), and the current research focus is mainly on
the recognition of low-frequency senses (that is, rarely used
word senses), also known as Long-Tail Senses (LTSs) (Su
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022b; Chen, Zhang, and He 2022;
Du et al. 2021; Blevins and Zettlemoyer 2020). The root of
the difficulty in long-tail WSD lies in:
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25877

