The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EMHI: A Multimodal Egocentric Human Motion Dataset with HMD and
Body-Worn IMUs
Zhen Fan* , Peng Dai* , Zhuo Su* , Xu Gao, Zheng Lv, Jiarui Zhang,
Tianyuan Du, Guidong Wang, Yang Zhang
PICO
{fanzhen.0315, daipeng.2022, suzhuo, gaoxu.1024, lvzheng.101, zhangjiarui.zjr123,
dutianyuan, guidong.wang, zhangyang.0621}@bytedance.com
Abstract

of IMU data. Most importantly, the lack of real-world multimodal training data poses the most significant challenge.
Previous works (Rhodin et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2019) introduced egocentric datasets using experimental fisheye camera setups to capture images and annotate 3D joints. However, these setups are impractical for real VR/AR products, which need compact, lightweight designs. Synthetic
datasets (Tome et al. 2019; Akada et al. 2024; CuevasVelasquez et al. 2024) use physics engines for egocentric
image rendering but suffer a domain gap with real images
due to the complexity of human motion and environments.
Meanwhile, the lower body may be occluded in a visionbased setting, and some body parts may fall outside the
field of view (FOV) depending on the body pose. IMUbased datasets avoid occlusion but suffer from drift over
time and ill-posed problems from sparse observations. Besides, existing methods (Jiang et al. 2022a; Zheng et al.
2023; Dai et al. 2024) typically use synthetic IMU data from
AMASS (Mahmood et al. 2019), which may not accurately
reflect real-world noise and drift. Some datasets (Trumble et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018) provide real 3 Degrees
of Freedom (3DoF, rotation) data from XSens, while others (Dai et al. 2024) include 6DoF (rotation and position)
data of head, hands, and 3DoF for lower legs, but these are
small-scale and primarily used for evaluation. Recently, several large-scale multimodal datasets (Ma et al. 2024; Grauman et al. 2024) have been released, offering RGB images,
upper body IMU data, and motion narrations. However, the
forward-facing camera limits the egocentric view, and missing lower-body IMU signals can cause ambiguity.
Combining egocentric cameras and body-worn IMUs
offers a promising multimodal solution due to their
lightweight and flexible design. This configuration is also
commonly found in VR scenarios. Our proposed EMHI
dataset, as shown in Fig. 1, features a VR headset with
two downward-sloping cameras for egocentric image capture, 6DoF head and hand tracking, and additional IMUs on
an actual VR device for lower-leg 3DoF tracking. We use
a markerless multi-view camera system for SMPL (Loper
et al. 2015) ground truth acquirement, with accuracy and
consistency refinement using IMU data, and synchronization via OptiTrack. Furthermore, we propose a new baseline
method, MEPoser, integrating egocentric images and IMU
data to perform real-time HPE on a standalone VR headset.

Egocentric human pose estimation (HPE) using wearable
sensors is essential for VR/AR applications. Most methods
rely solely on either egocentric-view images or sparse Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU) signals, leading to inaccuracies due
to self-occlusion in images or the sparseness and drift of inertial sensors. Most importantly, the lack of real-world datasets
containing both modalities is a major obstacle to progress
in this field. To overcome the barrier, we propose EMHI, a
multimodal Egocentric human Motion dataset with HeadMounted Display (HMD) and body-worn IMUs, with all data
collected under the real VR product suite. Specifically, EMHI
provides synchronized stereo images from downward-sloping
cameras on the headset and IMU data from body-worn sensors, along with pose annotations in SMPL format. This
dataset consists of 885 sequences captured by 58 subjects
performing 39 actions, totaling about 28.5 hours of recording. We evaluate the annotations by comparing them with
optical marker-based SMPL fitting results. To substantiate
the reliability of our dataset, we introduce MEPoser, a new
baseline method for multimodal egocentric HPE, which employs a multimodal fusion encoder, temporal feature encoder,
and MLP-based regression heads. The experiments on EMHI
show that MEPoser outperforms existing single-modal methods and demonstrates the value of our dataset in solving the
problem of egocentric HPE. We believe the release of EMHI
and the method could advance the research of egocentric HPE
and expedite the practical implementation of this technology
in VR/AR products.

Introduction
Egocentric human pose estimation (HPE) has gained significant attention in computer vision, driven by the demand
for accurate motion tracking in immersive VR/AR environments. Unlike traditional exocentric HPE which relies on
external sensors, egocentric HPE employs body-worn sensors such as egocentric cameras or sparse IMUs. Although
rapid progress has been made in this field, there remain challenges in obtaining accurate full-body poses from singlemodal data due to issues like 1) self-occlusion and viewpoint
variations in egocentric vision; and 2) sparsity and drifting
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2879

