The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

mmFAS: Multimodal Face Anti-Spoofing Using Multi-Level Alignment and
Switch-Attention Fusion
Geng Chen1,2 , Wuyuan Xie1 , Di Lin3 , Ye Liu4 , Miaohui Wang1 *
1

2

College of CSSE, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
4
School of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
chengeng@bupt.edu.cn, wuyuan.xie@gmail.com, wang.miaohui@gmail.com
Abstract

Recently, deep learning-based FAS methods (Guo et al.
2022; Zhou et al. 2022a; Huang et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2022b) have been developed and proven to be powerful.
These methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance
on several benchmark datasets. However, poor generalization limits their applications in many real-world scenarios
while new types of face attacks are emerging all the time
(Dong et al. 2021). One of the main reasons for the crossdataset performance is that they might easily overfit the
training data and lack the ability to learn intrinsic representative features. On the other hand, the emergence of multimodal data provides a new perspective for solving the generalization ability (Kuang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020a;
Liu et al. 2021; Heusch et al. 2020). Therefore, how to use
multimodal learning to solve this challenging problem is the
fundamental motivation of this paper.
As the RGB modality contains redundant and forensically
irrelevant information (Yu et al. 2022b) (e.g., clothing, accessories, and skin color), other easily acquired modality
data (i.e., depth and infrared) have been explored in various face-based security tasks (Liu et al. 2021; Heusch et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020a). In addition, there is a growing
number of multimodality-based FAS datasets (Agarwal et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2021; George et al.
2019). These multimodal datasets highlight the anisotropy
between different data sources. However, existing multimodal FAS schemes (Kuang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2022) either implicitly align or directly fuse
these different modalities, which can negatively impact both
training efficiency and generalization ability. Therefore, we
investigate an explicit alignment mechanism for the FAS
task, exploring the performance effect of multimodal feature
alignment on face presentation attacks for the first time.
In this paper, we propose a novel and effective
multimodal-based FAS framework (called mmFAS), which
consists of multiple-level alignment and switch-attention
fusion. Specifically, we utilize three feature extractors to
obtain shallow features from three modalities (e.g., RGB,
depth, and infrared). To alleviate the latent feature gap, we
jointly adopt instance contrastive learning and spoof class
matching, which explicitly align the three different modalities while enlarging their inter-instance and inter-class discrepancies. In addition, we propose the use of switch-

The increasing number of presentation attacks on reliable
face matching has raised concerns and garnered attention towards face anti-spoofing (FAS). However, existing methods
for FAS modeling commonly fuse multiple visual modalities (e.g., RGB, Depth, and Infrared) in a straightforward
manner, disregarding latent feature gaps that can hinder representation learning. To address this challenge, we propose
a novel multimodal FAS framework (mmFAS) that focuses
on explicit alignment and fusion of latent features across
different modalities. Specifically, we develop a multimodal
alignment module to alleviate the latent feature gap by using
instance-level contrastive learning and class-level matching
simultaneously. Further, we explore a new switch-attention
based fusion module to automatically aggregate complementary information and control model complexity. To evaluate
the anti-spoofing performance more effectively, we adopt a
challenging yet meaningful cross-database protocol involving
four benchmark multimodal FAS datasets to simulate realworld scenarios. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of mmFAS in improving the accuracy of FAS
systems, outperforming 10 representative methods.

1

Introduction

Face recognition (Xiao et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022) has become a popular means of providing certification services
in many multimedia applications. However, the increasing
prevalence of malicious face presentation attack (Zhang
et al. 2020b; George et al. 2019; Heusch et al. 2020), such
as print attack, replay attack and 3D mask attack, has made
this technology vulnerable and unreliable, resulting in significant threats to personal, financial, and even national security. To tackle this problem, many face presentation attack
detection methods (Zhou et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2023; Srivatsan, Naseer, and Nandakumar 2023) have been put forward
aiming to better distinguish between real and fake face images. Existing face anti-spoofing (FAS) methods (Yu et al.
2022a) are mainly based on feature descriptors. These methods have gained considerable attention but their performance
is still unsatisfactory when facing diverse and complex presentation attacks.
* Corresponding author: Miaohui Wang
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

58

