The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Channel Merging: Preserving Specialization for Merged Experts
Mingyang Zhang1 , Jing Liu2 , Ganggui Ding1 , Linlin Ou3 , Xinyi Yu3 ,
Bohan Zhuang1 *
1

Zhejiang University
Monash University
3
Zhejiang University of Technology
2

Abstract

Yu et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023). In multi-task scenarios, it is
common to ensemble LLMs specialized in different tasks to
optimize performance. However, as shown in Figure 1 (a),
traditional ensembling methods (Tang et al. 2024; Lu et al.
2023) require loading all specialized models into GPU memory, which is highly storage-intensive.

Lately, the practice of utilizing task-specific fine-tuning has
been implemented to improve the performance of large language models (LLM) in subsequent tasks. Through the integration of diverse LLMs, the overall competency of LLMs
is significantly boosted. Nevertheless, traditional ensemble
methods are notably memory-intensive, necessitating the simultaneous loading of all specialized models into GPU memory. To address the inefficiency, model merging strategies
have emerged, merging all LLMs into one model to reduce
the memory footprint during inference. Despite these advances, model merging often leads to parameter conflicts
and performance decline as the number of experts increases.
Previous methods to mitigate these conflicts include postpruning and partial merging. However, both approaches have
limitations, particularly in terms of performance and storage
efficiency when merged experts increase. To address these
challenges, we introduce Channel Merging, a novel strategy
designed to minimize parameter conflicts while enhancing
storage efficiency. This method clusters and merges channel
parameters based on their similarity to form several groups
offline. By ensuring that only highly similar parameters are
merged within each group, it significantly reduces parameter conflicts. During inference, we can instantly look up the
expert parameters from the merged groups, preserving specialized knowledge. Our experiments demonstrate that Channel Merging consistently delivers high performance, matching unmerged models in tasks like English and Chinese reasoning, mathematical reasoning, and code generation. Moreover, it obtains results comparable to model ensemble with
just 53% parameters when used with a task-specific router.

Method

Performance

Efficiency

One-size-fit-all (Yu et al. 2024)
Partial Merging (Jiang et al. 2023b)
Channel Merging (Ours)

×
✓
✓

✓
×
✓

Table 1: This table compares the scalability of different
merging approaches in terms of maintaining performance
and efficiency as the number of experts increases.
To combat the inefficiency of the model ensemble, model
merging strategies (Yadav et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024) have
been introduced, where delta parameters (Ilharco et al. 2023)
from each expert are merged into the pre-trained parameters,
allowing the system to load weights equivalent to a single
expert during inference. Nevertheless, as shown in Figure 1
(b), this one-size-fits-all merging can exacerbate parameter
conflicts as the number of experts increases, often leading to
a decline in downstream performance. To mitigate parameter conflicts, previous approaches can be divided into two
main strategies: (1) Post pruning, which prunes delta parameters—the alteration of the model parameters before and
after fine-tuning (Yu et al. 2024; Yadav et al. 2024). However, performance degradation still occurs as the number of
merged experts increases. (2) Implementing partial merging
(Jiang et al. 2023b), which merges task-agnostic parameters and maintains task-specific ones. Nonetheless, this strategy becomes less storage-efficient with the escalation in the
number of experts, as it necessitates the retention of more
separate parameters.
To effectively mitigate parameter conflicts while enhancing
storage efficiency, we specifically analyze the layer-by-layer
channel similarities between several experts and highlight
that merging with finer granularity can further reduce parameter conflicts. Based on our analysis, we introduce a
novel strategy called Channel Merging. As illustrated in Figure 1(c), this approach first clusters channel parameters that
are across various experts into several groups based on their

Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
such as LLaMA (Touvron et al. 2023) and Mistral (Jiang
et al. 2023a) have significantly pushed the boundaries of
artificial intelligence, achieving near-human performance
across various general tasks. Despite these achievements,
a notable performance gap remains in specialized domains
such as coding and mathematics. Addressing this gap, many
LLMs undergo task-specific fine-tuning to enhance their capabilities within these targeted areas (Zhou and Yuqi 2024;
* BZ is the corresponding author.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22479

