The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Differentially Private Prototypes for Imbalanced Transfer Learning
Dariush Wahdany1,3 * , Matthew Jagielski2 , Adam Dziedzic3 , Franziska Boenisch3
1

Fraunhofer AISEC
Google DeepMind
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
dariush.wahdany@aisec.fraunhofer.de, jagielski@google.com, adam.dziedzic@cispa.de, boenisch@cispa.de
2

Abstract

Data

Machine learning (ML) models have been shown to leak private information from their training datasets. Differential Privacy (DP), typically implemented through the differential private stochastic gradient descent algorithm (DP-SGD), has become the standard solution to bound leakage from the models.
Despite recent improvements, DP-SGD-based approaches for
private learning still usually struggle in the high privacy
(ε ≤ 1) and low data regimes, and when the private training
datasets are imbalanced. To overcome these limitations, we
propose Differentially Private Prototype Learning (DPPL) as
a new paradigm for private transfer learning. DPPL leverages
publicly pre-trained encoders to extract features from private
data and generates DP prototypes that represent each private
class in the embedding space and can be publicly released for
inference. Since our DP prototypes can be obtained from only
a few private training data points and without iterative noise
addition, they offer high-utility predictions and strong privacy
guarantees even under the notion of pure DP. We additionally
show that privacy-utility trade-offs can be further improved
when leveraging the public data beyond pre-training of the
encoder: in particular, we can privately sample our DP prototypes from the publicly available data points used to train the
encoder. Our experimental evaluation with four state-of-theart encoders, four vision datasets, and under different data
and imbalancedness regimes demonstrate DPPL’s high performance under strong privacy guarantees in challenging private learning setups.

1

Embedding

Public
Encoder

Training

Prototypes

Inference

DP-Prototype
Estimation

Figure 1: Overview of DPPL. We split the private data X
per class c into Xc ’s, infer them through a publicly pretrained encoder, and estimate per-class prototypes pc in the
embedding space with DP. Classification of samples is performed by returning the label of the closest prototype pc in
the embedding space according to some distance function d.
While, over the last years, there has been significant
progress in improving both computational efficiency (Bu
et al. 2021; Lee and Kifer 2021; Subramani, Vadivelu, and
Kamath 2021) and privacy-utility trade-offs (Bu, Mao, and
Xu 2022; De et al. 2022), there are a few relevant setups
where DP training still yields unfavorable results. These include the high privacy regime (expressed in DP with small
values of the privacy parameter ε, such as ε ≤ 1), the low
data regime, i.e., when only a few private data points are
available for training, and when the training dataset is imbalanced, i.e., when some classes have significantly more
data points than others (Buda, Maki, and Mazurowski 2018;
Liu et al. 2019; Reed 2001).
There are various reasons why DP training is challenging
in these setups (Feldman 2020; Esipova et al. 2023). One
of these is that DP protects small sets of examples due to
its “group privacy” property, providing a provable bound on
how much a DP algorithm can learn from small data (Feldman 2020). Beyond this concern, the iterative noise addition
weakens the signal from the training data, especially when
only a few training data points are available. Moreover, standard approaches for learning in imbalanced setups, such as
changing the sampling (Kubat, Matwin et al. 1997; Ling and
Li 1998), generating synthetic data for the minority classes
(Chawla et al. 2002), or weighing the training loss (Cao et al.
2019) are not directly compatible with DP or incur additional privacy costs. In a similar vein, each training iteration
with DP training incurs additional privacy costs (Abadi et al.
2016), making it hard to keep ε low, i.e., to stay in the high
privacy regime.

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are known to leak private information about their training datasets (Carlini et al. 2022;
Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Shokri et al. 2017).
As a solution to provably upper-bound privacy leakage, differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006) has emerged as
the de-facto standard for private training. It is usually implemented in ML through the differential private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm which bounds the contribution of each data point during training and iteratively
injects controlled amounts of noise (Abadi et al. 2016).
Thereby, DP-SGD has been shown to increase training time
and decrease the final model’s utility.
* Part of the work was conducted as visiting researcher at CISPA
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20991

