The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Doubly-Bounded Queue for Constrained Online Learning:
Keeping Pace with Dynamics of Both Loss and Constraint
Juncheng Wang* , Bingjie Yan, Yituo Liu
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract

information, the objective of the learner becomes to minimize the regret, which is the accumulated difference between the losses incurred by their online decisions and those
of some benchmark solutions. Zinkevich (2003) considered
both static regret to an offline benchmark and dynamic regret to an online benchmark. The proposed online projected
gradient descent algorithm provided a dynamic regret bound
1
that smoothly approaches to O(T 2 ) static regret, as the accumulated variation of the loss functions reduces, i.e., the
OCO algorithm keeps pace with the dynamics of the losses.
The projection operation to strictly satisfy the constraints
at each time can incur heavy computation. Furthermore, in
many applications, the online decisions are subject to constraints that are allowed to be violated at certain time slots.
Mahdavi, Jin, and Yang (2012) initiated the study on OCO
with soft constraint violation, which measures the amount of
compensated violations over time. In contrast, with a goal
to limit the instantaneous violation, Yuan and Lamperski
(2018) introduced a stronger notion of hard constraint violation that does not allow any compensated violation over
time. For fixed constraints, the best-known soft and hard
constraint violation bounds are both O(1) (Yu and Neely
2020; Guo et al. 2022).
Most existing works on OCO with time-varying constraints focused on the static regret (Yu, Neely, and Wei
2017; Wei, Yu, and Neely 2020; Cao, Zhang, and Poor 2021;
Sinha and Vaze 2024). Dynamic regret for time-varying constrained OCO was more recently studied (Chen, Ling, and
Giannakis 2017; Cao and Liu 2019; Liu et al. 2022; Guo
et al. 2022; Yi et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). As the accumulated variation of the constraint functions reduces, the bestknown soft and hard constraint violation
bounds for
time1
1
varying constraints approach to O(T 2 ) and O(T 2 log T ),
respectively (Wang et al. 2023; Sinha and Vaze 2024). However, none of the constraint violation bound recovers the
best-known O(1) violation for fixed constraints, i.e., the
constrained OCO algorithms do not keep pace with the dynamics of the constraints.
The above discrepancies motivate us to pose the following key question: Can a constrained OCO algorithm provide
a dynamic regret bound and a constraint violation bound
1
that smoothly approach to the best-known O(T 2 ) regret and
O(1) violation, respectively, as the dynamics of the losses
and constraints diminish? Our answer is yes.

We consider online convex optimization with time-varying
constraints and conduct performance analysis using two stringent metrics: dynamic regret with respect to the online solution benchmark, and hard constraint violation that does not
allow any compensated violation over time. We propose an
efficient algorithm called Constrained Online Learning with
Doubly-bounded Queue (COLDQ), which introduces a novel
virtual queue that is both lower and upper bounded, allowing tight control of the constraint violation without the need
for the Slater condition. We prove via a new Lyapunov drift
1+Vx
analysis that COLDQ achieves O(T 2 ) dynamic regret
Vg
and O(T ) hard constraint violation, where Vx and Vg capture the dynamics of the loss and constraint functions. For
the first time, the two bounds smoothly approach to the best1
known O(T 2 ) regret and O(1) violation, as the dynamics
of the losses and constraints diminish. For strongly convex
loss functions, COLDQ matches the best-known O(log T )
static regret while maintaining the O(T Vg ) hard constraint
violation. We further introduce an expert-tracking variation
of COLDQ, which achieves the same performance bounds
without any prior knowledge of the system dynamics. Simulation results demonstrate that COLDQ outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

In many online learning applications, optimization losses
and constraints are dynamic over time. Online Convex Optimization (OCO) (Shalev-Shwartz 2012; Hazan 2016), as
the intersection of learning, optimization, and game, is a vital framework for solving online learning problems under
uncertainty. It has broad applications such as advertisement
placement (Balseiro, Lu, and Mirrokni 2020), load balancing (Hsu et al. 2021), network virtualization (Shi, Lin, and
Fahmy 2021), and resource allocation (Wang et al. 2023).
In the standard OCO setting, a learner selects online decisions from a known convex set to minimize a sequence
of time-varying convex loss functions. The information of
each loss function, however, is only revealed to the learner
after the decision has been made. Given this lack of current
* Corresponding author, jcwang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21135

