The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Scalable Surrogate Verification of Image-Based Neural Network Control Systems
Using Composition and Unrolling
Feiyang Cai1,3 , Chuchu Fan2 , Stanley Bak1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
School of Computing, Clemson University
feiyang@clemson.edu, chuchu@mit.edu, stanley.bak@stonybrook.edu
tems (NNCS) is paramount. The deployment of such systems demands rigorous closed-loop verification to show that
hazardous situations are avoided. Although considerable
strides have been made in verifying NNCS (Sun, Khedr, and
Shoukry 2019; Schilling, Forets, and Guadalupe 2022), verification of image-based NNCS has recently gained attention (Hsieh et al. 2022; Astorga et al. 2023; Păsăreanu et al.
2023; ArjomandBigdeli, Mata, and Bak 2024). This task
is more difficult—image observations are high-dimensional
inputs and vision networks are typically more complex than
control networks, employing convolutional or transformer
layers. Scalability aside, such verification problems are even
hard to formulate, since reasoning over the set of images
possible in the real world is not a precise mathematical statement. Recent approaches have used geometric camera models to accurately represent the perception process, but they
are not applicable to complex scenarios (Habeeb et al. 2023).
One approach to this problem is using generative models to replace the perception system for the verification of
image-based NNCS (Katz et al. 2022). This first trains a
conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN) (Mirza
and Osindero 2014) to approximate the perception system,
generating images based on system states. The concatenation of cGAN and controller results in a unified network
controller with low-dimensional state inputs. This surrogate
controller allows existing verification methods (Xiang and
Johnson 2018), which combine neural network verification
tools and reachability analysis, to be applied.
However, the previous verification methodology (Katz
et al. 2022) suffers from being overly conservative, computing the reachable sets with significant overapproximation,
caused by two main sources: one-step error and multi-step
error. Within a single control period, the prior work computes the intervals of the control outputs and then applies
monotonic analysis of the system dynamics to obtain the
reachable sets, ignoring the dependencies between the input states and control outputs, causing one-step error. Additionally, discrete abstraction of reachable sets after each
step introduces multi-step error. The interaction of these two
sources of error produces considerable overapproximation,
potentially leading to false positives. As image-based NNCS
grow in complexity and incorporate modern neural network
architectures, extending the verification techniques to encompass these complexities presents additional challenges.

Abstract
Verifying safety of neural network control systems that use
images as input is a difficult problem because, from a given
system state, there is no known way to mathematically model
what images are possible in the real-world. We build upon
recent work that considers a surrogate verification approach,
training a conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN)
as an image generator in place of the real world. This setup
enables set-based formal analysis of the closed-loop system,
providing analysis beyond simulation and testing. While existing work is effective on small examples, excessive overapproximation both within a single control period (one-step
error) and across multiple periods (multi-step error) limits
its scalability. We propose approaches to overcome these errors. First, we address one-step error by composing the system’s dynamics along with the cGAN and neural network
controller, without losing the dependencies between input
states and the control outputs as in the monotonic analysis of
the system dynamics. Second, we reduce multi-step error by
repeating the single-step composition, essentially unrolling
multiple steps of the control loop into a large neural network.
We then leverage existing network verification algorithms to
compute accurate reachable sets for multiple steps, avoiding
the accumulation of abstraction error at each step. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in terms of both accuracy and scalability using two case studies. On the aircraft
taxiing system, the converged reachable set is 175% larger
using the prior baseline method compared with our proposed
approach. On the emergency braking system, with 24× the
number of image output variables from the cGAN, the baseline method fails to prove any states are safe, whereas our
improvements enable set-based safety analysis.

Introduction
Neural networks are key enablers of image-based control
systems, where applications span from autonomous vehicles (Chen et al. 2015) to industrial robotics (Levine et al.
2018). Unfortunately, neural networks rarely come with
guarantees of robustness or worst-case behaviors due to
the inherent non-zero error rates and are often susceptible to adversarial attacks (Boloor et al. 2020; Cai, Li,
and Koutsoukos 2020). In safety-critical scenarios, ensuring the safety and reliability of neural network control sysCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
21

