The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Analytical-Chemistry-Informed Transformer for Infrared Spectra Modeling
Shiluo Huang1 , Yining Jin2 , Wei Jin3 * , Ying Mu3
1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
3
Research Centre for Analytical Instrumentation, State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China
huangsl@swufe.edu.cn, yining.jin.academic@gmail.com, {jinweimy, muying}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

IR spectroscopy has been introduced to the analysis of complex samples in biological, medical, and chemical applications with the assistance of chemometrics (Åsmund Rinnan,
van den Berg, and Engelsen 2009). IR spectra could reveal
the categories and specific contents of samples, which is
usually realized by a calibration model (Manley 2014).
Despite the success of chemometric methods, it is still
challenging to establish a robust calibration model across
capricious spectra-collecting environments (Yang et al.
2024). It is recognized that the performance of calibration
models will degrade when handling the data collected with
different spectrometers, varied sampling protocols, or different environmental conditions (Nikzad-Langerodi et al.
2018). Illustrated in Fig. 1, calibration transfer aims to improve the prediction ability under such a condition, where
training (source) data and testing (target) data might not follow the i.i.d. assumption due to different spectra-collecting
processes. Conventional calibration transfer studies can be
categorized as domain adaptation methods (Vettoruzzo et al.
2024), which either retrain (Yu et al. 2021b; Mishra et al.
2021) or regularize (Nikzad-Langerodi et al. 2018; Zhang,
Zhou, and Li 2023) the calibration model with the data from
the target domain. However, collecting extra data from the
target domain could be costly and such data collection is not
always practical.
In the last decade, deep learning (DL) has dramatically
improved the state-of-the-art various fields (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2024; Nie et al. 2022). On the contrary, DL for IR spectroscopy is still in its infancy (Mishra et al. 2022b). Besides
the lack of large open datasets, the absence of specialized
DL architectures may be responsible for this delay. Convolutional networks (CNNs), Transformers, and other neural networks have been introduced to IR spectra modeling
(Zhang et al. 2019; Jung, Jung, and Cole 2023; Enders et al.
2021). Recently, researchers have tried to boost the performance via data augmentation and learn the augmented data
with CNNs (Wang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2024; Chen, Zhou,
and Ren 2024), which achieves competitive performance.
Although these networks alleviate the reliance on spectral
pre-processing (Mishra et al. 2022b), the learned models still
suffer performance degradation when training data and testing data are generated from different spectral-collecting processes. Meanwhile, existing networks seldom consider the

Infrared (IR) spectroscopy is a fundamental technique in analytical chemistry. Recently, deep learning (DL) has drawn
great interest as the modeling method of infrared spectral
data. However, unlike vision or language tasks, IR spectral
data modeling is faced with the problem of calibration transfer and has distinctive characteristics. Introducing the prior
knowledge of IR spectroscopy could guide the DL methods to
learn representations aligned with the domain-invariant characteristics of spectra, and thus improve the performance. Despite such potential, there is a notable absence of DL methods that incorporate such inductive bias. To this end, we
propose Analytical-Chemistry-Informed Transformer (ACT)
with two modules informed by the field knowledge in analytical chemistry. First, ACT includes learnable spectral processing inspired by chemometrics, which comprises spectral
pre-processing, tokenization, and post-processing. Second, a
straightforward yet effective representation learning mechanism, namely spectral-attention, is incorporated into ACT.
Spectral-attention utilizes the intra-spectral and inter-spectral
correlations to extract spectral representations. Empirical results show that ACT has achieved competitive results in 9 analytical tasks covering applications across pharmacy, chemistry, and agriculture. Compared with existing networks, ACT
reduces the root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP) by
more than 20% in calibration transfer tasks. These results indicate that DL methods in IR spectroscopy could benefit from
the integration of prior knowledge in analytical chemistry.

Code — https://github.com/Siryokait/ACT4IRSpectra

Introduction
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy plays a crucial role in both scientific research (Kalashnikov et al. 2016; Ramzan et al. 2024;
Bredenbeck et al. 2008) and industrial application (Porep,
Kammerer, and Carle 2015; Yu et al. 2021a; Miao et al.
2023), providing a rapid, non-destructive and economical
solution to chemical analysis (Weber et al. 2023; Martens
et al. 2017). As vibrational spectroscopy, IR spectroscopy
studies the absorbance of light resulting from molecular vibrations, which manifests itself as spectra containing peaks
or overtones at different wavelengths (Mishra et al. 2022a).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17440

