The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GaraMoSt: Parallel Multi-Granularity Motion and Structural Modeling for
Efficient Multi-Frame Interpolation in DSA Images
Ziyang Xu1 , Huangxuan Zhao2,3,∗ , Wenyu Liu1 , Xinggang Wang1, *
1

Institute of AI, School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
3
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{xuzyoung, liuwy, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn, zhao_huangxuan@sina.com
Interpolating 1( ), 2( ), 3( ) frames

Abstract
The rapid and accurate direct multi-frame interpolation
method for Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) images
is crucial for reducing radiation and providing real-time assistance to physicians for precise diagnostics and treatment. DSA
images contain complex vascular structures and various motions. Applying natural scene Video Frame Interpolation (VFI)
methods results in motion artifacts, structural dissipation, and
blurriness. Recently, MoSt-DSA has specifically addressed
these issues for the first time and achieved SOTA results. However, MoSt-DSA’s focus on real-time performance leads to
insufficient suppression of high-frequency noise and incomplete filtering of low-frequency noise in the generated images.
To address these issues within the same computational time
scale, we propose GaraMoSt. Specifically, we optimize the
network pipeline with a parallel design and propose a module
named MG-MSFE. MG-MSFE extracts frame-relative motion
and structural features at various granularities in a fully convolutional parallel manner and supports independent, flexible
adjustment of context-aware granularity at different scales,
thus enhancing computational efficiency and accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GaraMoSt achieves the
SOTA performance in accuracy, robustness, visual effects, and
noise suppression, comprehensively surpassing MoSt-DSA
and other natural scene VFI methods.

GaraMoSt-𝓛𝟏

MoSt-DSA-ℒ1

GaraMoSt
FILM-ℒ1
MoSt-DSA
SoftSplat-ℒ𝐹
FILM-ℒ𝑠𝑡𝑦𝑙𝑒
EMA-VFI

Figure 1: SSIM-Time comparison of various methods for interpolating 1 to 3 frames. Our GaraMoSt-L1 achieves SOTA
accuracy, while time cost is almost the same as MoSt-DSA.
Details in Table 1,2,3.

Code — https://github.com/ZyoungXu/GaraMoSt

Introduction
4D Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) is an advanced
medical imaging technology critical for diagnosing and treating various vascular diseases, including in the brain and heart
(2022). It is widely utilized in hospital interventional surgeries. DSA operates by injecting a contrast agent, usually
iodine-based, into the patient’s body, then capturing images
from different angles in space at a fixed rotational speed,
alongside the dynamic blood flow changes over time (2024).
Due to the radiative nature of the imaging environment, the
radiation dose received by patients and physicians is directly
proportional to the image count, posing a threat to health.
Decreasing the number of images through frame interpolation is a straightforward and effective method to reduce
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28530

radiation. However, simply achieving interpolation is insufficient for practical application; the interpolated images must
be accurate to assist in diagnostics effectively, and the time
cost must be low to aid surgeries in real-time and save valuable patient time. Due to data scarcity and cross-disciplinary
complexities, these issues received little attention and lacked
targeted solutions. Only recently, MoSt-DSA (2024a) was the
first to address these issues by proposing a direct multi-frame
interpolation (MFI) method. MFI is a video frame interpolation (VFI) task and a significant research topic in computer
vision (2023; 2018; 2023; 2024). Conventional MFI methods
using recursion are time-consuming and unsuitable for realtime support (2022; 2020; 2021). In contrast, MoSt-DSA’s
direct MFI method extracts general motion and structural features, maps them at different time steps, and directly infers
any number of frames in once forward computation, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in terms of image
quality, robustness, inference time, and computational cost.
The core of the direct MFI method is the precise extraction of motion and structural features (2023). Existing VFI

