The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Singular Value Scaling: Efficient Generative Model Compression via Pruned
Weights Refinement
Hyeonjin Kim and Jaejun Yoo*
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
{hyeonjin.kim, jaejun.yoo}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract

have been proposed (Liu et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Chung
et al. 2024; Fang, Ma, and Wang 2023).
Model compression typically involves two steps: 1) pruning to reduce model size while retaining essential pretrained knowledge, and 2) fine-tuning to restore performance. Among these, effective pruning has received significant attention for its ability to enhance following fine-tuning
step. The retained pre-trained knowledge from pruning can
enhance fine-tuning, leading to improved performance and
faster convergence without additional training costs. While
previous pruning methods (Chung et al. 2024; Fang, Ma, and
Wang 2023) effectively maintain model performance, they
often focus solely on preserving crucial connections in the
pre-trained model, overlooking the impact of pruned weights
on subsequent process, leading to inefficient fine-tuning or
distillation. This issue becomes more severe as the model’s
capacity decreases, and in some cases, the pruned weights
results in worse performance compared to random initialization; i.e. slow convergence speed and lower performance.
Therefore, addressing these factors is essential for achieving
more efficient generative models.
Our key observation is that pruned weights often exhibit
dominant singular vectors, which results in a large disparity
between the largest and smallest singular values. The presence of such dominant singular vectors significantly impacts
the model’s forward propagation, overshadowing the contributions of minor singular vectors, and the overall fine-tuning
process is dominated by these few dominant singular vectors. We find that this could limit the exploration of diverse
weight space. Therefore, ensuring a balanced contribution
among the singular vectors within pruned weights at initialization may offer a potential solution to the inefficiencies
observed in the fine-tuning process.
In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective refinement technique called Singular Value Scaling (SVS) to
enhance the efficiency of fine-tuning pruned weights. The
dominant singular values is scaled down to reduce the disparity between the largest singular values and smallest singular values while preserving the relative order of the singular values at initialization. In this way, the refined pruned
weights makes the fine-tuning process easier compared to
directly using the pruned weights by ensuring all singular vectors contribute more evenly at the beginning of finetuning. Note that since our method focuses on the knowledge

While pruning methods effectively maintain model performance without extra training costs, they often focus solely
on preserving crucial connections, overlooking the impact
of pruned weights on subsequent fine-tuning or distillation,
leading to inefficiencies. Moreover, most compression techniques for generative models have been developed primarily
for GANs, tailored to specific architectures like StyleGAN,
and research into compressing Diffusion models has just begun. Even more, these methods are often applicable only to
GANs or Diffusion models, highlighting the need for approaches that work across both model types. In this paper,
we introduce Singular Value Scaling (SVS), a versatile technique for refining pruned weights, applicable to both model
types. Our analysis reveals that pruned weights often exhibit
dominant singular vectors, hindering fine-tuning efficiency
and leading to suboptimal performance compared to random
initialization. Our method enhances weight initialization by
minimizing the disparities between singular values of pruned
weights, thereby improving the fine-tuning process. This approach not only guides the compressed model toward superior solutions but also significantly speeds up fine-tuning. Extensive experiments on StyleGAN2, StyleGAN3 and DDPM
demonstrate that SVS improves compression performance
across model types without additional training costs.

Introduction
Generative models like Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and Diffusion models (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020) have achieved remarkable performance across various computer vision tasks such as image
generation (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Karras
et al. 2020; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Wang et al. 2022),
image editing (Baykal et al. 2023; Pehlivan, Dalva, and Dundar 2023; Kawar et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023), even video
generation (Skorokhodov, Tulyakov, and Elhoseiny 2022;
Ho et al. 2022; Blattmann et al. 2023) and 3D generation
(Chan et al. 2022; Karnewar et al. 2023). The impressive performance of these generative models, however, often comes
at the cost of high memory and computational demands, limiting their real-world applicability. To address these issues,
several model compression technique for generative models
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17859

