The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph Structure Learning for Spatial-Temporal Imputation:
Adapting to Node and Feature Scales
Xinyu Yang1 , Yu Sun1* , Xinyang Chen2 * , Ying Zhang1 , Xiaojie Yuan1
1

2

College of Computer Science, DISSec, Nankai University, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
{yangxinyu@dbis., sunyu@, yingzhang@, yuanxj@}nankai.edu.cn, chenxinyang@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Marisca, and Alippi 2022; Liu et al. 2023a). Since AMS and
DBT stations are geographically closest to each other, their
corresponding edge weights in the graph are larger. Therefore, as shown in Figure 1(b), we can get an accurate imputation result of the feature DD in DBT, according to the DD
value in AMS station. Unfortunately, this is not always the
case, and we can observe that using the FH value in DBT station will mislead the existing methods for imputing the FH
value in AMS station. The reason is that features DD and
FH are recorded by sensors from different domains, where
DD captures wind direction data and FH is related to wind
speed. There is a significant correlation between wind direction information from AMS and DBT stations as they are
located close to each other. However, since AMS is situated
in an airport with a relatively sparse environment and DBT
is located in a municipality with many buildings, the relationship between wind speed values of two stations is not
clear.
Figure 1(c) illustrates the spatial relationships of different features across all stations, where we extract the attention map from the cross-feature self-attention mechanism.
As shown, the spatial relationships for different features are
varied, unlike the implicit assumption by existing methods
that spatial relationships across stations are similar for different features. In addition, in Figure 1(d), we also find that
there is a relatively fixed spatial relationship between the
features within each station. Specifically, the attention maps
between features within the two stations ELD and ELL are
generally similar. This suggests that there also exist correlations between different features across all stations. However,
this correlation cannot be reflected in the given graph and
thus cannot contribute to the imputation of existing methods.
Enlightened by the aforesaid analysis, we consider the
multi-scale Graph Structure Learning framework for spatialtemporal Imputation (GSLI). Our main contributions can be
summarized as follows.
(1) We present the node-scale graph structure learning
to model the fine-grained global spatial correlations of different features. By adaptively learning independent global
graph structures for different features, our framework can
mitigate the negative effects between features in different
domains and improve imputation performance.
(2) We design feature-scale graph structure learning to

Spatial-temporal data collected across different geographic
locations often suffer from missing values, posing challenges
to data analysis. Existing methods primarily leverage fixed
spatial graphs to impute missing values, which implicitly assume that the spatial relationship is roughly the same for
all features across different locations. However, they may
overlook the different spatial relationships of diverse features
recorded by sensors in different locations. To address this, we
introduce the multi-scale Graph Structure Learning framework for spatial-temporal Imputation (GSLI) that dynamically adapts to the heterogeneous spatial correlations. Our
framework encompasses node-scale graph structure learning
to cater to the distinct global spatial correlations of different
features, and feature-scale graph structure learning to unveil
common spatial correlation across features within all stations.
Integrated with prominence modeling, our framework emphasizes nodes and features with greater significance in the
imputation process. Furthermore, GSLI incorporates crossfeature and cross-temporal representation learning to capture
spatial-temporal dependencies. Evaluated on six real incomplete spatial-temporal datasets, GSLI showcases the improvement in data imputation.

Introduction
The stations at different geographic locations may occur missing values when recording spatial-temporal data
through multiple kinds of sensors (Zhao et al. 2020b; Fan
et al. 2023). Figure 1(a) presents an example of spatialtemporal data with four features recorded by seven stations
located in the Netherlands. As shown in Figure 1(b), the
readings of feature FH in station AMS at t3 and feature DD
in station DBT at t17 are missing. This may lead to anomalies in the patterns discovered by analysis models, thus creating challenges in mining spatial-temporal data (Ren et al.
2023).
The spatial correlation of spatial-temporal data is usually
given as a graph where stations are nodes and edges indicate geographic distance or connectivity between stations
(Li et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2023). Existing works typically utilize the given graph and graph neural networks (GNN) to capture spatial dependencies (Cini,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

959

