The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Mitigating Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models by Adaptively
Constraining Information Flow
Jiaqi Bai1,2 , Hongcheng Guo3 , Zhongyuan Peng4 , Jian Yang3 ,
Zhoujun Li3 , Mohan Li1,2 * , Zhihong Tian1,2
1

Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University, China
2
Huangpu Research School of Guangzhou University, China
3
CCSE, Beihang University, China
4
University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{jqbai, limohan, tianzhihong}@gzhu.edu.cn, {hongchengguo, jiaya, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn,
zhongyuan.peng@cripac.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Large vision-language models show tremendous potential in
understanding visual information through human languages.
However, they are prone to suffer from object hallucination,
i.e., the generated image descriptions contain objects that do
not exist in the image. In this paper, we reveal that object hallucination can be attributed to overconfidence in irrelevant visual features when soft visual tokens map to the LLM’s word
embedding space. Specifically, by figuring out the semantic
similarity between visual tokens and LLM’s word embedding, we observe that the smoothness of similarity distribution strongly correlates with the emergence of object hallucinations. To mitigate hallucinations, we propose using the
Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB) to alleviate overconfidence by introducing stochastic noise, facilitating the
constraining of irrelevant information. Furthermore, we propose an entropy-based noise-controlling strategy to enable
the injected noise to be adaptively constrained regarding the
smoothness of the similarity distribution. We adapt the proposed A DAVIB across distinct model architectures. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed A DAVIB mitigates object hallucinations by effectively alleviating the overconfidence in irrelevant visual features, with consistent improvements on two object hallucination benchmarks.

Figure 1: Impact on the smoothness of the similarity distribution correlates with the emergence of object hallucinations. We use the normalized dot product to measure the
semantic similarity between soft visual tokens and LLM’s
word embedding. The y-axis of the similarity distribution
denotes the similarity score. The x-axis is the top-ranked
LLM’s token sorting in descending order.

Code — https://github.com/jiaqi5598/AdaVIB

Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) (Zhu et al. 2023;
Dai et al. 2023a; Bai et al. 2023) have recently attracted increasing attention. Due to the superiority of generating contextually relevant natural language descriptions grounded on
visual patterns, LVLMs have shown impressive performance
on various vision-language tasks, including image captioning (Deng et al. 2009; Lin et al. 2014), visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Li et al. 2023c) and multimodal
machine translation (Yao and Wan 2020; Guo et al. 2022).
Despite their success, LVLMs are prone to object hallucinations (Rohrbach et al. 2018; Biten, Gómez, and Karatzas

2022), where the generated image descriptions are inconsistent with the objects that appear in the grounded image.
This inconsistency has significantly affected the reliability
and applicability of LVLMs, especially in scenarios that demand precise judgment.
Most existing works focus on mitigating object hallucinations by reducing over-reliance on prior knowledge of LLMs
through the decoding process (Huang et al. 2024; Favero
et al. 2024). They devise various methods to penalize specific patterns that may induce hallucinations (Huang et al.
2024; Leng et al. 2024) or curate a training dataset to address statistical biases arising from co-occurrence and spuri-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23442

