The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CAKE: Category Aware Knowledge Extraction for Open-Vocabulary Object
Detection
Shiyuan Ma1 * , Donglin Qian1 * , Kai Ye1 , Shengchuan Zhang1†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China
Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
{mashiyuan, qiandl, yekai}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zsc 2016@xmu.edu.cn
guide

Abstract
RoI

Open vocabulary object detection (OVOD) task aims to detect
objects in novel categories beyond the base categories in the
training set. To this end, the detector needs to access imagetext pairs containing rich semantic information or the visual
language pre-trained model (VLM) learned on them. Recent
OVOD methods rely on knowledge distillation from VLMs.
However, there are two main problems in current methods:
(1) Current knowledge distillation frameworks fail to take
advantage of the global category information of VLMs and
thus fail to learn category-specific knowledge. (2) Due to
the overfitting phenomenon of base categories during training, current OVOD networks generally have the problem of
suppressing novel categories as background. To address these
two problems, we propose a Category Aware Knowledge Extraction framework (CAKE), which consists of a CategorySpecific Knowledge Distillation branch (CSKD) and a Category Generalization Region Proposal Network (CG-RPN).
CSKD can more fully extract category-strong related information through category-specific distillation, and it is also
conducive to filtering the exclusion problem between individuals of the same category; in this process, the model constructs a category-specific feature set to maintain high-quality
category features. CG-RPN leverages the guidance of the feature set to adjust the confidence scores of region proposals, thereby mining proposals that potentially contain novel
categories of objects. Extensive experiments show that our
method can plug and play well with many existing methods
and significantly improve their detection performance. Moreover, our CAKE framework can reach state-of-the-art performance on OV-COCO and OV-LVIS datasets.

CLIP
Cluster-level
Distillation

Object-level
Distillation

Proposals

Feature set

(a) An overview of our proposed CAKE.
Baseline
scissors
sink
keyboard
couch
cake
knife
skateboard
snowboard
tie
umbrella

18.69
+7.18
26.37
+7.78
38.04
+2.8
45.73
31.37
+17.78
6.68
+18.96
30.81
+7.27
25.12
+8.04
10.33
14.26
24.49
+9.68
0

10

20

30

𝑁
𝐴𝑃50

40

CAKE

+18.4

50

60

70

(b) Enhancement on challenging novel categories.

Figure 1: (a) We introduce extra cluster-level distillation to
learn category-specific knowledge. Its output is also used to
build a feature set to guide proposal generation, which helps
alleviate overfitting. (b)We present the results of CAKE on
novel categories where the AP on the baseline is below 50,
showing that CAKE can effectively improve performance on
novel categories.

that covers all possibilities is impractical. Additionally, due
to the long-tail distribution of data, detector performance can
vary significantly across different categories.
Open Vocabulary Object Detection (OVOD) addresses
this challenge by enabling the detection of both known
(base) and unknown (novel) categories using a network
trained with fine-grained data only on base categories. This
approach reduces the need for extensive training data and
improves adaptability across various detection tasks. To
achieve OVOD, models often leverage Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) like CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), which
align visual and textual feature spaces by learning relationships from large image-text datasets. In this paper, we uti-

Introduction
Traditional object detection methods follow a close set setting, which all focuses on identifying objects from categories present in the training set, corresponding detection
networks can perform excellently in recognizing these categories(Ren et al. 2015; Mi et al. 2022; Xie et al. 2021; Chen
et al. 2024, 2022). However, real-world images often contain
a vast array of object categories, thus constructing a dataset
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5982

