The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Exploring More from Multiple Gait Modalities for Human Identification
Dongyang Jin1 * , Chao Fan2,1 * , Weihua Chen3 , Shiqi Yu1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, China
3
Alibaba Group
12332451@mail.sustech.edu.cn, chaofan996@szu.edu.cn, kugang.cwh@alibaba-inc.com, yusq@sustech.edu.cn
2

Three Typical Imagery Gait Representations*

Abstract
The gait, as a kind of soft biometric characteristic, can reflect the distinct walking patterns of individuals at a distance, exhibiting a promising technique for unrestrained human identification. With largely excluding gait-unrelated cues
hidden in RGB videos, the silhouette and skeleton, though
visually compact, have acted as two of the most prevailing
gait modalities for a long time. Recently, several attempts
have been made to introduce more informative data forms
like human parsing and optical flow images to capture gait
characteristics, along with multi-branch architectures. However, due to the inconsistency within model designs and experiment settings, we argue that a comprehensive and fair
comparative study among these popular gait modalities, involving the representational capacity and fusion strategy exploration, is still lacking. From the perspectives of fine vs.
coarse-grained shape and whole vs. pixel-wise motion modeling, this work presents an in-depth investigation of three
popular gait representations, i.e., silhouette, human parsing,
and optical flow, with various fusion evaluations, and experimentally exposes their similarities and differences. Based on
the obtained insights, we further develop a C2 Fusion strategy, consequently building our new framework MultiGait++.
C2 Fusion preserves commonalities while highlighting differences to enrich the learning of gait features. To verify our
findings and conclusions, extensive experiments on Gait3D,
GREW, CCPG, and SUSTech1K are conducted.

Feature
Type
Silhouette

Parsing

Flow

Static
Appearance

++

+++

+

Dynamic
Change

Whole

Whole & Part

Whole & Pixel

+ +++ : Non-significant to Significant
*Only Single Frame Presented for Simplicity
Three Common Fusion Strategies

Our Strategy

(a). Concat

(d).C2Fusion

A

B

(b). Attention A B

A

B

(c). Addition A + B

Figure 1: Top: comparing three typical gait modalities, i.e.,
the binary silhouette, body parsing, and optical flow images. Bottom: the comparison between three common fusion
strategies with our C2 Fusion.
To mitigate the influence of irrelevant visual cues such as
texture and background, gait recognition methods often rely
on derived gait representations extracted from RGB videos
rather than the videos themselves as inputs. The widely
used ones include binary silhouettes (Chao et al. 2022; Fan
et al. 2020; Lin, Zhang, and Yu 2021; Shen et al. 2023b;
Wang et al. 2024b; Fan et al. 2023a,b), skeleton coordinates (Liao et al. 2017; Teepe et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2024b),
SMPL model (Li et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2022a), body parsing (Zheng et al. 2023), and optical flow images (Castro et al.
2024; Feng, Yuan, and Fan 2023). Among these, the silhouette is favored for its clarity in color and richness in shape,
making it the most popular choice for gait modeling. Recent
studies have pointed out the limitations in silhouette images,
citing a lack of fine-grained part-level shape (Zheng et al.
2023) and explicit body structural characteristics (Peng et al.
2024), and introduce extra body parsing images and human
joints coordinate, often driven by multi-branch networks, to
reach the new state-of-the-art recognition performance. In
this paper, we agree that the multimodal approach represents

Code — https://github.com/ShiqiYu/OpenGait

Introduction
The pedestrian gait presented in walking videos typically
involves the visual characteristics of body shape and limb
movements. This unique application, known as gait recognition, distinguishes itself from other biometrics techniques
such as face, fingerprint, and iris recognition, by offering the
flexibility of non-intrusive and long-distance usage without
necessitating the subject’s cooperation. Furthermore, gait is
inherently hard to disguise and conceal. These attributes
render gait recognition particularly well-suited for unconstrained security applications such as suspect tracking and
retrieval (Nixon and Carter 2006).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4120

