The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Realistic Semi-supervised Medical Image Classification
Wenxue Li1,2 * , Lie Ju1 * , Feilong Tang1 * , Peng Xia3 ,
Xinyu Xiong4 , Ming Hu1 , Lei Zhu2† , Zongyuan Ge1†
1
Monash University
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
UNC-Chapel Hill
4
Sun Yat-sen University
wxli408@gmail.com, {Lie.Ju1, feilong.tang, zongyuan.ge}@monash.edu, leizhu@ust.hk

Balance Imbalance

Abstract
Existing semi-supervised learning (SSL) approaches follow the idealized closed-world assumption, neglecting the
challenges present in realistic medical scenarios, such as
open-set distribution and imbalanced class distribution. Although some methods in natural domains attempt to address
the open-set problem, they are insufficient for medical domains, where intertwined challenges like class imbalance and
small inter-class lesion discrepancies persist. Thus, this paper presents a novel self-recalibrated semantic training framework, which is tailored for SSL in medical imaging by ingeniously harvesting realistic unlabeled samples. Inspired by
the observation that certain open-set samples share some similar disease-related representations with in-distribution samples, we first propose an informative sample selection strategy that identifies high-value samples to serve as augmentations, thereby effectively enriching the semantics of known
categories. Furthermore, we adopt a compact semantic clustering strategy to address the semantic confusion raised by
the above newly introduced open-set semantics. Moreover, to
mitigate the interference of class imbalance in open-set SSL,
we introduce a less biased dual-balanced classifier with similarity pseudo-label regularization and category-customized
regularization. Extensive experiments on a variety of medical
image datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our
proposed method over state-of-the-art Closed-set and Openset SSL methods.

Classimbalance Realistic
Scenarios
Learning
Existing
Medical Open-set
Learning
SSL
Close-set Open-set

Numbers of Samples

2

(a) Problem illustration

Labeled
Unlabeled (closed)
Unlabeled (open)
Test

class

(b)Data distribution of realistic
medical scenarios

Figure 1: Illustration of realistic semi-supervised learning
for medical scenarios. (a) Problem illustration depicting the
combination of open-set and imbalanced class distributions
in realistic scenarios. (b) Data distribution in realistic medical scenarios, highlighting the imbalance and diversity in
labeled and unlabeled data, with the unlabeled set including
both known and unknown categories.

unlabeled data often lacks careful selection, as involving
experts in meticulous scrutiny of unlabeled data would incur significant costs and undermine the cost-effectiveness of
SSL. Thus, the unlabeled images often contain samples from
open-set categories. On the other hand, medical datasets naturally encounter the class imbalance issue, primarily caused
by the uneven distribution of diseases or lesions (Ju et al.
2022). The performance on minority classes is compromised
due to the imbalanced class distribution.
Tremendous efforts have been devoted to addressing the
challenges of open-set distribution and class imbalance. For
open-set distribution, existing open-set SSL studies (Yu et al.
2020; Saito, Kim, and Saenko 2021; Huang et al. 2021a;
Li et al. 2023b) primarily identify and remove open-set
samples from unlabeled data to prevent interference from
open-set categories during the training process. For the
class imbalance challenge, various methods have been proposed to achieve balanced representation learning, including re-sampling (Buda, Maki, and Mazurowski 2018; Dong,
Gong, and Zhu 2017; Soltanzadeh, Feizi-Derakhshi, and
Hashemzadeh 2023), re-weighting (Lin et al. 2017; Cui et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2023) and self-supervised training (Yang
and Xu 2020; Wei et al. 2021; Elbatel et al. 2023). However, these methods do not meet the requirements of realistic
medical domain recognition scenarios: a) They tackle these

Introduction
Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) (Tarvainen and Valpola
2017; Liu et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022b) offers a promising solution to mitigate the scarcity of medical expert annotations. However, their effectiveness often relies on the
assumption of a closed-world scenario. In realistic medical scenarios, open-set distribution (Oliver et al. 2018; Guo
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020) and imbalanced class distribution (Galdran, Carneiro, and González Ballester 2021; Ju
et al. 2022) significantly confuse the model training process,
degrades the model performance and further restricts the
practical application of SSL. Specifically, on the one hand,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4968

