The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ConDSeg: A General Medical Image Segmentation Framework via
Contrast-Driven Feature Enhancement
Mengqi Lei1 , Haochen Wu1 , Xinhua Lv1 , Xin Wang2
1

China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
2
Baidu Inc, Beijing, China
mengqi-lei@163.com, hcwu@cug.edu.cn, xinhualv@cug.edu.cn, wangxin105@baidu.com

Image

G.t.

TGANet pred.

Ours pred.

Single occur.

Medical image

Medical image segmentation plays an important role in clinical decision making, treatment planning, and disease tracking. However, it still faces two major challenges. On the
one hand, there is often a “soft boundary” between foreground and background in medical images, with poor illumination and low contrast further reducing the distinguishability of foreground and background within the image. On
the other hand, co-occurrence phenomena are widespread in
medical images, and learning these features is misleading to
the model’s judgment. To address these challenges, we propose a general framework called Contrast-Driven Medical
Image Segmentation (ConDSeg). First, we develop a contrastive training strategy called Consistency Reinforcement.
It is designed to improve the encoder’s robustness in various illumination and contrast scenarios, enabling the model
to extract high-quality features even in adverse environments.
Second, we introduce a Semantic Information Decoupling
module, which is able to decouple features from the encoder
into foreground, background, and uncertainty regions, gradually acquiring the ability to reduce uncertainty during training. The Contrast-Driven Feature Aggregation module then
contrasts the foreground and background features to guide
multi-level feature fusion and key feature enhancement, further distinguishing the entities to be segmented. We also propose a Size-Aware Decoder to solve the scale singularity of
the decoder. It accurately locate entities of different sizes in
the image, thus avoiding erroneous learning of co-occurrence
features. Extensive experiments on five datasets across three
scenarios demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our
method, proving its advanced nature and general applicability
to various medical image segmentation scenarios.

Image & g.t.

Co-occurrence

Natural scene

Abstract

The ambiguity of boundaries.

The challenge of co-occurrence.

Figure 1: Major challenges in medical image segmentation.
Brox 2015), U-Net++ (Zhou et al. 2018), PraNet (Fan et al.
2020), TGANet (Tomar et al. 2022), CASF-Net (Zheng et al.
2023), continuously improving segmentation performance.
In the field of medical images, different scenarios of tasks
use images with different modalities, such as endoscopy images (Jha et al. 2020, 2021), dermatoscopy images (Gutman et al. 2016; Codella et al. 2018), digitally scanned
whole slide images (Sirinukunwattana et al. 2017), etc. Although existing deep learning methods have made great
breakthroughs in medical image segmentation, achieving accurate segmentation is still a challenge, which comes from
two main aspects: ambiguous boundaries and co-occurrence
phenomena, which are visualized in Figure 1. On the one
hand, compared with natural images where the boundary between foreground and background is clear, in medical images, the foreground and background are often a kind of
blurred “soft boundary” (Xie et al. 2023; Lei and Wang
2024). This blurring is mainly due to the existence of transition areas between pathological tissue and surrounding normal tissue, making the boundary hard to define. Moreover,
in many cases, medical images exhibit poor light and low
contrast (Cossio 2023; Peng and Wang 2021), which further
blurs the boundary between pathological and normal tissues,
adding to the difficulty of distinguishing the boundary. On
the other hand, co-occurrence is widely present in medical images (Chen et al. 2022). For example, in endoscopy
polyp images, small polyps tend to co-occur with polyps of
similar size. This leads the model to easily learn certain co-

Code — https://github.com/Mengqi-Lei/ConDSeg

Introduction
Medical image segmentation is a cornerstone of the medical
imaging field, providing indispensable support for clinical
decision-making, treatment planning, and disease monitoring (Xun et al. 2022; Qureshi et al. 2023). In recent years,
deep learning methods (Xi et al. 2024) have shown great potential in medical image segmentation (Liu et al. 2021; Malhotra et al. 2022), such as U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4571

