The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Spatial Annealing for Efficient Few-shot Neural Rendering
Yuru Xiao, Deming Zhai* , Wenbo Zhao, Kui Jiang, Junjun Jiang, Xianming Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology
hitxyr@stu.hit.edu.cn, (zhaideming, wbzhao, jiangkui, jiangjunjun, csxm)@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

they still suffer from abnormal convergence and weak geometry awareness when dealing with sparse input views, a
problem known as few-shot neural rendering.
Current few-shot neural rendering methods prioritize mitigating overfitting and enhancing geometry reconstruction,
yet often neglect reconstruction efficiency. For instance,
RegNeRF (Niemeyer et al. 2022), DietNeRF (Jain, Tancik,
and Abbeel 2021), and VGOS (Sun et al. 2023) utilize patchbased geometry regularization or semantic consistency regularization, which involves computationally intensive forward processing on randomly sampled rendered patches. Alternatively, some methods require substantial modifications
to the base architecture (Zhu et al. 2024) or depend on 3D
prior from pre-trained networks (Wang et al. 2023; Xiao
et al. 2024), reducing pipeline efficiency. There is an urgent
need for methods that integrate into existing efficient architectures to improve robustness against sparse views while
maintaining computational efficiency.
FreeNeRF (Yang, Pavone, and Wang 2023) adopts a
coarse-to-fine training approach to address the few-shot neural rendering problem, akin to implicit geometry regularization. While FreeNeRF significantly enhances rendering
performance in few-shot scenarios with minimal code adjustments, its training process remains time-consuming and
labor-intensive due to its MLP-based architecture. Moreover, its implementation using frequency positional encoding is incompatible with hybrid acceleration architectures.
Exploring an efficient way to embed the frequency annealing concept into hybrid-represented neural fields holds the
promise of enhancing both practicality and performance.
Introducing frequency annealing in hybrid representations
requires explicitly modeling the frequency band-limit of hybrid represented fields. While current methods employ prefiltering strategies (Hu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024) to mitigate high-frequency information for anti-aliasing, they often
lack explicit analysis and formulation of the frequency bandwidth. Therefore, conducting frequency band limit analysis
and modeling for grid-based neural fields is crucial for advancing the efficiency of few-shot neural rendering.
In this paper, we derive the explicit formation of frequency bandwidth for a pre-filtering-driven hybrid representation through an analysis of the filtering process. Building
on this analysis, we introduce a more generalized form of
frequency regularization in the spatial domain, termed spa-

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) with hybrid representations
have shown impressive capabilities for novel view synthesis, delivering high efficiency. Nonetheless, their performance
significantly drops with sparse input views. Various regularization strategies have been devised to address these challenges. However, these strategies either require additional
rendering costs or involve complex pipeline designs, leading to a loss of training efficiency. Although FreeNeRF
has introduced an efficient frequency annealing strategy, its
operation on frequency positional encoding is incompatible with the efficient hybrid representations. In this paper,
we introduce an accurate and efficient few-shot neural rendering method named Spatial Annealing regularized NeRF
(SANeRF), which adopts the pre-filtering design of a hybrid representation. We initially establish the analytical formulation of the frequency band limit for a hybrid architecture
by deducing its filtering process. Based on this analysis, we
propose a universal form of frequency annealing in the spatial domain, which can be implemented by modulating the
sampling kernel to exponentially shrink from an initial one
with a narrow grid tangent kernel spectrum. This methodology is crucial for stabilizing the early stages of the training
phase and significantly contributes to enhancing the subsequent process of detail refinement. Our extensive experiments
reveal that, by adding merely one line of code, SANeRF delivers superior rendering quality and much faster reconstruction speed compared to current few-shot neural rendering
methods. Notably, SANeRF outperforms FreeNeRF on the
Blender dataset, achieving 700× faster reconstruction speed.

Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021), represented by a multi-layer perception (MLP), is a powerful
learning-based tool for detailed 3D reconstruction and highfidelity novel view synthesis. However, NeRF requires dense
input views or days of training time, limiting its application in real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving,
robotics, and AR/VR. Although grid-based hybrid presentations (Müller et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023) have been introduced to improve training efficiency by accelerating convergence and reducing training time from hours to minutes,
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8691

