The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ZeroHAR: Sensor Context Augments Zero-Shot Wearable Action Recognition
Ranak Roy Chowdhury1 , Ritvik Kapila1 , Ameya Panse1 , Xiyuan Zhang1 , Diyan Teng2 , Rashmi
Kulkarni2 , Dezhi Hong3 * , Rajesh K. Gupta1 , Jingbo Shang1
1

University of California San Diego
2
Qualcomm
3
Amazon
{rrchowdh, rkapila, apanse, xiz032, rgupta, jshang}@ucsd.edu, {diyateng, rashmik}@qti.qualcomm.com,
hondezhi@amazon.com
Abstract
Wearable Human Action Recognition (wHAR) uses motion
sensor data to identify human movements, which is essential for mobile and wearable devices. However, traditional
wHAR systems are only trained on a limited set of activities. Hence, they fail to generalize to diverse human motions,
prompting Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL). Existing ZSL methods
for wHAR focus solely on augmenting labels, such as representing them as attribute matrices, images, videos, or text.
We propose ZeroHAR that enhances ZSL by not just focusing on activity labels, but also augmenting motion data with
sensor context features. Our approach incorporates information about the sensor type, the Cartesian axis of the data, and
the sensor’s body position, providing the model with crucial
spatial and biomechanical insights. This helps the model to
generalize better to new actions. First, we train the model by
aligning the latent space of the motion time series with its
corresponding sensor context, while distancing it from unrelated sensor contexts. Then, we train the model using the target activity descriptions. We tested our method against eight
baselines on five benchmark HAR datasets with various sensors, placements, and activities. Our model shows exceptional
generalizability across the 18 motion time series classification benchmark datasets, outperforming the best baselines by
262% in the zero-shot setting.

Figure 1: Different Approaches to Zero-shot Inertial HAR.

unseen classes. For example, a model may be trained on
IMU data for “walking” but is expected to recognize “running” during test time. Both these activities share several
similarities in terms of body posture and limb movements.
For example, both involve an upright posture with a straight
spine and head facing forward, the arms swing alternately
with the legs, and they both require a cyclic movement
pattern of the legs. Such basic body movements constitute
activities at large. Hence, a model that learns these lowlevel fine-grained knowledge from the activities that it were
trained on, can recognize unseen activities at test time.
Figure 1 shows how existing work in ZSL extracts finegrained details about human activity from different representations of these activities: (a) Activity-attribute matrices
that encode basic limb movements and body posture information in a binary matrix (Wang, Miao, and Hao 2017;
Cheng et al. 2013b,a); (b) Text describing the nature and
type of limb and joint movements involved in various activity and feeding the text through a language model to extract embeddings (Matsuki, Lago, and Inoue 2019; Wu et al.
2020; Moon et al. 2022); (c) Images or videos of people

Introduction
Wearable HAR predicts human activities using data from
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs). Existing inertial HAR
systems are often trained on data from a limited set of motions, collected and annotated within a controlled setting.
These models do not recognize the richer and more diverse
set of motions that humans exhibit in the real world. Annotating vast amounts of IMU data for all possible human
movements to train a HAR model is not plausible. Hence,
in HAR, although a model may be trained on a limited set
of activities, we expect it to recognize unseen activities after
deployment, a process known as Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL).
ZSL involves training a model on data from seen classes
and evaluating it on test data from unseen classes. To achieve
this objective, ZSL is trained to learn fine-grained attributes
shared among classes that can be generalized to recognize
* Work unrelated to Amazon.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16046

