The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Revisiting Multimodal Fusion for 3D Anomaly Detection from an Architectural
Perspective
Kaifang Long1* , Guoyang Xie2 * , Lianbo Ma1† , Jiaqi Liu3 , Zhichao Lu3
1

Software College, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
The Department of Intelligent Manufacturing, CATL, Ningde, China
3
The Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
longkf@stumail.neu.edu.cn, guoyang.xie@ieee.org, malb@swc.neu.edu.cn, liu jiaqi @outlook.com, luzhichaocn@gmail.com
2

Abstract

94

Existing efforts to boost multimodal fusion of 3D anomaly
detection (3D-AD) primarily concentrate on devising more
effective multimodal fusion strategies. However, little attention was devoted to analyzing the role of multimodal fusion
architecture (topology) design in contributing to 3D-AD. In
this paper, we aim to bridge this gap and present a systematic study on the impact of multimodal fusion architecture
design on 3D-AD. This work considers the multimodal fusion
architecture design at the intra-module fusion level, i.e., independent modality-specific modules, involving early, middle or
late multimodal features with specific fusion operations, and
also at the inter-module fusion level, i.e., the strategies to fuse
those modules. In both cases, we first derive insights through
theoretically and experimentally exploring how architectural
designs influence 3D-AD. Then, we extend SOTA neural architecture search (NAS) paradigm and propose 3D-ADNAS to
simultaneously search across multimodal fusion strategies and
modality-specific modules for the first time. Extensive experiments show that 3D-ADNAS obtains consistent improvements
in 3D-AD across various model capacities in terms of accuracy,
frame rate, and memory usage, and it exhibits great potential
in dealing with few-shot 3D-AD tasks.

baseline

I-AUROC

92
90

88
86

fusion features fusion
types selection operations

Figure 1: (Left) The impact of multimodal fusion architecture design on 3D-AD performance. This shows the distribution of 3D-AD performance with variations at the intra- and
inter-module fusion levels. (Right) 3D-ADNAS vs. SOTA
methods in terms of accuracy, FPS, and memory usage.

Introduction
Industrial anomaly detection is expected to accurately find
out the difference between normal samples and anomalies
like human inspectors. To achieve this, an emerging way is to
exploit both image color (RGB) and depth information (rather
than only RGB) for quality inspection, termed as 3D anomaly
detection (3D-AD) (Qin et al. 2023; Zavrtanik, Kristan, and
Skočaj 2024a). It works well since 3D depth information has
shown an essential role in improving industrial detection accuracy (Cao, Xu, and Shen 2024). The typical way of existing
3D-AD methods is to train a reconstruction-based model via
restoring synthetic abnormal samples to normal ones, and
then utilize reconstruction features for defect identification
of discriminator (Zhou et al. 2024). One key challenge of this
way is how to realize correct fusion of the two modalities
(i.e., RGB images and 3D point cloud) through multimodal
* Contribute equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12273

fusion network such that the integration of depth information
will not interfere with color information (Gu et al. 2024a).
Regarding to the multimodal fusion network, it is natural
that consistently evolved architectures outperform the original ones. In this sense, we have to figure out a question that
whether the existing multimodal fusion architectures are ideal
for 3D-AD. As previewed in Figure 1, we can observe that
the architectural designs (in terms of modality-specific modules and combination of these modules) have a significant
impact on 3D-AD’s accuracy. In fact, this observation can be
validated via theoretical analyses (as provided in Revisiting
3D-AD Fusion Architecture Section). This motivates us to
design multimodal fusion architectures/topologies tailored
for 3D-AD.
The primary goal of this work is to bridge the gap between multimodal fusion architectures and 3D-AD via (i)
systematically studying the impact of architectural components on 3D-AD, (ii) recognizing crucial design schemes that
can enhance 3D-AD, and (iii) proposing a simple yet effective
3D-ADNAS with a novel two-level search space tailored for
3D-AD. We adopt empirical and theoretical approaches and
conduct extensive experiments to realize this goal.
Given that EasyNet (Chen et al. 2023) servers as foundation framework for 3D-AD, we initiate this work from it to
revisit multimodal fusion network and formulate the design
of target multimodal fusion network around a two-level multimodal fusion problem, i.e., intra-module fusion and inter-

