The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SatCLIP: Global, General-Purpose Location Embeddings with Satellite Imagery
Konstantin Klemmer1 , Esther Rolf2 , Caleb Robinson3 , Lester Mackey1 , Marc Rußwurm4
1

Microsoft Research
2
CU Boulder
3
Microsoft AI for Good Research Lab
4
Wageningen University & Research
{koklemmer, caleb.robinson, lmackey}@microsoft.com, esther.rolf@colorado.edu, marc.russwurm@wur.nl
ground conditions: social, environmental, etc

Abstract

population density, soil quality, temperature, ...
wealth, agriculture, precipitation, biodiversity
elevation, housing, infrastructure, sun exposure

Geographic information is essential for modeling tasks in
fields ranging from ecology to epidemiology. However, extracting relevant location characteristics can be challenging,
often requiring expensive data fusion or distillation from
massive global imagery datasets. To address this challenge,
we introduce Satellite Contrastive Location-Image Pretraining (SatCLIP). This global, general-purpose geographic location encoder learns an implicit representation of locations
by matching CNN and ViT inferred visual patterns of openly
available satellite imagery with their geographic coordinates.
The resulting SatCLIP location encoder efficiently summarizes the characteristics of any given location for convenient
use in downstream tasks. In our experiments, we use SatCLIP
embeddings to improve performance on nine diverse geospatial prediction tasks including temperature prediction, animal
recognition, and population density estimation. SatCLIP consistently outperforms alternative location encoders and shows
promise for improving geographic domain adaptation. The
results demonstrate the potential of vision-location models to
learn meaningful representations of our planet from the vast,
varied, and largely untapped modalities of geospatial data.

image encoder
extracts
visual signals
of ground conds.

Pretraining

pretrained SatCLIP embeddings
(L=40, 3-PCA visualization)

location encoder
learns an
implicit
representation
of ground conds.

downstream task model
e.g. initialized with SatCLIP

weights

far but
similar

close
but
different

Figure 1: Motivation for SatCLIP: Capturing ground conditions from satellite images and transferring them into a location encoder via constrastive image-location pretaining.

et al. 2023). Many geospatial modeling approaches in the
sciences even directly leverage geographic location for improving predictions – in fields ranging from epidemiology,
the Earth system sciences, to ecology (Mac Aodha, Cole,
and Perona 2019; Cole et al. 2023).
But integrating geographic information into a deep learning model is not straightforward. Even though spatial coordinates are often informative, introducing them as features
can amplify geographic distribution shift problems and lead
to poor evaluation accuracy. This is especially of concern
for the setting of geospatial domain adaptation, when data
from evaluation areas (and their coordinates) are absent in
the training data. On the other hand, models that ignore the
spatial nature of the problem will generally perform worse in
problems of spatial interpolation, where the evaluation area
overlaps with the training area. This brings about an important challenge for representing Earth’s diverse surface: capturing the rich information in ground conditions that computer vision models trained on satellite imagery can represent, while simultaneously respecting and integrating the
spatial structures and interdependence of geospatial data.
We tackle this research problem by pretraining location
encoders: models that take in latitude and longitude, and output a high dimensional embedding of any place on earth.
Specifically, we leverage the location information indexing satellite images as an input to a contrastive pretraining objective that aims to match location-image pairs, similarly to the vision-language pretraining deployed in Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Radford et al.

Introduction
Satellite imagery has proven to be a valuable source of input
data for predictive models across a wide range of real-world
applications (Rolf et al. 2024), for example, interpolating
missing air pollution data (Chen et al. 2019), crop yield
forecasting (Tseng, Kerner, and Rolnick 2022), and agroforestry carbon stock prediction (Reiersen et al. 2022). Patterns extracted from satellite images can describe the unique
characteristics of locations, by capturing their natural and
built environment. Importantly, characteristics are often correlated in space: While two nearby locations are more likely
to have similar features (e.g. the same land cover), two distant locations can also share location characteristics when
they share similar environmental ground conditions like climate zones (Fig. 1, right).
Since the spatial patterns governing different geographic
data modalities are often complex and non-linear, predictive
models working with geo-data benefit from explicitly integrating intuitions for spatial and spatio-temporal dependencies (Klemmer and Neill 2021; Klemmer et al. 2022; Cole
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4347

