The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Robust Multi-Objective Preference Alignment with Online DPO
Raghav Gupta∗1 , Ryan Sullivan†‡2 , Yunxuan Li†3 , Samrat Phatale1 , Abhinav Rastogi1
1

2

Google DeepMind
University of Maryland, College Park
3
Google

Abstract

jective with a weight that represents the relative importance
of that objective (Wu et al. 2024). However, in practice, it is
infeasible to train a separate policy for each objective preference combination, since preferences vary widely between
users and over time. Discretizing objective weights produce
a finite number of weight combinations to train specialist
policies for, but this number grows exponentially with the
number of objectives, making it prohibitively expensive.
Recent LLM alignment methods train steerable policies
(Dong et al. 2023) that can be controlled at inference time to
generate outputs corresponding to different reward weightings, without retraining. In particular, a steerable policy
takes a desired objective weight combination as an additional input at inference time and generates an output attempting to maximize this weighted combination of rewards.
Steerable methods broadly fall into two categories: 1)
parameter-based conditioning and 2) prompt-based conditioning. Parameter-based conditioning (Rame et al. 2024;
Jang et al. 2023) still relies on separate parameters (spanning all or a subset of the policy model) for each objective
but, instead of retraining a policy for each objective weight
combination, obtains policy weights as a linear combination
of weights from the existing single-objective policies. This
model souping (Wortsman et al. 2022) may be combined
with multi-task training (Wang et al. 2024b) by dynamically
sampling objective weights during training. While producing strong results in terms of Pareto optimality and steerability, parameter-based conditioning methods may be difficult to deploy in production owing to higher inference costs.
Having to do on-the-fly souping for each query, ostensibly
with different objective weights, gets computationally expensive with an increasing number of objectives, as well as
the granularity of objective weights – even with low-rank
decomposition of model parameters (Hu et al. 2022).
Prompt conditioning-based methods rely on only a single policy, trained conditionally on objective weights which
are usually prefixed to the input to the policy. Prompt-based
conditioning has been combined with RL finetuning (RLFT)
(Jang et al. 2023) and supervised finetuning (SFT) + rejection sampling-based methods (Yang et al. 2024; Wang et al.
2024a). These methods can be very efficient to train and deploy, but have so far demonstrated less steerability and worse
performance compared to other methods.
Separate from reinforcement learning, preference opti-

Multi-objective preference alignment of large language models (LLMs) is critical for developing AI systems that are
more configurable, personalizable, helpful, and safe. However, optimizing model outputs to satisfy diverse objectives
with variable weights at inference time for truly personalized
models presents a significant challenge. Existing approaches
are either computationally expensive to train or do not sufficiently steer model behaviors. This paper introduces the
Multi-Objective Online DPO (MO-ODPO) algorithm, designed to robustly and efficiently align model behaviors with
multiple, potentially conflicting human preferences. Our approach incorporates a prompt conditioning mechanism, allowing us to train a single preference-conditional policy, that
can adapt to new preference combinations at inference. Experiments on two popular benchmarks show that MO-ODPO
Pareto-dominates existing baselines while providing excellent inference-time steerability between diverse objectives.

1

Introduction

Learning from human feedback has been effective at aligning large language models (LLMs) to human preferences
in many domains such as summarization, conversational
agents, and safety. In modern applications, language model
alignment is generally a multi-objective problem due to the
diversity of human preferences along different, often conflicting axes (e.g., conciseness versus detail, factuality versus creativity). Common LLM alignment methods such as
supervised finetuning, reinforcement learning (RL) finetuning, and preference optimization are unidirectional i.e. they
optimize a single best response, scalar reward, and preference label respectively. Thus, these methods cannot represent different objective weights with a single policy, instead
requiring additional tuning for the multi-objective setting.
Linear scalarization of multiple objectives (Li, Zhang, and
Wang 2020) with weights for each objective is a common solution for accommodating multiple objectives in LLM alignment. Multiple objectives are normalized into one scalar reward or preference by scaling the reward signal for each ob∗

Correspondence to raghavgupta@google.com
These authors contributed equally.
‡
Work done while at Google
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

27321

