The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FriendsQA: A New Large-Scale Deep Video Understanding Dataset with
Fine-grained Topic Categorization for Story Videos
Zhengqian Wu1,3,4 * , Ruizhe Li1,3,4 * , Zijun Xu2,3,4 ,
Zhongyuan Wang1,2,3,4 , Chunxia Xiao1,2,3,4 , Chao Liang1,2,3,4†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University, China
4
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{2023202110068, 2020300004016, 2019300003083, cxxiao, cliang}@whu.edu.cn, wzy hope@163.com
2

Factoid VideoQA (NExT-QA)

Abstract
Video question answering (VideoQA) aims to answer natural language questions according to the given videos. Although existing models perform well in the factoid VideoQA
task, they still face challenges in deep video understanding
(DVU) task, which focuses on story videos. Compared to
factoid videos, the most significant feature of story videos is
storylines, which are composed of complex interactions and
long-range evolvement of core story topics including characters, actions and locations. Understanding these topics requires models to possess DVU capability. However, existing
DVU datasets rarely organize questions according to these
story topics, making them difficult to comprehensively assess VideoQA models’ DVU capability of complex storylines. Additionally, the question quantity and video length of
these dataset are limited by high labor costs of handcrafted
dataset building method. In this paper, we devise a large
language model based multi-agent collaboration framework,
StoryMind, to automatically generate a new large-scale DVU
dataset. The dataset, FriendsQA, derived from the renowned
sitcom Friends with an average episode length of 1,358 seconds, contains 44.6K questions evenly distributed across 14
fine-grained topics. Finally, We conduct comprehensive experiments on 10 state-of-the-art VideoQA models using the
FriendsQA dataset.

A woman is cycling on a road with grass growing on both sides.

00:00 00:16

Q1: what is the woman doing?
A. cycling
B. squatting
C. playing instrument

Attribution: P

D.drinking soup

E. skiing

DVU (FriendsQA)

Rachel unexpectedly leaves her wedding and moves in with Monica, surprising everyone. Ross, recently divorced,
is disheartened …Ross gathers his courage from friends and expresses his feelings to Rachel.

00:00

22:49

Q1: What is the main action taking place in Scene 2 at Monica's Apartment?
A. The characters are watching and reacting to a Spanish soap opera.
Attribution: P
B. The characters are having a discussion about relationships.
C. The characters are preparing and eating a meal together.
Story topic: A L
D. The characters are playing a board game.
Related time: 05:22-09:27
Q2: How do the characters' reactions to Ross's divorce highlight their different personalities?
A. They are all supportive and understanding of his situation.
Attribution: I
B. They offer him unsolicited advice and try to fix his problems.
C. They make light of his situation and encourage him to move on. Story topic: CA
D. They express sympathy but avoid getting emotionally involved. Related time: 02:00-13:55
Attribution: Perception (P)

Inference (I)

Story topic: Character (C)

Action (A) Location (L)

Figure 1: Comparisons of factoid VideoQA and DVU.

Code — https://github.com/nercms-mmap/FriendsQA
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17022

(MLLM) technologies, significant progress has been made
in recent years (Yu et al. 2023).
However, VideoQA models’ performance significantly
declines on deep video understanding (DVU) task. For instance, VideoChat2 achieves 61.70% accuracy on the factoid
NExT-QA dataset but drops to 44.05% on our DVU FriendsQA dataset. As illustrated in Figure 1, the key reasons include: First, regarding question attributes, in addition to perception questions that inquire about visual cues, DVU also
includes inference questions that assess the understanding of
storylines, offering more diverse questions. Second, for the
same perception questions, factoid VideoQA involves shortrange shot-level perception in factoid video depicting simple events without complex narrative interactions, whereas
DVU involves long-range scene-level (Liang et al. 2009; Xu,
Wei, and Wu 2023) perception in story videos encompass

Introduction
Video question answering (VideoQA) aims to answer natural language questions based on given videos, supporting advanced applications like video grounding (Ren et al. 2024)
and video chatbots (Jin et al. 2024). Early researches on factoid VideoQA focus on questions about actions or objects
in videos (Yu et al. 2019). With the popularity of video language model (VLM) and multimodal large language model
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Chao Liang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8523

