The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Highly Imperceptible Black-Box Graph Injection Attacks
with Reinforcement Learning
Maochang Zhao, Jing Zhang*
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{mczhao, jingz}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

nodes into the graph, attackers can effectively disrupt the
classification performance of GNNs.
Early work primarily focused on misleading the victim
model by modifying the structure of the graph, such as
adding or deleting edges, or by altering node features to produce erroneous results (Wang and Gong 2019; Wang et al.
2024). Researchers, under varying degrees of background
knowledge, have implemented targeted or untargeted attacks
by perturbing the message passing mechanism within the
node neighborhood or by disrupting the topology of the entire graph (Sharma et al. 2023). However, this type of graph
modification attack (GMA) assumes that the attacker has the
authority to alter the data. For instance, in a fraud detection
system (Duan et al. 2024), the attacker’s goal is to allow the
target account to evade detection and carry out illegal activities unnoticed. However, attackers typically do not have
the privilege to modify user features (e.g., transaction frequency), making GMA impractical in most scenarios.
In contrast, a more practical attack method is the Graph
Injection Attack (GIA), which involves injecting new adversarial nodes and edges into the graph (e.g., adding new nodes
with malicious features and connecting them to existing
nodes) to achieve the attack (Wang et al. 2020). GIA does
not require changing the topology and features of the original nodes; instead, it achieves the attack by injecting adversarial nodes. Due to its flexibility, GIA has been proven to be
more effective and practical than GMA (Chen et al. 2022).
In a fraud detection scenario, attackers can create fake accounts (i.e., adversarial nodes) that simulate the transaction
and behavior patterns of normal users, and inject transaction
edges between the fake accounts and the target account (i.e.,
connect the adversarial nodes to the target node) to conceal
their fraudulent activities. Recently, numerous methods have
used GIA to disrupt model performance. For example, contrastive learning methods (Liu, Huang, and Zhao 2024) use
a pseudo-node generator and gradient optimization to generate pseudo-nodes with attack capabilities; poisoning attack
methods (Sun et al. 2020) inject nodes into the graph during
the training phase and execute attacks; reinforcement learning methods (Ju et al. 2023) utilize a node generator and
edge selector to produce adversarial nodes and edges.
Although graph injection attacks have been extensively
studied, in practical applications, attackers often do not have
access to specific structural and parameter information of the

Recent studies have revealed the vulnerability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to adversarial attacks. In practice, effectively attacking GNNs is not easy. Existing attack methods primarily focus on modifying the topology of the graph
data. In many scenarios, attackers do not have the authority to manipulate the graph’s topology, making such attacks
challenging to execute. Although node injection attacks are
more feasible than modifying the topology, current injection
attacks rely on knowledge of the victim model’s architecture. This dependency significantly degrades attack quality
when there is inconsistency in the victim models. Moreover,
the generation of injected nodes often lacks precise control
over features, making it difficult to balance attack effectiveness and stealthiness. In this paper, we investigate a node
injection attack under model-agnostic conditions and propose Targeted Evasion Attack via Node Injection (TEANI).
Specifically, TEANI models the generation of adversarial
nodes as a Markov process. Without considering the target
model’s structure, it guides the agent to select features that
maximize attack effectiveness within a budget, based solely
on the results of queries to a black-box model. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets and mainstream GNN models demonstrate that the proposed TEANI poses more effective and imperceptible threats than state-of-the-art attack
methods.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018), as powerful tools for processing
graph-structured data, have achieved significant success in
many fields in recent years. Whether it is social network
analysis (Pei, Chakraborty, and Sycara 2015), recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2019), or bioinformatics (yang
zhang et al. 2024), GNNs have demonstrated excellent performance and broad application prospects. GNNs capture
the relationships between nodes through a message-passing
mechanism, enabling them to excel in various graph tasks.
However, this also makes GNNs more susceptible to adversarial attacks. Recent studies (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and
Günnemann 2018; Dai et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019) have
shown that by manipulating features, edges, and injecting
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13357

