The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DPCL-Diff: Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning Based on Graph Node
Diffusion Model with Dual-Domain Periodic Contrastive Learning
Yukun Cao, Lisheng Wang * , Luobin Huang
Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, China
caoyukun@shiep.edu.cn, 2207992575@mail.shiep.edu.cn, 1877098981@mail.shiep.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal knowledge graph (TKG) reasoning that infers future
missing facts is an essential and challenging task. Predicting
future events typically relies on closely related historical facts,
yielding more accurate results for repetitive or periodic events.
However, for future events with sparse historical interactions,
the effectiveness of this method, which focuses on leveraging
high-frequency historical information, diminishes. Recently,
the capabilities of diffusion models in image generation have
opened new opportunities for TKG reasoning. Therefore, we
propose a graph node diffusion model with dual-domain periodic contrastive learning (DPCL-Diff). Graph node diffusion
model (GNDiff) introduces noise into sparsely related events
to simulate new events, generating high-quality data that better
conforms to the actual distribution. This generative mechanism significantly enhances the model’s ability to reason about
new events. Additionally, the dual-domain periodic contrastive
learning (DPCL) maps periodic and non-periodic event entities
to Poincaré and Euclidean spaces, leveraging their characteristics to distinguish similar periodic events effectively. Experimental results on four public datasets demonstrate that DPCLDiff significantly outperforms state-of-the-art TKG models
in event prediction, demonstrating our approach’s effectiveness. This study also investigates the combined effectiveness
of GNDiff and DPCL in TKG tasks.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) store a large amount of information about the natural world and have shown great success in
many downstream applications, such as natural language processing (Hu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2020), recommendation
system (Xuan et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2022), and information retrieval (Zhou et al. 2022). Traditional KGs typically only contain static snapshots of facts, integrating facts (also known as
events) in the form of static relational triples (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜), where
𝑠 and 𝑜 represent the subject and object entities, respectively,
and 𝑟 represents the relationship type. However, in the real
world, knowledge evolves and constantly exhibits complex
temporal dynamics (Wang et al. 2017; Yin and Cui 2016),
which has inspired the construction and application of Temporal Knowledge Graph (TKG). TKG extends the previous
static relational triples (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) to quaternions (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜, 𝑡) with
* Lisheng Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14806

timestamps. Thus, the TKG consists of multiple snapshots
where facts in the same snapshot appear simultaneously.
Existing studies have identified two main types of new
events in TKG: periodic events that will recur (Liang et al.
2023; Li et al. 2021), and events that have not occurred before
but may occur in the future (Xu et al. 2023). For these new
events, TKG reasoning offers fresh perspectives and insights
for many downstream applications, such as event prediction
(Zhou et al. 2023), political decision making (Zhang and
Zhou 2022), dialogue generation (Hou et al. 2024), and text
generation (Li et al. 2022b). These applications have greatly
stimulated intense interest in TKG. In this work, we focus on
predicting new facts in future time, a task known as graph
extrapolation (Chen et al. 2023; Li et al. 2021). Our goal is to
predict the missing entities in the query (𝑠, 𝑝, ?, 𝑡) for future
timestamps 𝑡 that still need to be observed in the training set.
Most current work models the structural and temporal characteristics of TKG to capture the specific relationships and
temporal dependencies between different events for future
event prediction.Many studies (Liang et al. 2023; Xu et al.
2023; Li et al. 2021)can predict repetitive or periodic events
by referring to the known historical events and distinguishing
the different effects of periodic and non-periodic events on
reasoning tasks through contrastive learning. However, in
actual reasoning tasks, some periodic events share the same
head entities and relations, differing only in their tail entities. This results in overly similar representations, making it
difficult to distinguish them during reasoning. Additionally,
In event-based TKG, new events that have never occurred
account for about 40% (Jäger 2018). Due to the sparse traces
of temporal interactions throughout the timeline of these new
events, it is impossible to use reasoning methods based on
high-frequency periodic events, resulting in poor reasoning
performance for these types of events.
To address the above issue, we propose a diffusion modelbased dual-doma in periodic contrast learning (DPCL-Diff)
for temporal knowledge graph reasoning (TKG), using a
Graph Node Diffusion model (GNDiff) to infer new events.
GNDiff solves the sparse interaction traces for new events
by adding noise to correlated sparse events of new entities
on the timeline. This diffusion mechanism simulates the realworld occurrence of new events, generating high-quality data
that closely align with the actual distribution through gradual
correction during the denoising process. It also captures the

