The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SalM2 : An Extremely Lightweight Saliency Mamba Model for Real-Time
Cognitive Awareness of Driver Attention
Chunyu Zhao, Wentao Mu, Xian Zhou, Wenbo Liu, Fei Yan, Tao Deng*
School of Information Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
{zhaochunyu, mwt2858781490, zhouxian, liuwenbo}@my.swjtu.edu.cn,
fyan@home.swjtu.edu.cn, tdeng@swjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Driver attention recognition in driving scenarios is a popular direction in traffic scene perception technology. It aims to
understand human driver attention to focus on specific targets/objects in the driving scene. However, traffic scenes contain
not only a large amount of visual information but also semantic information related to driving tasks. Existing methods
lack attention to the actual semantic information present in
driving scenes. Additionally, the traffic scene is a complex
and dynamic process that requires constant attention to objects related to the current driving task. Existing models, influenced by their foundational frameworks, tend to have large
parameter counts and complex structures. Therefore, this paper proposes a real-time saliency Mamba network based on
the latest Mamba framework. As shown in Figure 1, our
model uses very few parameters (0.08M, only 0.09∼11.16%
of other models), while maintaining SOTA performance or
achieving over 98% of the SOTA model’s performance.

AUC_b: 98.57%

AUC_j: 99.77%

NSS: 100.63%

Para: 0.20%

Para: 0.20%

Para: 0.09%

CC: 100.32%

SIM: 97.86%

KLD: 100%

Para: 0.20%

Para: 0.09%

Para: 0.20%

Figure 1: Comparison of Parameters and Performance. We
compare our model with other state-of-the-art models on
the DrFixD-rainy dataset. The horizontal axis represents the
number of parameters (M), and the vertical axis represents
performance. • denotes our model, and • denotes the bestperforming model among the comparison models, and • denotes other comparison models. denotes truncated coordinates, with the origin set to 0.08.

Code — https://github.com/zhao-chunyu/SaliencyMamba

Introduction
With the rapid advancement of autonomous driving technology, understanding and predicting driver behavior has become increasingly important. Among the many factors affecting driving safety, the driver’s attention state is crucial
(Balasubramani et al. 2024). Distraction or insufficient attention can lead to reduced perception of the surrounding
environment, increasing the risk of traffic accidents (Fang
et al. 2024). Therefore, research on methods for recognizing
driver attention is of great significance for enhancing road
safety and advancing the development of intelligent driving
assistance systems.
Given that the traffic driving scenario is dynamic and
complex (Alkaabi 2023), it is unwise to analyze driver attention solely based on features from the driving scene. The
driving environment contains not only rich “Bottom-up” image features (such as the sky, buildings, vehicles, etc.) but
also “Top-down” information related to the current driving
task (such as vehicles ahead, pedestrians crossing the road,

traffic lights, etc.). Relying only on features within the driving scene to identify driver attention may cause the model
to overfit to the labeled driver attention data, leading to a
lack of understanding of the driving context and reducing
the model’s generalization ability. However, within the visual attention system, relevant stimuli and cues can be selected while filtering out less relevant ones from the rich
visual information around us. Attention resources are then
allocated to these stimuli and cues, typically by directing
gaze toward objects of interest in the visual environment
(Hertz-Palmor et al. 2023; Itti and Koch 2001). This process
is known as selective visual attention or selective attention
allocation (Evans et al. 2011). Similarly, in specific traffic
driving scenarios, a driver’s visual attention, driven by the
driving task, tends to focus on one or more regions or targets
that are related to the task at hand. When performing a driving task, a driver’s attention needs to remain highly focused,
consistently allocating attention to objects or areas relevant
to the current driving task. If the driving scenario or task
changes, the driver’s attention will also shift accordingly.
Therefore, the semantic information of the current driving

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1647

