The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Trading Off Quality and Uncertainty Through Multi-Objective Optimisation in
Batch Bayesian Optimisation
Chao Jiang and Miqing Li*
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom
cxj249@student.bham.ac.uk, m.li.8@bham.ac.uk

Abstract

which is particularly beneficial when dealing with expensive
problems. As a result, batch (parallel) Bayesian optimisation
(BBO) has been developed (Schonlau 1997), in which q solutions are selected for evaluation in parallel by using a batch
method. By evaluating q solutions in parallel, BBO can significantly reduce the overall optimisation time. However, in
BBO the task of balancing exploitation and exploration is
non-trivial as one may not want to find a batch of adjacent
solutions that represent similar trade-offs between exploitation and exploration.
In response to the challenge faced in batch methods, one
of the recent advancements started making use of multiple
acquisition functions (Bischl et al. 2014; Feng et al. 2015;
Grobler, Kok, and Wilke 2017; Lyu et al. 2018; Chen, Luo,
and Wang 2022; Chen et al. 2023). These studies leverage
multi-objective optimisation to simultaneously consider several acquisition functions, thereby allowing a complement
between them. One benefit of considering multiple acquisition functions in BBO is that a number of solutions having
different preferences with respect to exploitation and exploration can be selected in a batch.
However, despite having their own preferences, acquisition functions may behave similarly since they all aim to
achieve a good balance between exploitation and exploration. This may lead to the selection of similar solutions
for evaluation. Figure 1 illustrates this situation, where acquisition functions PI, EI, and LCB are considered. As can
be seen from the figure, the Pareto fronts of all the combinations of these acquisition functions are located within a narrow area (marked by a red line). Keeping searching around
this area may not help in exploring undeveloped, yet potentially promising, areas.
In this paper, we attempt to address the above issue by
directly treating exploitation and exploration as two objectives, reflected by quality (i.e., the posterior mean) and uncertainty, respectively. These two very different objectives
enable the search to have chances to explore diverse yet potentially promising areas. As can be seen from Figure 1,
the Pareto front of exploitation (i.e., µ(x)) and exploration
(σ(x)) consists of points on multiple areas (cyan points in
the top panel), including some far from the Pareto front area
of the three acquisition functions (red line). We call the proposed method POEE (Pareto optimisation for exploitation
and exploration), and its main contributions are as follows.

Batch Bayesian Optimisation (BBO) has emerged as a potent
approach for optimising expensive black-box functions. Central to BBO is the issue of selecting a number of solutions at
the same time through a batch method, in the hope for them
to represent good, yet different, trade-offs between exploitation and exploration. To address this issue, one of the recent
advancements has leveraged multi-objective optimisation to
simultaneously consider several acquisition functions (e.g.,
PI, EI, and LCB), allowing them to complement each other.
However, acquisition functions may behave similarly (since
they all aim for a good balance between exploitation and exploration), restricting the search on different promising areas.
In this paper, we attempt to address the above issue. We directly treat exploitation (reflected by quality, i.e., the posterior
mean) and exploration (reflected by uncertainty) as two objectives. When selecting trade-off solutions between the two
objectives, we consider a dynamically updated Pareto front
where the uncertainty changes once a solution is selected,
thereby allowing exploration on different promising areas.
Through an extensive experiment study, we show the effectiveness of the proposed method in comparison with state-ofthe-arts in the area.

Introduction
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) is a successful technique for
solving expensive black-box problems (Wang et al. 2017a;
Eriksson et al. 2019; Chugh 2020; Song et al. 2022; Huang
et al. 2024; Santoni et al. 2024). In BO, the search needs
to achieve a trade-off between exploitation and exploration
during the optimisation process. The former involves refining and leveraging high-quality solutions that have already been identified, while the latter entails exploring lessknown areas. In BO, an acquisition function plays a major
role in achieving the trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Notable examples of such acquisition functions
include Probability of Improvement (PI) (Kushner 1964),
Expected Improvement (EI) (Mockus, Tiesis, and Zilinskas
1978), and Lower Confidence Bound (LCB) (Lai and Robbins 1985).
In practical scenarios, it is common to leverage hardware
capabilities to conduct a number of evaluations in parallel,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27027

