The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchically-Structured Open-Vocabulary Indoor Scene Synthesis
with Pre-trained Large Language Model
Weilin Sun1 , Xinran Li1 , Manyi Li1 * , Kai Xu2 * , Xiangxu Meng1 , Lei Meng1, 3 *
1

School of Software, Shandong University, China
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, China
3
Shandong Research Institute of Industrial Technology, China
{sunweilin, xinranli}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, manyili@sdu.edu.cn, kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com, {mxx, lmeng}@sdu.edu.cn,
2

Abstract
Indoor scene synthesis aims to automatically produce plausible, realistic and diverse 3D indoor scenes, especially given
arbitrary user requirements. Recently, the promising generalization ability of pre-trained large language models (LLM)
assist in open-vocabulary indoor scene synthesis. However,
the challenge lies in converting the LLM-generated outputs
into reasonable and physically feasible scene layouts. In this
paper, we propose to generate hierarchically structured scene
descriptions with LLM and then compute the scene layouts.
Specifically, we train a hierarchy-aware network to infer the
fine-grained relative positions between objects and design a
divide-and-conquer optimization to solve for scene layouts.
The advantages of using hierarchically structured scene representation are two-fold. First, the hierarchical structure provides a rough grounding for object arrangement, which alleviates contradictory placements with dense relations and enhances the generalization ability of the network to infer finegrained placements. Second, it naturally supports the divideand-conquer optimization, by first arranging the sub-scenes
and then the entire scene, to more effectively solve for a feasible layout. We conduct extensive comparison experiments
and ablation studies with both qualitative and quantitative
evaluations to validate the effectiveness of our key designs
with the hierarchically structured scene representation. Our
approach can generate more reasonable scene layouts while
better aligned with the user requirements and LLM descriptions. We also present open-vocabulary scene synthesis and
interactive scene design results to show the strength of our
approach in the applications.

1

bed:{
x: 1.9; y: 1.0; z: 0.5; length:
1.8m; width:2.0m;...}
nightstand:{
x: 1.9; y: 1.0; z: 0.5;...}...

LLM

(a) Numerical layouts

LLM

bed

Out-of-Boundary

nightstand

near, left of
far
near, right of
far, left of
far

(b) Dense scene graphs

Unreasonable Placements

bed

ont

right

left of

nightstand

in fr

of

above

LLM

of

User Input: “The
room is about 4x5
meters. There will
be an elderly man
living in this room.”

abo
ve

Overlapped

(c) Hierarchical descriptions

Figure 1: Compared to LLM-generated (a) numerical layouts and (b) scene graphs with dense relations, we use (c)
LLM-generated hierarchical scene descriptions, whose internal nodes represent functional areas with compact and
generalizable prior, to generate more reasonable and physically feasible scene layouts aligned with the descriptions.

user requirements. However, due to the complexity of indoor
scenes, most of them are limited within the scope of training
data and cannot be generalized to arbitrary conditions.
Some pioneer works (Feng et al. 2023; Fu et al. 2024;
Yang et al. 2024b) make use of the promising generalization ability of pre-trained large language models (LLM) to
address the open-vocabulary scene synthesis task, where
the LLM is responsible for interpreting any textual requirement into detailed scene configurations. The challenge lies
in obtaining reasonable and physically feasible scene layouts from LLM outputs. Directly using LLM to output numerical layouts (Feng et al. 2023) causes unreliable results
with heavy object overlap and out-of-boundary, since LLM
fails to understand the spatial relationship with numerical
layouts. On the other hand, LLM shows good performance
in generating detailed text descriptions of various scenes, but
still require an approach to convert the textual descriptions
into numerical layouts while maintaining the generalization
of the entire pipeline. The existing methods (Fu et al. 2024;
Yang et al. 2024b) have to pre-define textual phrases and numerical rules for several types of spatial relations to obtain

Introduction

Indoor scene design requires a comprehensive consideration
of space partition, functional arrangement, and aesthetic creativity to determine the object selection and placement to
form the scene layout. There has been a vast amount of research on indoor scene synthesis, ranging from layout optimization (Yu et al. 2011; Merrell et al. 2011; Qi et al.
2018) to various conditional scene synthesis (Wang et al.
2018; Paschalidou et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2023; Tang et al.
2023). The goal is to automatically produce plausible, realistic, and diverse 3D indoor scenes, especially given arbitrary
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7122

