The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Valid Dual Bounds in Constraint Programming:
Boosted Lagrangian Decomposition with Self-Supervised Learning
Swann Bessa,1,2,* Darius Dabert,1, 2, * Max Bourgeat,1
Louis-Martin Rousseau,1 Quentin Cappart1
1

Polytechnique Montréal, Montreal, Canada
2
Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
{swann.bessaa, darius.dabert}@polytechnique.edu
{max.bourgeat, louis-martin.rousseau, quentin.cappart}@polymtl.ca
Abstract

problem. Constraint programming (CP) is a versatile tool
for addressing combinatorial optimization problems (Rossi,
Van Beek, and Walsh 2006) as it is not confined to linear
models, unlike mixed-integer programming (MIP). It can
theoretically address any combinatorial problem, including
those with non-linear constraints or objectives. Standard CP
solvers rely on a search procedure that exhaustively yet efficiently enumerates all possible assignments of values to
variables until the optimal solution is found.
The search is commonly conducted depth-first, combined
with branching and pruning techniques. The search backtracks to the previous decision point when an infeasible solution is encountered due to an empty domain. Through this
procedure, and given that the entire search space is explored,
the final solution found is proven to be optimal. Unfortunately, this tree search grows exponentially with the number
of variables, making a complete enumeration of solutions
still intractable for large problems. To address this challenge,
CP search is first enhanced through a mechanism called
propagation, which reduces the number of possible combinations and, consequently, the size of the tree. Given the current domains of the variables and a constraint, propagation
eliminates values from the domains that cannot be part of
the final solution due to constraint violations. This process
is repeated at each domain change and for each constraint
until no more values can be removed from the domains.
A first design choice in CP is the branching strategy,
which dictates how the search space is explored. Welldesigned heuristics are more likely to discover promising
solutions, whereas poor heuristics may lead the search into
unproductive regions of the solution space. The selection of
an appropriate branching strategy is generally non-trivial,
and its automatic design with learning methods has been extensively studied by the research community (Michel and
Van Hentenryck 2012; Song et al. 2022; Marty et al. 2024).
A second critical choice, though much less explored through
the lens of learning, is the bounding strategy. Most existing
CP solvers rely on a straightforward mechanism. When a
feasible solution is found, a new constraint is added to ensure the following solution is better than the current one.
This new constraint can enable more propagation. Unfortunately, the filtering provided by this approach is often relatively poor. Furthermore, this mechanism only allows the
computation of a primal bound and does not offer dual

Lagrangian decomposition (LD) is a relaxation method that
provides a dual bound for constrained optimization problems
by decomposing them into more manageable sub-problems.
This bound can be used in branch-and-bound algorithms to
prune the search space effectively. In brief, a vector of Lagrangian multipliers is associated with each sub-problem, and
an iterative procedure (e.g., a sub-gradient optimization) adjusts these multipliers to find the tightest bound. Initially
applied to integer programming, Lagrangian decomposition
also had success in constraint programming due to its versatility and the fact that global constraints provide natural
sub-problems. However, the non-linear and combinatorial nature of sub-problems in constraint programming makes it
computationally intensive to optimize the Lagrangian multipliers with sub-gradient methods at each node of the tree
search. This currently limits the practicality of LD as a general bounding mechanism for constraint programming. To
address this challenge, we propose a self-supervised learning approach that leverages neural networks to generate multipliers directly, yielding tight bounds. This approach significantly reduces the number of sub-gradient optimization
steps required, enhancing the pruning efficiency and reducing the execution time of constraint programming solvers.
This contribution is one of the few that leverage learning
to enhance bounding mechanisms on the dual side, a critical element in the design of combinatorial solvers. This work
presents a generic method for learning valid dual bounds in
constraint programming. We validate our approach on two
challenging combinatorial problems: The multi-dimensional
knapsack problem and the shift scheduling problem. The results show that our approach can solve more instances than
the standard application of LD to constraint programming,
reduce execution time by more than half, and has promising
generalization ability through fine-tuning.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization has applications across diverse
fields, such as aerospace, scheduling, and economics. The
objective is to identify an optimal solution from a finite set of
possibilities. A significant challenge in combinatorial optimization is the state-space explosion problem: the number of
potential solutions grows exponentially with the size of the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11113

