The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimal Auction Design for Mixed Bidders
Xiaohui Bei1 , Pinyan Lu2 , Zhiqi Wang2 , Tao Xiao3 , Xiang Yan3
1
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics, Shanghai University of Finance and
Economics
3
Huawei Taylor Lab
xhbei@ntu.edu.sg, lu.pinyan@mail.shufe.edu.cn, wangzhiq@126.com, xiaotao21@huawei.com, xyansjtu@163.com
2

Abstract

auto-bidding services for advertisers, meaning DSPs know
the bidder’s value and type, whereas ADX does not. In this
scenario, a well-designed auction format can assist in generating more profits and facilitating better resource allocation.
Besides advertising auctions, art auctions also involve
both UM and VM. Art pieces are unique and often hold sentimental or historical value, making collectors or enthusiasts
more inclined to purchase them at higher prices. Hence, they
could be considered VMs in this context. However, some
other bidders buy the art pieces for their potential investment
value. These bidders should be modeled as UMs, resulting in
the coexistence of UMs and VMs in art auctions. Note that
VMs are usually more willing to spend money in an auction,
which means there is a large potential for the mechanism to
extract more revenue from them.
In most previous works, UMs and VMs are usually considered separately. That is, all bidders in an auction are assumed to have the same UM/VM type. However, since different advertisers usually have different bidding strategies, a
practical online advertising platform observes a mixture of
UMs and VMs participating in an auction simultaneously,
and moreover, the auctioneer cannot distinguish them.
The presence of both UMs and VMs brings additional
challenges designing Incentive Compatible (IC) and Individually Rational (IR) mechanisms. Specifically, relying on the
bidders who bid their own types makes them able to benefit
by misreporting both of their values and/or UM/VM types.
The problem moves to the multi-parameter from the singleparameter domain, where people have little understanding
of the optimal auction design in most settings.
In this work, we investigate the revenue-maximizing optimal auction design for mixed bidders under the Bayesian
setting1 . Our main results are:

The predominant setting in classic auction theory considers
bidders as utility maximizers (UMs), who aim to maximize
quasi-linear utility functions. Recent autobidding strategies
in online advertising have sparked interest in auction design with value maximizers (VMs), who aim to maximize the
total value obtained. In this work, we investigate revenuemaximizing auction design for selling a single item to a
mix of UMs and VMs. Crucially, we assume the UM/VM
type is private information of a bidder. This shift to a multiparameter domain complicates the design of incentive compatible mechanisms. Under this setting, we first characterize
the optimal auction structure for auctions with a single bidder.
We observe that the optimal auction moves gradually from a
first-price auction to a Myerson auction as the probability of
the bidder being a UM increases from 0 to 1. We also extend
our study to multi-bidder setting and present an algorithm for
deriving the optimal lookahead auction with multiple mixed
types of bidders.

Introduction
In the past decades, online advertising has experienced significant success through effective auction design. The role of
online advertising auctions in generating revenue for many
IT companies is immense. At the same time, the scale and
complexity of the online advertising market have led to the
development and adoption of more efficient auction designs
for the online environment.
The classical auction theory mainly builds upon the utility maximizer (UM) model; the objective of a UM is to
maximize her (quasi-linear) utility, which is the difference
between the allocated value and the payment. In the meanwhile, the growing adoption of autobidding in online advertising has motivated a new value maximizer (VM) paradigm
(Aggarwal, Badanidiyuru, and Mehta 2019; Balseiro et al.
2021; Deng et al. 2021). Unlike the UMs, the objective of
a VM is to maximize the total value she receives. VM can
be used to model, for example, a company’s advertising department that cannot collect the unspent budget (Lu, Xu,
and Zhang 2023). Consider an ad exchange (ADX) in online ads systems, which is the auctioneer facing bids from
the demand-side platforms (DSPs). Modern DSPs provide

• We provide a neat characterization of IC auctions in the
presence of both UMs and VMs simultaneously. We then
express the revenue as a function only related to the allocation for UMs. Unlike the single-parameter environment in which the objective is linear with respect to the
allocation function, our characterization and revenue expression are more complex in the mixed bidder setting.
• We then apply the variation method to solve the optimal
allocation function and present an algorithm to compute

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13614

Mechanism based on known prior of bidder’s types and values.

