The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tri-Ergon: Fine-Grained Video-to-Audio Generation with Multi-Modal
Conditions and LUFS Control
Bingliang Li1,2 * , Fengyu Yang2 * , Yuxin Mao3 , Qingwen Ye1 , Hongkai Chen1† , Yiran Zhong4 †
1

vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University
4
OpenNLPLab
{bingliangli,fengyuyang1}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, maoyuxin@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, qingwen.ye@vivo.com,
allenhkchen@gmail.com, zhongyiran@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Recent innovations in V2A generation have demonstrated considerable progress; however, current state-of-theart methods still face limitations that hinder their practical
application in industrial settings. Three primary issues have
been identified in existing methods: i) The generated audio
content may not be closely aligned with the corresponding
visual or textual inputs due to single/double modality inputs.
ii) Lack of precise control over audio attributes to effectively
synchronize the audio and visual contents. iii) The absence
of high fidelity, stereo, long-duration, and open-domain audio generation capability. Overcoming these challenges is
essential for improving the effectiveness of V2A models in
accurately generating audio alongside visual content.
In this paper, we posit that these challenges can be effectively mitigated through the utilization of fine-grained audio control and generation. Our concept of fine-grained encompasses two key aspects: i) the application of multi-modal
conditions for audio generation, and ii) the implementation
of a meticulous audio generation process that allows for exact control over loudness, audio quality, and duration. The
former enables the model to leverage a broader range of information for audio generation, resulting in more coherent
audio output. For instance, text information can provide semantic context for the audio, which is particularly beneficial
for off-screen audio generation. Audio input serves as a style
reference for the audio generation process. The latter aspect
of fine-grained control ensures that the generated audio is
closely aligned with the visual input and possesses enhanced
quality.
In light of the aforementioned observation, we propose
a novel framework called Tri-Ergon1 to address the above
limitations, as depicted in Figure 1. Tri-Ergon introduces
three multi-modal conditioning and precise loudness control
mechanisms. Specifically, the multi-modal conditioning utilizes textual, auditory, visual prompts to steer the audio generation process, enabling the creation of audio tracks that are
semantically rich and contextually appropriate. An unbalanced multi-modal prompting module is introduced to en-

Video-to-audio (V2A) generation utilizes visual-only video
features to produce realistic sounds that correspond to the
scene. However, current V2A models often lack fine-grained
control over the generated audio, especially in terms of loudness variation and the incorporation of multi-modal conditions. To overcome these limitations, we introduce Tri-Ergon,
a diffusion-based V2A model that incorporates textual, auditory, and pixel-level visual prompts to enable detailed and
semantically rich audio synthesis. Additionally, we introduce Loudness Units relative to Full Scale (LUFS) embedding, which allows for precise manual control of the loudness
changes over time for individual audio channels, enabling our
model to effectively address the intricate correlation of video
and audio in real-world Foley workflows. Tri-Ergon is capable of creating 44.1 kHz high-fidelity stereo audio clips of
varying lengths up to 60 seconds, which significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art V2A methods that typically
generate mono audio for a fixed duration.

Project website — https://tri-ergon.github.io/Tri-Ergon/

Introduction
When we experience visual events, we naturally expect to
hear the corresponding sounds, enhancing our understanding and perception of the world. However, current video generation models mainly focus on creating visual content from
text, often neglecting the integration of audio. The videoto-audio (V2A) task aims to fill this gap by generating semantically relevant and temporally synchronized audio from
video frames. Due to its potential applications in movie automatic dubbing, video content production, game production, and other fields, the V2A task has attracted growing
interest. As video generation models undergo continual refinement, the generation of fine-grained, high-fidelity, synchronized audio that aligns with prescribed loudness standards has emerged as a pivotal focal point for research.

1
In memory of the sound-on-film system developed around
1919 (Lipton 2021) by three German inventors. Tri-Ergon means
“the work of three”, derived from the Greek word τ ρία, which
corresponds to the three modalities in our work.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4616

