The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BSDB-Net: Band-Split Dual-Branch Network with Selective State Spaces
Mechanism for Monaural Speech Enhancement
Cunhang Fan1 , Enrui Liu1 , Andong Li2,3 * , Jianhua Tao4 , Jian Zhou1 , Jiahao Li1 , Chengshi
Zheng2,3 , Zhao Lv1 *
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
2
Key Laboratory of Noise and Vibration Research, Institute of Acoustics Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
cunhang.fan@ahu.edu.cn, e23201090@stu.ahu.edu.cn, liandong@mail.ioa.ac.cn, jhtao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
jzhou@ahu.edu.cn, e23301209@stu.ahu.edu.cn, cszheng@mail.ioa.ac.cn, kjlz@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

techniques that are both effective and computationally efficient (Pandey and Wang 2019).
Existing speech enhancement methods can be roughly
categorized into two classes, namely in the time domain (Luo and Mesgarani 2019; Yin et al. 2020) and in the
time-frequency (T-F) domain. This paper mainly focuses on
the latter. Initially, SE methods focused on magnitude spectrum enhancement with the phase kept unaltered (Tan and
Wang 2019). Subsequent researches have revealed the pivotal role of phase (Yin et al. 2020), which inspire many studies to model complex spectra to better recover phase information. Masking-based methods, such as the complex ratio
mask (Williamson, Wang, and Wang 2015), have been recognized for their ability to modulate both the real (R) and
imaginary (I) components of the noisy complex spectra, surpassing the performance of traditional masks like ideal binary mask (Divenyi 2004) and ideal ratio mask (Hummersone, Stokes, and Brookes 2014). Besides, complex spectral mapping (CSM) has also been introduced to reconstruct
the target RI components directly (Tan and Wang 2019).
However, this direct mapping can lead to a compensation
effect between phase and magnitude (Wang, Wichern, and
Le Roux 2021). Recent advancements have seen the application of decoupling concepts in audio processing (Alex
et al. 2024). Some multi-stage methods have been proposed
to address SE problems. These methods decouple the original mapping problem into two stages: predicting the magnitude spectrum at first and refining the complex spectrum
through residual learning in the second stage. This approach
partially mitigates the implicit compensation effect between
phase and magnitude (Li et al. 2021a). Nonetheless, the sequential nature of these methods can be limiting, as the performance of later stages is heavily dependent on the output
of earlier stages (Li et al. 2022b).
Despite the promising results of previous works, their
high computational complexity can impede the practical
application of SE models. First, as a front-end task, the
impact of SE on downstream tasks, such as ASR, should
be considered. Moreover, effective deployment in edge
or resource-constrained environments, like online meetings
and real-time communications, necessitates extremely low-

Although the complex spectrum-based speech enhancement
(SE) methods have achieved significant performance, coupling amplitude and phase can lead to a compensation effect, where amplitude information is sacrificed to compensate for the phase that is harmful to SE. In addition, to further
improve the performance of SE, many modules are stacked
onto SE, resulting in increased model complexity that limits
the application of SE. To address these problems, we proposed a dual-path network based on compressed frequency
using Mamba. First, we extract amplitude and phase information through parallel dual branches. This approach leverages
structured complex spectra to implicitly capture phase information and solves the compensation effect by decoupling amplitude and phase, and the network incorporates an interaction module to suppress unnecessary parts and recover missing components from the other branch. Second, to reduce network complexity, the network introduces a band-split strategy
to compress the frequency dimension. To further reduce complexity while maintaining good performance, we designed a
Mamba-based module that models the time and frequency dimensions under linear complexity. Finally, compared to baselines, our model achieves an average 8.3 times reduction in
computational complexity while maintaining superior performance. Furthermore, it achieves a 25 times reduction in complexity compared to transformer-based models.

Introduction
In the realm of audio signal processing, speech enhancement (SE) is regarded as a fundamental technique to recover
the clean speech from noisy environments. The degradation
of speech quality by background noise is not only perceptually bothersome but also significantly impairs the performance of automatic speech recognition (ASR) (Chan 2016;
Liu et al. 2018). Also, SE is indispensable in smart devices,
vehicular systems, and home automation. With the burgeoning prevalence of online conferencing, the demand for realtime SE solutions has surged, underscoring the necessity for
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23850

