The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IsUMap: Manifold Learning and Data Visualization leveraging Vietoris-Rips
Filtrations
Parvaneh Joharinad * 1,2 , Hannaneh Fahimi * 1,2 , Lukas Silvester Barth * 2 , Janis Keck * 2, 3 , Jürgen
Jost2
1

Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS,AI) Dresden/Leipzig, Germany,
2
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig, Germany,
3
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
parvaneh.joharinad@mis.mpg.de, fatemeh.fahimi@mis.mpg.de, lukas.barth@mis.mpg.de, janis.keck@maxplanckschools.de,
jjost@mis.mpg.de
Abstract

into low-dimensional representations include feature learning or representation learning techniques. These enable systems to automatically discover the necessary representations
for various downstream tasks. A standard strategy in representation learning is to train a deep neural network, call one
of the latent layers the representation layer and investigate
it with a variety of techniques, cf. (Bengio, Courville, and
Vincent 2013; Botteghi, Poel, and Brune 2022). While fascinating and fruitful, a disadvantage is that those representations are hard to interpret because of the large number of
learnable parameters. In this article, we thus focus on a manifold learning algorithm that has only very few predefined
parameters and is hence particularly transparent. Topological Data Analysis (TDA) translates the homology classes of
a filtered simplicial complex of Vietoris-Rips (VR) type into
a set of barcodes (Zomorodian and Carlsson 2004; Carlsson 2009) to capture the persistent topological features of
a point cloud. Simplicial complexes can encode relations,
e.g. in social networks, that are of higher-order than those in
binary metric relations. This suggests them as natural mathematical objects for data analysis, even when the analysis
is geometric, and extends beyond inferring topological characteristics as in TDA. Our approach therefore is also different from TDA. It leverages the VR filtration corresponding to the given metric, to combine local geometries and to
achieve a unified global geometric representation. Thus, our
new method, called IsUMap (operating in the category of
uber-metric spaces (UM))), combines ideas from TDA with
the established dimensionality reduction methods of UMAP
(McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018) and Isomap (Tenenbaum, Silva, and Langford 2000). IsUMap is specifically
designed to address the issue of non-uniform data distribution on a low-dimensional manifold by applying local distortions to the distance function, thereby overcoming the limitation of the above mentioned approaches. But this leads to
the challenge of aggregating pairwise similarities between
data points, represented by a distance function, across overlapping neighborhoods with different geometries. When the
data is initially sampled from a Riemannian manifold (a natural assumption), we eventually obtain a triangulated metric
space composed of distorted local pieces of that manifold,
but with a unified intrinsic global distance function. This

We introduce IsUMap, a novel manifold learning technique.
It enhances data representation by integrating aspects of
UMAP and Isomap with Vietoris-Rips filtrations and metric realization of one-parameter filtrations of simplicial complexes.
Inferring topological information from combinatorial models
which have been built according to metric relations (VietorisRips complexes) has proven useful in topological data analysis and general machine learning applications. This encourages the use of such objects for geometric inference.
We extend this research direction with a clear theoretical
pipeline. It not only provides a comprehensive guide for assigning a (triangulated) metric space to every admissible oneparameter filtration of simplicial complexes but also offers a
method for merging these objects. Our method thus presents
a systematic and detailed construction of a metric representation for locally distorted metric spaces that captures complex
data structures more accurately than previous schemes. It also
addresses limitations in existing methods by accommodating
non-uniform data distributions and intricate local geometries.
We validate its performance through extensive experiments
on examples with known geometries and in applications to
data, in particular from computational biology.

Code and extended article with appendix available at —
https://github.com/LUK4S-B/IsUMap

1

Introduction

A good representation of complex data may enable an intuitive understanding of important features, making it indispensable for data analysis in a wide range of scientific
disciplines and applications. Good representations are often
more compact (and hence computationally more efficient)
than the original data, while capturing or even enhancing
the relevant features. This makes them useful for downstream tasks, transfer learning and a better understanding
of the data. The many tools for transforming complex data
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17699

