The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

The VOROS: Lifting ROC Curves to 3D to Summarize Unbalanced Classifier
Performance
Christopher Ratigan1 , Lenore Cowen1, 2
1

2

Department of Mathematics, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155 USA
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155 USA
christopher.ratigan@tufts.edu, cowen@cs.tufts.edu

Abstract
While the area under the ROC curve is perhaps the most common measure that is used to rank the relative performance
of different binary classifiers, longstanding field folklore has
noted that it can be a measure that ill-captures the benefits
of different classifiers when either the actual class values or
misclassification costs are highly unbalanced between the two
classes. We introduce a new ROC surface, and the VOROS,
a volume over this ROC surface, as a natural way to capture
these costs, by lifting the ROC curve to 3D. Compared to previous attempts to generalize the ROC curve, our formulation
also provides a simple and intuitive way to model the scenario
when only ranges, rather than exact values, are known for
possible class imbalance and misclassification costs.

Code — https://github.com/ChristopherRatigan/VOROS

Introduction
The ROC curve, constructed by plotting the False Positive
Rate (FPR) against the True Positive Rate (TPR), is the most
canonical way to measure the performance of a binary classifier.
Definition 1. Given an ROC curve y = f (x), the area under
the ROC curve, henceforth AUROC, is defined by
Z 1
f (x)dx
0

As has long been known (Hand 2009), automatically choosing the binary classifier with the higher AUROC makes perfect sense when two rather strong conditions are met: 1) the
expected ratio of positives to negatives in the dataset where
the classifier is to be deployed is balanced or nearly balanced,
and 2) the cost of misclassifying a positive example as negative is equal or nearly equal to the cost of misclassifying
a negative example as positive, i.e. that C0 /C1 ≈ 1 and
|P|/|N | ≈ 1, where we denote by P the set of observations
that are positive and N denotes the set of observations that
are negative. C0 and C1 denote the cost of misclassifying
a case from N as belonging to P and the converse, respectively. The area under the ROC curve of a binary classifier F
represents the probability that given two observations ρ ∈ P
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20148

and η ∈ N , F assigns a higher score to ρ than it does to η
(Bradley 1997).
But, if the costs or classes are not balanced, then it is not
always sensible to directly compare the AUROCs in this
pairwise manner. If one class has many more cases than the
other, comparing a random positive and negative example
is unlikely to occur in practice. Likewise, if the two types
of errors differ in individual costs then it may not be as
important that it is possible to separate a randomly chosen
positive example from a randomly chosen negative example.
Observe that when exact information is available on the
ratios C0 /C1 and |P|/|N |, it is always possible to find a binary classifier (point) taken from the ROC curve of classifier
F1 that minimizes the total misclassification cost, and a binary classifier taken from the ROC curve of classifier F2 that
minimizes the total misclassification cost, and then choose
whichever classifier has lower total misclassification cost.
However, as we (see example datasets, below) and others
demonstrate (Provost, Fawcett, and Kohavi 1998; Hand 2009;
Drummond and Holte 2000)), such a cost comparison no
longer corresponds to a comparison of the AUROCs. In fact,
classifiers with better AUROCs can perform much worse in
total misclassification cost in these settings.
Much previous work has attempted to deal with the shortcomings of the AUROC by looking at different notions of a
weighted AUROC (McClish 1989; Maurer and Pontil 2020;
Li and Fine 2010); however, most of these formulations require fixing the cost distribution and class imbalance as a
prior. (Two notable exceptions are (Hernández-Orallo, Flach,
and Ramirez 2011) and the recent paper of (Shao et al. 2024),
that takes an interesting (and complementary approach) to
solving the problem we address in this paper, namely simultaneously representing different weighted costs)). Versions of
weighted AUROC that apply for a fixed cost distribution and
class imbalance do not easily extend to model uncertainty in
the cost distribution or only bounds on the class imbalance
(though we note that a previous paper of Guo et al. did define
a “3D ROC histogram,” with a general 3rd axis that could
represent either classifier confidence or cost; where the cost
version is closest in spirit to the present work (Guo, Shen,
and Zhang 2019)).
By instead making something similar to the weighted AUROC a slice of a ROC volume, lifted to 3D, we are able to
model ranges of misclassification costs and class imbalance.

