The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

LAGD: Local Topological-Alignment and Global Semantic-Deconstruction for
Incremental 3D Semantic Segmentation
Yumin Zhang1 , Haoran Duan1 , Rui Sun1 , Yue Cheng2
Tejal Shah1 , Rajiv Ranjan1 , Bo Wei1 *
1
School of Computing, Newcastle University, United Kingdom
School of Software Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
{y.zhang361, haoran.duan, rui.sun, tejal.shah, raj.ranjan, bo.wei}@newcastle.ac.uk, yuecheng@bjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Numerous deep learning-based works focusing on 3D semantic segmentation have been proposed and have achieved impressive performance. However, due to catastrophic forgetting, existing methods degrade dramatically in a real-world
scenario where new 3D semantic categories are arriving continually. As such, applying typical class-incremental learning methods on 3D data can aggravate forgetting due to
their irregular and noisy geometric structure. Aiming to address this realistic challenge, from the perspective of capturing local topological characteristics and mitigating global semantic shift, we propose a unified framework named Local
topological Alignment and Global semantic Deconstruction
(LAGD) to incrementally learn semantic knowledge of novel
3D categories while maintaining performance on previously
learned knowledge. Specifically, we develop a novel Interaction Topological-aware Alignment (ITA) to maintain the
learned knowledge efficiently by capturing the local geometric characteristics with interacted adjacent state-specific
knowledge. Besides, to mitigate the forgetting caused by the
global semantic shift, we deconstruct the logits into positive and negative parts which are distilled separately, achieving an elaborate distillation process in terms of Semanticknowledge Deconstruction Distillation (SDD). With the cooperation of ITA and SDD, LAGD achieves a state-of-the-art
performance, especially in the long-term incremental learning scenario. Extensive experimental results illustrate the superiority of our proposed LAGD.

State s-1

State s

State s+1

Inference

model s-1

model s

model s+1

model s+1

Figure 1: Illustration of incremental 3D semantic segmentation. In each state training state, only ground-truth of current
categories is accessible, while in the inference phase, point
clouds should be segmented into all semantic categories.

However, existing 3D semantic segmentation methods
trained on close-set and static datasets are not suitable in
the real-world class-incremental scenario where the novel
3D categories which are disjoint from previous categories
are extended incrementally, as shown in Figure 1. In such
a situation, due to catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al.
2017), the updating model cannot perform well on previously learned knowledge. A straightforward method to handle it is to retrain the segmentation model with all available
data (i.e., joint training), which is restrained by data privacy
and the cost of retraining (Zhang et al. 2022). Thus, class incremental learning is proposed to alleviate catastrophic forgetting in updating parameters with available supervised labels only for current categories (Rebuffi et al. 2017).
Nevertheless, most of the class incremental methods focused on 2D vision (Shmelkov, Schmid, and Alahari 2017;
Kemker et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2022), while with less
attention to 3D context and mainly focusing on the classlevel (Dong et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Chowdhury et al.
2022) simpler than the fine-grind semantic segmentation
task. Naively applying current 2D Class-Incremental Semantic Segmentation (CISS) methods to 3D point clouds
neglects the precious and unique geometric characteristics
features thereby aggravating forgetting (Dong et al. 2021).

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision and has achieved dramatic developments in various fields, e.g. autonomous driving (Feng et al. 2020), medical analysis (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Huang
et al. 2020), and few-shot learning (Wang et al. 2019a;
Zhang et al. 2024). Unlike regular pixels in 2D vision, 3D
point cloud semantic segmentation is more challenging due
to its unstructured and unordered characteristics (Yang et al.
2023a). Various fully supervised 3D semantic segmentation
approaches (Qi et al. 2017a,b; Zhao et al. 2021; Wu et al.
2024) have been proposed to address this issue and have
achieved impressive performance in recent years.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22677

