The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SSE-SAM: Balancing Head and Tail Classes Gradually Through Stage-Wise SAM
Xingyu Lyu1,2 , Qianqian Xu1 * , Zhiyong Yang2 , Shaojie Lyu3 , Qingming Huang2, 1, 4 *
1

Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tencent Corporate
4
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
lvxingyu20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn, shaojielv@tencent.com,
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Real-world datasets often exhibit a long-tailed distribution,
where vast majority of classes known as tail classes have only
few samples. Traditional methods tend to overfit on these tail
classes. Recently, a new approach called Imbalanced SAM
(ImbSAM) is proposed to leverage the generalization benefits
of Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) for long-tailed distributions. The main strategy is to merely enhance the smoothness of the loss function for tail classes. However, we argue
that improving generalization in long-tail scenarios requires
a careful balance between head and tail classes. We show
that neither SAM nor ImbSAM alone can fully achieve this
balance. For SAM, we prove that although it enhances the
model’s generalization ability by escaping saddle point in the
overall loss landscape, it does not effectively address this for
tail-class losses. Conversely, while ImbSAM is more effective at avoiding saddle points in tail classes, the head classes
are trained insufficiently, resulting in significant performance
drops. Based on these insights, we propose Stage-wise Saddle Escaping SAM (SSE-SAM), which uses complementary
strengths of ImbSAM and SAM in a phased approach. Initially, SSE-SAM follows the majority sample to avoid saddle
points of the head-class loss. During the later phase, it focuses
on tail-classes to help them escape saddle points. Our experiments confirm that SSE-SAM has better ability in escaping
saddles both on head and tail classes, and shows performance
improvements.

Code — https://github.com/Zemdalk/SSE-SAM

Introduction
Over the past few decades, deep neural networks have made
significant progress in various fields, largely due to the use of
well-curated datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Krizhevsky, Hinton
et al. 2009). However, real-world data often exhibit a long-tail
distribution (Ouyang et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2021; Wei and
Gan 2023; Li et al. 2024), where a few dominant classes (head
classes) hold the majority of samples and most other classes
(tail classes) have very few. Modern over-parameterized neural networks tend to overfit on head classes and underperform
on tail classes due to inadequate training for the latter (Buda,
Maki, and Mazurowski 2018; Van Horn and Perona 2017).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19278

Several methods have been developed to address this imbalance. Most of these approaches use re-weighting techniques,
such as LDAM (Cao et al. 2019), logit-adjustment (Menon
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023), and Vector Scaling (VS) Loss
(Kini et al. 2021), to adjust class weights and focus on tail
classes in the loss function. This adjustment significantly
enhances model performance in datasets with long-tail distributions. However, these re-weighting techniques can still
cause overfitting in tail classes (Hawkins 2004).
To address overfitting, many strategies involving smoothness regularization have been proposed (Kang et al. 2019;
Alshammari et al. 2022). Sharpness-Aware Minimization
(SAM) (Foret et al. 2021), known for its strong theoretical
basis and excellent results, has garnered considerable attention. According to Rangwani et al. (2022), SAM effectively
helps models escape saddle points, heading for a flat local
minimum. Zhou et al. (2023) introduced Imbalanced SAM
(ImbSAM) for long-tail learning, which bypasses the SAM
optimization for head classes to prevent their dominance in
the optimization process, showing notable performance improvements in long-tail scenarios. However, empirical studies
indicate that ImbSAM significantly reduces the generalization ability of head classes compared to SAM. Thus, enhancing long-tail generalization requires a careful balance
between head and tail classes.
To find a better solution, we first examine the properties
of SAM and ImbSAM. We show that SAM theoretically has
a greater component on the maximum negative curvature direction than Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), suggesting
a stronger saddle escape capability. However, in long-tail
distributions, head classes mainly influence the direction and
magnitude of perturbations in SAM, often neglecting tail
classes. In contrast, empirical studies show that ImbSAM
reduces the misleading effects of head classes, helping tail
classes escape saddles more effectively. However, it results
in insufficient training of head classes.
From the analysis, SAM and ImbSAM offer complementary benefits, but it’s challenging to escape saddle points in
both head and tail classes simultaneously. To tackle this, we
introduce a new approach called Stage-wise Saddle Escaping
SAM (SSE-SAM), designed to gradually overcome saddle
points in both head and tail classes. SSE-SAM divides the
training into two phases. Initially, it employs the small loss
assumption to help head classes escape saddle points effec-

