The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fairness-Accuracy Trade-Offs: A Causal Perspective
Drago Plečko, Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
dp3144@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

university admissions, law enforcement, credit assessments,
and health care (Khandani, Kim, and Lo 2010; Mahoney and
Mohen 2007; Brennan, Dieterich, and Ehret 2009). These
technologies now significantly influence the lives of individuals and are frequently used in high-stakes settings (Topol
2019; Berk et al. 2021; Taddeo and Floridi 2018). As these
systems replace or augment human decision-making processes, concerns about fairness and bias based on protected
attributes such as race, gender, or religion have become a
prominent consideration in the ML literature. The available
data used to train automated systems may contain past and
present societal biases as an imprint and therefore has the potential to perpetuate or even exacerbate discrimination against
protected groups. This is highlighted by reports on biases in
systems for sentencing (Angwin et al. 2016), facial recognition (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018), online ads (Sweeney
2013; Datta, Tschantz, and Datta 2015), and system authentication (Sanburn 2015), among many others. Despite the
promise of AI to enhance human decision-making, the reality is that these technologies can also reflect or worsen
societal inequalities. As alluded to before, the issue does not
arise uniquely from the usage of automated systems; humandriven decision-making has long been analyzed in a similar
fashion. Evidence of bias in human decision-making is abundant, including studies on the gender wage gap (Blau and
Kahn 1992, 2017) and racial disparities in legal outcomes
(Sweeney and Haney 1992; Pager 2003). Therefore, without
proper care about fairness and transparency of the new generation of AI systems, it is unclear what its impact will be on
the historically discriminated groups.

With the widespread adoption of AI systems, many of the decisions once made by humans are now delegated to automated
systems. Recent works in the literature demonstrate that these
automated systems, when used in socially sensitive domains,
may exhibit discriminatory behavior based on sensitive characteristics such as gender, sex, religion, or race. In light of this,
various notions of fairness and methods to quantify discrimination have been proposed, also leading to the development
of numerous approaches for constructing fair predictors. At
the same time, imposing fairness constraints may decrease the
utility of the decision-maker, highlighting a tension between
fairness and utility. This tension is also recognized in legal
frameworks, for instance in the disparate impact doctrine of
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 – in which specific
attention is given to considerations of business necessity – possibly allowing the usage of proxy variables associated with
the sensitive attribute in case a high-enough utility cannot be
achieved without them. In this work, we analyze the tension
between fairness and accuracy from a causal lens for the first
time. We introduce the notion of a path-specific excess loss
(PSEL) that captures how much the predictor’s loss increases
when a causal fairness constraint is enforced. We then show
that the total excess loss (TEL), defined as the difference between the loss of predictor fair along all causal pathways vs.
an unconstrained predictor, can be decomposed into a sum
of more local PSELs. At the same time, enforcing a causal
constraint often reduces the disparity between demographic
groups. Thus, we introduce a quantity that summarizes the
fairness-utility trade-off, called the causal fairness/utility ratio,
defined as the ratio of the reduction in discrimination vs. the
excess in the loss from constraining a causal pathway. This
quantity is particularly suitable for comparing the fairnessutility trade-off across different causal pathways. Finally, as
our approach requires causally-constrained fair predictors, we
introduce a new neural approach for causally-constrained fair
learning. Our approach is evaluated across multiple real-world
datasets, providing new insights into the tension between fairness and accuracy.

1

Introduction

Automated decision-making systems based on machine learning and artificial intelligence are now commonly implemented in various critical sectors of society such as hiring,
This paper is part of the Proceedings of the 39th AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2025).

26344

Within the growing literature on fair machine learning, a
plethora of fairness definitions have been proposed. Commonly considered statistical criteria, among others, include
demographic parity (independence (Darlington 1971)), equalized odds (separation (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016)), and
calibration (sufficiency (Chouldechova 2017)). These definitions, however, have been shown as mutually incompatible (Barocas and Selbst 2016; Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and
Raghavan 2016). Despite a number of proposals, there is
still a lack of consensus on what the appropriate measures of
fairness are, and how statistical notions of fairness could incorporate moral values of the society at large. For this reason,
a number of works explored the causal approaches to fair machine learning (Kusner et al. 2017; Kilbertus et al. 2017; Nabi

