The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MDD-5k: A New Diagnostic Conversation Dataset for Mental Disorders
Synthesized via Neuro-Symbolic LLM Agents
Congchi Yin1,2 * , Feng Li1 , Shu Zhang1 , Zike Wang1 * , Jun Shao1† , Piji Li2 ,
Jianhua Chen3,4,5,6† , Xun Jiang1,2
2

1
Theta Health Inc.
Chen Frontier Lab for AI and Mental Health, Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Mental Health Center
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
5
Shanghai Clinical Research Center for Mental Health
6
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders
congchi.yin@gmail.com, {jun.shao, xun.jiang}@thetahealth.ai, jianhua.chen@smhc.org.cn

Patient Case

Abstract

Age: 20 Gender: Female
ICD-10: F32.901
Diagnosis result: Depression
Chief complaint: L w m
…
History of present illness: A
year ago, the patient often
felt h peless…

The clinical diagnosis of most mental disorders primarily
relies on the conversations between psychiatrist and patient. The creation of such diagnostic conversation datasets
is promising to boost the AI mental healthcare community.
However, directly collecting the conversations in real diagnosis scenarios is near impossible due to stringent privacy and
ethical considerations. To address this issue, we seek to synthesize diagnostic conversation by exploiting anonymized patient cases that are easier to access. Specifically, we design a
neuro-symbolic multi-agent framework for synthesizing the
diagnostic conversation of mental disorders with large language models. It takes patient case as input and is capable
of generating multiple diverse conversations with one single
patient case. The framework basically involves the interaction between a doctor agent and a patient agent, and generates
conversations under symbolic control via a dynamic diagnosis tree. By applying the proposed framework, we develop
the largest Chinese mental disorders diagnosis dataset MDD5k. This dataset is built upon 1000 real, anonymized patient
cases by cooperating with Shanghai Mental Health Center
and comprises 5000 high-quality long conversations with diagnosis results and treatment opinions as labels. To the best of
our knowledge, it’s also the first labeled dataset for Chinese
mental disorders diagnosis. Human evaluation demonstrates
the proposed MDD-5k dataset successfully simulates humanlike diagnostic process of mental disorders.

Diagnostic Conversation
One-to-One
PatientCaseto-Dialogue
Generation
Framework

Doctor: Do you find yourself
overeating at times?
Patient: Overeating? This is
unlikely to happen. I
generally have little appetite
and a low desire to eat.

(a) Previous one-to-one patinetcase-to-dialogue generation
Patient Case
Age: 20 Gender: Female
ICD-10: F32.901
Diagnosis result: Depression
Chief complaint: L w m
…
History of present illness: A
year ago, the patient often
felt h peless…

Diagnostic Conversation
One-to-Many
PatientCaseto-Dialogue
Generation
Framework

Doctor: Do you find yourself
overeating at times?
Patient: Overeating? This is
unlikely to happen. I
generally have little appetite
and a low desire to eat.

(b) Our proposed one-to-many patinetcase-to-dialogue generation

Figure 1: Illustration of previous one-to-one patientcaseto-dialogue generation and our proposed one-to-manypatientcase-to-dialogue generation framework.

2022). With the recent progress of large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al. 2022), which emerges capabilities of human-like text generation, many researchers turn
to building conversational AI system for mental healthcare. Current implementations can be divided into two categories, finetuning a small model (e.g. Llama2-7B (Touvron
et al. 2023)) with physician-patient conversations (EmoLLM
Team 2024; Yang et al. 2024b; Liu et al. 2023) or building prompt-based physician-patient role-playing framework
(Wang et al. 2024a; Zhang et al. 2024) with state-of-the-art
language models (e.g. ChatGPT (Ouyang et al. 2022)). Regardless of the method employed, domain-specific mental
health datasets play a fundamental and indispensable role.
We focus on diagnostic conversation dataset for mental
disorders in this work. The clinical diagnosis of mental disorders differs from other diseases in that it primarily relies
on the mental status examination of patients, which is reflected through conversations between psychiatrists and pa-

Code&Dataset — https://github.com/lemonsis/MDD-5k.

Introduction
Mental health issues have garnered increasing attention in
recent years. According to the statistics of World Health Organization (WHO), one in every eight people in the world
lived with a mental disorder in 2019, and people living
with anxiety and depressive disorders kept rising significantly because of the COVID-19 pandemic (WHO et al.
* Work done during an internship.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25715

