The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FilterTS: Comprehensive Frequency Filtering for Multivariate Time Series
Forecasting
Yulong Wang1,2 , Yushuo Liu1,2 , Xiaoyi Duan1,2 , Kai Wang1,2,*
1

College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Tianjin Media Computing Center
{yl.wang, yushuo.liu, xyd}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, wangk@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Multivariate time series forecasting is crucial across various
industries, where accurate extraction of complex periodic and
trend components can significantly enhance prediction performance. However, existing models often struggle to capture these intricate patterns. To address these challenges, we
propose FilterTS, a novel forecasting model that utilizes specialized filtering techniques based on the frequency domain.
FilterTS introduces a Dynamic Cross-Variable Filtering Module, a key innovation that dynamically leverages other variables as filters to extract and reinforce shared variable frequency components across variables in multivariate time series. Additionally, a Static Global Filtering Module captures
stable frequency components, identified throughout the entire
training set. Moreover, the model is built in the frequency domain, converting time-domain convolutions into frequencydomain multiplicative operations to enhance computational
efficiency. Extensive experimental results on eight real-world
datasets have demonstrated that FilterTS significantly outperforms existing methods in terms of prediction accuracy and
computational efficiency.

Figure 1: Illustration of Stable and Synchronized Variable
Frequency Components Using the ETTh1 Dataset. (a) displays the frequency spectrum of the HUFL variable across
the entire training set, highlighting dominant stable frequency components with red dots. (b) shows synchronized
variable frequency components between HUFL and MUFL
variables within a rapidly fluctuating input window (outlined
with a red rectangle), after subtracting dominant stable frequency components.

code — https://github.com/wyl010607/FilterTS

Introduction
Multivariate time series forecasting is crucial across various
domains such as finance(Olivares et al. 2023), transportation(Bui, Cho, and Yi 2022), and energy(Zhou et al. 2021),
where the data often exhibits complex temporal characteristics like periodic changes and trends(Qiu et al. 2024).
Traditional time series analysis methods predominantly
focus on time-domain analysis (Zhou et al. 2021; Nie et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2024), yet they often fall short in capturing periodic information directly(Wang et al. 2023). Recent
studies have increasingly applied frequency domain analysis to time series, which transforms time series into the frequency space, allowing distinct frequency components to be
clearly separated (Xu, Zeng, and Xu 2024; Yi et al. 2024).
Despite these advancements, these methods sometimes fail
to effectively differentiate the importance of various frequency components, treating all components equally, which

might lead to model overfitting while neglecting crucial a
priori periodic information and inter-variable dependencies.
To address these challenges, an effective strategy is the
selective extraction and emphasis of frequency components
that are most predictive of future observations. We categorize features in time series into (a) stable frequency components and (b) variable frequency components based on
their behavior in the frequency domain. Stable components,
such as natural cycles (daily, weekly, monthly) and frequencies associated with specific business processes, often appear as dominant frequencies in the series, as determined
through frequency domain analysis on training data, depicted in Figure 1a. Variable components, whose characteristics may change over time due to environmental or external
factors, are often elusive with static filters. Capturing these
dynamically changing frequency components effectively remains a research gap. We hypothesize, based on experimen-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21375

