The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IteRPrimE: Zero-shot Referring Image Segmentation with Iterative Grad-CAM
Refinement and Primary Word Emphasis
Yuji Wang* , Jingchen Ni* , Yong Liu, Chun Yuan, Yansong Tang†
*

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{yuji-wan24, njc24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, † tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2024a; Bai et al. 2024), RIS necessitates the differentiation of instances within the same category and their relationships with other objects or the scene,
which requires high demands on the semantic understanding and spatial perception of the model. However, annotating
exact pairs of images, descriptions, and ground-truth masks
is both expensive and time-intensive, as the annotation of a
query needs a grasp of diverse positional and attributive details within the image (Liu, Ding, and Jiang 2023; Ding et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2019). Recent weakly supervised RIS techniques (Strudel, Laptev, and Schmid 2022; Lee et al. 2023;
Xu et al. 2022) have been introduced to mitigate these annotation challenges, yet they still depend on paired data for
training purposes and have relatively poor performance. In
contrast, a zero-shot approach holds greater value. Leveraging vision-language pre-trained (VLP) models such as CLIP
(Radford et al. 2021), this method efficiently generalizes
across diverse concepts and unseen categories without further training and fine-tuning.
Existing methodologies to harness the characteristics of
being unnecessary to fit training data presented by zero-shot
learning often employ a two-stage pipeline, shown in Figure 1 (a). As a discriminator between the images masked
by the candidate masks and the expression, CLIP is used to
select the instance mask whose similarity score is the highest (Sun et al. 2024; Yu, Seo, and Son 2023; Suo, Zhu, and
Yang 2023; Ni et al. 2023). However, we observed that these
methods always malfunctioned when encountering text inputs with positional information such as “left” and “right”.
Due to only a single instance contained in a masked image,
the absence of relative spatial perception can be the inherent
limitation of these CLIP-based paradigms. Previous pieces
of literature alleviate this issue by injecting the human priors or bias that explicitly prompts the CLIP with the given
direction clues (Ni et al. 2023; Suo, Zhu, and Yang 2023).
To be more specific, they manually design spatial decaying
weights from 1 to 0 in the directions consistent with text
phrases to make the model aware of positional information,
but it can not generalize the scenarios out of predefined directions such as “next to”. Additionally, the domain shift
for CLIP from the natural image to the masked image can
also impact the segmentation performance (Liu et al. 2024a;
Ding et al. 2022; Zhu and Chen 2024).
Some researchers (Lee et al. 2023) have leveraged Grad-

Zero-shot Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) identifies the
instance mask that best aligns with a specified referring expression without training and fine-tuning, significantly reducing the labor-intensive annotation process. Despite achieving
commendable results, previous CLIP-based models have a
critical drawback: the models exhibit a notable reduction in
their capacity to discern relative spatial relationships of objects. This is because they generate all possible masks on
an image and evaluate each masked region for similarity to
the given expression, often resulting in decreased sensitivity to direct positional clues in text inputs. Moreover, most
methods have weak abilities to manage relationships between
primary words and their contexts, causing confusion and reduced accuracy in identifying the correct target region. To
address these challenges, we propose IteRPrimE (Iterative
Grad-CAM Refinement and Primary word Emphasis), which
leverages a saliency heatmap through Grad-CAM from a
Vision-Language Pre-trained (VLP) model for image-text
matching. An iterative Grad-CAM refinement strategy is introduced to progressively enhance the model’s focus on the
target region and overcome positional insensitivity, creating a self-correcting effect. Additionally, we design the Primary Word Emphasis module to help the model handle complex semantic relations, enhancing its ability to attend to
the intended object. Extensive experiments conducted on the
RefCOCO/+/g, and PhraseCut benchmarks demonstrate that
IteRPrimE outperforms previous SOTA zero-shot methods,
particularly excelling in out-of-domain scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/VoyageWang/IteRPrimE

Introduction
Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) requires the model
to generate a pixel-level referred object mask based on a
textual description, extending the applicability to various
tasks such as robot interaction and image editing (Yang
et al. 2024, 2022; Liu et al. 2024b; Lai et al. 2024; Luo
et al. 2024b). Different from standard semantic segmentation (Wang, Zhao, and Sun 2023; Wang et al. 2024b; Han
*

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8159

