The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Achieving Maximin Share and EFX/EF1 Guarantees Simultaneously
Hannaneh Akrami1,2 , Nidhi Rathi1,3
2

1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Graduiertenschule Informatik, Universität des Saarlandes
3
Saarland Informatics Campus
hakrami@mpi-inf.mpg.de, nrathi@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract

Zeckhauser 1990; Brams and Taylor 1996b,a; Moulin 2004;
Budish and Cantillon 2010)).
The numerous applications depicting the necessity of understanding the process of fairly dividing resources among
multiple economic players has given rise to a formal theory
of fair division. Such problems lie at the interface of economics, mathematics, and computer science, and they have
been extensively studied for past several decades (Moulin
2019). Although the roots of fair division can be found in
antiquity, for instance, in ancient Greek mythology and the
Bible, its formal history stretches back to the seminal work
of Steinhaus, Banach and Knaster in 1948 (Steinhaus 1948).
In this work, we study the well-studied fair division setting of allocating a set of discrete or indivisible items among
agents. A fair division instance consists of a set N = [n]
of n agents and a set M of m items. Every agent i specifies her preferences over the items via an additive valuation
function vi : 2M → R≥0 . The goal is to find a partition
X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) of the given items such that every agent
i ∈ N , upon receiving bundle Xi , considers X to be fair.
Primarily, there have been two ways of defining fairness
for resource-allocation settings: (i) envy-based, where an
agent compares her bundle with other bundles in the allocation to decide if it is fair to her and (ii) share-based, where
an agent considers an allocation to be fair for her through
the value she obtains from her bundle (irrespective of what
others receive). Envy-freeness (Foley 1966) is arguably the
flag-bearer of envy-based notions of fairness that entails an
allocation X to be fair if every agent values her own bundle at least as much as she value any other agent’s bundle
(i.e., vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj ) for all i, j ∈ [n]). On the other hand,
proportionality is an important share-based notion of fairness that entails an allocation to be fair when every agent
i ∈ [n] values her bundle at least as much as her proportional share value of vi (M)/n. Both of these notions are
known to exist in the setting where the resource is divisible (i.e., a cake [0, 1]), but unfortunately, a simple instance
where a single valuable (indivisible) item is to be divided
between two agents does not admit any envy-free or proportional allocation.
Within the last decade, we have seen an extensive study
of various relaxations of envy-freeness and proportionality that are more suitable for the discrete setting. Among
those, the most prominent relaxations, and the focus of our

We study the problem of computing fair divisions of a set
of indivisible goods among agents with additive valuations.
For the past many decades, the literature has explored various
notions of fairness, that can be primarily seen as either having envy-based or share-based lens. For the discrete setting
of resource-allocation problems, envy-free up to any good
(EFX) and maximin share (MMS) are widely considered as
the flag-bearers of fairness notions in the above two categories, thereby capturing different aspects of fairness herein.
Due to lack of existence results of these notions and the fact
that a good approximation of EFX or MMS does not imply
particularly strong guarantees of the other, it becomes important to understand the compatibility of EFX and MMS allocations with one another.
In this work, we identify a novel way to simultaneously
achieve MMS guarantees with EFX/EF1 notions of fairness, while beating the best known approximation factors by
Chaudhury et al. and Amanatidis, et al. Our main contribution is to constructively prove the existence of (i) a partial allocation that is both 2/3-MMS and EFX, and (ii) a complete
allocation that is both 2/3-MMS and EF1. Our algorithms
run in pseudo-polynomial time if the approximation factor
for MMS is relaxed to 2/3 − ε for any constant ε > 0 and in
polynomial time if, in addition, the EFX (or EF1) guarantee
is relaxed to (1 − δ)-EFX (or (1 − δ)-EF1) for any constant
δ > 0. In particular, we improve from the best approximation
factor known prior to our work by Chaudhury et al., which
computes partial allocations that are 1/2-MMS and EFX in
pseudo-polynomial time.

1

Introduction

The theory of fair division addresses the fundamental problem of allocating a set of resources among a group of individuals, with varied preferences, in a meaningfully fair manner. The need of fairness is a key concern in the design of
many social institutions, and it arises naturally in multiple
real-world settings such as division of inheritance, dissolution of business partnerships, divorce settlements, assigning
computational resources in a cloud computing environment,
course assignments, allocation of radio and television spectrum, air traffic management, to name a few (see (Pratt and
Copyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13529

