The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking Transformer-Based Blind-Spot Network
for Self-Supervised Image Denoising
Junyi Li, Zhilu Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo*
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
nagejacob@gmail.com, cszlzhang@outlook.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Blind-spot networks (BSN) have been prevalent neural architectures in self-supervised image denoising (SSID). However,
most existing BSNs are conducted with convolution layers.
Although transformers have shown the potential to overcome
the limitations of convolutions in many image restoration
tasks, the attention mechanisms may violate the blind-spot requirement, thereby restricting their applicability in BSN. To
this end, we propose to analyze and redesign the channel and
spatial attentions to meet the blind-spot requirement. Specifically, channel self-attention may leak the blind-spot information in multi-scale architectures, since the downsampling
shuffles the spatial feature into channel dimensions. To alleviate this problem, we divide the channel into several groups
and perform channel attention separately. For spatial selfattention, we apply an elaborate mask to the attention matrix to restrict and mimic the receptive field of dilated convolution. Based on the redesigned channel and window attentions, we build a Transformer-based Blind-Spot Network
(TBSN), which shows strong local fitting and global perspective abilities. Furthermore, we introduce a knowledge distillation strategy that distills TBSN into smaller denoisers to
improve computational efficiency while maintaining performance. Extensive experiments on real-world image denoising datasets show that TBSN largely extends the receptive
field and exhibits favorable performance against state-of-theart SSID methods.

AP-BSN

LG-BPN

PUCA

TBSN (Ours)

Figure 1: Visualization of effective receptive field for representative blind-spot networks (BSNs). Benefiting from proposed dilated window and channel attention mechanisms,
our TBSN shows stronger local fitting and global information aggregation capability with respect to previous BSNs.
feasible solution is to capture datasets (Plotz and Roth 2017;
Abdelhamed, Lin, and Brown 2018) with strictly aligned
noisy-clean pairs for network training (Guo et al. 2019; Kim
et al. 2020). However, the data collection process requires
rigorously controlled environments and much human labor,
which is less practical.
Recently, self-supervised image denoising (SSID) (Krull,
Buchholz, and Jug 2019; Lee, Son, and Lee 2022; Li et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023b; Jang et al. 2023a) has been introduced to circumvent the requirement of the paired datasets.
The pioneering work Noise2Void randomly masks some locations of a noisy input and trains the network to reconstruct them from their surrounding ones. In the case of pixelwise independent noise, the network learns to predict the
masked pixels without random noise, i.e., the clean pixels, thereby achieving self-supervised denoising. Blind-spot
networks (BSN) (Laine et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Byun,
Cha, and Moon 2021) take a step further to implement the
mask schema with dedicated designed network architectures
that exclude the corresponding input pixel from the receptive field of each output location, which shows superiority in both performance and training efficiency. For spatially correlated noise removal in real-world scenarios, some
works (Wu et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020) suggest first breaking the noise correlation with pixel-shuffle downsampling
(PD), and then denoising with BSN. In particular, asymmetric PD strategy (Lee, Son, and Lee 2022; Wang et al. 2023b;
Jang et al. 2023a) for training and inference has shown a better trade-off between noise removal and detail preserving.
Existing BSN architectures are mostly convolutional neu-

Code — https://github.com/nagejacob/TBSN

Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental low-level vision task that
aims to recover implicit clean images from their noisy observations. With the development of convolutional neural
networks, learning-based methods (Mao, Shen, and Yang
2016; Zhang et al. 2017; Tai et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2024)
have shown significant improvements against traditional
ones (Buades, Coll, and Morel 2005; Dabov et al. 2007). In
order to facilitate network training, it is common to synthesize noisy-clean image pairs with additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) for supervised learning. Since the distribution gap between AWGN and camera noise, they exhibit degraded denoising performance in real-world scenarios. One
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4788

