The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DLF: Disentangled-Language-Focused Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Pan Wang1 * , Qiang Zhou1 , Yawen Wu1 , Tianlong Chen2 , Jingtong Hu1
1

University of Pittsburgh
2
UNC Chapel Hill
{pan.wang, qiang.zhou, yawen.wu, jthu}@pitt.edu, tianlong@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) leverages heterogeneous modalities, such as language, vision, and audio, to enhance the understanding of human sentiment. While existing
models often focus on extracting shared information across
modalities or directly fusing heterogeneous modalities, such
approaches can introduce redundancy and conflicts due to
equal treatment of all modalities and the mutual transfer of
information between modality pairs. To address these issues,
we propose a Disentangled-Language-Focused (DLF) multimodal representation learning framework, which incorporates a feature disentanglement module to separate modalityshared and modality-specific information. To further reduce
redundancy and enhance language-targeted features, four geometric measures are introduced to refine the disentanglement process. A Language-Focused Attractor (LFA) is further
developed to strengthen language representation by leveraging complementary modality-specific information through a
language-guided cross-attention mechanism. The framework
also employs hierarchical predictions to improve overall accuracy. Extensive experiments on two popular MSA datasets,
CMU-MOSI and CMU-MOSEI, demonstrate the significant
performance gains achieved by the proposed DLF framework. Comprehensive ablation studies further validate the effectiveness of the feature disentanglement module, languagefocused attractor, and hierarchical predictions.

Figure 1: Task pipeline of the Multimodal Sentiment Analysis, and varied performance of different modalities.

with unimodal solutions, MSA often presents a more robust performance by leveraging complementary information
from different modalities. How to effectively learn essential
representations without redundant and conflicting information from multiple heterogeneous modalities, however, remains an open question in the academic field, especially in
multimodal learning communities.
In recent years, researchers have shown an increased interest in MSA. Many multimodal models have been proposed to facilitate MSA, and they can be categorized into
two groups: representation learning-oriented methods (Guo
et al. 2022; Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Sun
et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2022c) and multimodal fusionoriented methods (Zhang et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2020;
Yang et al. 2022b; Tsai et al. 2019; Lv et al. 2021; Rahman et al. 2020). The former primarily aims to acquire an
advanced semantic understanding of various modalities enriched with diverse clues of human sentiments, resulting in
more powerful human sentiment encoders. Conversely, the
latter emphasizes designing sophisticated fusion strategies
at various levels, including feature-level, decision-level, and
model-level fusion, to derive unified representations from
multimodal data. It is worth noting that the fundamental aspect of MSA lies in learning and integrating multimodal representations, where the goal is to accurately process and in-

Code — https://github.com/pwang322/DLF.

Introduction
With the rapid development of social media, multimodal interaction has become increasingly popular, which attracts
many researchers to transfer uni-modal learning to multimodal learning tasks (Awal et al. 2024; Guan et al. 2024;
Xu, Zhu, and Clifton 2023). One of the most significant
subfields is multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) (Geetha
et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2022a). MSA aims to perceive human sentiment through multiple heterogeneous modalities,
such as language, vision, and audio, playing a crucial role in
many applications including cognitive psychology, scenario
understanding, and mental health (Ali and Hughes 2023; Ezzameli and Mahersia 2023; Yang et al. 2023a). Compared
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21180

