The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Core-to-Global Reasoning for Compositional Visual Question Answering
Hao Zhou1 , Tingjin Luo2 * , Zhangqi Jiang2
Department of Operational Research and Planning, Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
{zhouhao3075, tingjinluo}@hotmail.com, jiangzq@nudt.edu.cn

Image

Abstract
Compositional visual question answering (Compositional
VQA) needs to provide an answer to a compositional question, which requires the model to have advanced capabilities
of multi-modal semantic understanding and logical reasoning. However, current VQA models mainly concentrate on
enriching the visual representations of images and neglect the
redundancy in the enriched information to bring some negative impacts. To enhance the value and availability of semantic features, we propose a novel core-to-global reasoning
(CTGR) model for compositional VQA. The model first extracts both global features and core features from image and
question through a feature embedding module. Then, to enhance the value of semantic features, we propose an information filtering module to align visual features and text features
at the core semantic level and to filter out the redundancy carried by image and question features at the global semantic
level, which can further strengthen cross-modal correlations.
Besides, we design a novel core-to-global reasoning mechanism for multimodal fusion, which integrates content features
from core learning and context features from global features
for accurate answer predictions. Finally, extensive experimental results on GQA, GQA-sub, VQA2.0 and Visual7W
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of CTGR.

Objects
chair_1
curtain chair_2

Attributes and relations
chair_1 right of chair_2
left of

1

curtain

white

Q: Is the curtain to the left of the chair white or black? A: white
(a)

Without filtering

Question Filtering
(b)

Question and Image Filtering

Figure 1: (a) An example of compositional VQA. (b) The
visualization of the model’s attention with different semantic
values by filtering image and question features.
In literature, compositional VQA methods fall into two
categories(Jing et al. 2022b): modular-based and holisticbased models. Modular-based methods (Chen et al. 2021;
Shi, Zhang, and Li 2019) divide the VQA model into distinct
modules according to the input question, and construct a dynamic neural modular network (NMN) with the semantic
symbols for reasoning. For example, Andreas et al. (Andreas
et al. 2016) decomposed the input question into linguistic
substructures, such as objects, relations, attributes, etc., and
then dynamically instantiated modular networks for reasoning based on these substructures. Most of them focus on the
generalization and explainability of visual reasoning based
on NMN (Xue, Qian, and Xu 2023). Holistic-based models (Jing et al. 2022a, 2020; Zhang et al. 2021) use a single
model, such as graph neural network (GNN), for different
inputs to learn multiple semantic features to achieve inference. For example, Hu et al. (Hu et al. 2019) constructed a
GNN with objects in the scene as nodes and learned contextual features for inference by message passing.
However, most VQA models focus on enriching image representations without checking whether all enriched
features are necessary to reason about the answer or not
(Nguyen et al. 2022). Except for the core predicate semantics (e.g., object, relations, and attributes in images and questions), the enriched features still contain a large amount of

Introduction
Compositional Visual Question Answering (Compositional
VQA) refers to answering a compositional question based
on image content, which contains various visual concepts
such as objects, attributes, and relationships (Antol et al.
2015). As shown in Fig.1, the key to answering the compositional question is not only to understand the color of the curtain as white, but also to understand the spatial relationship
between the chair and the curtain (Zerroug et al. 2022; Shen,
Inoue, and Shinoda 2024). Compared to general VQA (Wu
et al. 2017; Schwenk et al. 2022), compositional VQA requires models that can deeply mine multiple visual concepts
and generate accurate answers for a challenging question.
Due to the advantage of spatial and semantic understanding,
the compositional VQA can be used in various fields, such
as intelligent assistants, smart homes, and automatic driving
(Barra et al. 2021; Andreas et al. 2016).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10770

