The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Amplifier: Bringing Attention to Neglected Low-Energy Components
in Time Series Forecasting
Jingru Fei1 , Kun Yi2 , Wei Fan3 , Qi Zhang4 , Zhendong Niu1 *

1
Beijing Institute of Technology
State Information Center of China
3
University of Oxford
4
Tongji University
{jingrufei, zniu}@bit.edu.cn, kunyi.cn@gmail.com, weifan.oxford@gmail.com, zhangqi cs@tongji.edu.cn
2

Abstract
We propose an energy amplification technique to address
the issue that existing models easily overlook low-energy
components in time series forecasting. This technique comprises an energy amplification block and an energy restoration block. The energy amplification block enhances the energy of low-energy components to improve the model’s learning efficiency for these components, while the energy restoration block returns the energy to its original level. Moreover,
considering that the energy-amplified data typically displays
two distinct energy peaks in the frequency spectrum, we integrate the energy amplification technique with a seasonaltrend forecaster to model the temporal relationships of these
two peaks independently, serving as the backbone for our
proposed model, Amplifier. Additionally, we propose a semichannel interaction temporal relationship enhancement block
for Amplifier, which enhances the model’s ability to capture
temporal relationships from the perspective of the commonality and specificity of each channel in the data. Extensive experiments on eight time series forecasting benchmarks consistently demonstrate our model’s superiority in both effectiveness and efficiency compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Amplitude

(a)
Input with some low-energy
components removed
Frequency

Original Input

(b)

Code — https://github.com/aikunyi/Amplifier

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Analysis about low-energy components in time series forecasting. (a) Indispensability: Discarding low-energy
components results in an increased MSE value. (b) Dependence on energy magnitude: The components that are ignored are consistently those with low energy, irrespective of
their position within the frequency bands.

Time series forecasting holds significant importance in reallife applications, encompassing various fields such as financial markets (Yi et al. 2024d), weather forecasting (Yi et al.
2024a), traffic flow prediction (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018; Fan
et al. 2022), energy planning (Yi et al. 2024b). Recently, the
rapid advancement of deep learning has given rise to various
models for time series forecasting, including RNN-based
methods (e.g., LSTNet (Lai et al. 2018), DeepAR (Salinas et al. 2020)), TCN-based methods (e.g., SCINet (Liu
et al. 2022a), TimesNet (Wu et al. 2023)), Transformerbased methods (e.g., PatchTST (Nie et al. 2023), iTransformer (Liu et al. 2024)), and Linear-based methods (e.g.,
DLinear (Zeng et al. 2023), RLinear (Li et al. 2023)), etc.
Although these deep learning methods have demonstrated
competitive performance across various scenarios, they possess several inherent drawbacks in their ability to learn from

different energy components, and tend to focus on learning high-energy components while neglecting low-energy
components, leading to an incomplete utilization of the informative aspects crucial for time series forecasting.
What are low-energy components? In signal processing and analysis, the energy of a signal refers to the total
amount of signal strength or power (Lathi and Green 1998).
Low-energy components in a signal refer to frequency components with smaller amplitudes within the frequency spectrum (Oppenheim 1999).
Low-energy components are indispensable. In contexts
like signal compression or model simplification, low-energy
components might be dismissed as unimportant or treated

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11645

