The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Toward Improving Robustness and Accuracy in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Aishwarya Soni and Tanima Dutta
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanas, India
{aishwaryasoni.rs.cse19, tanima.cse}@iitbhu.ac.in

Abstract

particularly vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where even
small perturbations can significantly degrade their performance. Despite this vulnerability, the robustness of UDA
methods against adversarial attacks has been largely overlooked, as highlighted in recent studies (Lo and Patel 2022;
Zhu et al. 2023). This gap presents a major challenge for
deploying UDA models in safety-critical applications.

Adversarial robustness in the context of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is particularly challenging due to the
lack of labels in the target domain. Pseudo labels are often
used to make adversarial robust models but compromise robustness and accuracy, falling short of the performance due to
noise and inaccuracies in these pseudo labels. The main challenges in achieving robustness and accuracy include ensuring
reliable pseudo labels and developing effective training methods that bring alignment between clean and adversarial examples of target data. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel training method within the self-training paradigm Consistent Attention Mapping with Self Pseudo Label Refinement
(CAM+SPLR). It begins with the pre-training of the UDA
model, resulting in a UDA pre-trained model, which is initialized into two separate models: the Anchor model and the
TargetNet model. The Anchor model encourages the attention maps of clean images and their adversarial counterparts
to be similar, while the TargetNet model simultaneously performs self-training using Adversarial target data and refining the pseudo labels. CAM+SPLR improves both semantically relevant key features and pseudo-labels through a twostep stochastic gradient descent process during training. We
conducted extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, including OfficeHome, PACS, and VisDA, demonstrating significant improvements in both robustness and accuracy. Our
method achieves an average accuracy improvement of 6%
and 8.1% and an average robustness improvement of 10.2%
and 4.9%, compared to state-of-the-art methods on the PACS
and VisDA datasets.

Cl Image Desk Lamp Adv Image

Radio

Computer

Cl Image
(a)

Push Pin
(d)

Hammer
(e)

Push Pin
(b)

Adv Image
(c)

Figure 1: (a) Clean image, (b) Corresponding attention map
where red regions indicate areas contributing more to the
model’s classification, (c) Adversarial example of (a), (d)
Attention map of adversarial example illustrating the attention shift relative to the attention map of the corresponding
clean image, as depicted in (b), (e) Attention shift due to
noisy labels, focusing on the background or semantically irrelevant features. (Cl: Clean, Adv: Adversarial)
Adversarial Training (AT) is a proven strategy in deep
neural networks (DNNs) for defending against adversarial attacks. Several AT approaches have been developed (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Madry et al. 2017; Dong et al. 2018; Lo and Patel
2021) to enhance the robustness of DNNs by training models on adversarial examples using a max-min optimization
process. However, this approach typically relies on groundtruth labels to generate adversarial examples, which limits
its application in UDA where labeled target data are unavailable. Moreover, the self-training method is effective in
using adversarial examples from the target data to enhance
robustness. These adversarial examples are generated using
pseudo labels predicted by a pre-trained UDA model. However, there are still significant challenges in self-training to
direct the use of pseudo labels.
When pseudo labels are used to generate adversarial examples, the noise and inaccuracies in these labels can cause
the model to overfit specifically to these adversarial exam-

Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Wilson and Cook 2020) has achieved significant success in transferring learned representations from a
labelled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Existing methods (Ganin et al. 2016; Long et al. 2018, 2017;
Saito et al. 2018; Sun and Saenko 2016; Xu et al. 2019;
Choi et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2021b) focus on improving the
model’s ability to generalize and accurately map these representations to the target domain. However, in real-world applications, it’s crucial for UDA models to be secure against
potential threats like adversarial examples (AEs). UDA are
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6987

