The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Incomplete Modality Disentangled Representation
for Ophthalmic Disease Grading and Diagnosis
Chengzhi Liu1,2 * , Zile Huang1,2 * , Zhe Chen2 , Feilong Tang2† , Yu Tian4 , Zhongxing Xu2 ,
Zihong Luo2 , Yalin Zheng2 , Yanda Meng1,2†
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, UK
Department of Eye and Vision Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK
4
Center For AI And Data Science For Integrated Diagnostics, University of Pennsylvania, USA
Y.M.Meng@exeter.ac.uk
2

Abstract

ophthalmic disease diagnosis that effectively addresses incomplete modalities remains challenging.
Existing methods for handling missing-modality problems can be classified into two categories: (1) Naive Modality Generation (Wang, Cui, and Li 2023; Chen et al. 2024)
reconstructs missing modalities from the available ones.
However, controlling and generating medical image quality
is complex due to a lack of clinical knowledge background,
thus introducing noise and suffering from computational
burden. (2) Latent Subspace Methods (Liu et al. 2023a;
Wang et al. 2023a; Liu et al. 2023b; Wang et al. 2023c;
Shi et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024a; Tang et al. 2024b; Yang
et al. 2024) directly project inputs with different modality
combinations into a deterministic embedding, ensuring consistency between the features and logits of the student and
teacher models, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Despite the success of these methods, they suffer from poor scalability and
limited feature representations during knowledge distillation
and do not intrinsically investigate the integration among
various modalities.
Under the missing-modality setting, we identify a suboptimal challenge in multimodal distillation: Although the
teacher model generates more valuable feature representations than the student model, these representations are redundant and lack modality-specific information, resulting in
ineffective distillation. The reasons for this challenge are
twofold: (i) Modality Heterogeneity: The discrepancies in
the inherent properties, statistical distribution, and structural
characteristics of data across different modalities lead to a
feature distribution gap and information redundancy during
multimodal joint learning, which is confirmed by the empirical observation in (Liang et al. 2022; Udandarao, Gupta, and
Albanie 2023; Hu et al. 2024). These discrepancies are further exacerbated under the missing-modality setting, leading to degraded model performance. (ii) Implicit Representation Constraint: As shown in Fig. 1 (c), different input
combinations from the same class are forced to learn the embeddings in the same direction of latent space, reducing the
diversity of features. The lack of feature diversity results in
sub-optimal distillation, affecting the model performance.
To this end, we propose an Incomplete Modality
Disentangled Representation (IMDR) strategy for ophthalmic disease diagnosis to disentangle features into ex-

Ophthalmologists typically require multimodal data sources
to improve diagnostic accuracy in clinical decisions. However, due to medical device shortages, low-quality data and
data privacy concerns, missing data modalities are common
in real-world scenarios. Existing deep learning methods tend
to address it by learning an implicit latent subspace representation for different modality combinations. We identify two
significant limitations of these methods: (1) implicit representation constraints that hinder the model’s ability to capture modality-specific information and (2) modality heterogeneity, causing distribution gaps and redundancy in feature representations. To address these, we propose an Incomplete Modality Disentangled Representation (IMDR) strategy, which disentangles features into explicit independent
modal-common and modal-specific features by guidance of
mutual information, distilling informative knowledge and enabling it to reconstruct valuable missing semantics and produce robust multimodal representations. Furthermore, we introduce a joint proxy learning module that assists IMDR in
eliminating intra-modality redundancy by exploiting the extracted proxies from each class. Experiments on four ophthalmology multimodal datasets demonstrate that the proposed
IMDR outperforms the state-of-the-art methods significantly.

Introduction
Retinal Fundus Imaging and Optical Coherence Tomography are widely used 2D and 3D imaging techniques for detecting ophthalmic diseases. Recent methods have integrated
multiple modalities to enhance diagnostic accuracy (Watanabe et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023b; Peng et al. 2024b; Zou
et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2024a; Trinh et al. 2024; Xiong et al.
2024; Li et al. 2024b; Wang et al. 2023d; Duan et al. 2024;
Qu et al. 2023; Meng et al. 2024; Peng et al. 2023). Despite
the benefits of more comprehensive diagnostic insights compared to single-modality approaches, factors such as lowquality data, lack of equipment, and data privacy concerns
in real-world practice settings can lead to missing modalities (Warner et al. 2024). Developing a reliable method for
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Feilong Tang; Yanda Meng
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5361

