The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Computing Perfect Bayesian Equilibria
in Sequential Auctions with Verification
Vinzenz Thoma1,3 , Vitor Bosshard2 , Sven Seuken2,3
1

ETH Zurich,
University of Zurich,
3
ETH AI Center
vinzenz.thoma@ai.ethz.ch, {bosshard, seuken}@ifi.uzh.ch
2

Abstract

a failure to anticipate the equilibrium outcome (Klemperer
2002).
Few analytical results are known for sequential auctions, which motivates computational methods. However,
designing scalable or converging algorithms is challenging, given the existing hardness results for computing equilibria (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009; Cai
and Papadimitriou 2014). Prior work has used iterative
best-response algorithms to compute Bayes-Nash equilibria in single-round auctions (Vorobeychik and Wellman
2008; Reeves and Wellman 2004; Rabinovich et al. 2013a;
Bosshard et al. 2020). This does not extend to sequential
auctions, due to two complications: (1) the continuous bidding space leads to infinitely many subgames, in each of
which the bidders need to play an equilibrium strategy and
form beliefs by Bayesian updating, and (2) the auction does
not have an optimal substructure, i.e. the equilibrium of a
subgame depends on bidding strategies in previous rounds.
Therefore, the auction cannot be solved by backward induction.

We present an algorithm for computing pure-strategy ωperfect Bayesian equilibria in sequential auctions with continuous action and value spaces. Importantly, our algorithm
includes a verification phase that computes an upper bound
on the utility loss of the found strategies. Prior work on
equilibrium computation in auctions with verification has focussed on the single-round case, but the methods do not work
for sequential auctions because of two main challenges: (1)
there are infinitely many subgames, and (2) the setting has
no optimal substructure as bidders’ beliefs and best response
strategies depend on the strategies of previous rounds. We
make two contributions. First, we introduce a tailor-made
game abstraction that discretizes the auction and augments
the state space with the public beliefs, such that an approximate equilibrium can be computed via dynamic programming. Second, we prove a decomposition theorem to upper
bound the utility loss of the computed equilibrium. This is
essential because it is neither guaranteed that the auction has
an equilibrium nor that any algorithm converges to it. We validate our algorithm on multiple settings with known equilibria
and apply it to a new multi-round combinatorial auction.

1

Our Contribution
We study the problem of computing perfect Bayesian equilibria (PBEs) with verification in sequential auctions. We
make two technical contributions. First, we introduce a bespoke game abstraction that reduces the state space to finite
cardinality. It further endows the game with an optimal substructure, such that we can compute PBEs by backward induction (Section 4). We achieve this by (1) introducing public belief states, on which the bidders condition their strategy, (2) restricting them to bid piecewise constant, and (3)
choosing how bidders update their beliefs off-equilibrium.
To find a PBE candidate in the abstraction, we recursively
compute Bayes-Nash equilibria (BNEs) in each round of the
auction via an iterated best-response algorithm (Section 4).
Second, we prove a bound on the utility loss of our computed PBEs in the unabstracted game (Section 5). Our proof
exploits the optimal substructure and the piecewise convexity of bidders’ utilities to bound the utility loss over the infinite set of possible types and histories. To approximate the
bound for a given set of strategies, we provide an easy-toimplement verification procedure (Section 5).
Our algorithm reproduces existing analytical results in
multiple settings, including sequential sales with and with-

Introduction

In sequential auctions, multiple items are sold or bought
over multiple rounds. Such formats are widely used, for example for selling art, fish, timber, mineral rights, broadcast
licences, and government debt (Gale and Stegeman 2001).
Sequential auctions are easy to run in practice and are particularly useful in settings where not all bidders or items are
present in all rounds (Parkes and Singh 2003).

Equilibrium computation in auctions
As many auctions used in practice are not strategyproof, it is
important to study their equilibrium properties. This is necessary to predict how bidders are likely to bid, for providing
strategic recommendations to bidders, and to assess the efficiency and revenue properties of new auction designs (Bünz,
Lubin, and Seuken 2022). Consider the famous example of
the 2000 Swiss 3G sequential auction that only produced a
fraction of the expected revenue due to a poor design and
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
14158

