The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CAMH: Advancing Model Hijacking Attack in Machine Learning
Xing He1 * , Jiahao Chen1 * , Yuwen Pu1 , Qingming Li1† , Chunyi Zhou1 ,
Yingcai Wu1 , Jinbao Li23 , Shouling Ji1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Shandong Artificial Intelligence Institute
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Qilu University of Technology

Abstract

tasks than its original one. Successfully executing a model
hijacking attack can lead to two principal risks: accountability risk and parasitic computing risk (Salem, Backes, and
Zhang 2022).
The accountability risk means that attackers could use the
model to conduct illegal or unethical tasks, such as turning an ordinary image classifier into a tool for identifying faces in pornographic content, all without the model
owner’s knowledge. This could lead to the model owner being wrongly accused of providing illegal services despite not
being directly involved. Additionally, the owners of hijacked
models face the risk of parasitic computing, where attackers exploit the hijacked model to run their own applications
without incurring the costs of operating, and maintaining the
models themselves, which can be prohibitively expensive in
some regions (see detailed scenarios in Section 3.1).
Salem et al. (Salem, Backes, and Zhang 2022) first introduced the concept of model hijacking attacks. They demonstrated during training how a target model could be redirected, such as transforming an image classifier into a facial
recognition tool. These attacks degrade model performance
and expose model owners to legal and ethical risks. Si et al.
(Si et al. 2023) further expanded this research domain by
introducing new attack strategies applicable to complex scenarios beyond image classification, including data manipulation and task transfer. The hijacking attacks are an emerging
threat to model security, and the only two current methods
primarily focus on modifying poisoning operations within
the training dataset, which means that the model’s output remains constrained to the number of categories defined by the
original task. Consequently, these methods impose significant restrictions on the flexibility of hijacking tasks, such as
requiring the number of categories in the hijacking task not
to exceed those in the original task and ensuring that the data
distribution of the original task does not differ significantly.
If these conditions are not met, it becomes impossible to balance the hijacking task and the original task’s performance,
resulting in loss of concealment or hijacking failure.
We hope that model hijacking attacks will no longer be
limited by previous methods. In the implementation process,
we summarize three major challenges:

In the burgeoning domain of machine learning, the reliance
on third-party services for model training and the adoption of
pre-trained models have surged. However, this reliance introduces vulnerabilities to model hijacking attacks, where adversaries manipulate models to perform unintended tasks, leading to significant security and ethical concerns, like turning
an ordinary image classifier into a tool for detecting faces in
pornographic content, all without the model owner’s knowledge. This paper introduces Category-Agnostic Model Hijacking (CAMH), a novel model hijacking attack method capable of addressing the challenges of class number mismatch,
data distribution divergence, and performance balance between the original and hijacking tasks. CAMH incorporates
synchronized training layers, random noise optimization, and
a dual-loop optimization approach to ensure minimal impact
on the original task’s performance while effectively executing the hijacking task. We evaluate CAMH across multiple
benchmark datasets and network architectures, demonstrating
its potent attack effectiveness while ensuring minimal degradation in the performance of the original task.

1

Introduction

In today’s digital era, machine learning (ML) models have
become essential tools in critical fields such as finance,
healthcare, and autonomous driving (Li et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a). Training machine learning
models is expensive, as it requires costly computational resources and precise hyperparameter tuning by domain experts (Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2020). To reduce
these costs, organizations are increasingly turning to thirdparty services like Google AutoML (Google 2017), Amazon
SageMaker (Amazon 2017), or Microsoft Azure ML (Microsoft 2014) for neural network training or downloading
pre-trained models from repositories such as Hugging Face
(Clement et al. 2016) or Model Zoo, especially those trained
on popular datasets (Jing 2021).
However, this practice exposes models to real-world security risks, particularly model hijacking attacks. Model hijacking attacks enable adversaries to take control of a target model and compel it to perform completely different
* These authors contributed equally.

• C1: How do we solve the limitation that the number of
hijacking task categories cannot exceed the number of
original task categories?

†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17141

