The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Influence-Based Fair Selection for Sample-Discriminative Backdoor Attacks
Qi Wei1 , Shuo He1 , Jiahan Zhang3 , Lei Feng2 * , Bo An1,4
2

1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3
Johns Hopkins University, USA
4
Skywork AI
{qi.wei, shuo.he, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, jzhan423@jh.edu, feng lei@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Backdoor attacks have posed a serious threat in machine
learning models, wherein adversaries can poison training
samples with maliciously crafted triggers to compromise the
victim model. Advanced backdoor attack methods have focused on selectively poisoning more vulnerable training samples, achieving a higher attack success rate (ASR). However, we found that when the manipulation strength of the
trigger is constrained to a very small value for imperceptible attacks, they suffer from extremely uneven class-wise
ASR due to the unequal selection of instances per class. To
solve this issue, we propose a novel backdoor attack method
based on Influence-based Fair Selection (IFS), including two
objectives: 1) selecting samples that contribute significantly
to ASR and 2) ensuring class balance during the selection
process. Specifically, we adapt Influence Functions, a classic technique in robust statistics, to evaluate the influence
of trigger-embedded training samples on ASR. In this case,
training samples contributing to reducing the backdoored test
risk could possess higher influence scores. Further, a groupbased pruning strategy is designed to avoid calculating the influence on ASR for all training samples, thereby significantly
reducing the computational cost. Then, based on the influence
score, we design an adaptive thresholding scheme to dynamically select samples with higher influence while maintaining
class balance. Extensive experiments on four datasets verify
the effectiveness of IFS compared with advanced methods.

1

Blended

Patched

Figure 1: Visualization of backdoored samples with different manipulation strength ϵ, which reflects the visibility of the trigger in a
sample. A smaller value of ϵ is preferred since it enhances stealth.

normal output, but when encountering the trigger, it would
uncontrollably produce adversary-desirable output.
The principle of current attack methods is improving the
stealthiness and effectiveness of backdoor attacks. Therefore, they (Gu et al. 2019; Jia, Liu, and Gong 2022) commonly consider only poisoning a small proportion of training samples with visually invisible triggers (controlled by
a manipulation strength parameter as shown in Figure 1),
which can evade human and machine detection more easily.
Furthermore, instead of randomly selecting training samples
to be backdoored with heuristic strategies (Gu et al. 2019;
Jia, Liu, and Gong 2022), recent methods (Xia et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2023; Xun et al. 2024) proposed to choose representative samples via a pre-designed criterion such as forgetting score (Xia et al. 2022) and representational distance
score (Wu et al. 2023), which further improves the effectiveness of backdoor attacks.
However, we found that the attack success rates (ASRs)
of these methods are highly sensitive to the visibility of the
trigger, i.e., the manipulation strength parameter ϵ. For example, when reducing ϵ from 4 (a common setup in existing methods) to 2 (which makes the trigger more imperceptible), current methods have a significant performance
degradation (e.g., on ImageNet-10 with a 1% poison rate,
the ASRs drops by more than 40% for attack methods FUS
(Xia et al. 2022) and RD (Wu et al. 2023)). This observation
indicates the limited effectiveness of these attack methods in
practical scenarios where high stealthiness is required.
To investigate this phenomenon, we further introduce a
new metric, i.e., the variance of class-level ASR, indicating
the discrepancy in ASR among different classes, and track
the variance of class-level ASR and the number of backdoor
samples in each class during the training stage under various
values of ϵ. The results in Figure 2 show that when the value
of ϵ becomes small, the variance in class-wise ASR is greatly

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in various machine learning tasks such as image
classification, video understanding, and natural language
processing. However, recent works (Gu et al. 2019; Jia,
Liu, and Gong 2022; Xia et al. 2022) have revealed that
DNNs are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Specifically, the
malicious adversary can elaborately craft backdoor samples
(with triggers) and effortlessly distribute them on the Internet. Meanwhile, innocent users or companies might unwittingly crawl these backdoor samples and collect them into a
dataset for model training. Once using the poisoned training
set for model training, the model will be injected with the
trigger. At ordinary times, the infected model would produce
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21474

