The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Tilted Quantile Gradient Updates for Quantile-Constrained
Reinforcement Learning
Chenglin Li1 , Guangchun Ruan2 , Hua Geng1 *
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, MIT, Boston, USA
licl23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gruan@mit.edu, genghua@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

expectations may still induce constraint violation in extreme
cases, and the potential risk cannot be strictly limited. A better solution is to apply probability-related constraints, e.g.
95%-quantile, to impose a more accurate and robust requirement for safety. In this case, the probability Pr[C ≤ d] can
be more informative than the safety expectation E[C] ≤ d.
A probabilistic constraint or a chance constraint is typically expressed as follows (Chow et al. 2018; Chen, Subramanian, and Paternain 2024):
Pr[C ≤ d] ≥ 1 − ε
(2)
Eqn. (2) strictly limits the probability of constraint violation under a given level ε, but this constraint is computationally intractable and suffers from low sample efficiency
and lack of distribution priors. A direct transformation of
(2) needs to apply the quantile, or value-at-risk (VaR) metric. Mathematically, Eqn. (2) is equivalent to the following
quantile constraint:
q1−ε := inf{x| Pr[C ≤ x] ≥ 1 − ε} ≤ d
(3)
An optimization model with quantile constraints integrated is still computationally intensive for training. In the
literature, quantile optimization has been widely studied. Estimating the gradient of quantile is a challenge, and most
of the existing solutions such as the perturbation analysis (Jiang and Fu 2015), the likelihood ratio method (Glynn
et al. 2021), and the kernel density estimation (Hong and Liu
2009) are heavily relied on the analytical model formulation.
Also, these models are focused on unconstrained optimization problems with quantile-based objectives, but the focus
of this paper is on the quantile constrains for Safe RL.
Quantile-constrained RL was first studied in (Jung et al.
2022), and the idea was to supplement the expected cumulative cost E[C] with an additive term to approximate the
quantile q1−ε . Within this setting, the quantile constraint
could be converted into an expectation-type constraint at
last, aligning with the CMDP framework. Note that this
work required the cumulative cost distribution, and its empirical performances might be over-conservative (with relatively low return) because of the biased approximation of
quantiles.
Other related works have also been conducted to bound
the probability of constraint violation. Yang et al. (2023)
applied Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) as an approximation of the quantile. Chow et al. (2018) proposed

Safe reinforcement learning (RL) is a popular and versatile
paradigm to learn reward-maximizing policies with safety
guarantees. Previous works tend to express the safety constraints in an expectation form due to the ease of implementation, but this turns out to be ineffective in maintaining safety
constraints with high probability. To this end, we move to
the quantile-constrained RL that enables a higher level of
safety without any expectation-form approximations. We directly estimate the quantile gradients through sampling and
provide the theoretical proofs of convergence. Then a tilted
update strategy for quantile gradients is implemented to compensate the asymmetric distributional density, with a direct
benefit of return performance. Experiments demonstrate that
the proposed model fully meets safety requirements (quantile
constraints) while outperforming the state-of-the-art benchmarks with higher return.

Introduction
There has been rising attention on Safe reinforcement learning (RL) which seeks to develop a policy that maximizes
the expected cumulative return while meeting all the safety
constraints. A common option is the Constrained Markov
Decision Process (CMDP) framework, in which the safety
constraintsPare established to bound the expected cumulative
cost C = t γ t c by:
E[C] ≤ d

(1)

Most previous works follow this framework to construct
constraints, because this form is consistent with the expected
cumulative return (objective function) such that the gradient
calculation would become the same for both the safety constraints and the objective function. As for the solution, the
Lagrange approach is common (Achiam et al. 2017; Liang,
Que, and Modiano 2018; Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor
2018; Liu, Ding, and Liu 2020), but there are other options
such as projection-based methods (Yang et al. 2020), shielding methods (Alshiekh et al. 2018; Carr et al. 2023), and barrier methods (Marvi and Kiumarsi 2021; Cheng et al. 2019).
Unfortunately, the above expectation setup does not apply
for many real-world safety-critical applications. Bounding
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18236

