The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Social Recommendation via Graph-Level Counterfactual Augmentation
Yinxuan Huang1∗ , Ke Liang1 * ,
Yanyi Huang1 , Xiang Zeng1 , Kai Chen1† , Bin Zhou1†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan, China
{huangyinxuan22,chenkai ,huangyanyi22,binzhou}@nudt.edu.cn, liangke200694@126.com
Abstract
Traditional recommendation system focus more on the correlations between users and items (user-item relationships),
while research on user-user relationships has received significant attention these years, which is also known as social recommendation. Graph-based models have achieved a
great success in this task by utilizing the complex topological information of the social networks. However, these models still face the insufficient expressive and overfitting problems. Counterfactual approaches are proven effective as information augmentation strategies towards above issues in
various scenarios, but not fully utilized in social recommendations. To this end, we propose a novel social recommendation method, termed SR-GCA, via a plug-and-play GraphLevel Counterfactual Augmentation mechanism. Specifically,
we first generate counterfactual social and item links by constructing a counterfactual matrix for data aug- mentation.
Then, we employ a supervised learning strategy to refine
data both factual and counterfactual links. Thirdly, we enhance representations learning between users via an alignment and self-supervised optimization techniques. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the promising capacity of our model
from five aspects: superiority, effectiveness, transferability,
complexity, and robustness. In particular, the transferability
is well-proven by extending our GCA module to three typical
social recommendation models.

Figure 1: A comparison of user-user interaction graphs and
user-item bipartite graphs. Traditional RS tasks generally
focus on simpler user-item interactions within User-Item
graph, whereas SR delves into the more complex relationships within User-User social Graphs.

that typically deal with simpler user-item interactions in bipartite graph structures. A multitude of SR methods have
been proposed, such as SocialMF (Qian 2015) and SoRec
(Ma et al. 2008a; Liang et al. 2024a), which extract features by decomposing rating and social matrices or applying social regularization. Recently, the rapid evolution of
graph neural networks (GNNs) has prompted exploration
of their application within the SR domain (Qin et al. 2020;
Liang et al. 2024b). This interest stems from GNNs’ capability to synthesize node-specific information and the underlying topological structures (Sun et al. 2024a; Liang et al.
2024c). Their adeptness at managing the complexities embedded in social relationship networks positions GNNs as an
ideal choice for modeling the non-Euclidean nature of social
dynamics and user interactions (Qin et al. 2021; Song et al.
2024; Luo et al. 2024a). They naturally represent user interactions and user-item relationships as graph-structured data.
GNN-based SR methods typically follow two approaches:
either integrating user-item and user-user graphs into a single heterogeneous graph for unified representation learning
or separately modeling these graphs and combining the resulting vectors for a comprehensive user representation (Yu

Introduction
Recommendation systems (RS) primarily emphasize the
correlations between users and items (user-item relationships), achieving remarkable success on e-commerce platforms like Amazon, Taobao, and others (Tu et al. 2021; Yu
et al. 2022). However, as the amount of available information increases and more people prefer to make friends online, the scope of recommendation scenarios has expanded
from user-item interactions to user-user interactions (Mei,
Huang, and Li 2021) (see Fig. 1). This shift has led to the
emergence of a new field known as social recommendation
(SR), which focuses on exploring the more complex relationships between users, in contrast to traditional RS tasks
* Co-first authors with equally contribution.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

334

