The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MMGDreamer: Mixed-Modality Graph for Geometry-Controllable
3D Indoor Scene Generation
Zhifei Yang1 * , Keyang Lu2 , Chao Zhang3† , Jiaxing Qi4 , Hanqi Jiang3 , Ruifei Ma3 , Shenglin Yin1 ,
Yifan Xu4 , Mingzhe Xing1 , Zhen Xiao1† , Jieyi Long5 , Xiangde Liu3 , and Guangyao Zhai6
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
3
Beijing Digital Native Digital City Research Center
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
5
Theta Labs, Inc.
6
Technical University of Munich
2

yangzhifei@stu.pku.edu.cn, ariczhang2009@gmail.com, xiaozhen@pku.edu.cn, guangyao.zhai@tum.de
Abstract

3D scenes based on input prompts, allowing for precise control and adjustment of specific objects within those scenes.
It is widely applied in Virtual Reality (Bautista et al. 2022),
Interior Design (Çelen et al. 2024), and Embodied Intelligence(Yang et al. 2024; Zhai et al. 2024a), providing immersive experiences and enhancing decision-making processes.
Within these applications, scene graphs serve as a powerful
tool by succinctly abstracting the scene context and interrelations between objects, enabling intuitive scene manipulation and generation (Dhamo et al. 2021).

Controllable 3D scene generation has extensive applications
in virtual reality and interior design, where the generated
scenes should exhibit high levels of realism and controllability in terms of geometry. Scene graphs provide a suitable data representation that facilitates these applications.
However, current graph-based methods for scene generation
are constrained to text-based inputs and exhibit insufficient
adaptability to flexible user inputs, hindering the ability to
precisely control object geometry. To address this issue, we
propose MMGDreamer, a dual-branch diffusion model for
scene generation that incorporates a novel Mixed-Modality
Graph, visual enhancement module, and relation predictor.
The mixed-modality graph allows object nodes to integrate
textual and visual modalities, with optional relationships between nodes. It enhances adaptability to flexible user inputs
and enables meticulous control over the geometry of objects
in the generated scenes. The visual enhancement module enriches the visual fidelity of text-only nodes by constructing
visual representations using text embeddings. Furthermore,
our relation predictor leverages node representations to infer
absent relationships between nodes, resulting in more coherent scene layouts. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that MMGDreamer exhibits superior control of object geometry, achieving state-of-the-art scene generation performance.

Despite the significant progress made by retrieval-based
(Lin and Mu 2024), semi-generative (Ren et al. 2024), and
fully-generative (Zhai et al. 2024c) methods in graph-based
controllable scene generation, these approaches predominantly rely on textual descriptions to construct input scene
graphs. While text serves as a high-level representation encapsulating rich semantic information, it falls short in accurately describing the geometry of objects in the generated
scenes, resulting in inadequate geometric control over the
generated objects (Rombach et al. 2022). Moreover, each
node in the scene graph contains only textual information
about object category, which limits its adaptability to flexible user input. To address these limitations, we introduce
MMGDreamer, a dual-branch diffusion model designed for
processing multimodal information, incorporating a novel
Mixed-Modality Graph (MMG) as a key component. As depicted in Fig. 1, the node of MMG can be represented in
three ways: text, image, or a combination of both. Additionally, edges between nodes can be selectively provided
or omitted based on user input. This flexible graph structure
supports five types of user input, as illustrated in Fig. 1.A,
significantly enhancing adaptability to diverse user demands
and enabling precise control over object geometry in generated scenes.

Project page —
https://yangzhifeio.github.io/project/MMGDreamer

Introduction
Deep generative models have initiated a new era of artificial
intelligence-generated content, driving developments in natural language generation (Zheng et al. 2024), video synthesis (Liao et al. 2024a), and 3D generation (Poole et al. 2022).
Controllable Scene Generation refers to generating realistic

To fully leverage the capabilities of MMG, MMGDreamer features two pivotal modules: the visual enhancement module and the relation predictor. When nodes of the
input scene graph contain solely textual information, the visual enhancement module employs text embeddings to con-

* Work done at Beijing Digital Native Digital City Research

Center.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9391

