The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KPL: Training-Free Medical Knowledge Mining of Vision-Language Models
Jiaxiang Liu1, 2 , Tianxiang Hu1, 2 , Jiawei Du3, 4 , Ruiyuan Zhang1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou3, 4 , Zuozhu Liu
1, 2 *
1

ZJU-Angelalign R&D Center for Intelligence Healthcare, ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University, China
2
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
4
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
{jiaxiang.21, zuozhuliu}@intl.zju.edu.cn
Abstract

long, slender body
short tail
large, round eyes
point coloration
green or yellow eyes
blue-grey fur
short, dense fur
long, fluffy tail
short legs

Visual Language Models such as CLIP excel in image recognition due to extensive image-text pre-training. However, applying the CLIP inference in zero-shot classification, particularly for medical image diagnosis, faces challenges due to: 1)
the inadequacy of representing image classes solely with single category names; 2) the modal gap between the visual and
text spaces generated by CLIP encoders. Despite attempts to
enrich disease descriptions with large language models, the
lack of class-specific knowledge often leads to poor performance. In addition, empirical evidence suggests that existing proxy learning methods for zero-shot image classification
on natural image datasets exhibit instability when applied to
medical datasets. To tackle these challenges, we introduce the
Knowledge Proxy Learning (KPL) to mine knowledge from
CLIP. KPL is designed to leverage CLIP’s multimodal understandings for medical image classification through Text Proxy
Optimization and Multimodal Proxy Learning. Specifically,
KPL retrieves image-relevant knowledge descriptions from
the constructed knowledge-enhanced base to enrich semantic
text proxies. It then harnesses input images and these descriptions, encoded via CLIP, to stably generate multimodal proxies that boost the zero-shot classification performance. Extensive experiments conducted on both medical and natural
image datasets demonstrate that KPL enables effective zeroshot image classification, outperforming all baselines. These
findings highlight the great potential in this paradigm of mining knowledge from CLIP for medical image classification
and broader areas.

British Shorthair

Dark nose pad

Siamese

Russian Blue

Bright blue-gray coat color

Short, plush coat texture
Round face shape
Greenish eyes
Thick neck
Thick tail
Uniformity in coat color
Large, round eyes Slender and muscular
Triangular head Graceful posture
Small, wide-set ears
Eye color (blue eyes)
Whisker pattern symmetry

Eye position (wide-set)

VCD

KPL

Category Name

LLM
Knowledge

Visual-based
Retrieve

Figure 1: VCD utilizes a limited number of descriptions that
may be irrelevant to the images, whereas KPL generates
richer descriptions from the knowledge of LLMs. These are
visually-based and retrieved to ensure the descriptions’ relevance to the images (Text Proxy Optimization).
Xian et al. 2018; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2013),
which is essential in real-world healthcare settings. Visual
Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP have demonstrated
promising performance in these tasks (Radford et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2023a; Eslami, de Melo, and Meinel 2021; Gai
et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023). After training CLIP on internet-sourced images with their corresponding captions or descriptions to gain image-text alignment
(Radford et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023; Esmaeilpour et al.
2022), the CLIP inference procedure utilizes class name features as proxies to classify images by comparing the similarity between image features and these text-based proxies
(Radford et al. 2021). While CLIP effectively uses unlabeled internet data for large-scale training to foster a rich
multimodal understanding, its performance often falls short
in specialized classification tasks, such as the medical domain (Liu et al. 2023b; Lai et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2024a,b).

Code — https://github.com/JXLiu-AI/KPL

Introduction
Zero-shot image classification is a crucial task in various domains (Radford et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022a; Qian, Xu,
and Hu 2024; Ren, Su, and Liu 2024; Zhou et al. 2023;
Jiao et al. 2023; Novack et al. 2023; Ali and Khan 2023),
especially where comprehensive datasets covering all possible classes are unattainable and annotated images are scarce.
An exemplary application is zero-shot medical image diagnosis (Wang et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2023b; Mahapatra, Bozorgtabar, and Ge 2021; Mahapatra, Ge, and Reyes 2022;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18852

