The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

General Uncertainty Estimation with Delta Variances
Simon Schmitt, 1,2 John Shawe-Taylor, 2 Hado van Hasselt1
1

DeepMind
University College London, UK
suschmitt@google.com

Abstract

The approach can be applied to neural networks or functions that contain neural networks as building blocks to compute a quantity of interest. For instance we could learn a
step-by-step dynamics model and then use it to infer some
utility function for decision making.

1

Inference Compute

Decision makers may suffer from uncertainty induced by limited data. This may be mitigated by accounting for epistemic
uncertainty, which is however challenging to estimate efficiently for large neural networks.
To this extent we investigate Delta Variances, a family of
algorithms for epistemic uncertainty quantification, that is
computationally efficient and convenient to implement. It can
be applied to neural networks and more general functions
composed of neural networks. As an example we consider a
weather simulator with a neural-network-based step function
inside – here Delta Variances empirically obtain competitive
results at the cost of a single gradient computation.
The approach is convenient as it requires no changes to the
neural network architecture or training procedure. We discuss
multiple ways to derive Delta Variances theoretically noting
that special cases recover popular techniques and present a
unified perspective on multiple related methods. Finally we
observe that this general perspective gives rise to a natural
extension and empirically show its benefit.

K×
eval

1×
grad
1×
eval

Pareto Frontier: Inference vs. Training Compute
Dropout

better

2

Delta Variance
Lower Bound
(baseline without uncertainty)

1x

Introduction

Decision makers often need to act given limited data. Accounting for the resulting uncertainty (epistemic uncertainty)
may be helpful for active learning (MacKay 1992a), exploration (Duff 2002; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002)
and safety (Heger 1994).
How to measure epistemic uncertainty efficiently for large
neural networks is active research. Computational efficiency
is important because even a single evaluation (e.g. a forward
pass through a neural network) can be expensive. Popular
approaches compute an ensemble of predictions using bootstrapping or MC dropout and incur a multiplicative computational overhead. Other approaches are faster but require
changes to the predictors architecture and training procedure (Van Amersfoort et al. 2020).
In this paper we propose the Delta Variance family of algorithms which connects and extends Bayesian, frequentist
and heuristic notions of variance. Delta Variances require no
changes to the architecture or training procedure while incurring the cost of little more than a gradient computation. We
present further appealing properties and benefits in Table 1.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20318

Ensemble

better

Training Compute Multiplier

Kx

Figure 1: We compare the computational overhead of training
and evaluating different variance estimators. Delta Variances
are favourable in terms of computational efficiency. They
incur negligible training overhead while inference incurs
the cost of a regular gradient pass making them more efficient than the alternatives considered. Monte-Carlo Dropout
also incurs negligible training overhead, but requires K independent evaluations for inference. Most expensive are Bootstrapped Ensembles requiring K× repeated computations.
In Section 6 we consider the GraphCast weather forecasting system with a neural network step function (Lam et al.
2023). We then compute the epistemic uncertainty of various derived quantities such as the expected precipitation or
wind-turbine-power at a particular location.
Section 5 observes how instances of the Delta Variance
family can be derived using different assumptions and theoretical frameworks. We begin with a Bernstein-von Mises
plus Delta Method derivation, which relies on strong assumptions. We conclude with an influence function based derivation, which relies only on mild assumptions. Interestingly
the resulting instances are not only similar, but also become
identical as the number of observed data-points grows.
Formalizing the Delta Variance family allows us to connect
Bayesian and frequentist notions of variance, adversarial
robustness and anomaly detection in a unified perspective.

