The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Incomplete Multi-view Clustering via Diffusion Contrastive Generation
Yuanyang Zhang1 * , Yijie Lin2 * , Weiqing Yan3 , Li Yao1,4† , Xinhang Wan5 ,
Guangyuan Li6 , Chao Zhang7 , Guanzhou Ke8 , Jie Xu9
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
3
School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University
4
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast
University), Ministry of Education, China
5
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
6
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
7
Department of Control Science and Intelligence Engineering, Nanjing University
8
School of Economics and Management, Beijing Jiaotong University
9
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhangyuanyang, yao.li}@seu.edu.cn, linyijie.gm@gmail.com
Abstract
Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) has garnered increasing attention in recent years due to the common issue of
missing data in multi-view datasets. The primary approach to
address this challenge involves recovering the missing views
before applying conventional multi-view clustering methods.
Although imputation-based IMVC methods have achieved
significant improvements, they still encounter notable limitations: 1) heavy reliance on paired data for training the data
recovery module, which is impractical in real scenarios with
high missing data rates; 2) the generated data often lacks
diversity and discriminability, resulting in suboptimal clustering results. To address these shortcomings, we propose a
novel IMVC method called Diffusion Contrastive Generation
(DCG). Motivated by the consistency between the diffusion
and clustering processes, DCG learns the distribution characteristics to enhance clustering by applying forward diffusion
and reverse denoising processes to intra-view data. By performing contrastive learning on a limited set of paired multiview samples, DCG can align the generated views with the
real views, facilitating accurate recovery of views across arbitrary missing view scenarios. Additionally, DCG integrates
instance-level and category-level interactive learning to exploit the consistent and complementary information available
in multi-view data, achieving robust and end-to-end clustering. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: Motivation. We observed that as the diffusion process progresses, the generated sample representations tend
to gradually aggregate toward the center of the cluster.
radar to perceive their surroundings and navigate (Cui et al.
2024). Multi-view data offers a comprehensive perspective
of the same subject from various angles, making it a critical
area of machine learning and data mining.
To extract and synthesize the full picture from these disparate sources, one of the pivotal techniques in multi-view
learning is multi-view clustering (MVC), which aims to partition multi-view data into distinct clusters (Cai et al. 2024a;
Yan et al. 2024; Cai et al. 2024b; Lu et al. 2024) by leveraging the inherent consistency and complementarity nature of
the information across different views (Lin et al. 2024). The
success of existing multi-view clustering methods heavily
relies on the completeness of multi-view data, i.e., all views
are consistently available for each sample. However, this
condition is rarely met in real-life scenarios due to sensor
malfunctions or damage during storage. To tackle this problem, Incomplete Multi-view Clustering (IMVC) has been
proposed to effectively cluster data even when some views
are missing (Zhang et al. 2023; Wan et al. 2024).
The predominant strategy for addressing the incomplete
multi-view data is to recover the missing view and subsequently apply existing MVC methods (Guan et al. 2024;
Ke et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2024; Cai et al. 2022) for clustering. Specifically, existing IMVC methods primarily focus
on crafting consistent common representations through con-

Introduction
In practical applications, data collected from different sensors or feature extraction methods is often presented in
multiple-view forms. For instance, healthcare professionals
utilize multi-view data such as MRI images, CT scans, and
X-rays for diagnostic purposes (Chen 2022). Similarly, autonomous vehicles employ data from cameras, LiDAR, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22650

