The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learn How to Query from Unlabeled Data Streams in Federated Learning
Yuchang Sun1 , Xinran Li1 , Tao Lin2 , Jun Zhang1
1

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Westlake University
{yuchang.sun, xinran.li}@connect.ust.hk, lintao@westlake.edu.cn, eejzhang@ust.hk

Abstract

Shi et al. 2023b), which, however, is unrealistic in many applications. In practice, the data samples usually arrive at the
clients without any label (Jin et al. 2020). For example, hospitals collect raw medical images in the course of routine
care which are initially unannotated raw images. As labeling these images requires highly experienced clinical staff
to spend minutes per image, it is more feasible to select a
subset of samples for label querying and subsequent model
training. In this case, designing an effective strategy to identify the samples that could provide the most benefit in model
training becomes a critical problem.
Data querying strategies for non-FL settings have been
widely studied in the active learning (AL) literature (Settles 2009; Liu et al. 2022; Cacciarelli and Kulahci 2024).
However, there are limited studies towards adapting these
strategies to FL settings due to the challenges brought by the
inherently decentralized nature of FL. The major challenge
lies in the conflict between the collaborative goal of optimizing the global model and the limited access to local data on
clients. To be specific, FL aims to optimize the global model
over all the training data across clients while each client can
only access its private training data. Given this fact, it is
difficult for clients to select the most critical data samples
which promote the global training. One straightforward approach is prioritizing local data on each client, which, however, is a myopic strategy without considering the goal of
global model training, ultimately leading to suboptimal data
selections. More recently, there are some attempts to explore
the data querying problem in FL with fixed unlabeled dataset
by designing local selection rules (Kim et al. 2023; Cao et al.
2023). Nevertheless, the performance of these methods is restricted since the data selections on clients tend to operate in
a non-cooperative fashion without the guidance towards the
global training goal. To solve these problems, it is imperative to design a specific data querying strategy tailored for
FL with decentralized data streams while accounting for the
collaborative objective of global model training.
In this work, we investigate the data querying problem
in FL, particularly focusing on a case where unlabeled data
arrive at clients in a streaming fashion. By alternating local data query and model training procedures, clients aim to
collaboratively optimize the global model, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. In the subsequent sections, we first empirically show
the impact of various data querying strategies on the perfor-

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative learning among
decentralized clients while safeguarding the privacy of their
local data. Existing studies on FL typically assume offline labeled data available at each client when the training starts.
Nevertheless, the training data in practice often arrive at
clients in a streaming fashion without ground-truth labels.
Given the expensive annotation cost, it is critical to identify a subset of informative samples for labeling on clients.
However, selecting samples locally while accommodating
the global training objective presents a challenge unique to
FL. In this work, we tackle this conundrum by framing the
data querying process in FL as a collaborative decentralized
decision-making problem and proposing an effective solution
named LeaDQ, which leverages multi-agent reinforcement
learning algorithms. In particular, under the implicit guidance from global information, LeaDQ effectively learns the
local policies for distributed clients and steers them towards
selecting samples that can enhance the global model’s accuracy. Extensive simulations on image and text tasks show that
LeaDQ advances the model performance in various FL scenarios, outperforming the benchmarking algorithms.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) has emerged
as a distributed paradigm for training machine learning
(ML) models while preserving local data privacy. In FL,
the model training process involves multiple clients, each
possessing its own local training data with different distributions. These clients jointly optimize an ML model based
on their local data and periodically upload the model updates to the server. Afterwards, the server updates the global
model by applying the aggregated updates and distributes
the current model to the clients for next-iteration training.
This approach has gained significant attention in practical
applications such as healthcare (Rieke et al. 2020) and Internet of Things (Zhang et al. 2022a), due to its potential
to address privacy concerns associated with centralized data
storage and processing.
Most of existing FL studies assume that clients have a
fixed pool of training data samples with ground-truth labels (Li et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023; Yang, Xiao, and Ji 2023;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20752

