The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Two-Timescale Critic-Actor for Average Reward MDPs with Function
Approximation
Prashansa Panda and Shalabh Bhatnagar
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India.
prashansap@iisc.ac.in; shalabh@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Several recent works have focused on carrying out nonasymptotic convergence analyses for AC algorithms. Recently,
a two-timescale critic-actor algorithm has been presented for
the discounted cost setting in the look-up table case where
the timescales of the actor and the critic are reversed and only
asymptotic convergence shown. In our work, we present the
first two-timescale critic-actor algorithm with function approximation in the long-run average reward setting and present the
first finite-time non-asymptotic as well as asymptotic convergence analysis for such a scheme. We obtain optimal learning
rates and prove that our algorithm achieves a sample complexity that can be made arbitrarily close to that of single-timescale
AC and clearly better than the one obtained for two-timescale
AC in a similar setting. A notable feature of our analysis is
that we present the asymptotic convergence analysis of our
scheme in addition to the finite-time bounds that we obtain and
show the almost sure asymptotic convergence of the (slower)
critic recursion to the attractor of an associated differential
inclusion with actor parameters corresponding to local maxima of a perturbed average reward objective. We also show the
results of numerical experiments on three benchmark settings
and observe that our critic-actor algorithm performs the best
amongst all algorithms.

1

Introduction

Actor-Critic (AC) methods have proved to be efficient in
solving many reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. Actor-only
methods such as REINFORCE suffer from high variance during the estimation of the policy gradient whereas critic-only
methods like Q-learning are efficient in the tabular setting
but can diverge when function approximation is used. AC
methods try to circumvent these problems by combining both
policy- and value-based methods to solve RL problems. In
these approaches, the goal of the actor is to learn the optimal
policy using the value updates provided by the critic, while
the goal of the critic is to learn the value function for a policy
prescribed by the actor. One obtains stable behavior of such
algorithms through a difference in timescales that we explain
in more detail below.
The AC framework is designed to mimic the policy iteration (PI) procedure for Markov decision processes (Puterman
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19813

2014). The AC algorithms incorporate two-timescale coupled stochastic recursions with the learning rate of the actor
typically converging to zero at a rate faster than that of the
critic. The timescale separation in two-timescale stochastic
approximation algorithms such as AC is critical in ensuring
stability of the recursions and their almost sure convergence.
This is because from the viewpoint of the faster timescale,
the slower recursion appears to be quasi-static while from
the viewpoint of the slower timescale, the faster recursion
appears to have converged. This helps the AC scheme to
emulate policy iteration and thereby converge to the optimal
policy. Asymptotic convergence analyses of two-timescale
AC schemes are largely available via the ordinary differential
equation (ODE) based approach. In (Bhatnagar, Borkar, and
Guin 2023), the critic-actor (CA) algorithm was proposed, in
the lookup table setting for the infinite-horizon discounted
cost criterion, where the roles of the actor and the critic were
reversed by swapping their timescales. The resulting procedure is seen to track value iteration instead of policy iteration.
In this paper, we carry this idea forward and present, for
the first time, a critic-actor algorithm with function approximation and for the long-run average (and not discounted)
reward setting. We then carry out detailed asymptotic and nonasymptotic convergence analyses of the same. Our algorithm
runs temporal difference learning on the slower timescale to
estimate the critic updates and stochastic policy gradient on
the faster timescale for the actor. We prove that this algorithm
emulates an approximate value iteration scheme. Our paper
plugs in an important gap that existed previously by studying
a new class of algorithms obtained by merely reversing the
timescales of the actor and the critic. Our finite-time analysis
shows that the two-timescale CA algorithm has a better sample complexity when compared with the two-timescale AC
algorithm.
In our algorithm, even though there are three recursions,
the average reward and actor recursions together proceed on
the same timescale that is faster than the timescale of the
critic update. Notice the difference of our scheme with AC
algorithms for average-reward MDPs such as those in (Wu
et al. 2022; Bhatnagar et al. 2009), where the average-reward
recursion proceeds on the same (faster) timescale as the critic
while the actor recursion proceeds slower. We use linear
function approximation for the critic recursion and a policy
gradient actor. We perform the non-asymptotic analysis of

