The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Latent Reward: LLM-Empowered Credit Assignment
in Episodic Reinforcement Learning
Yun Qu* , Yuhang Jiang* , Boyuan Wang, Yixiu Mao, Cheems Wang, Chang Liu, Xiangyang Ji†
Tsinghua University
{qy22, jiangyh19, wangby22, myx21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
cheemswang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2021), is challenging in episodic RL due to delayed
and sparse feedback. Return decomposition (Arjona-Medina
et al. 2019), which estimates proxy rewards by using stateaction pairs to redistribute episodic rewards, has emerged in
the literature as a promising direction to remedy this issue.
Subsequent works often focus on model architectures (Liu
et al. 2019; Widrich et al. 2021) or human-designed regression principles (Ren et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2024), overlooking the training difficulty posed by redundant information. Zhang et al. (2024b) attempted to address this redundancy by employing a causal approach to filter out rewardirrelevant features but still struggled with the lack of semantic interpretation.
A prominent observation in human problem-solving is
that contribution assessments often encompass a range of
qualitative and quantitative factors. For instance, soccer
players’ performance is evaluated not only by goals scored
but also by injury prevention and coordination. Similarly,
the rewards designed in RL are commonly a combination of
multiple factors (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012; Qu et al.
2023). Previous methods (Arjona-Medina et al. 2019; Ren
et al. 2021) mainly focus solely on the values of final returns
without tapping into the multifaceted nature of performance
evaluation, resulting in poor semantic interpretability and
ambiguous credit assignment. Recently, the demonstrated
capabilities of pre-trained LLM (Achiam et al. 2023) suggest that integrating its prior knowledge for improved credit
assignment is a promising solution. However, the misalignment between LLM’s linguistic knowledge and the symbolic representations required for specific tasks poses significant challenges, while the inherent randomness and hallucinations in LLM inference further diminish its effectiveness (Peng et al. 2023; Carta et al. 2023).
Motivated by the urgent demand of depicting multifaceted
performance evaluation, we propose a key concept for credit
assignment, termed Latent Reward, where different dimensions capture various aspects of task performance while
eliminating reward-irrelevant redundancy. We then devise
a framework LaRe, which (i) derives semantically interpretable latent rewards by incorporating task-related priors from LLM and (ii) utilizes them to enhance reward
decomposition. With the insight that semantically generated code can bridge linguistic knowledge in LLM and targets in symbolic form due to its executability for symbolic

Reinforcement learning (RL) often encounters delayed and
sparse feedback in real-world applications, even with only
episodic rewards. Previous approaches have made some
progress in reward redistribution for credit assignment but
still face challenges, including training difficulties due to redundancy and ambiguous attributions stemming from overlooking the multifaceted nature of mission performance evaluation. Hopefully, Large Language Model (LLM) encompasses fruitful decision-making knowledge and provides a
plausible tool for reward redistribution. Even so, deploying
LLM in this case is non-trivial due to the misalignment between linguistic knowledge and the symbolic form requirement, together with inherent randomness and hallucinations
in inference. To tackle these issues, we introduce LaRe,
a novel LLM-empowered symbolic-based decision-making
framework, to improve credit assignment. Key to LaRe is
the concept of the Latent Reward, which works as a multidimensional performance evaluation, enabling more interpretable goal attainment from various perspectives and facilitating more effective reward redistribution. We examine that
semantically generated code from LLM can bridge linguistic
knowledge and symbolic latent rewards, as it is executable for
symbolic objects. Meanwhile, we design latent reward selfverification to increase the stability and reliability of LLM
inference. Theoretically, reward-irrelevant redundancy elimination in the latent reward benefits RL performance from
more accurate reward estimation. Extensive experimental results witness that LaRe (i) achieves superior temporal credit
assignment to SOTA methods, (ii) excels in allocating contributions among multiple agents, and (iii) outperforms policies
trained with ground truth rewards for certain tasks.

Introduction
Episodic reinforcement learning is dedicated to solving
problems of receiving only episodic rewards, a frequently
encountered situation in real-world applications of RL, such
as autonomous driving (Kiran et al. 2021) and healthcare (Zeng et al. 2022). Credit assignment (Sutton et al.
2011; Zhang, Veeriah, and Whiteson 2020), which involves
assessing the contributions of single-step decisions (Ren
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20095

