The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Theorem Rationale for Improving the Mathematical Reasoning
Capability of Large Language Models
Yu Sheng1,2 , Linjing Li1,2,3 * , Daniel Dajun Zeng1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Wenge Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
{shengyu2021, linjing.li, dajun.zeng}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

of open-source LLMs such as the LLaMA series (Touvron
et al. 2023a) still trails behind. Considering the cost and
the requirement for further optimization, it is a valuable but
ongoing challenge to improve the MR capability of opensource LLMs.
A contemporary paradigm of improving the capabilities of open-source LLMs to tackle complex mathematical tasks has been fine-tuning the models with annotated or
generated question-solution data pairs involving Chain-ofThought (CoT) rationale, which directly teaches the model
how to perform CoT reasoning on these tasks. While the
learning process has been proven effective in previous studies (Yue et al. 2024; Ho, Schmid, and Yun 2023; Magister
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b), the performance on problems
at advanced mathematical levels remains unsatisfying. Some
research have observed LLMs are prone to missing core concepts or theorems necessary for solving the problems or applying these theorems incorrectly (Chen et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024c). To this end, this paper explores the probability of further enhancing the MR capability of LLMs from
the perspective of leveraging professional mathematical theorems in specific questions.
MR is inherently a knowledge-intensive task that requires
machines to acquire mathematical knowledge and apply it to
solve problems. Mathematical theorems, encompassing advanced mathematical concepts and principles (Pólya, Szegö
et al. 1998), are essential common knowledge accumulated
by humans and play an important role on MR tasks. For
the process of human beings solving math problems (Nathan
2014; Marasabessy 2021), if a person cannot provide a solution directly from elementary arithmetic after reading the
problem text, he would select a subset of theorems potentially useful for solving the question from his entire knowledge base. Subsequently, he will ponder a solution based
on the mathematical rationales entailed in these theorems.
The quality of the chosen theorem set possesses a critical
affect on the final solution. Irrelevant theorems can induce
redundant or even fallacious intermediate steps, dramatically increasing the likelihood of blunder in the final answer.
However, in the filed of LLM mathematical reasoning, current methods following CoT paradigm have absolutely ignored the explicit thought process of reflecting on the corresponding theorems combined with the question, raising the
hazard of involving unrelated theorems and hallucination.

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant
progress in mathematical reasoning, especially in elementary
math. However, they remain indisposed on tackling complex
questions at high-school or college levels, which put forward
a more advanced requirement of mastering relevant mathematical theorems. For we humans, whether selecting the appropriate theorems according to the provided question is a
crucial factor affecting the quality of the ultimate solutions,
yet which has been neglected by previous research in the field
of LLM reasoning. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
to enhance the LLM’s capability of utilizing the mathematical theorems to specific problems, which we refer to as Theorem Rationale (TR). To this end, a new dataset encompassing
problem-theorem-solution triples is deliberately established
for transferring principles of TR. Furthermore, we develop
an evolving strategy to boost hierarchical instructions oriented on the theorems to alleviate difficulty in acquiring the
curated data and facilitate the digestion of theorem application from various perspectives. Evaluations on a wide range
of public datasets exhibit that the model fine-tuned with our
dataset achieves consistent improvements at varying mathematical levels compared to the backbone. And further ablation studies illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed evolutionary strategies on enhancing the model’s capability of
math problem-solving. Overall, extensive experiments reveal
the potential of our proposed method which highlights the
significance of aligning the problems with the concrete theorems for LLMs to alleviate hallucination and improve the
models’ mathematical reasoning capabilities.

Code — https://github.com/YuSheng-00/TRStatic

1

Introduction

Mathematical Reasoning (MR) is a pivotal aspect of human
cognition and has been a long-standing pursuit of the artificial intelligence research (Iuculano and Menon 2018). With
the exponentially growing scale of training data and models,
some proprietary large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI
2024; Google 2023) have demonstrated significant advancements in MR tasks (Wang et al. 2024a; Imani, Du, and Shrivastava 2023; Luo et al. 2023a). However, the performance
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15151

