The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Effective, Efficient and Unsupervised Social Event Detection in the
Hyperbolic Space
Xiaoyan Yu1 , Yifan Wei2 , Shuaishuai Zhou3 , Zhiwei Yang4 , Li Sun5 , Hao Peng2 ,
Liehuang Zhu1 * , Philip S. Yu6
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, China
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
North China Electric Power University, Beijing, China
6
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
{xiaoyan.yu, liehuangz}@bit.edu.cn, {weiyifan, penghao}@buaa.edu.cn, psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

Recent advancements in modeling social messages into
graphs have yielded promising results across supervised
(Cao et al. 2021), self-supervised (Ren et al. 2022), and unsupervised (Cao et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024) paradigms.
These methods typically construct the social message graph
based on message attributes (Peng et al. 2021) and employ graph neural networks (GNNs), optimized through contrastive learning (Cao et al. 2021), reinforcement learning
(Peng et al. 2022), and pseudo-label generation (Ren et al.
2022) to learn clustering-friendly message representations.
Notably, Cao et al. (2024) introduced an unsupervised algorithm based on structural entropy (Li and Pan 2016) minimization, achieving state-of-the-art performance without
any supervision signal.
However, existing works have neglected some or all of
the potential challenges posed by the characteristics of social message data. Firstly, the large scale of social messages leads to resource-intensive learning. Social messages are often short texts that users post in response to specific events. Among messages describing the same event,
certain messages may exhibit high content similarity, even
nearly identical semantics. When handling such data, current methods (Ren et al. 2022; Cao et al. 2021) consider
all messages for learning, leading to resource wastage. Secondly, the complex interrelations between messages require a stereoscopic representation. To uncover the relationships among messages, current methods (Cao et al. 2024;
Ren et al. 2023) learn message representations within the
Euclidean space. However, in real-world scenarios, messages often exhibit nested and hierarchical patterns (Wang
et al. 2024). When confronted with such data patterns, the
Euclidean space lacks the expressiveness required to uncover profound interrelations among them. Thirdly, the dynamic nature of novel events continuously emerging necessitates SED systems to react efficiently. New events occur
continuously, regularly introducing new topics, trends, and
relationships, making it costly and laborious to obtain message labels or total event count. Efficiently detecting new
events from a large-scale message pool without supervision
is crucial for SED systems.
To address the aforementioned challenges, this work in-

The vast, complex, and dynamic nature of social message
data has posed challenges to social event detection (SED).
Despite considerable effort, these challenges persist, often resulting in inadequately expressive message representations
(ineffective) and prolonged learning durations (inefficient).
In response to the challenges, this work introduces an unsupervised framework, HyperSED (Hyperbolic SED). Specifically, the proposed framework first models social messages
into semantic-based message anchors, and then leverages the
structure of the anchor graph and the expressiveness of the
hyperbolic space to acquire structure- and geometry-aware
anchor representations. Finally, HyperSED builds the partitioning tree of the anchor message graph by incorporating
differentiable structural information as the reflection of the
detected events. Extensive experiments on public datasets
demonstrate HyperSED’s competitive performance, along
with a substantial improvement in efficiency compared to the
current state-of-the-art unsupervised paradigm. Statistically,
HyperSED boosts incremental SED by an average of 2%, 2%,
and 25% in NMI, AMI, and ARI, respectively; enhancing efficiency by up to 37.41 times and at least 12.10 times, illustrating the advancement of the proposed framework.

Implements — github.com/XiaoyanWork/HyperSED
Extended version — arxiv.org/abs/2412.10712

Introduction
Social Event Detection (SED), a task aimed at identify noteworthy occurrences on social media (Cordeiro and Gama
2016), remains challenging due to its large scale, complex
interrelations, and high dynamism (Fedoryszak et al. 2019).
The SED task is pivotal for various downstream applications, such as crisis management (Pohl, Bouchachia, and
Hellwagner 2012), public opinion monitoring (Karamouzas,
Mademlis, and Pitas 2022), etc. Current attempts frame SED
as a problem of learning representations of social messages
and clustering them into events (Cao et al. 2021; Ren et al.
2022).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13106

