The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

When Can We Approximate Wide Contrastive Models with Neural Tangent
Kernels and Principal Component Analysis?
Gautham Govind Anil1 * , Pascal Esser2 , Debarghya Ghoshdastidar2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
2
Technical University of Munich
gauthamga.gga@gmail.com, {esser, ghoshdas}@cit.tum.de

Abstract

2020; HaoChen et al. 2021), whereas non-contrastive learning avoids collapse by incorporating architectural asymmetry (Grill et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021) or reduction in
dimension redundancy (Zbontar et al. 2021; Bardes, Ponce,
and LeCun 2021). In practice, a plethora of SSL strategies, including deep contrastive and non-contrastive models, have been proposed over the past years across multiple domains; many of them demonstrating excellent performance empirically (Assran et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023).
While these works underline the importance of SSL and
(non-)contrastive models for applications, their theoretical
understanding is still limited.
Theoretical analysis of SSL is in its early stages. There
has been considerable effort in deriving generalization error bounds for downstream tasks on learned embeddings
(Arora et al. 2019b; Wei, Xie, and Ma 2021; Bao, Nagano,
and Nozawa 2022), and analysing spectral / isoperimetric
properties of data augmentation (Han, Ye, and Zhan 2023;
Zhuo et al. 2023). Results based on learning theoretic measures (Saunshi et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2020; Nozawa and Sato
2021), information theory (Tsai et al. 2020; Tosh, Krishnamurthy, and Hsu 2021) and loss landscapes (Pokle et al.
2022; Ziyin et al. 2022) have been studied.
Generalisation bounds, however, provide little understanding of the representations learned via SSL. (Balestriero
and LeCun 2022) answer this by showing that various (non)contrastive learning formulations result in learning spectral embedding, principal component analysis (PCA) or their
variants. In a similar vein, (Munkhoeva and Oseledets 2023)
relate contrastive learning with trace maximization problems
and matrix completion—all related to PCA. Equivalences
between the optimization formulations of SSL and PCA do
not necessarily imply that (non-)contrastive models, trained
with gradient descent, perform PCA. This requires analysing
either the converged solution or the training dynamics of
SSL.
A number of works derive and study the training dynamics of (non)contrastive learning, albeit mostly limited to
linear neural networks (Wang and Isola 2020; Tian, Chen,
and Ganguli 2021; Wang and Liu 2021; Tian 2022; Esser,
Mukherjee, and Ghoshdastidar 2023). In the context of
non-linear networks, (Simon et al. 2023) suggest that for
wide neural networks, that is, in the neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Jacot, Gabriel, and Hongler 2018; Lee

Contrastive learning is a paradigm for learning representations from unlabelled data and several recent works have
claimed that such models effectively learn spectral embeddings and show relations between (wide) contrastive models
and kernel principal component analysis (PCA). However,
it is not known if trained contrastive models indeed correspond to kernel methods or PCA. In this work, we analyze the
training dynamics of two-layer contrastive models, with nonlinear activation, and answer when these models are close
to PCA or kernel methods. It is well known in the supervised setting that neural networks are equivalent to neural tangent kernel (NTK) machines, and that the NTK of infinitely
wide networks remains constant during training. We provide
the first constancy results of NTK for contrastive losses, and
present a nuanced picture: NTK of wide networks remains
almost constant for cosine similarity based contrastive losses,
but not for losses based on dot product similarity. We further study the training dynamics of contrastive models with
orthogonality constraints on output layer, which is implicitly
assumed in works relating contrastive learning to spectral embedding. Our deviation bounds suggest that representations
learned by contrastive models are close to the principal components of a certain matrix computed from random features.

Introduction
The paradigm of self-supervised learning (SSL) builds on
the idea of using knowledge about semantic similarities in
the data to define which data-points should be mapped close
to each other in the latent representation. The goal of SSL
is to learn a “good representation”. While there is no unique
notion of “good” without taking a downstream task into consideration (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013), in general one is interested in mapping semantically similar objects to close representations in the latent space, but avoid
“dimension collapse” that occurs when different dimensions
in the latent space collapse to the same value. Depending
on the mechanism used to prevent collapse of learned embeddings, SSL strategies can be broadly categorised as contrastive or non-contrastive learning. Contrastive learning relies on negative samples to ensure representations do not collapse (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Chen et al. 2020; He et al.
* Work done partly at Technical University of Munich
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15399

