The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FLUE: Streamlined Uncertainty Estimation for Large Language Models
Shiqi Gao, 1 Tianxiang Gong, 1 Zijie Lin, 3 Runhua Xu, 1 Haoyi Zhou, 2, 4 * Jianxin Li 1, 4
1

SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
School of Software, Beihang University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing
{gaoshiqi, gongtianxiang, runhua, haoyi, lijx}@buaa.edu.cn, lin.zijie@u.nus.edu
Abstract

Several research efforts have focused on providing targeted optimizations for uncertainty estimation in openended QA with LLMs to address these challenges. Most of
these uncertainty estimation approaches are sample-based
methods (Malinin and Gales 2021; Kuhn, Gal, and Farquhar
2023), which essentially measure the consistency of multiple sampling outputs by introducing randomness into the
model output process. There are two main approaches: 1)
measuring token-level uncertainty (Malinin and Gales 2021;
Balabanov and Linander 2024) and approximating sequence
uncertainty through entropy chain propagation, where the
uncertainty arises from the inconsistency of the conditional
prediction posterior of ensemble models under the same
prefix condition, ignoring the potential nonlinear relationship between the uncertainties of continuous tokens; and 2)
measuring sequence-level uncertainty (Farquhar et al. 2024;
Manakul, Liusie, and Gales 2023), which leverages the randomness of decoding (e.g., controlling Temperature or TopK) to obtain diverse sequence semantics and measure the
inconsistency in the semantic space, inherently requiring additional inference costs.
An effective uncertainty estimation for LLMs should possess two key characteristics: 1) no additional inference cost
and 2) the ability to capture the semantic features of uncertainty in the sequence. One potential solution is to utilize
the large number of parameters in LLMs to introduce randomness in the output and measure knowledge uncertainty.
Recent work has revealed a clear distinction between the
layers in LLMs, with knowledge storage typically located
in the higher-level FFN layers (Chuang et al. 2023; Geva
et al. 2020), and these layers usually exhibit similar characteristics (Sun et al. 2024). Introducing randomness during
a single forward pass enables the acquisition of token-level
Monte Carlo samples without requiring multiple inferences.
In this work, we initially demonstrated that the entropy of
hidden states within a specific layer interval of LLMs can
serve as an approximate upper bound for the entropy of predictive posterior, providing a theoretical foundation for subsequent sampling strategies. We then introduced the MCFLUE sampling method, transforming the multi-layer hidden states during forward propagation into a samplable output space. Sampling hidden states within layer intervals provides an approximation of empirical entropy, which aligns
with the empirical entropy obtained through MC-Dropout

Uncertainty estimation is essential for practical applications
such as decision-making, risk assessment, and human-AI collaboration. However, uncertainty estimation in open-ended
question-answering (QA) tasks presents unique challenges.
The output space for open-ended QA is vast and discrete, and
the autoregressive nature of LLMs, combined with the rapid
increase in model parameters, makes inference sampling significantly costly. An ideal uncertainty estimation for LLMs
should meet two criteria: 1) incur no additional inference cost
and 2) capture the semantic dependencies of token-level uncertainty within sequences. We propose a promising solution
that converts redundancy into randomness in the extensive parameters of LLMs to quantify knowledge uncertainty. We can
obtain token-level Monte Carlo samples without multiple inferences by introducing randomness during a single forward
pass. We theoretically analyze the FLUE sampling method
and employ a post-processing method to learn the state transitions from token uncertainty to sequence uncertainty. In openended QA tasks, we demonstrate that FLUE can achieve competitive performance in estimating the uncertainty of generated sentences without extra inference overhead.

1

Introduction

The increasing capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Achiam et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023a) for
a wide range of applications have sparked growing interest in uncertainty estimation for tasks such as decisionmaking, risk assessment, and human-AI collaboration in
real-world scenarios (Amodei et al. 2016; Xiao and Wang
2019; Ye et al. 2024). However, uncertainty estimation for
open-ended question-answering (QA) tasks, a unique advantage of LLMs, faces distinct challenges compared to wellstudied tasks such as classification and regression (Malinin
and Gales 2021). The output space for open-ended question answering is discrete and enormous (Malinin and Gales
2021) (i.e., for each question, there are L|V| possible outputs, where L is the output length and V is the vocabulary
size). Moreover, the autoregressive generative structure and
the rapid growth of model parameters make inference sampling significantly expensive.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16745

