The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Alignment-Free RGB-T Salient Object Detection: A Large-Scale Dataset and
Progressive Correlation Network
Kunpeng Wang1 , Keke Chen1 , Chenglong Li2 , Zhengzheng Tu1 * , Bin Luo1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education, Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory
of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, China
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Security Artificial Intelligence, School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, China
{kp.wang, chenk1220, lcl1314}@foxmail.com, zhengzhengahu@163.com, luobin@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract
Alignment-free RGB-Thermal (RGB-T) salient object detection (SOD) aims to achieve robust performance in complex
scenes by directly leveraging the complementary information
from unaligned visible-thermal image pairs, without requiring manual alignment. However, the labor-intensive process
of collecting and annotating image pairs limits the scale of existing benchmarks, hindering the advancement of alignmentfree RGB-T SOD. In this paper, we construct a large-scale
and high-diversity unaligned RGB-T SOD dataset named
UVT20K, comprising 20,000 image pairs, 407 scenes, and
1256 object categories. All samples are collected from realworld scenarios with various challenges, such as low illumination, image clutter, complex salient objects, and so on. To
support the exploration for further research, each sample in
UVT20K is annotated with a comprehensive set of ground
truths, including saliency masks, scribbles, boundaries, and
challenge attributes. In addition, we propose a Progressive
Correlation Network (PCNet), which models inter- and intramodal correlations on the basis of explicit alignment to
achieve accurate predictions in unaligned image pairs. Extensive experiments conducted on two unaligned three weakly
aligned three aligned datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method.

Figure 1: Comparison on scale (i.e., circular area), scenes
(i.e., vertical axis), and object categories (i.e., horizontal axis) of the proposed UVT20K dataset with existing
representative RGB-T and RGB-D SOD datasets, including UVT2000 (Wang et al. 2024a), VT5000 (Tu et al.
2020), VT1000 (Tu et al. 2019), VT821 (Wang et al. 2018),
ReDWeb-S (Liu et al. 2021a), SIP (Fan et al. 2020), and
DUT-RGBD (Piao et al. 2019).

Code and Dataset — https://github.com/Angknpng/PCNet

Therefore, some studies introduce thermal images alongside visible images to enhance performance in complex
scenes. For example, (Tu et al. 2020) release a prevalent
RGB-Thermal (RGB-T) SOD benchmark with spatial alignment to facilitate the utilization of corresponding multimodal information. Therefore, existing methods are almost
designed on the basis of alignment, and demonstrate their
effectiveness through modality discrepancy reduction (Liu
et al. 2021c), multi-modal interaction improvement (Tu et al.
2021), modality modulation (Cong et al. 2022), and so on.
However, the original captured RGB-T image pairs are
unaligned in space and scale, and manually aligning them
is labor-intensive and not conducive to practical application and deployment. Moreover, directly applying existing
alignment-based methods to unaligned data leads to significant performance degradation due to the difficulty of exploiting multi-modal correspondences. To this end, (Tu et al.
2022) make the first attempt to build modality correspondences on weakly aligned datasets, which are artificially created from existing aligned datasets (Wang et al. 2018; Tu

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to identify and segment
the most attractive regions in visual scenes. It can help eliminate redundant information and has been applied in a variety of vision tasks, such as image compression (Li et al.
2017), video analysis (Fan et al. 2019), and visual tracking (Zhang et al. 2020). Although great progress has been
made, RGB SOD methods (Wang et al. 2022) only based on
visible images still struggle to distinguish salient regions in
complex scenes, such as background clutter, low illumination, and similar foreground and background.
Thermal sensors can capture the overall shape of objects, providing complementary information to visible images (Lu et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021; Yuan et al. 2024).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7780

