The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Integrating Symbolic Reasoning into Neural Generative Models for Design
Generation
Maxwell Jacobson, Yexiang Xue
Purdue University

Abstract Reprint. This is an abstract reprint of a journal
article by Jacobson and Xue (2025).

Abstract
Design generation requires tight integration of neural and
symbolic reasoning, as good design must meet explicit user
needs and honor implicit rules for aesthetics, utility, and convenience. Current automated design tools driven by neural
networks produce appealing designs, but cannot satisfy user
specifications and utility requirements. Symbolic reasoning
tools, such as constraint programming, cannot perceive lowlevel visual information in images or capture subtle aspects
such as aesthetics. We introduce Spatial Reasoning Integrated Generator (SPRING) for design generation. SPRING
embeds a neural and symbolic integrated spatial reasoning
module inside the deep generative network. The spatial reasoning module samples the set of locations of objects to be
generated from a backtrack-free distribution. This distribution modifies the implicit preference distribution, which is
learned by a recursive neural network to capture utility and
aesthetics. Sampling from the backtrack-free distribution is
accomplished by a symbolic reasoning approach, SampleSearch, which zeros out the probability of sampling spatial locations violating explicit user specifications. Embedding symbolic reasoning into neural generation guarantees
that the output of SPRING satisfies user requirements. Furthermore, SPRING offers interpretability, allowing users to
visualize and diagnose the generation process through the
bounding boxes. SPRING also handles novel user specifications not encountered during its training with zero-shot constraint transfer. Quantitative evaluations and a human study
show that SPRING outperforms baseline generative models,
delivering high design quality and better meeting user specifications.

References
Jacobson, M. J.; and Xue, Y. 2025. Integrating symbolic reasoning into neural generative models for design generation.
Artificial Intelligence, 339: 104257.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28741

