The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Stable-Hair: Real-World Hair Transfer via Diffusion Model
Yuxuan Zhang1 , Qing Zhang3 , Yiren Song4 , Jichao Zhang5 , Hao Tang6 , Jiaming Liu2*
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tiamat AI
3
Shenyang Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
National University of Singapore
5
Ocean University of China
6
Peking University
zyx153@sjtu.edu.cn, zhangqing221@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yiren@nus.edu.sg,
zhang163220@gmail.com, haotang@pku.edu.cn, jmliu1217@gmail.com
Abstract

SOTA methods in the field of image generation. These models not only enable more stable training but also demonstrate
impressive results in terms of diversity and fidelity. Consequently, we are intrigued by the question: “Can we leverage
the powerful capabilities of diffusion models to achieve more
stable and high-precision hair transfer?”
Building on the aforementioned considerations, in this
paper, we propose a novel hair transfer framework based
on diffusion models, named Stable-Hair. Inspired by
method (Wei et al. 2023) which converts different editing
conditions (e.g., text, sketch) into different proxies in the
StyleGAN W+ space, we designed a two-stage paradigm to
ensure the precision and naturalness of our hair transfer process. In the first stage, we train a Bald Converter to transform
the user-provided source image into a bald proxy image.
Furthermore, a key advancement in our methodology is the
implementation of an automated data generation pipeline,
which generates triplets for training. This pipeline utilizes
the Large Language Model for generating text prompts, and
the Stable Diffusion Inpainting model for creating reference
images. This synthetic training data ensures the effective
training of our framework, enabling it to robustly handle
challenging hairstyles with remarkable fidelity. In the second stage, a Hair Extractor is specially trained to capture
and encode hairstyles from reference images with unprecedented levels of detail and texture. A Latent IdentityNet is
used to encode the source image, ensuring that the identity and background of the source image remain consistent
throughout the transfer process. By integrating these two
components with diffusion U-Net, we can effectively inject
the features of the reference hair into the source image. This
approach not only allows the hair to adapt accurately to the
new environment of the source image but also ensures that it
is styled appropriately, appearing natural and matching the
original appearance of the subject.
To rigorously preserve the non-hair regions and maintain
the facial identity of the subject, we have developed an innovative architecture named Latent ControlNet. This structure integrates our Bald Converter and Latent IdentityNet.
By transforming the pixel-space transfer process to operate
within the latent space of the diffusion model, Latent ControlNet ensures color consistency in the non-hair regions of
the source image during the transfer process.

Current hair transfer methods struggle to handle diverse
and intricate hairstyles, limiting their applicability in realworld scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel diffusionbased hair transfer framework, named Stable-Hair, which robustly transfers a wide range of real-world hairstyles to userprovided faces for virtual hair try-on. To achieve this goal, our
Stable-Hair framework is designed as a two-stage pipeline.
In the first stage, we train a Bald Converter alongside stable diffusion to remove hair from the user-provided face images, resulting in bald images. In the second stage, we specifically designed a Hair Extractor and a Latent IdentityNet to
transfer the target hairstyle with highly detailed and highfidelity to the bald image. The Hair Extractor is trained to
encode reference images with the desired hairstyles, while the
Latent IdentityNet ensures consistency in identity and background. To minimize color deviations between source images
and transfer results, we introduce a novel Latent ControlNet architecture, which functions as both the Bald Converter
and Latent IdentityNet. After training on our curated triplet
dataset, our method accurately transfers highly detailed and
high-fidelity hairstyles to the source images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-theart performance compared to existing hair transfer methods.

Introduction
Hair transfer is one of the most challenging tasks in the virtual try-on domain. The objective of this task is to transfer
hair color, shape, and structure attributes from a reference
image to a user-provided source image while preserving the
identity and background of the source image. In recent years,
advances in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Tan
et al. 2020; Zhang and Zheng 2018; Guo et al. 2022; Zhu
et al. 2022; Chang, Kim, and Kim 2023; Chung et al. 2022;
Zhu et al. 2021; Saha et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022, 2023;
Nikolaev et al. 2024; Khwanmuang et al. 2023; Kim et al.
2022) have driven significant progress in this field. However, these GAN-based methods often struggle to handle the
diverse and complex hairstyles encountered in real-world
scenarios, severely limiting their effectiveness in practical
applications. Recently, diffusion models have emerged as
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10348

