The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Optimized Gradient Clipping for Noisy Label Learning
Xichen Ye1 , Yifan Wu1,2 , Weizhong Zhang2,4 , Xiaoqiang Li1 * , Yifan Chen3 * , Cheng Jin2,5
1

Shanghai University
2
Fudan University
3
Hong Kong Baptist University
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
5
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{yexichen0930, victorwu, xqli}@shu.edu.cn, {weizhongzhang, jc}@fudan.edu.cn, yifanc@hkbu.edu.hk
Abstract

Cross Entropy (CE), the most widely used loss function
for classification, is nevertheless vulnerable to label noise. In
contrast, symmetric loss functions like Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) are noise tolerant but less effective for training classification models (Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry 2017; Zhang
and Sabuncu 2018). This discrepancy has driven the studies into robust loss functions, which primarily focus on how
to make full use of both CE and MAE (Zhang and Sabuncu
2018; Feng et al. 2020; Englesson and Azizpour 2021; Wang
et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2023) and have achieved
notable success. Besides these, another promising approach,
clipping-based techniques, also warrants greater attention.
Among them, Menon et al. (2020) first introduced the PHuberCE method, which refines traditional gradient clipping
by applying gradient clipping to model-predicted probabilities (see the definition in Section 3.1), offering an improved
approach to handling noisy labels. More recently, Wei et al.
(2023) proposed LogitClip, which involves clipping the logits to indirectly constrain the upper and lower bounds of the
gradients.
Specifically, the two aforementioned clipping-based
methods rely on the validation set to determine a fixed optimal clipping threshold, overlooking the dynamic nature of
gradients during the training process. However, as demonstrated by the simple binary classification experiment in Figure 1, we observe distinct shifts in the gradient distribution
throughout training, which significantly affect the suitability of a fixed threshold. Considering the fact that employing
a higher threshold can enhance the model’s fitting ability,
yet fails to bound the decreasing noisy gradients; conversely,
employing a strict threshold ensures the noisy gradients remain bounded but compromises the model’s fitting ability,
we expect a dynamically adjustable threshold for gradient
clipping that continuously adapts in response to the shifts in
the gradient distribution.
Motivated by this, in this paper, we propose an optimizebased strategy, Optimized Gradient Clipping (OGC), which
ensures that the threshold adjusts itself as the distribution
of gradients evolves during training, maintaining an optimal balance between fitting ability and noise suppression.
Specifically, OGC 1) utilizes a 2-component Gaussian Mixture Model (2-GMM) to model the distribution of crossentropy losses for clean and noisy samples, 2) and estimates the ratio of the noisy gradients to the clean gradi-

Previous research has shown that constraining the gradient of
loss function w.r.t. model-predicted probabilities can enhance
the model robustness against noisy labels. These methods
typically specify a fixed optimal threshold for gradient clipping through validation data to obtain the desired robustness
against noise. However, this common practice overlooks the
dynamic distribution of gradients from both clean and noisylabeled samples at different stages of training, significantly
limiting the model capability to adapt to the variable nature
of gradients throughout the training process. To address this
issue, we propose a simple yet effective approach called Optimized Gradient Clipping (OGC), which dynamically adjusts
the clipping threshold based on the ratio of noise gradients
to clean gradients after clipping, estimated by modeling the
distributions of clean and noisy samples. This approach allows us to modify the clipping threshold at each training step,
effectively controlling the influence of noise gradients. Additionally, we provide statistical analysis to certify the noisetolerance ability of OGC. Our extensive experiments across
various types of label noise, including symmetric, asymmetric, instance-dependent, and real-world noise, demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach.

Code — https://github.com/Virusdoll/OGC

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of supervised deep learning relies heavily
on the availability of large-scale, qualifiedly-annotated data.
Research has shown that an over-parameterized Deep Neural Network (DNN) can easily fit a dataset with randomly
assigned labels (Zhang et al. 2017), underscoring the importance of high-quality annotations. However, in real-world
scenarios, the annotation process will inevitably introduce
noisy labels (incorrectly annotated labels), which is liable to
compromise the performance of the model. Therefore, the
study of noisy label learning has attracted significant attention. The goal of noisy label learning is to train a model on a
given corrupted dataset, which contains mislabeled samples,
while mitigating the adverse effects of noisy labels, and ultimately enabling the trained model to generalize well on a
clean evaluation set.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9463

