The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CoT4Rec: Revealing User Preferences Through Chain of Thought for
Recommender Systems
Weiqi Yue, Yuyu Yin, Xin Zhang, Binbin Shi, Tingting Liang * , Jian Wan
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
{yueweiqi, yinyuyu, zhangxin, shibinbin, liangtingting, wanjian}@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract

Current recommender systems have greatly benefited
from the integration of LLMs, yet there remain two significant limitations that need to be addressed: (1) Identifier
Uninterpretability. As shown in Figure 1 (a), most recommender systems still employ discrete identifiers (e.g., user
IDs and item IDs) to represent users and items, mirroring the
approach of traditional recommendation models (Geng et al.
2022; Zheng et al. 2024). These methods focus solely on collaborative filtering between users and items, failing to leverage the world knowledge integrated by LLMs and neglecting
the impact at the semantic level. (2) Lack of Transparency.
As depicted in Figure 1 (b), some approaches utilize the
textual metadata (e.g., title) to represent users and items,
thereby making full use of LLMs’ world knowledge (Cui
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023). However, these studies rely on
implicit reasoning for recommendations, which might introduce hallucination issues caused by LLMs, thereby reducing
the accuracy of the recommendations and significantly impacting the user experience.
To address these limitations, some studies have considered employing generative models to capture textual information from user reviews, extracting key insights to refine
the recommendation process (Lu et al. 2023; Li, Zhang,
and Chen 2023a). However, it is crucial to recognize that
users often struggle to summarize the underlying motivations for their actions. The explanations derived from user
feedback do not truly achieve a cause-to-effect relationship,
thus falling short of truly understanding the reasons behind
user behaviors. Furthermore, user feedback is typically characterized by insufficiency or noise in most datasets.
Considering these issues, our goal is to develop a LLMbased recommendation architecture that has a clear recommendation logic and can fully utilize the world knowledge
of LLMs. Building on this, our design introduces a user preference analyzer before the personalized recommendation.
The analyzer can generate user preferences based on user’s
historical interactions and construct a transparent reasoning
chain from user behavior to personalized recommendation.
The challenge lies in ensuring that the generated user preferences are both authentic and targeted, as well as constructing
a coherent recommendation model with a transparent reasoning process.
To this end, in this paper, we introduce CoT4Rec, an innovative sequential recommendation framework that breaks

Large Language Models (LLMs) offer groundbreaking advancements in recommender systems through superior text
analysis and decision-making support. However, integrating
LLMs into recommender systems still suffers from the problems of identifier uninterpretability and lack of transparency.
To address these issues and fully leverage the capabilities
of LLMs, we propose a chain of thought (CoT) based recommendation framework called CoT4Rec which employs
LLMs as data enhancers for user preference analysis. Initially, we design a CoT reasoning strategy that can derive
more behaviorally-aligned user preference features by clustering users’ historical interactions. Subsequently, we propose a two-stage recommendation model that not only makes
full use of the world knowledge embedded in LLMs but also
generates a logically transparent reasoning path. By integrating a user preference analyzer early in the recommendation
pipeline, the model deeply analyzes users’ historical interactions, helping to enhance the personalization and transparency of the recommender system. CoT4Rec demonstrates
superior performance over existing state-of-the-art models in
recommendation tasks across four public datasets, achieving
improvements ranging from 2.2% to 12.2%.

Code — https://github.com/815382636/CoT4Rec

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have accumulated a substantial knowledge base by learning from vast amounts of
text data, demonstrating excellence in understanding and
generating natural language texts (Zhao et al. 2023; Li,
Zhang, and Chen 2023b; Chang et al. 2024). With LLMs
achieving significant advantages in handling natural language processing (NLP) tasks, researchers have begun to
explore the possibility of applying these models to recommender systems. Models such as P5 (Geng et al. 2022), M6rec (Cui et al. 2022), LC-rec (Zheng et al. 2024) and Recformer (Li et al. 2023) have injected new vitality into the
field of recommender systems by integrating the extensive
knowledge base of LLMs. These models have not only enhanced recommendation performance but also significantly
improved the portability of recommender systems.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13142

