The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

REGNav: Room Expert Guided Image-Goal Navigation
Pengna Li* , Kangyi Wu* , Jingwen Fu, Sanping Zhou†
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{sauerfisch, wukangyi747600, fu1371252069}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, spzhou@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-goal navigation aims to steer an agent towards the goal
location specified by an image. Most prior methods tackle
this task by learning a navigation policy, which extracts visual features of goal and observation images, compares their
similarity and predicts actions. However, if the agent is in a
different room from the goal image, it’s extremely challenging to identify their similarity and infer the likely goal location, which may result in the agent wandering around. Intuitively, when humans carry out this task, they may roughly
compare the current observation with the goal image, having
an approximate concept of whether they are in the same room
before executing the actions. Inspired by this intuition, we
try to imitate human behaviour and propose a Room Expert
Guided Image-Goal Navigation model (REGNav) to equip
the agent with the ability to analyze whether goal and observation images are taken in the same room. Specifically, we
first pre-train a room expert with an unsupervised learning
technique on the self-collected unlabelled room images. The
expert can extract the hidden room style information of goal
and observation images and predict their relationship about
whether they belong to the same room. In addition, two different fusion approaches are explored to efficiently guide the
agent navigation with the room relation knowledge. Extensive
experiments show that our REGNav surpasses prior state-ofthe-art works on three popular benchmarks.

Figure 1: We solve the task of image-goal navigation, where
an agent (the yellow robot) is required to navigate to a location depicted by a goal image. To accomplish this, our agent
tries to compare the current observation with the goal image and tease out whether the current location is in the same
room with the goal image before executing actions.

Code — https://github.com/leeBooMla/REGNav

Introduction

agent must reason the likely location of the goal image to
navigate to. This requires the agent to perceive the environment efficiently, compare the current observation with the
goal image and find the associations before taking the action.
However, the complex spatial structure of unseen environments often leads to significant discrepancies between the
agent’s actual location and the goal location (e.g. in different
rooms). In such cases, the goal image and the current observation may have little overlap and it becomes challenging for
the agent to identify their similarities and associations. This
results in the agent failing to reason the goal location, thus
taking meaningless actions, such as back-tracking or aimlessly wandering. The key to solving this issue is to extract
the spatial information from the observations to help reason
the spatial relationship with the goal image.

Image-goal navigation (ImageNav) (Zhu et al. 2017) is an
emerging embodied intelligence task, where the agent is
placed in an unseen environment and needs to navigate to an
image-specified goal location using visual observations. Due
to its widespread applications in last mile delivery, household robots, and personal robots (Wasserman et al. 2023;
Majumdar et al. 2022; Krantz et al. 2023b), it has raised increasing research attention in recent years.
Despite its broad applications, this task remains highly
challenging. Since the environment map is unknown, the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4860

