The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Generalizability in Molecular Conformation Generation with
M ETRIZATION-Informed Geometric Diffusion Pretraining
Xiaozhuang Song1 , Yuzhao Tu1 , Hangting Ye2 , Wei Fan3 ,
Qingquan Zhang4 , Xiaoxue Wang5 , Tianshu Yu1 ,
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
2
Jilin University,
3
University of Oxford,
4
Southern University of Science and Technology,
5
ChemLex Technology Co., Ltd.
xiaozhuangsong1@link.cuhk.edu.cn, yutianshu@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

Each approach has its own set of advantages and limitations.
Pure data-driven generation methods have recently gained
prominence due to their remarkable ability to capture the overall structural distribution of molecules (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2021; Hoffman et al. 2022), wherein
diffusion-based generative models stand out with exemplary
performance (Xu et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2024; Zhou et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2023b). The high-level idea of diffusionbased molecular generation methods undergo a transition
from their stable equilibrium conformations to a state of increased disorder through a series of controlled diffusion steps,
and then learn a model to reverse the diffusion process (Song
and Ermon 2019; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Xu et al. 2022).
These methods leverage vast datasets to learn and predict
molecular structures (Ryan, Lengyel, and Shatruk 2018; Ross
et al. 2022; Siebenmorgen et al. 2024). However, this reliance
on pre-existing data poses a significant limitation: generated
molecules tend to bear a strong resemblance to training samples, resulting in a lack of generalization when applied to
novel, unseen molecular structures (Keith et al. 2021; Dou
et al. 2023; van Tilborg et al. 2024). Conversely, traditional
computational methods, particularly those based on quantum chemistry and related mathematical tools (Havel and
Wüthrich 1985; An and Tao 2003; McArdle et al. 2020), are
celebrated for their robust generalization capabilities. Distance geometry is the mathematical basis for a geometric theory of computational methods (Havel 1998; Riniker and Landrum 2015). Specifically, the problem involves determining a
3-dimensional spatial structure that meets the given upper and
lower bounds on distances between points. This problem has
been proven to be strong NP-hard (Saxe 1979). To solve this
problem, the M ETRIZATION algorithm (Kuszewski, Nilges,
and Brünger 1992; Spellmeyer et al. 1997) was proposed as
an efficient distance relationships sampling method given the
bounds. By combining the M ETRIZATION algorithm with
Schoenberg’s theorem (Schoenberg 1935), it enables the embedding of bounds into 3-dimensional spatial coordinates.
These methods can adeptly handle a wide array of molecular
structures, thanks to their foundation in fundamental physical
principles. Nevertheless, they are often criticized for their low
solution efficiency and an inherent difficulty in capturing the
holistic structure of complex molecules (Heinen et al. 2020).

Diffusion-based generative models have recently excelled in
generating molecular conformations but struggled with the
generalization issue – models trained on one dataset may
produce meaningless conformations on out-of-distribution
molecules. On the other hand, distance geometry serves as
a generalizable tool for the traditional computational chemistry methods of molecular conformation, which is predicated
on the assumption that it is possible to adequately define the
set of all potential conformations of any non-rigid molecular system using purely geometric constraints. In this work,
we for the first time explicitly incorporate distance geometry
constraints into pretraining phase of diffusion-based molecular generation models to improve the generalizability. Inspired by the classical distance geometry solution designed
for solving the molecular distance geometry problem, we propose MiGDiff, a Metrization-Informed Geometric Diffusion
framework. MiGDiff injects distance geometry constraints
by pretraining the deep geometric diffusion backbone within
the Metrization sampling approach, yielding a “Metrizationdriven pretraining + Data-driven finetuning” paradigm. Experimental results demonstrate that MiGDiff outperforms state-ofthe-art methods and possesses strong generalization capabilities, particularly on generating previously unseen molecules,
revealing the vast untapped potential of combining traditional
computational methods with deep generative models for 3D
molecular generation.

Code — https://github.com/ShawnKS/MIGDiff

Introduction
The generation of 3D molecular conformations is a cornerstone in various scientific domains (Wang et al. 2023a),
including drug discovery (Anderson 2003; Ingraham et al.
2023) and material science (Rosei et al. 2003; Anstine and
Isayev 2023). Traditionally, two primary methodologies have
been employed to tackle this challenge: data-driven generative methods (Guo et al. 2024) and computational methods grounded in quantum chemistry principles (Havel and
Wüthrich 1985; Kuszewski, Nilges, and Brünger 1992; An
and Tao 2003; Sit, Wu, and Yuan 2009; Sit and Wu 2011).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

755

