The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FD2 -Net: Frequency-Driven Feature Decomposition Network for Infrared-Visible
Object Detection
Ke Li1 , Di Wang1 * , Zhangyuan Hu1 , Shaofeng Li1 * , Weiping Ni2 , Lin Zhao3 , Quan Wang1
1
Xidian University,
Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology,
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2

Abstract
c

Shared
Encoder

CNN Encoder

(I)
Low-Freq Unit

c

High-Freq Unit
Low-Freq Unit
High-Freq Unit

(II)

c

Shared Feat.

CNN Encoder

Infrared Feat. Visible Feat.

Infrared Visible

Infrared-visible object detection (IVOD) seeks to harness
the complementary information in infrared and visible images, thereby enhancing the performance of detectors in complex environments. However, existing methods often neglect
the frequency characteristics of complementary information,
such as the abundant high-frequency details in visible images
and the valuable low-frequency thermal information in infrared images, thus constraining detection performance. To
solve this problem, we introduce a novel Frequency-Driven
Feature Decomposition Network for IVOD, called FD2 -Net,
which effectively captures the unique frequency representations of complementary information across multimodal visual spaces. Specifically, we propose a feature decomposition encoder, wherein the high-frequency unit (HFU) utilizes discrete cosine transform to capture representative highfrequency features, while the low-frequency unit (LFU) employs dynamic receptive fields to model the multi-scale context of diverse objects. Next, we adopt a parameter-free complementary strengths strategy to enhance multimodal features through seamless inter-frequency recoupling. Furthermore, we innovatively design a multimodal reconstruction
mechanism that recovers image details lost during feature extraction, further leveraging the complementary information
from infrared and visible images to enhance overall representational capacity. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
FD2 -Net outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) models across
various IVOD benchmarks, i.e. LLVIP (96.2% mAP), FLIR
(82.9% mAP), and M3 FD (83.5% mAP).

Shared Encoder

Infrared Visible

Fourier Spectral Analysis

-freq

Low

-freq

Low

-freq

Low

hHig

freq

eq
h-fr

Hig

Figure 1: Illustration of the differences between our FD2 Net and existing IVOD approaches. Our algorithm employs
frequency decoupling to separate high- and low-frequency
information in infrared and visible images, thereby effectively leveraging multimodal complementary features to extract more discriminative and robust characteristics.
difficulties, thereby igniting substantial research interest in
Infrared-Visible Object Detection (IVOD).
However, current IVOD methods still have three weaknesses. Weakness 1: They tend to overlook the frequency
characteristics of object features within infrared and visible
images. Infrared imaging primarily captures low-frequency
thermal radiation, while visible imaging emphasizes highfrequency details. Prevailing architectures (Li et al. 2023a;
Zhao et al. 2023c) often overlook this kind of intrinsic
property, and embed cross-modality information into a unified feature space, which results in the inability to extract
modality-specific features. Weakness 2: With a fixed receptive field, these methods only extract local information,
which makes it difficult to adapt to the positional biases
inherent in infrared and visible images. Moreover, models
with small kernels are inadequate for effectively capturing
long-range information, which is crucial as the surrounding
environment provides vital clues about object size, shape,
and other characteristics (Li et al. 2024). Weakness 3: Recent IVOD approaches commonly employ downsampling
operations to mitigate visual noise and reduce computational

Introduction
Object detection is a foundational topic in computer vision,
aiming to localize and identify diverse objects within images
or videos. It has extensive applications in autonomous driving, surveillance, and remote sensing (Fu et al. 2023b; Li
et al. 2023b). Nevertheless, visible object detection encounters substantial challenges in adverse conditions like rain,
fog, clouds, and poor illumination, primarily due to the inherent limitations of RGB sensors. As a result, alternative visual sensors, particularly infrared cameras, are increasingly
utilized to complement RGB cameras in overcoming these
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4797

