The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Bridging the Gap Between Hyperdimensional Computing and Kernel Methods via
the Nyström Method
Quanling Zhao, Anthony Hitchcock Thomas, Ari Brin, Xiaofan Yu, Tajana Rosing
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego
{quzhao,ahthomas,abrin,x1yu,tajana}@ucsd.edu

Abstract

and does not require back-propagation. The operations used
in HDC are lightweight and highly parallelizable, making
them suitable for implementation on low-energy and parallel hardware platforms. This makes HDC an attractive alternative for implementing learning in resource constrained
settings. As a result, HDC has gained significant interest in
recent years, especially in Internet of Things (IoT) (Khaleghi
et al. 2022; Zhao et al. 2022; Morris et al. 2021); and
in the computer hardware community (Dutta et al. 2022;
Kang et al. 2022a) such as FPGAs (Salamat et al. 2019),
GPUs (Kang et al. 2022b), ASICs (Zhang et al. 2023) and inmemory computing (Dutta et al. 2022; Xu, Kang, and Rosing 2023).
The first stage in any HDC task is encoding, which maps
data from its ambient representation x ∈ X , into a representation ϕ(x) residing in a high-dimensional inner product
space H (Kleyko et al. 2023). HDC uses addition and multiplication (called ‘bundling” and “binding” in the HDC literature), to build representations of complex structures from
simple building blocks or to implement tasks like learning.
For instance, classification using HDC represents each class
as a sum of the encodings of its training data, called a “prototype.” Inference can then be performed by finding the closest
prototype to a query.
The crucial assumption underlying the success of this
technique is that “similar” points in X are mapped to “similar” regions of H. In practice, this desideratum typically
means that dot-products in H should be reflective of some
salient notion of similarity on X . In HDC, one typically
builds representations incrementally, by bundling and binding together the embeddings of simpler atoms. In this work,
we observe that one can also go in the opposite direction:
starting from a known similarity function of interest, it is
possible to generate an equivalent—up to some approximation factor—encoding function.
The advantage of this “top down” approach is that there
is a vast literature on designing good similarity functions for
different kinds of learning problems. In machine learning,
similarity functions that work by computing inner products
between high-dimensional embeddings of data are called
kernel functions, and are the basis of kernel methods, a
vast area of research in theoretical and applied ML (ShaweTaylor and Cristianini 2004; Smola and Schölkopf 1998).
This literature has devoted substantial attention to the prob-

Hyperdimensional computing (HDC) is an approach from the
cognitive science literature for solving information processing tasks using data represented as high-dimensional random
vectors. The technique has a rigorous mathematical backing, and is easy to implement in energy-efficient and highly
parallel hardware like FPGAs and “processing-in-memory”
architectures. The effectiveness of HDC in machine learning largely depends on how raw data is mapped to highdimensional space. In this work, we propose NysHD, a new
method for constructing this mapping that is based on the
Nyström method from the literature on kernel approximation. Our approach provides a simple recipe to turn any
user-defined positive-semidefinite similarity function into an
equivalent mapping in HDC. There is a vast literature on the
design of such functions for learning problems. Our approach
provides a mechanism to import them into the HDC setting,
expanding the types of problems that can be tackled using
HDC. Empirical evaluation against existing HDC encoding
methods shows that NysHD can achieve, on average, 11%
and 17% better classification accuracy on graph and string
datasets respectively.

Code — https://github.com/QuanlingZhao/NysHD

Introduction
Biological brains “compute” using data representations that
are intrinsically fault-tolerant, suitable for highly-parallel
circuitry, and reveal complex structures in an environment
that are easy to learn (Hertz 2018). Motivated by these desirable qualities, hyperdimensional computing (HDC) builds
on theories of representation from cognitive science (Kanerva 2009; Plate 1995) to develop novel hardware and algorithms for information processing tasks. In HDC, all computation is performed using high-dimensional, low-precision,
vector representations of data. These representations can be
manipulated using simple, element-wise operators, so as to
implement learning algorithms or other information processing tasks.
In contrast to deep learning models, training HDC-based
models can typically be done in a single pass over the
training data (Hernández-Cano et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2022)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22813

