The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unveiling the Threat of Fraud Gangs to Graph Neural Networks:
Multi-Target Graph Injection Attacks Against GNN-Based Fraud Detectors
Jinhyeok Choi, Heehyeon Kim, Joyce Jiyoung Whang*
School of Computing, KAIST
{cjh0507, heehyeon, jjwhang}@kaist.ac.kr

GNN-based
Fraud Detector

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as an effective tool for fraud detection, identifying fraudulent users, and
uncovering malicious behaviors. However, attacks against
GNN-based fraud detectors and their risks have rarely been
studied, thereby leaving potential threats unaddressed. Recent findings suggest that frauds are increasingly organized
as gangs or groups. In this work, we design attack scenarios where fraud gangs aim to make their fraud nodes misclassified as benign by camouflaging their illicit activities in
collusion. Based on these scenarios, we study adversarial attacks against GNN-based fraud detectors by simulating attacks of fraud gangs in three real-world fraud cases: spam
reviews, fake news, and medical insurance frauds. We define these attacks as multi-target graph injection attacks and
propose MonTi, a transformer-based Multi-target one-Time
graph injection attack model. MonTi simultaneously generates attributes and edges of all attack nodes with a transformer
encoder, capturing interdependencies between attributes and
edges more effectively than most existing graph injection attack methods that generate these elements sequentially. Additionally, MonTi adaptively allocates the degree budget for
each attack node to explore diverse injection structures involving target, candidate, and attack nodes, unlike existing
methods that fix the degree budget across all attack nodes.
Experiments show that MonTi outperforms the state-of-theart graph injection attack methods on five real-world graphs.

GNN-based
Fraud Detector
Injection
Attack

Fraud Gang
Original Graph

Attacked Graph

Benign Node
Fraud Node
Attack Node
Correctly Classified
Misclassified

Figure 1: An example of a multi-target graph injection attack
against a GNN-based fraud detector: a fraud gang injects
attack nodes to induce misclassification of their fraud nodes.
e.g., GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), and GAT (Veličković et al.
2018). On the other hand, various tailored GNNs for fraud
detection have recently been developed to filter the camouflaged fraudsters, such as CARE-GNN (Dou et al. 2020),
PC-GNN (Liu et al. 2021), and GAGA (Wang et al. 2023c).
However, vulnerabilities of these GNN-based fraud detectors to adversarial attacks remain unexplored.
It has been recently observed that frauds are increasingly
organized into gangs or groups exhibiting collusive patterns
to carry out fraudulent activities more effectively with reduced risk (Wang et al. 2023b; Yu et al. 2023; Ma et al.
2023). For example, in the medical insurance domain, fraudsters may collaborate with doctors or insurance agents to
obtain fake diagnoses. On online review platforms, fraudsters could create multiple fake reviews using different IDs.
On social media platforms, fraudsters can spread misinformation by using multiple fake accounts. We design these
three attack scenarios where fraud gangs attack GNN-based
fraud detectors to make them misclassify the fraud nodes
as benign. Furthermore, to simulate the scenarios, we create
datasets and target sets that consist of fraud nodes grouped
based on metadata or relations in real-world graphs.
In this work, the adversarial attack on GNN-based fraud
detectors by fraud gangs is defined as a multi-target graph
injection attack. We adopt a graph injection attack, as it is
more feasible than a graph modification attack, which re-

Introduction
Recent endeavors have highlighted the power of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for fraud detection (Dou et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2022). In fraud detection tasks, complex interactions of fraudsters can be effectively modeled using graphs,
and frauds are typically represented as nodes corresponding
to individuals with malicious intentions. GNN-based fraud
detection methods aim to determine whether the nodes are
fraudulent or benign. Meanwhile, it has been reported that
adversarial attacks can cause GNNs to malfunction across
various domains, including recommender systems and social network analysis (Chen et al. 2022a; You et al. 2023;
Huang and Li 2023; Shao et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a).
Those works consider vanilla GNNs as victim models,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16028

