The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conformal Inference of Individual Treatment Effects Using Conditional Density
Estimates
Baozhen Wang, Xingye Qiao
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Binghamton University
{bwang62, xqiao}@binghamton.edu

Abstract

ever, these methods could be model-specific, and not always
ensure that the predicted confidence intervals achieve the
nominal coverage probability, i.e., the proportion of times
that the true treatment effect lies within the constructed intervals across different samples. This issue can limit the reliability and generalizability of the treatment effect estimates,
particularly when applied to diverse patient populations or
under varying clinical conditions.

In an era where diverse and complex data are increasingly
accessible, the precise prediction of individual treatment effects (ITE) becomes crucial across fields such as healthcare,
economics, and public policy. Current state-of-the-art approaches, while providing valid prediction intervals through
Conformal Quantile Regression (CQR) and related techniques, often yield overly conservative prediction intervals.
In this work, we introduce a conformal inference approach
to ITE using the conditional density of the outcome given
the covariates. We leverage the reference distribution technique to efficiently estimate the conditional densities as the
score functions under a two-stage conformal ITE framework.
We show that our prediction intervals are not only marginally
valid but are narrower than existing methods. Experimental
results further validate the usefulness of our method.

1

Conformal prediction (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer
2005; Lei, Robins, and Wasserman 2013; Lei et al. 2018)
provides a model-agnostic and distribution-free framework
that outputs interval predictions with the desired coverage
probability. The main idea of (split) conformal prediction is
to compute a conformity score by fitting a predictive model
on the training set, and then evaluate the conformity score
on the calibration set to quantify the uncertainty of future
predictions. Although the conformal framework is modelagnostic and always achieves a coverage guarantee, the average length of resulting prediction intervals can highly rely on
the choice of the score functions. Lei and Candès (2021) propose a two-stage methodology utilizing weighted conformal
prediction (WCP) (Tibshirani et al. 2019) to address the covariate shift problem during counterfactual inference. This
method is considered as the state-of-the-art method which
provides prediction intervals for ITE problems, with desired
coverage guarantee as well as reasonably short intervals.
Chen et al. (2024) study a similar approach, where they use
the joint density to compute weights in WCP. Alternatively,
Alaa, Ahmad, and van der Laan (2023) develop a methodology called conformal meta-learner, which applies conformal prediction directly with imputed pseudo outcomes. Both
methods utilize Conformal Quantile Regression (CQR) (Romano, Patterson, and Candes 2019), an approach that integrates the concept of conformal prediction with quantile regression. CQR is capable of adapting to any heteroscedasticity in the data, but may not guarantee the shortest prediction
intervals. Additionally, the two-stage design inherent in both
methods tends to produce conservative results. Experimental
studies consistently show that these methods yield conservative prediction intervals with a coverage much greater than
the desired level (Lei and Candès 2021; Alaa, Ahmad, and
van der Laan 2023). Motivated by the need for more precise
prediction interval for ITE, this work aims to refine these
methodologies to achieve shorter prediction intervals while

Introduction

Understanding the effect of interventions on an individual
level is important across many domains, such as healthcare,
economics, and public policy. Traditional average treatment
effect estimates consider all individuals but fail to account
for the heterogeneity in individual responses. As diverse
data from various fields become more accessible, machine
learning plays an increasingly significant role in revealing
insights from the data.
In recent years, many research works have focused on machine learning algorithms that provide point estimates of the
Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE) (Athey and
Imbens 2016; Wager and Athey 2018; Künzel et al. 2019;
Meng and Qiao 2020), which quantifies the expected difference in treatment outcomes for individuals with specific
characteristics. While CATE takes into account the varying
covariates of the individuals by averaging effects across similar individuals, it can still sometimes overlook individuallevel heterogeneity. Recent works on Individualized Treatment Effect (ITE) have made significant progress in addressing these limitations, offering more accurate predictions tailored to each individual (Hill 2011; Alaa and Van
Der Schaar 2017; Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017). They
utilize Gaussian processes or Bayesian approaches to provide interval-valued predictions at the individual level. HowCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21009

