The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Online MDP with Prototypes Information: A Robust Adaptive Approach
Shuo Sun1 , Meng Qi2 , Zuo-Jun Max Shen1,3
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
2
SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
3
Faculty of Engineering and Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
shuo sun@berkeley.edu, mq56@cornell.edu, maxshen@berkeley.edu

Abstract

of determining which model to trust or how to integrate insights from multiple sources to create a robust and effective policy when faced with various plausible model estimates. Similar challenges with multiple transition models arise in recommendation systems, supply chain management, and other domains where early performance and
worst-case guarantees are crucial (Chatterjee et al. 2020).
Moreover, the concept of multiple parameter models is analogous to the scenario-based stochastic programming literature, where each scenario represents a different possibility
of the uncertain parameters.
In this work, we focus on this multi-model setting where
there are multiple models (prototypes) of the transition probabilities of the underlying Markov chain and the goal is to
identify the true model and therefore solve for the optimal
policy. Moreover, we address the problem in an online setting that we need to make real-time decisions with streaming
data while knowing the prototypes. These prototypes could
be estimated from offline dataset. The key challenge in such
settings is two-fold: First, we need to efficiently identify the
true underlying transition model while making decisions in
real-time. Second, and perhaps more critically, we must ensure good performance during the learning phase when data
is limited and model uncertainty is high. Classical online
MDP algorithms focus primarily on achieving sublinear regret but may perform poorly in early stages and lack worstcase performance guarantees.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel robust
learning algorithm that efficiently identifies the true transition kernel while guaranteeing model performance during
the exploration stage. Our approach gradually updates the
discrete prototype set and calculates the optimal robust policy, which achieves sublinear regret and provides a lower
bound for the algorithm performance at each episode. As
data accumulates, we propose a termination mechanism that
efficiently identifies the true transition kernel.
Our work differentiates itself from existing approaches in
several key aspects. First, we consider an online MDP with
structural information of prototypes, which has not been
studied before. Moreover, most work in robust MDP considers an offline setting or assumes access to a generator
but we consider an online setting. Typically, robust MDP
approaches assume a fixed ambiguity set size to calculate
the optimal policy in the worst-case scenario. In contrast,

In this work, we consider an online robust Markov Decision
Process (MDP) where we have the information of finitely
many prototypes of the underlying transition kernel. We consider an adaptively updated ambiguity set of the prototypes
and propose an algorithm that efficiently identifies the true
underlying transition kernel while guaranteeing the performance of the corresponding robust policy. To be more specific, we provide a sublinear regret of the subsequent optimal
robust policy. We also provide an early stopping mechanism
and a worst-case performance bound of the value function. In
numerical experiments, we demonstrate that our method outperforms existing approaches, particularly in the early stage
with limited data. This work contributes to robust MDPs
by considering possible prior information about the underlying transition probability and online learning, offering both
theoretical insights and practical algorithms for improved
decision-making under uncertainty.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14075

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) have become a fundamental framework for sequential decision-making under uncertainty, with applications spanning diverse fields such as
control, healthcare and supply chain management. Despite
their widespread use, MDPs often face challenges when the
true transition dynamics are unknown, potentially leading to
suboptimal decisions.
In many real-world scenarios, decision-makers may rely
on external datasets to parameterize the MDP model, but
have access to multiple plausible model estimates, each potentially leading to different optimal policies. This setting
is commonly seen in many applications, for example, the
healthcare system (Steimle, Kaufman, and Denton 2021).
Consider the context of optimizing its breast cancer screening protocol. Decision-makers might have access to local
hospital data, a national cancer research institute’s model,
and an international meta-analysis. Each source could suggest a different optimal screening frequency and age range
for mammograms. This situation exemplifies the challenge
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20717

