The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Pose Magic: Efficient and Temporally Consistent Human Pose Estimation
with a Hybrid Mamba-GCN Network
Xinyi Zhang1 , Qiqi Bao2 , Qinpeng Cui1 , Wenming Yang1 , Qingmin Liao1 *
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Zhejiang University of Science & Technology, Hangzhou, China
xinyi-zh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, nora919530829@163.com, cqp22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, liaoqm@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in 3D Human Pose
Estimation (HPE) are primarily based on Transformers. However, existing Transformer-based 3D HPE backbones often
encounter a trade-off between accuracy and computational
efficiency. To resolve the above dilemma, in this work, we
leverage recent advances in state space models and utilize
Mamba for high-quality and efficient long-range modeling.
Nonetheless, Mamba still faces challenges in precisely exploiting local dependencies between joints. To address these
issues, we propose a new attention-free hybrid spatiotemporal architecture named Hybrid Mamba-GCN (Pose Magic).
This architecture introduces local enhancement with GCN by
capturing relationships between neighboring joints, thus producing new representations to complement Mamba’s outputs.
By adaptively fusing representations from Mamba and GCN,
Pose Magic demonstrates superior capability in learning the
underlying 3D structure. To meet the requirements of realtime inference, we also provide a fully causal version. Extensive experiments show that Pose Magic achieves new SOTA
results (↓ 0.9mm) while saving 74.1% FLOPs. In addition,
Pose Magic exhibits optimal motion consistency and the ability to generalize to unseen sequence lengths.

Figure 1: Comparisons of transformer-based methods on
Human3.6M (↓). FLOPs/frame denotes floating point operations per output frame. The proposed Pose Magic attains superior results, while maintaining computational efficiency.

Introduction

formers (Vaswani et al. 2017) to capture spatiotemporal information from 2D pose sequences. Their outstanding performance is largely attributed to the powerful self-attention
mechanism and the ability to capture long-range dependencies. However, despite the long-range receptive field,
Transformer-based methods have high computational complexity (quadratic growth with the number of frames), making it challenging to deploy on devices with limited computational resources. Moreover, employing efficient techniques
such as token pruning (Ma et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023b) for
3D HPE often sacrifices a globally effective receptive field.
These methods do not inherently resolve the trade-off between accuracy and computational efficiency.
Recently, achievements in State Space Models (SSMs),
particularly Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023; Liu et al. 2024; Zhu
et al. 2024), have established them as an efficient and effective backbone for building deep networks. To address the
above issue, we propose a novel attention-free spatiotemporal architecture. Specifically, both spatial and temporal
Mamba blocks are included, which effectively learn rich

Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) aims to capture positions of joints on the human skeleton in 3D space
from images or videos. It is widely applied in action recognition (Peng et al. 2024), action correction and online coaching
(Dittakavi et al. 2022), and augmented/virtual reality (Yuan
et al. 2023). With these extensive applications, the demand
for more accurate, computationally efficient and temporally
consistent models continues to grow.
Impressive progress has been made in monocular 3D HPE
(Zhu et al. 2023; Mehraban, Adeli, and Taati 2024). But it
inherently remains an ill-posed problem due to depth ambiguity. To mitigate this issue in a single frame, some efforts have been made to comprehensively exploit the spatial and temporal relationships between joints contained in
the input video. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods (Li
et al. 2022a,b; Zhang et al. 2022; Zhu et al. 2023) use Trans* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10248

