The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Robust and Privacy-Preserving Representations via Information Theory
Binghui Zhang1 , Sayedeh Leila Noorbakhsh1 , Yun Dong2 , Yuan Hong3 , Binghui Wang1
1
Illinois Institute of Technology
Milwaukee School of Engineering
3
University of Connecticut
{bzhang57,snoorbakhsh}@hawk.iit.edu, dong@msoe.edu, yuan.hong@uconn.edu, bwang70@iit.edu
2

Abstract

a statistical method. Further, some works (Song, Shokri, and
Mittal 2019b,a) show adversarially robust models can even
leak more private information (also verified in our results).
In this paper, we focus on the research question: 1)
Can we design a model that ensures adversarial robustness
and attribute privacy protection while maintaining the utility of any (unknown) downstream tasks simultaneously? 2)
Further, can we theoretically understand the relationships
among adversarial robustness, utility, and attribute privacy?
To achieve the goal, we propose an information-theoretic
defense framework through the lens of representation learning, termed ARPRL. Particularly, instead of training models
from scratch, which requires huge computational resources
and is time consuming, shared learnt representations ensures
the community to save much time and costs for future use.
Our ARPRL is partly inspired by two works (Zhu, Zhang,
and Evans 2020; Zhou et al. 2022), which show adversarially robust representations based defenses outperform the
de facto adversarial training based methods, while being the
first work to contrivially generalize learning data representations that are robust to both adversarial examples and attribute inference adversaries. More specifically, we formulate learning representations via three mutual information
(MI) objectives: one for adversarial robustness, our for attribute privacy protection, and one for utility preservation.
We point out that our ARPRL is task-agnostic, meaning the
learnt representations does not need to know the target task
at hand and can be used for any downstream task. Further,
based on our MI objectives, we can derive several theoretical results. For instance, we obtain an inherent tradeoff between adversarial robustness and attribute privacy, as well
as between utility and attribute privacy. These tradeoffs are
also verified through the experimental evaluations on multiple benchmark datasets. We also derive the guaranteed attribute privacy leakage. Our key contributions are as below:

Machine learning models are vulnerable to both security attacks (e.g., adversarial examples) and privacy attacks (e.g.,
private attribute inference). We take the first step to mitigate
both the security and privacy attacks, and maintain task utility as well. Particularly, we propose an information-theoretic
framework to achieve the goals through the lens of representation learning, i.e., learning representations that are robust to
both adversarial examples and attribute inference adversaries.
We also derive novel theoretical results under our framework,
e.g., the inherent trade-off between adversarial robustness/utility and attribute privacy, and guaranteed attribute privacy
leakage against attribute inference adversaries.

Code&Full Report — https://github.com/ARPRL/ARPRL

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has achieved breakthroughs in many
areas such as computer vision and natural language processing. However, recent works show current ML design
is vulnerable to both security and privacy attacks, e.g., adversarial examples and private attribute inference. Adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Carlini and Wagner
2017; Qu, Li, and Wang 2023; Hong et al. 2024), i.e., natural data with imperceptible perturbations, cause ML models
to make incorrect predictions and prevent them from being
deployed in safety-critical applications such as autonomous
driving (Eykholt et al. 2018) and medical imaging (Bortsova
et al. 2021). Many real-world applications involve data containing private information, such as race, gender, and income. When applying ML to these applications, it poses a
great challenge as private attributes can often be accurately
inferred (Jia et al. 2017; Aono et al. 2017; Melis et al. 2019).
To mitigate adversarial examples and attribute inference
attacks, many defenses are proposed but follow two separate
lines with different techniques. For instance, state-of-the-art
defenses against adversarial examples are based on adversarial training (Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2019), which solves a min-max optimization problem. In
contrast, a representative defense against inference attacks
is based on differential privacy (Abadi et al. 2016), which is

• We propose the first information-theoretic framework to
unify both adversarial robustness and privacy protection.
• We formulate learning adversarially robust and privacypreserving representations via mutual information goals
and train neural networks to approximate them.
• We provide novel theoretical results: the tradeoff between adversarial robustness/utility and attribute privacy,
and guaranteed attribute privacy leakage.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22363

