The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learnware Specification via Label-Aware Neural Embedding
Wei Chen1, 2 , Jun-Xiang Mao1, 2, 3 , Min-Ling Zhang1, 2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Information Technology and Data Management Department of China Mobile Communications Group Zhejiang Co., Ltd
wei-chen@seu.edu.cn, maojx@seu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

skills (Mumuni, Mumuni, and Gerrar 2024), thus making the
process highly intricate and expensive (Sarker 2021). Furthermore, concerns surrounding data privacy and proprietary
restrictions significantly impede users from developing and
reusing models across varying tasks.
To address these challenges concurrently, the learnware
paradigm has been introduced (Zhou 2016). This paradigm
aims to establish a learnware dock system of numerous welltrained machine learning models, enabling users to reuse existing helpful models for their tasks instead of starting from
scratch (Zhou and Tan 2024). Each learnware in the dock
system is a well-established model associated with a specification, which characterizes the specialty of the corresponding model in the submitting stage, enabling it to be identified
accurately for new task requirements in the deploying stage.
To achieve this vision, the key challenge is: How to generate specifications that represent the ability and specialty of
models without exposing the developers’ training data, and
leverage these specifications to identify and even reassemble
a few helpful learnware’s models to tackle new tasks?
Reviewing the entire learnware paradigm, it becomes evident that the quality of the specification is a critical factor influencing model reuse. Existing specification generation methods are mostly based on the Reduced Kernel Mean
Embedding (RKME) technique (Wu et al. 2023; Zhou and
Tan 2024), which uses the Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) in the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS)
to seek a reduced set that characterizes the model’s capabilities. Through the RKME technique, users can efficiently
identify useful learnwares by aligning their requirement data
with the generated specification, all while preserving privacy (Lei, Tan, and Zhou 2024). Recently, the first opensource learnware dock system, Beimingwu, has been successfully developed and released (Tan et al. 2024c).
Although existing RKME-based specification methods
for learnware retrieval and model reuse have proven effective in many application scenarios (Zhang et al. 2021; Guo
et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2023; Tan et al. 2024a), such methods
mainly utilize feature information to generate specifications
by assuming the existence of the ground-truth labeling function, while leaving the label information, which is capable
of providing rich semantic characterization, untouched. Furthermore, the quality of the generated specifications heavily relies on the choice of the kernels, which makes it pro-

The learnware paradigm aims to establish a learnware dock
system of numerous well-trained machine learning models,
enabling users to reuse existing helpful models for their
tasks instead of starting from scratch. Each learnware in the
system is a well-established model submitted by its developer, associated with a specification generated by the learnware dock system. The specification characterizes the specialty of the corresponding model, enabling it to be identified accurately for new task requirements. Existing specification generation methods are mostly based on the Reduced
Kernel Mean Embedding (RKME) technique, which uses the
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) in the Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) to seek a reduced set that characterizes the model’s capabilities. However, existing RKMEbased methods mainly utilize feature information to generate specifications by assuming the existence of the groundtruth labeling function, while leaving the label information,
which is capable of providing rich semantic characterization,
untouched. Furthermore, the quality of the generated specifications heavily relies on the choice of the kernels, which
makes it prohibitive to adapt to all real-world scenarios. In
this paper, to overcome the above limitations, we propose a
novel specification approach named L ANE, i.e., Label-Aware
Neural Embedding. In L ANE, the neural embedding space
is utilized to replace the RKHS, effectively circumventing
the step of kernel selection and thereby addressing the dependency on kernels in existing RKME-based specification
methods. More importantly, L ANE uses the label information
as additional supervision to enhance the generation process,
resulting in specifications of superior quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the
proposed L ANE approach in the learnware paradigm.

Introduction
In recent years, advancements in machine learning technology and its growing real-world applications have given rise
to a multitude of models (Jordan and Mitchell 2015). However, the traditional machine learning paradigm requires a
step-by-step construction of the model from scratch tailored
to each task. This approach demands a large amount of
high-quality training data (Zhu et al. 2016), costly computational resources (Menghani 2023), and proficient training
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15857

