The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fairness Shields: Safeguarding against Biased Decision Makers
Filip Cano1 , Thomas A. Henzinger2 , Bettina Könighofer1 ,
Konstantin Kueffner2 , Kaushik Mallik3 *
1

Graz University of Technology
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
3
IMDEA Software Institute
filipcano95@gmail.com, {tah, konstantin.kueffner}@ist.ac.at, bettina.koenighofer@tugraz.at, kaushik.mallik@imdea.org
2

Abstract

recommended decision
Sub-symbolic
classifier

As AI-based decision-makers increasingly influence human
lives, it is a growing concern that their decisions may be unfair or biased with respect to people’s protected attributes,
such as gender and race. Most existing bias prevention measures provide probabilistic fairness guarantees in the long run,
and it is possible that the decisions are biased on any decision sequence of fixed length. We introduce fairness shielding, where a symbolic decision-maker—the fairness shield—
continuously monitors the sequence of decisions of another
deployed black-box decision-maker, and makes interventions
so that a given fairness criterion is met while the total intervention costs are minimized. We present four different algorithms for computing fairness shields, among which one
guarantees fairness over fixed horizons, and three guarantee
fairness periodically after fixed intervals. Given a distribution
over future decisions and their intervention costs, our algorithms solve different instances of bounded-horizon optimal
control problems with different levels of computational costs
and optimality guarantees. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of these shields in ensuring fairness
while maintaining cost efficiency across various scenarios.

1

input
features

gender, age, ...

accept?/reject?

intervention cost

Fairness
shield

protected feature

♂♂♂♀♀♂

gender

final decision
accept/reject

Figure 1: The operational diagram of fairness shields.

Fairness shields consider fairness from the sequential
decision-making standpoint, where decisions are made on
individuals appearing sequentially over a period of time,
and each decision may be influenced by those made in the
past. While the classical fairness literature typically evaluated fairness in a history-independent manner, the sequential setting, with its history-dependence, has been shown to
better capture real-world decision-making problems (Zhang
et al. 2021). Among the works on fairness in the sequential setting, most prior works are aimed at achieving fairness in the long run (Hu et al. 2022). Recently, the boundedhorizon and the periodic variants have been proposed, which
are often more realistic, as regulatory bodies usually assess fairness after bounded time or at regular intervals, such
as yearly or quarterly (Alamdari et al. 2024). Our fairness
shields guarantee bounded-horizon and periodic fairness of
deployed unknown decision-makers by monitoring each decision and minimally intervening if necessary. Fairness is
guaranteed on all runs of the system, whereas existing algorithms guarantee fairness only on average, leaving individual runs prone to exhibit biases (Alamdari et al. 2024).
The basic functionality of fairness shields is depicted in
Fig. 1. We assume a bounded-horizon or periodic fairness
property is given, with a known time horizon or period, respectively. For each individual appearing in sequence, the
fairness shield observes the protected attribute, the classifier’s recommendation, and the cost of changing that recommendation to a different value, where the cost is assumed
to be either provided by the decision-maker or pre-specified
as constant. The shield then makes the final decision, ensur-

Introduction

With the increasing popularity of machine learning (ML)
in human-centric decision-making tasks, including banking (Liu et al. 2018) and college admissions (Oneto et al.
2020), it is a growing concern that the decision-makers often show biases based on protected attributes of individuals,
like gender and race (Dressel et al. 2018; Obermeyer et al.
2019; Scheuerman et al. 2019). Therefore, mitigating biases
in ML decision-makers is an important problem and an active area of research in AI.
A majority of existing bias prevention techniques use
design-time interventions, like pre-processing the training
dataset (Kamiran et al. 2012; Calders et al. 2013), tailoring
the loss function used for training (Agarwal et al. 2018; Berk
et al. 2017), or post-processing the decisions using a statically calibrated output function (Hardt et al. 2016; Caton
et al. 2020). We propose fairness shielding, the first runtime intervention procedure for safeguarding the fairness of
already deployed decision-makers.
* Part of the research was done when the author was at ISTA.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15659

