The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Masked Language Modeling Becomes Conditional Density Estimation
for Tabular Data Synthesis
Seunghwan An1 , Gyeongdong Woo1 , Jaesung Lim1 , ChangHyun Kim1 , Sungchul Hong3 ,
Jong-June Jeon2 *
1

Department of Statistical Data Science, University of Seoul, S. Korea
2
Department of Statistics, University of Seoul, S. Korea
3
Department of Statistics, Changwon National University, S. Korea
{dkstmdghks79, dngudxor23, wotjd1410, hahaha503}@uos.ac.kr, shong@changwon.ac.kr, jj.jeon@uos.ac.kr
Abstract

and Armon 2022), and (ii) the tabular data does not have
an intrinsic ordering among columns (Gulati and Roysdon
2023).
(i) Considering the heterogeneous nature of tabular data
and aiming to develop a method that addresses the challenges of modeling diverse distributions of continuous
columns, we employ histogram-based non-parametric conditional density estimation through a multi-class classification task (Li, Bondell, and Reich 2019). This approach enables us to apply the classification loss uniformly across
all types of columns. Since the histogram-based approach
is theoretically valid only when continuous variables have
bounded supports (Wasserman 2006; Li, Bondell, and Reich
2019), we transform continuous columns using the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) and constrain their values
to the interval [0, 1] (Li et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2022).
(ii) To learn the arbitrary generation ordering of columns,
we utilize the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) approach
(Devlin et al. 2019). By employing a masking scheme and
the BERT model architecture, our proposed model enables
the estimation of conditional densities across arbitrary combinations of target and conditional variables (Ghazvininejad et al. 2019; Ivanov, Figurnov, and Vetrov 2019; Nazábal
et al. 2020). (Gulati and Roysdon 2023) proposed a similar method called TabMT, however, TabMT faces challenges
in distributional learning because it relies on predicting the
K-means cluster index of masked entries. Our approach
contrasts with existing auto-regressive density estimators,
which generate data in a fixed column order (Hansen 1994;
Kamthe, Assefa, and Deisenroth 2021; Letizia and Tonello
2022). Additionally, (Germain et al. 2015; Papamakarios,
Pavlakou, and Murray 2017) are also able to estimate conditional densities but differ from our approach by masking the
model weights rather than the input.
Therefore, our proposed method redefines the consecutive multi-class classification task of MLM as histogrambased non-parametric conditional density estimation. We
term our proposed model MaCoDE (Masked Conditional
Density Estimation). The main contribution of our work is
bridging the theoretical gap between distributional learning
and the consecutive minimization of the multi-class classification loss within the MLM approach.
Specifically, we demonstrate that minimizing the orderless multi-class classification loss, when combined with the

In this paper, our goal is to generate synthetic data for heterogeneous (mixed-type) tabular datasets with high machine
learning utility (MLu). Since the MLu performance depends
on accurately approximating the conditional distributions, we
focus on devising a synthetic data generation method based
on conditional distribution estimation. We introduce MaCoDE by redefining the consecutive multi-class classification
task of Masked Language Modeling (MLM) as histogrambased non-parametric conditional density estimation. Our approach enables the estimation of conditional densities across
arbitrary combinations of target and conditional variables. We
bridge the theoretical gap between distributional learning and
MLM by demonstrating that minimizing the orderless multiclass classification loss leads to minimizing the total variation distance between conditional distributions. To validate
our proposed model, we evaluate its performance in synthetic
data generation across 10 real-world datasets, demonstrating its ability to adjust data privacy levels easily without retraining. Additionally, since masked input tokens in MLM are
analogous to missing data, we further assess its effectiveness
in handling training datasets with missing values, including
multiple imputations of the missing entries.

Code — https://github.com/an-seunghwan/MaCoDE
Appendix — https://github.com/anseunghwan/MaCoDE/blob/main/appendix.pdf

1

Introduction

There are two main objectives in synthetic tabular data
generation: (1) preserving the statistical characteristics of
the original dataset and (2) achieving comparable machine
learning utility (MLu) to the original dataset. In this paper,
our focus is on generating synthetic data with high MLu performance. Note that achieving high statistical fidelity does
not guarantee high MLu performance (Hansen et al. 2023).
Given that MLu performance depends on accurately approximating conditional distributions, we focus on developing a synthetic data generation method based on conditional
distribution estimation. However, two important properties
of tabular data must be considered: (i) tabular data can consist of mixed types of data (Borisov et al. 2021; Shwartz-Ziv
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15356

