The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MoLE: Decoding by Mixture of Layer Experts Alleviates Hallucination
in Large Vision-Language Models
Tian Liang1 , Yuetian Du1 , Jing Huang1 , Ming Kong1 , Luyuan Chen2 , Yadong Li3 , Siye Chen3 ,
Qiang Zhu1 *
1
Zhejiang University,
Beijing Information Science and Technology University,
3
Ant Group
{liangtian2022, 22421227, huangjin9, zjukongming, zhuq}@zju.edu.cn; chenly@bistu.edu.cn; {liyadong.lyd,
chensiye.csy}@antgroup.com
2

Abstract
Recent advancements in Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) highlight their ability to integrate and process
multi-modal information. However, hallucinations—where
generated content is inconsistent with input vision and instructions—remain a challenge. In this paper, we analyze
LVLMs’ layer-wise decoding and identify that hallucinations
can arise during the reasoning and factual information injection process. Additionally, as the number of generated tokens
increases, the forgetting of the original prompt may also lead
to hallucinations.To address this, we propose a training-free
decoding method called Mixture of Layer Experts (MoLE).
MoLE leverages a heuristic gating mechanism to dynamically
select multiple layers of LVLMs as expert layers: the Final
Expert, the Second Opinion expert, and the Prompt Retention
Expert. By the cooperation of each expert, MoLE enhances
the robustness and faithfulness of the generation process. Our
extensive experiments demonstrate that MoLE significantly
reduces hallucinations, outperforming the current state-ofthe-art decoding techniques across three mainstream LVLMs
and two established hallucination benchmarks. Moreover, our
method reveals the potential of LVLMs to independently produce more reliable and accurate outputs.

Figure 1: An illustration of Mixture of Layer Experts(MoLE) Decoding. We designed heuristic gating
mechanisms to select three expert layers from LVLMs: the
Final Expert, Second Opinion Expert, and Prompt Retention
Expert. By employing collaborative decoding from multiple
experts, we achieve more accurate and faithful answers, as
illustrated in the example of ‘dog’ in the figure.

Code — https://github.com/Rainlt/MoLE/

Introduction

2023b), which leverage “amateur models” for eliminating
erroneous outputs. These methods have gained traction due
to their ability to reduce hallucinations without the need
for additional training. Typically, in such setups, an expert
model (the original LVLM) is contrasted with a weaker or
more confused model, and the differences in their outputs
are used to filter out hallucinations. While this approach has
shown some success, it is inherently limited by the reliance
on weaker models, which may not always provide the most
accurate guidance.
Recognizing the limitations of traditional contrastive decoding, we draw inspiration from the Mixture of Experts
(MoE) (Jacobs et al. 1991) framework to propose a novel
strategy, Mixture of Layer Experts (MoLE) Decoding,
aimed at addressing the hallucination problem more effectively. Unlike previous methods that construct amateur models, our approach leverages multiple complementary expert

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have emerged as
the dominant paradigm for tackling vision-language tasks,
demonstrating remarkable performance across various applications. However, a critical challenge that continues to
hinder the effectiveness of these models is the issue of hallucination—where the generated content deviates from the
input vision or instructions. This not only compromises the
faithfulness of the output but also undermines the reliability
of LVLMs in real-world scenarios (Liu et al. 2024b). Addressing this problem has become a pressing concern in the
field.
Existing approaches to mitigating hallucinations have primarily focused on contrastive decoding techniques (Li et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18684

