The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Extracting PAC Decision Trees from Black Box Binary Classifiers:
The Gender Bias Study Case on BERT-based Language Models
1,3

2

3

Ana Ozaki , Roberto Confalonieri , Ricardo Guimarães , Anders Imenes

3

1

Universitetet i Oslo, Norway
Università degli Studi di Padova, Italy
3
Universitetet i Bergen, Norway
anaoz@uio.no, roberto.confalonieri@unipd.it
2

Abstract

II et al. 2011; Awudu and Zhou 2015) (see also (Chorowski
and Zurada 2011; Shih, Darwiche, and Choi 2019) for works
extracting decision diagrams from trained neural networks).
Previous works in this direction indicate that, in practice, decision trees are indeed useful for understanding patterns in
the data, which cannot be understood from black-box models. This approach has been applied to various domains such
as medicine (Dancey, Bandar, and McLean 2010), traffic signal control (Zhu, Yin, and Chen 2023), risk credit evaluation (Baesens et al. 2003), water resource management (Wei,
Chen, and Hsu 2012), multimedia (Fanta, Pulc, and Holena
2019), among others. The decision tree in this case functions
as a surrogate for the original model. The advantage of surrogate models is their ability to abstract the original model,
focusing on specific inputs or aspects of interest.
In this paper, we apply this approach to unveil occupational gender bias in BERT-based language models. By extracting rules that approximate parts of the model of interest,
we can avoid the challenges associated with approximating
the whole language model, which could be computationally
infeasible or inefficient. Moreover, the approach of extracting decision trees can be applied to black-box models regardless of their internal architectures, which are constantly
evolving as the field of artificial intelligence tackles increasingly complex tasks.
The main challenge with such approximations lies in determining how accurately the extracted decision tree represents the relevant parts of the original black box model. To
the best of our knowledge, current practical approaches for
extracting decision trees from trained neural networks do not
provide theoretical guarantees regarding the fidelity of the
decision trees with respect to the original model. What guarantees would be appropriate? How could such guarantees
be given? In Computational Learning Theory, the most well
studied framework which gives correctness guarantees is
known as the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) framework (Valiant 1984). In the original framework, a learner
receives examples classified according to some target function. The classification is binary and the classified examples
come according to a probability distribution that is fixed but
arbitrary and unknown. The learner then creates a hypothesis consistent with the information received. In a nutshell,
the theoretical correctness guarantee is that, provided with
enough data, with high probability, the difference between

Decision trees are a popular machine learning method, valued for their inherent explainability. In Explainable AI, decision trees serve as surrogate models for complex black box
AI models or as approximations of parts of such models. A
key challenge of this approach is assessing how accurately
the extracted decision tree represents the original model and
determining the extent to which it can be trusted as an approximation of its behavior. In this work, we investigate the
use of the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) framework
to provide a theoretical guarantee of fidelity for decision trees
extracted from AI models. Leveraging the theoretical foundations of the PAC framework, we adapt a decision tree algorithm to ensure a PAC guarantee under specific conditions.
We focus on binary classification and conduct experiments
where we extract decision trees from BERT-based language
models with PAC guarantees. Our results indicate occupational gender bias in these models, which confirm previous
results in the literature. Additionally, the decision tree format
enhances the visualization of which occupations are most impacted by social bias.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are known to be easy to explain because,
given an input, one can directly trace the decisions which
led to the output. However, this method lacks the generalizability of architectures based on neural networks that have
hidden layers. Although there has been some progress in
increasing the generalizability of decision trees (Frosst and
Hinton 2017) and even translating trained neural networks
into decision trees (Aytekin 2022), there appears to be a
trade-off between generalizability and interpretability that is
not easy to balance.
To enjoy the best of both worlds, the AI research community has been exploring the idea of extracting decision
trees from trained neural networks. The extracted trees can
then serve as an explainable approximation of these blackbox models (Confalonieri et al. 2020; Krishnan, Sivakumar,
and Bhattacharya 1999; Vasilev, Mincheva, and Nikolov
2020; Boz 2002; Bologna and Hayashi 2018; Schmitz,
Aldrich, and Gouws 1999; Dancey, McLean, and Bandar
2004; Burkhardt et al. 2021; Setiono and Liu 1995; Nanfack, Temple, and Frénay 2021; Craven and Shavlik 1995;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19767

