The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Transtreaming: Adaptive Delay-aware Transformer
for Real-time Streaming Perception
Xiang Zhang1 * , Yufei Cui2 * , Chenchen Fu1† , Zihao Wang1 , Yuyang Sun1 , Xue Liu2 , Weiwei Wu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
School of Computer Science, McGill University
{230238536, chenchen_fu, 213213628, yysun, weiweiwu}@seu.edu.cn, yufei.cui@mail.mcgill.ca, xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Real-time object detection is critical for the decision-making
process for many real-world applications, such as collision
avoidance and path planning in autonomous driving. This
work presents an innovative real-time streaming perception
method, Transtreaming, which addresses the challenge of realtime object detection with dynamic computational delays. The
core innovation of Transtreaming lies in its adaptive delayaware transformer, which can concurrently predict multiple
future frames and select the output that best matches the realworld present time, compensating for any system-induced
computational delays.
The proposed model outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods, even in single-frame detection scenarios, by leveraging a transformer-based methodology. It demonstrates robust
performance across a range of devices, from powerful V100
to modest 2080Ti, achieving the highest level of perceptual accuracy on all platforms. Unlike most state-of-the-art methods
that struggle to complete computation within a single frame
on less powerful devices, Transtreaming meets the stringent
real-time processing requirements on all kinds of devices. The
experimental results emphasize the system’s adaptability and
its potential to significantly improve the safety and reliability
of many real-world systems, such as autonomous driving.

Figure 1: Fluctuation of the computational delay using the
same detector when processing different frames with varying workloads (simulated by adopting a similar approach to
GPU contention generation in (Xu et al. 2020)) on a server
equipped with NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080.

Code — https://github.com/DecAngel/Transtreaming

Introduction
Existing object detection methods have now achieved high
performance with low latency. Most of these studies have
either focused on 1) improving detection accuracy (Parmar
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021), or 2) striking a balance between performance and latency (Redmon et al. 2016; Ge et al.
2021). More recently, while real-world applications such as
autonomous driving systems require real-time detection results for accurate decision making, researchers began to pay
much attention on real-time object detection. This area, also
known as streaming perception, is gaining prominence for
its potential to revolutionize the way we interact with and
understand our environment in real time.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

This author is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10185

For real-time object detection, researchers initially aimed
at enhancing the speed of non-real-time detectors to meet
stringent real-time requirements, such as achieving frame
rates of 60 frames per second (FPS). However, as noted by
(Yang et al. 2022), no matter how fast the detector is, in realworld online scenarios, when the detector handles the latest
observation, the state of the world around the moving vehicle
has already changed. Thus the detection result will always be
at least one frame delay from the latest observation.
To this end, some recent studies (Yang et al. 2022; Li et al.
2023; He et al. 2023; Jo et al. 2022; Huang and Chen 2023)
have improved the detector models to include forecasting
capabilities. These models are trained to anticipate the future
positions of objects (e.g. one frame into the future), such
that the detector can finish the computation within one frame
(Yang et al. 2022). For example, assuming a constant video
streaming rate of 30FPS, this implies that the detection pro1
cess needs to be completed within 30
second. To emulate
varying vehicular speeds, these models were trained across a
spectrum of video streaming rates. For example, if a vehicle
is moving at 30km/h (or 60km/h), the video streaming rate
is set at 1× (or 2×) the original rate, respectively. Despite

