The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ml4xcube: Machine Learning Toolkits for Earth System Data Cubes
Julia Peters 1 2 , Anja Neumann1 2 , Marco Jaeger1 2 , Lukas Gienapp1 2 , Josefine Umlauft1 2
1

2

Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany
Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI), Leipzig University, Germany
julia.peters@informatik.uni-leipzig.de, josefine.umlauft@uni-leipzig.de

Abstract
Rapidly changing climate conditions and the increase in extreme events are posing severe challenges to human life and
infrastructure, requiring sophisticated analytical capabilities
for hazard prediction and disaster risk management. Earth
System Data Cubes (ESDCs) have become an essential tool
in Earth System Sciences (ESS) by organizing large-scale,
multivariate environmental datasets into a structured, scalable
and analysis-ready format. However, modern machine learning techniques are not yet being utilized to their full potential
on ESDCs. This is due to the lack of proper tooling, domainspecific challenges, and high barriers of entry for practitioners. We introduce ml4xcube, an open-source Python framework designed to assist ESS domain experts in applying ML
techniques on ESDCs for advanced analysis and prediction of
environmental variables and impacts. Through a comprehensive suite of tools, it addresses specific challenges associated
with the nature of ESS data, such as the non-uniform data
distribution due to dynamic gaps, or spatio-temporal autocorrelation of environmental variables. Due to its modular architecture, it covers the complete analysis process, from data
exploration, and preparation, to model development, result interpretation and evaluation. With support for distributed computing, it handles large ESDC datasets efficiently. In order to
ease the adoption it includes extensive documentation and tutorial notebooks. We demonstrate ml4xcube’s capabilities
through three examples, showcasing its potential and capabilities for integrating machine learning with ESDC data.

Latitude

b.

c.

g
Lon

e

itud

Figure 1: Lexcube visualization (Söchting et al. 2023) of an
Earth System Data Cube displaying the environmental variables (a) air temperature, (b) soil moisture and (c) radiation
aligned along common spatial and temporal coordinates.
as the 2018 European Compound Heatwave and Drought
(Rousi et al. 2023) and the 2021 Pacific Northwest Heatwave
(White et al. 2021), highlight the need for precise predictive
models and proactive disaster management. To this end, advances in remote sensing technologies have revolutionized
Earth System Sciences (ESS) by collecting vast amounts
of Earth observational data through drones, aerial systems
and satellites. These technologies provide crucial information for understanding climate extremes, with a single satellite capturing up to terabytes of data each day (Schieler et al.
2019). However, managing and analyzing this abundance of
data in order to answer the relevant scientific questions poses
substantial challenges for Earth System scientists.
Earth System Data Cubes (ESDCs, Mahecha et al. 2020)
have emerged as a viable solution. They organize extensive
multidimensional datasets into structured grids, where various environmental variables are mapped to the same spatiotemporal coordinate system. This unified structure is essential for efficiently synchronizing and correlating diverse environmental datasets. Figure 1 shows exemplary variables
stored in one ESDC, here tracking air temperature, soil
moisture, and solar radiation measurements. ESDCs were
developed as part of the Deep Earth System Data Lab (DeepESDL) project1 , utilizing Earth observation variables acquired by the European Space Agency. DeepESDL provides

Code — https://github.com/deepesdl/ML-Toolkits

1

Time

a.

Introduction

Extreme events, such as heatwaves, droughts, heavy precipitation and tropical cyclones have become increasingly
frequent and severe across the entire globe (IPCC 2023).
They pose substantial threats to human lives and infrastructure (Noy 2016; Fowler et al. 2024), as well as to natural
ecosystems and biodiversity (Flach et al. 2020; Mahecha
et al. 2024). Especially, people living in regions with development constraints suffer from reduced food and fresh
water security, leading to a 15 times higher mortality rate
due to extreme events compared to less vulnerable regions
(IPCC 2023). Impacts of recent catastrophic events, such
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

28302

https://www.earthsystemdatalab.net/

