The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Anytime Multi-Agent Path Finding with an Adaptive Delay-Based Heuristic
Thomy Phan* 1 , Benran Zhang* 1 , Shao-Hung Chan1 , Sven Koenig2
1

University of Southern California
2
University of California, Irvine
{thomy.phan,jimyzhan,shaohung}@usc.edu, sven.koenig@uci.edu

Original MAPF-LNS

Abstract
Anytime multi-agent path finding (MAPF) is a promising
approach to scalable and collision-free path optimization in
multi-agent systems. MAPF-LNS, based on Large Neighborhood Search (LNS), is the current state-of-the-art approach
where a fast initial solution is iteratively optimized by destroying and repairing selected paths of the solution. Current MAPF-LNS variants commonly use an adaptive selection mechanism to choose among multiple destroy heuristics. However, to determine promising destroy heuristics,
MAPF-LNS requires a considerable amount of exploration
time. As common destroy heuristics are stationary, i.e., nonadaptive, any performance bottleneck caused by them cannot be overcome by adaptive heuristic selection alone, thus
limiting the overall effectiveness of MAPF-LNS. In this paper, we propose Adaptive Delay-based Destroy-and-Repair
Enhanced with Success-based Self-learning (ADDRESS) as
a single-destroy-heuristic variant of MAPF-LNS. ADDRESS
applies restricted Thompson Sampling to the top-K set of the
most delayed agents to select a seed agent for adaptive LNS
neighborhood generation. We evaluate ADDRESS in multiple maps from the MAPF benchmark set and demonstrate
cost improvements by at least 50% in large-scale scenarios
with up to a thousand agents, compared with the original
MAPF-LNS and other state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Scheme of our contribution. Instead of using an
adaptive selection mechanism π to choose among multiple
stationary destroy heuristics Hx (Li et al. 2021), ADDRESS
(our approach) only uses a single adaptive heuristic.

a set of destroy heuristics, LNS iteratively destroys and replans a fixed number of paths, according to an agent neighborhood, until the time budget runs out. MAPF-LNS represents the current state-of-the-art in anytime MAPF and has
been experimentally shown to scale up to scenarios with
hundreds of agents (Li et al. 2021). Due to its increasing popularity, several extensions have been proposed like
fast local repairing, integration of primal heuristics, machine
learning-guided neighborhood selection, neighborhood size
adaptation, and parallelism (Chan et al. 2024; Huang et al.
2022; Lam et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022; Phan et al. 2024b).
Current MAPF-LNS variants use an adaptive selection
mechanism π to choose from the set of destroy heuristics,
as illustrated in Figure 1 (Ropke and Pisinger 2006). However, to determine promising destroy heuristics, MAPF-LNS
requires a considerable amount of exploration time. As common destroy heuristics are stationary, i.e., non-adaptive (Li
et al. 2021), any performance bottleneck caused by them
cannot be overcome by the adaptive selection mechanism π
alone, thus limiting the overall effectiveness of MAPF-LNS.
In this paper, we propose Adaptive Delay-based Destroyand-Repair Enhanced with Success-based Self-learning
(ADDRESS), as a single-destroy-heuristic variant of MAPFLNS, illustrated in Figure 1. ADDRESS applies restricted
Thompson Sampling to the top-K set of the most delayed
agents to select a seed agent for adaptive LNS neighborhood
generation. Our contributions are as follows:

Code — https://github.com/JimyZ13/ADDRESS

1

ADDRESS (Ours)

Introduction

A wide range of real-world applications like goods transportation in warehouses, search and rescue missions, and
traffic management can be formulated as Multi-Agent Path
Finding (MAPF) problem, where the goal is to find collisionfree paths for multiple agents with each having an assigned
start and goal location. Finding optimal solutions, w.r.t. minimal flowtime or makespan is NP-hard, which limits scalability of most state-of-the-art MAPF solvers (Ratner and
Warmuth 1986; Sharon et al. 2012; Yu and LaValle 2013).
Anytime MAPF based on Large Neighborhood Search
(LNS) is a promising approach to finding fast and highquality solutions to the MAPF problem within a fixed time
budget (Li et al. 2021). Given an initial feasible solution and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We discuss a performance bottleneck of the current empirically most effective destroy heuristic in MAPF-LNS
23286

