The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Correlation-Attention Masked Temporal Transformer for User Identity Linkage
Using Heterogeneous Mobility Data
Ziang Yan1 , Xingyu Zhao1 , Hanqing Ma1 ,
Wei Chen2 , Jianpeng Qi1 , Yanwei Yu1 * , Junyu Dong1
1

Faculty of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{yza, zhaoxingyu, mahanqing}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, onedeanxxx@gmail.com,
{qijianpeng, yuyanwei, dongjunyu}@ouc.edu.cn
Platform A

Abstract
With the rise of social media and Location-Based Social
Networks (LBSN), check-in data across platforms has become crucial for User Identity Linkage (UIL). These data
not only reveal users’ spatio-temporal information but also
provide insights into their behavior patterns and interests.
However, cross-platform identity linkage faces challenges
like poor data quality, high sparsity, and noise interference, which hinder existing methods from extracting crossplatform user information. To address these issues, we propose a Correlation-Attention Masked Transformer for User
Identity Linkage Network (MT-Link), a transformer-based
framework to enhance model performance by learning spatiotemporal co-occurrence patterns of cross-platform users. Our
model effectively captures spatio-temporal co-occurrence in
cross-platform user check-in sequences. It employs a correlation attention mechanism to detect the spatio-temporal cooccurrence between user check-in sequences. Guided by attention weight maps, the model focuses on co-occurrence
points while filtering out noise, ultimately improving classification performance. Experimental results show that our
model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by
12.92%∼17.76% and 5.80%∼8.38% improvements in terms
of Macro-F1 and Area Under Curve (AUC).

Mon.
18:30

Mon.
8:30
Tue. 10:00

Fri.
23:50
Sun.
12:30

Platform B

Mon.
8:45

Fri.
22:45

Sat.
16:30

Wed. 6:30

Figure 1: Spatio-temporal check-ins of the same user across
platforms, along with different behavioral patterns.
limited by the discrete and sparse nature of the data, restricting their ability to capture continuous behavior and model
cross-platform interactions. The performance of these methods is often constrained by the dataset distribution and lacks
a deep exploration of hidden patterns within user checkin sequences. Despite these limitations, data mining approaches have made significant progress in addressing the
spatio-temporal UIL problem (Riederer et al. 2016; Basık
et al. 2017; Li, Zhu, and Xie 2019; Basik, Ferhatosmanoğlu,
and Gedik 2020). These methods effectively link the same
user across different platforms by focusing on spatial and
temporal correlations. Recently, clustering-based methods
(Ding et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2017; Xue et al.
2021) and kernel density estimation methods (Chen et al.
2018, 2023) have further attempted to solve the challenges
posed by sparse spatio-temporal check-in data, thereby improving identification accuracy. Notably, deep learning approaches (Feng et al. 2019, 2020; Li et al. 2023) have also
achieved impressive success in capturing abstract representations of user check-in sequences, demonstrating significant potential in modeling complex spatio-temporal data.
Although significant progress has been made in spatiotemporal user identity linkage, we identify three key limitations in most existing methods, which hinder the accuracy
and robustness of the linkage process. First, current research
mainly focuses on solving the problem of data sparsity, but
introduces inherent noise in the check-in sequence and ignores the information of co-occurrence points. For example, Figure 1 clearly shows that the check-in frequency of
the same user varies across different platforms. We define
check-ins that occur at the same time and place as spatiotemporal co-occurrence points. If we consider all check-in
points to determine whether these check-in points are generated by the same user, random check-ins (i.e., the red points)

Introduction
Location-Based Social Network (LBSN) services like Twitter and Foursquare have made daily life more convenient,
generating vast amounts of spatio-temporal human mobility data (Qin et al. 2023), such as point-of-interest (POI)
check-in sequences (Zhao et al. 2020). The availability of
such spatio-temporal data provides a foundation for exploring User Identity Linkage (UIL) tasks (Riederer et al. 2016),
which holds significant potential in areas such as recommendation systems (Chen et al. 2020), user behavior analysis, and privacy protection (Qi et al. 2018). Several studies (Goga et al. 2013; Rossi and Musolesi 2014; Naini
et al. 2015) have leveraged spatio-temporal check-in data to
match user identities based on mobility trajectories, demonstrating the effectiveness of such data.
Previous methods have had some success (Goga et al.
2013; Rossi and Musolesi 2014; Naini et al. 2015) but are
* Corresponding author: Yanwei Yu.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12999

