The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Filter or Compensate: Towards Invariant Representation from Distribution Shift
for Anomaly Detection
Zining Chen1 , Xingshuang Luo1 , Weiqiu Wang1 , Zhicheng Zhao1,2,3 * , Fei Su1,2,3 , Aidong Men1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Network System and Network Culture, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intereactive Technology and Experience System, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Beijing, China
chenzn@bupt.edu.cn, {luoxingshuang,wangweiqiu,zhaozc,sufei,menad}@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent Anomaly Detection (AD) methods have achieved
great success with In-Distribution (ID) data. However, realworld data often exhibits distribution shift, causing huge performance decay on traditional AD methods. From this perspective, few previous work has explored AD with distribution shift, and the distribution-invariant normality learning
has been proposed based on the Reverse Distillation (RD)
framework. However, we observe the misalignment issue between the teacher and the student network that causes detection failure, thereby propose FiCo, Filter or Compensate,
to address the distribution shift issue in AD. FiCo firstly
compensates the distribution-specific information to reduce
the misalignment between the teacher and student network
via the Distribution-Specific Compensation (DiSCo) module, and secondly filters all abnormal information to capture distribution-invariant normality with the DistributionInvariant Filter (DiIFi) module. Extensive experiments on
three different AD benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of FiCo, which outperforms all existing state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods, and even achieves better results on the ID
scenario compared with RD-based methods.

Figure 1: Anomaly map from different scenarios of SOTA
AD methods (Bae, Lee, and Kim 2023; Liu et al. 2023;
Tien et al. 2023; Cao, Zhu, and Pang 2023) on the MVTec
benchmark (Bergmann et al. 2019). The image of each row
represents a different scenario, including ID and four OOD
(brightness, contrast, defocus blur and gaussian noise) scenarios.

Code — https://github.com/znchen666/FiCo

Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) has been extensively researched
and plays a critical role in numerous applications. Its main
objective is to identify anomalous patterns within large
amounts of data. Real-world applications, such as manufacturing quality control (Bergmann et al. 2019), video surveillance (Liu et al. 2018), and medical monitoring (Schlegl
et al. 2019), are in high demand for accurate and robust AD
algorithms. In most scenarios, acquiring labeled anomaly
data is challenging and expensive. As a result, unsupervised
anomaly detection has become the prevailing focus of research. To address this issue, previous studies have made
efforts from various aspects, such as reconstruction-based
(Ristea et al. 2022; Zavrtanik, Kristan, and Skočaj 2022;
Zhang et al. 2023; Zhang, Xu, and Zhou 2024), embeddingbased (Roth et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022;

Liu et al. 2023; Zhu and Pang 2024; Lee and Choi 2024), and
knowledge distillation-based (Bergmann et al. 2020; Salehi
et al. 2021; Deng and Li 2022; Tien et al. 2023; Gu et al.
2023) approaches, etc., which have led to significant advancements recently.
These methods mostly assume training and test sets are
In-Distribution (ID), thus the only purpose is to identify
anomalies from normal ones without distribution shift. However, the assumption is not realistic in real-world scenarios, causing huge performance decay when confronting realworld Out-of-Distribution (OOD) data (Bae, Lee, and Kim
2023; Liu et al. 2023; Tien et al. 2023), as shown in Fig. 1.
The test data possibly have both anomalous patterns and distribution shifts, and most methods show accurate anomaly
map merely on the ID scenario without distribution shift, but

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2420

