The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fair Graph U-Net: A Fair Graph Learning Framework Integrating Group and
Individual Awareness
Zichong Wang1 , Zhibo Chu1 , Thang Viet Doan1 , Shaowei Wang2 ,
Yongkai Wu3 , Vasile Palade4 , Wenbin Zhang1 *
1

Florida International University, Florida, U.S.A.
2
University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada
3
Clemson University, South Carolina, U.S.A.
4
Coventry University, Coventry, U.K.
U-net (Gao and Ji 2019) selects the top k most important
nodes to form a more compact graph while preserving crucial information.
Despite their effectiveness, the existing pooling methods
can inadvertently introduce biases against subgroups defined by sensitive attributes such as race, gender, and age.
Specifically, pooling layers, driven by performance optimization, typically remove nodes to downsample representations, avoiding the introduction of noise into the computed
features, especially since graphs are frequently represented
sparsely. This process, however, often disproportionately affects nodes from various subgroups, leading to skewed representations in the downsampled subgraphs. As a result, the
labels of these subgraphs, represented by their central node
labels, may become excessively correlated with sensitive attributes, embedding biases directly into the model outputs
and potentially resulting in discriminatory decisions against
the center node. Such biases can severely limit the adoption of GNNs in high-stake decision-making scenarios, such
as job screening (Wang et al. 2023c), healthcare (Zhang
et al. 2023) and criminology (Zhang and Weiss 2022). For
instance, in the study of interaction networks of complex
diseases, researchers have identified specific subnetworks
that are associated with the disease (Cho, Kim, and Przytycka 2012). In such cases, differences in the representation of various groups in subgraphs can lead to an overcorrelation of diseases with sensitive attributes, which can affect the subsequent allocation of social welfare healthcare
resources. Moreover, another critical limitation of existing
pooling-based graph methods is their neglect of graph structure bias (i.e., excessively linking nodes with similar sensitive attribute values). When nodes are eliminated during
pooling, associated edges are removed, potentially resulting
in isolated nodes. To counteract this and maintain information propagation in subsequent layers, existing methods employ an edge generation mechanism that increases the connectivity of the graph (Gao and Ji 2019). However, this strategy can unintentionally introduce graph structural bias as
nodes sharing sensitive attribute values are often more frequently connected within graphs.
On the other hand, a number of research approaches
have been proposed to address bias and discrimination
in graph learning (Wang et al. 2024c), generally categorized into group fairness (Mehrabi et al. 2021), aiming for

Abstract
Learning high-level representations for graphs is crucial for
tasks like node classification, where graph pooling aggregates node features to provide a holistic view that enhances
predictive performance. Despite numerous methods that have
been proposed in this promising and rapidly developing research field, most efforts to generalize the pooling operation to graphs are primarily performance-driven, with fairness issues largely overlooked: i) the process of graph pooling could exacerbate disparities in distribution among various subgroups; ii) the resultant graph structure augmentation
may inadvertently strengthen intra-group connectivity, leading to unintended inter-group isolation. To this end, this paper
extends the initial effort on fair graph pooling to the development of fair graph neural networks, while also providing
a unified framework to collectively address group and individual graph fairness. Our experimental evaluations on multiple datasets demonstrate that the proposed method not only
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in terms of fairness but
also achieves comparable predictive performance.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown superior performance in modeling graph-structured data in various domains, such as social network analysis (Wang et al. 2023d),
recommendation system (Ying et al. 2018a), and urban computing (Bao et al. 2017). These models, which are extensions
of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Lee, Lee, and
Kang 2019), are specifically adapted to address the unique
challenges of non-Euclidean data that lacks spatial locality and a fixed order (Gao and Ji 2019). A key application
of GNNs is graph classification, which involves algorithmically identifying class labels for subgraphs (i.e., the label of the central node). This task requires holistic graphlevel representations that can handle graphs of varying sizes
and topologies, underscoring the critical role of the pooling
mechanism in the process. To this end, various graph pooling
designs have been developed to create effective and meaningful graph representations. For example, SAGPool (Lee,
Lee, and Kang 2019) utilizes a self-attention mechanism to
determine which nodes to retain or discard. Similarly, Graph
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28485

