The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Verified Safe Neural Network Controllers for Multi-Agent Path Finding
Mingyue Zhang 1 , Nianyu Li 2 * , Yi Chen1 , Jialong Li 3 , Xiao-Yi Zhang 4 ,
Hengjun Zhao1 , Jiamou Liu 5 , Wu Chen 1
1

College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory (ZGC Lab), Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
4
School of Computer & Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
5
School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
myzhangswu@swu.edu.cn, li nianyu@pku.edu.cn, lijialong@fuji.waseda.jp, xiaoyi@ustb.edu.cn, chenwu@swu.edu.cn
Abstract

the environment; (3) safe certificates-based methods (Zeng
et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2022), which use Lyapunov functions or barrier functions to constrain the controller’s actions within a safe range. Among these, the third category
provides the strictest theoretical safety guarantees due to its
strong foundation in control theory and differential invariants (Liu, Zhan, and Zhao 2011).
In the line of safe certificates-based methods, Control Barrier Functions (CBFs) stand out due to their effectiveness
in managing dynamic systems while ensuring critical safety
constraints and maintaining boundary conditions (Cheng
et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2021). CBFs are integrated into MAPF controllers to monitor system states and
adjust control inputs, thus preventing agents from breaching safety boundaries. The application of CBFs in MAPF
has led to significant innovations, from single-agent CBFbased shields designed to correct potentially hazardous actions (Cheng et al. 2019), to multi-agent CBF tailored for cooperative scenarios (Cai et al. 2021), decentralized CBF ensuring scalable collision-free operations (Wang, Ames, and
Egerstedt 2017), and resilient CBF for response to the adversarial agents (Usevitch and Panagou 2023).
However, implementing CBFs in MAPF presents significant challenges, primarily due to the complexity and unpredictability inherent in dynamic multi-agent environments.
Some existing work often relies on experts to manually design CBF using prior knowledge of system dynamics, a
task that becomes particularly challenging under complex
and uncertain conditions. Additionally, there is a growing
interest in employing deep learning to train CBFs, especially suited for managing nonlinear and uncertain dynamics (Zeng et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2021). However, since
the learning method is data-driven, the rigorousness of the
learned CBF resulting from zero training loss is not guaranteed. The inaccuracy of such learned CBFs can severely
undermine the safety guarantees for the controller, thereby
hindering the practical application of CBFs.
Our Works. In response, our study proposes a verified safe
multi-agent neural control (VSMANC), which offers two
key benefits: (1) it designs neural networks for CBFs and
controllers, and jointly learns them from agent-environment
interactions without relying on knowledge of the system dynamics; (2) it can formally analyze the input-output properties of the CBFs, strictly ensuring its rigorousness, thereby

Multi-agent path finding (MAPF) is a safety-critical scenario
where the goal is to secure collision-free trajectories from initial to desired locations. However, due to system complexity
and uncertainty, integrating learning-based controllers with
MAPF is challenging and cannot theoretically guarantee the
safety of the learned controllers. In response, our study proposes a verified safe multi-agent neural control (VSMANC)
approach for MAPF, focusing on the unified training of Decentralized Control Barrier Functions (DCBF) and controllers
to enhence safety. VSMANC enables all agents to concurrently learn controllers and DCBFs using a unified loss function designed to maximize safety, adhere to standard control policies, and incorporate path-finding-related heuristics.
We also propose a formal verification-guided retraining process to both verify the properties of the learned DCBFs and
generate counterexamples for retraining, thereby providing a
verified safety guarantee. We validate our approach through
shape formation experiments and UAV simulations, demonstrating significant improvements in safety and effectiveness
in complex multi-agent environments.

Introduction
Multi-agent path finding (MAPF) seeks collision-free trajectories for multiple agents moving from their initial to desired locations (Stern et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2024; Liu and
Zhang 2022). The importance of MAPF is clear in a wide
range of applications: multi-agent monitoring (Ondrácek,
Vanek, and Pechoucek 2015), cooperative delivery (Zong
et al. 2022), and multi-robot patrolling (Joe and Lau 2023).
Many methods have been developed to address the critical
need for collision avoidance in these contexts (Borrmann
et al. 2015; Cheng et al. 2020; Qin et al. 2021).
To address the collision avoidance problem in MAPF,
there are three mainstream approaches: (1) model-based
planning approaches (Chen et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2019),
which plan safe trajectories based on the system dynamics;
(2) model-free methods based on safe multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Gu et al. 2023; Melcer, Amato, and
Tripakis 2022), which impose safety constraints on MARL
and learn a safe neural controller through interaction with
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23369

