The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Reinforcement Learning in Probabilistic Reward Machines
Xiaofeng Lin, Xuezhou Zhang
Boston University
{xfl,xuezhouz}@bu.edu

Abstract

RM can fully specify the reward function. Hence, for an
MDP with RM, we can obtain an equivalent cross-product
MDP by leveraging the information of RM(see Lemma 1)
and applying off-the-shelf RL algorithms e.g., Q-learning of
Sutton and Barto (2018) to learn an optimal policy. However, as we shall see later, this naive approach will incur a
large regret.

In this paper, we study reinforcement learning in Markov
Decision Processes with Probabilistic Reward Machines
(PRMs), a form of non-Markovian reward commonly found
in robotics tasks. We design an
→ algorithm for PRMs that
achieves
a regret bound of !
O( HOAT + H 2 O2 A3/2 +
→
H T ), where H is the time horizon, O is the number of observations, A is the number of actions, and T is the number of
time-steps.
This result improves over the best-known bound,
→
!
O(H OAT ) of Bourel et al. (2023) for MDPs with Deterministic Reward Machines (DRMs), a special case of PRMs.
3 2
When T ↑ H 3 O→
A and OA ↑ H, our regret bound leads
HOAT ), which matches the established
to a regret of !
O( →
lower bound of !( HOAT ) for MDPs with DRMs up to a
logarithmic factor. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first efficient algorithm for PRMs. Additionally, we present
a new simulation lemma for non-Markovian rewards, which
enables reward-free exploration for any non-Markovian reward given access to an approximate planner. Complementing our theoretical findings, we show through extensive experiment evaluations that our algorithm indeed outperforms
prior methods in various PRM environments.

One limitation of the classic RM framework is that the
transition between the state of RM is restricted to be deterministic, whereas stochastic transitions are much more
common in practice, especially with uncertainty in the environment. For instance, suppose a robot working in a warehouse is tasked with managing a warehouse by performing
simple tasks of fetching and delivering items (as shown in
Figure 1). The robot starts at a charging station, navigates
to the item pickup location, collects the item, and then proceeds to the delivery location to deliver the item and receives
a reward. Based on past experience and pre-collected data:
there is a 20 percent chance that the item at the pickup location is not ready, requiring the robot to wait until the item
is ready, and a 10 percent chance that the delivery location is occupied, causing the robot to wait before delivering the item. The robot is rewarded only when it successfully collects and delivers the item in sequence. The setting
where the rewards can exhibit non-Markovian and stochastic
dynamics can be represented as Probabilistic Reward Machine(PRM)(Dohmen et al. 2022).
In this paper, we investigate RL in Markov decision processes with probabilistic reward machines. We formalize
the regret minimization problem within the episodic MDP
with PRM setting and introduce an algorithm, UCBVI-PRM,
a UCB-style model-based RL algorithm with novel steps
specifically tailored
→to PRMs. Our algorithm achieves a re! HOAT ) that matches the established
gret bound of O(
→
lower bound of !( HOAT ) for MDPs with PRMs up to
a logarithmic factor. Additionally, we present a new simulation lemma that characterizes the difference in policy evaluations between two MDPs with generic non-Markovian rewards. Based on the lemma, we design a reward-free exploration algorithms that can collect data with sufficient coverage to learn a near-optimal policy under any non-Markovian
reward in downstream tasks. Finally, we conduct experiments to showcase the efficiency of UCBVI-PRM.

Code — https://github.com/XiaofengLin7/UCBVI PRM

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning traditionally focuses on the setting
where the reward function is Markovian, meaning that it depends solely on the current state and action, and independent
of history. However, in many real-world scenarios, the reward is a function of the history of states and actions. For example, consider a robot tasked with patrolling various locations in an industrial park. The performance of robot is measured by how thorough it regularly covers different zones in
the park, which cannot easily be represented as a function of
its current state and action, but rather would depend on its
whole trajectory during the patrol.
One emerging tool to model such performance metrics is
called the Reward Machine (RM)(Icarte et al. 2018, 2022),
which is a Deterministic Finite-State Automaton (DFA) that
can compress the sequence of past events into one single
state. Combined with the current observation, the state of
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
18728

