The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Critical Forgetting-Based Multi-Scale Disentanglement for Deepfake Detection
Kai Li1 , Wenqi Ren2 * , Jianshu Li3 , Wei Wang2∗ , Xiaochun Cao2 ,
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
3
National University of Singapore
likai63@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {renwq3, wangwei29, caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jianshu.l@antgroup.com
2

Abstract

tion that the attribute features are forgery-relevant as long
as they do not impact the cross-reconstruction results. However, DCI (Liang, Shi, and Deng 2022) indicates that this
assumption does not hold in the intra-dataset scenario, and
the attribute features extracted by cross-reconstruction degrade the performance of the detector. We argue that this
assumption also does not hold in the cross-dataset scenario.
As shown in Figure 1, we compare the Area Under Curve
(AUC) metric of the original backbone (Ori) and that of
the cross-reconstruction decoupling framework (Dis). AUC
measures the model performance of binary classification,
with higher values indicating better performance. It can be
observed that it is difficult to guarantee that “Dis” is better
than “Ori”, whether in the intra-dataset (a, e, f) or crossdataset (b, c, d, f, g, h) scenarios. Moreover, we conduct
comparison experiments about the Equal Error Rate metric
in the supplementary material. Third, the attribute features
tend to overly capture specific artifacts in the training set,
resulting in suboptimal generalization.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel deepfake detection method with enhanced disentanglement capability. Our method is based on two key observations: i)
It is difficult to isolate attribute features that do not contain forgery-irrelevant information at all, but it is achievable to avoid forgery-irrelevant information dominating attribute features. ii) The specific artifacts in the training set
are more readily captured, thus exerting a more pronounced
effect during the training phase than general forgery features. Specifically, to alleviate the decoupling difficulty, we
employ an encoder to transform the image into feature maps.
Each map represents a specific facial aspect, like texture,
color, or edges. Then, based on our key observation i), we
introduce the Pearson coefficient in the decoupling stage,
considering both direction and magnitude to further separate forgery-relevant attributes from forgery-irrelevant content. This makes it easier for the decoupler to isolate the expected information. The classification loss and Pearson loss
force the forgery-relevant information to dominate the attribute features, and the forgery-irrelevant information gradually shifts to the content features.
Further, we extend the single-scale forgery representation
decoupling to a multi-scale one. Deep InfoMax (Hjelm et al.
2019) indicates that a complete representation of an image is
not necessary for classification tasks, e.g., we only focus on

Recent face forgery detection methods based on disentangled representation learning utilize paired images for crossreconstruction, aiming to extract forgery-relevant attributes
and forgery-irrelevant content. However, there still exist the
following issues that may comprise the detector performance:
i) using information-dense images as the decoupling targets
increases the decoupling difficulty; ii) the extracted attribute
features are reconstruction-irrelevant rather than forgeryrelevant, and single-scale forgery representation decoupling
cannot capture sufficient discriminative information; iii) the
generalization performance of decoupled attribute features is
poor as the detector focuses on learning specific artifact types
in the training set. To address these issues, we propose a novel
disentangled representation learning framework for deepfake
detection. First, we extract features by partitioning the dense
information within the image, focusing independently on texture, color, or edges. These features are then used as the decoupling targets rather than the images themselves, which
could mitigate the decoupling difficulty. Second, we extend
reconstruction loss from image-level to feature-level, thus extending the forgery representation decoupling from singlescale to multi-scale. Third, we propose a critical forgetting
mechanism that forces the detector to forget the most salient
features during training, which correspond to specific forgery
artifact types in the training set. Extensive experimental results validate the efficacy of the proposed method.

Introduction
Recent efforts (Liang, Shi, and Deng 2022; Yan et al.
2023) have been made to tackle the generalization challenge, which is caused by the discrepancy between training
and test datasets, by employing disentangled representation
learning. They first extract attribute and content features for
a pair of real and fake images, respectively. Then, an image is cross-reconstructed by using its content feature and
the attribute feature of another image, ensuring that the attribute features are forgery-relevant while content features
are forgery-irrelevant. However, some issues still exist that
need to be addressed. First, utilizing information-dense images as the decoupling targets increases the decoupling difficulty. Second, these methods are built on a strong assump* Corresponding authors: Wenqi Ren, Wei Wang.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

424

