The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SongGLM: Lyric-to-Melody Generation with 2D Alignment Encoding and
Multi-Task Pre-Training
Jiaxing Yu1 , Xinda Wu1 , Yunfei Xu2 , Tieyao Zhang1 , Songruoyao Wu1 , Le Ma1 , Kejun Zhang1,3 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
AI Center, Guangdong OPPO Mobile Telecommunications Corp., Ltd.
3
Innovation Center of Yangtze River Delta, Zhejiang University
Demo
Demo
{yujx, wuxinda}@zju.edu.cn, xuyunfei@oppo.com,
{kreutzer0421, wsry, maller, zhangkejun}@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract 
 

 


  

  

Lyric-to-melody generation aims to automatically create
melodies based on given lyrics, requiring the capture of complex and subtle correlations between them. However, previous works usually suffer from two main challenges: 1) lyricmelody alignment modeling, which is often simplified to onesyllable/word-to-one-note alignment, while others have the
problem of low alignment accuracy; 2) lyric-melody harmony modeling, which usually relies heavily on intermediates or strict rules, limiting model’s capabilities and generative diversity. In this paper, we propose SongGLM, a lyricto-melody generation system that leverages 2D alignment encoding and multi-task pre-training based on the General Language Model (GLM) to guarantee the alignment and harmony
between lyrics and melodies. Specifically, 1) we introduce a
unified symbolic song representation for lyrics and melodies
with word-level and phrase-level (2D) alignment encoding to
capture the lyric-melody alignment; 2) we design a multitask pre-training framework with hierarchical blank infilling objectives (n-gram, phrase, and long span), and incorporate lyric-melody relationships into the extraction of harmonized n-grams to ensure the lyric-melody harmony. We also
construct a large-scale lyric-melody paired dataset comprising over 200,000 English song pieces for pre-training and
fine-tuning. The objective and subjective results indicate that
SongGLM can generate melodies from lyrics with significant
improvements in both alignment and harmony, outperforming
all the previous baseline methods.

1

I

 

want to

One-to-One


  
know

One-to-Many

(a) Alignment



Limited Diversity



Lyric Intermediates Melody
Features
Features

(b) Harmony

Figure 1: Illustration of lyric-to-melody generation challenges: alignment modeling and harmony modeling.
1) Lyric-melody alignment modeling. Lyric-melody
alignment denotes the quantitative relationships between
syllables/words and notes, particularly the number of notes
mapped to a single syllable or word, which has a significant impact on the richness and singability of a song. Since
most existing works (Yu, Srivastava, and Canales 2021; Ju
et al. 2022; Lv et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022) only explore
the one-syllable/word-to-one-note (one-to-one) alignment,
few works consider the one-syllable/word-to-multiple-notes
(one-to-multiple) alignment. Bao et al. (2019) predicted the
number of notes corresponding to the given syllable with
a greedy alignment strategy. Sheng et al. (2021) utilized
sentence-level and token-level attention masks to achieve
alignment between word/syllable and note. However, these
methods usually suffer from low alignment accuracy, attributable to their indirect ways of learning the lyric-melody
alignment. Consequently, it is essential to introduce a unified
representation for lyrics and melodies that directly captures
the lyric-melody alignment.
2) Lyric-melody harmony modeling. Lyric-melody harmony refers to the qualitative relationships between syllables/words and notes, emphasizing their feature coherence,
which is crucial for the rhythmic and structural consistency
of a song. Ju et al. (2022) proposed templates which consist of tonality, chord, rhythm, and cadence, serving as a
bridge between lyrics and melodies to improve the harmony.
Lv et al. (2022) extracted key features from lyrics, including tonality, rhythm, chord, and structure, and leveraged
these features as the query to retrieve and concatenate pregenerated melody segments. Zhang et al. (2022) introduced
several rules about lyric-melody relationships from the perspectives of tone, rhythm, and structure, and integrated them
into the decoding step of lyric-to-melody generation models.
These approaches rely heavily on either intermediates (tem-

Introduction

Lyric-to-melody generation, which aims to automatically
generate melodies from given lyrics, has attracted lots of
attention from both academia and industry. When creating
melodies, capturing the complex and subtle lyric-melody
correlations is crucial. Previous works (Watanabe et al.
2018; Bao et al. 2019; Yu, Srivastava, and Canales 2021;
Ju et al. 2022; Sheng et al. 2021; Lv et al. 2022; Zhang et al.
2022; Ding et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024) in
this field have achieved great progress in capturing these correlations, but still encounter two primary challenges: lyricmelody alignment modeling and harmony modeling.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25742

