The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TEncDM: Understanding the Properties of the Diffusion Model
in the Space of Language Model Encodings
Alexander Shabalin1,5 * , Viacheslav Meshchaninov1 * , Egor Chimbulatov1 , Vladislav Lapikov1 ,
Roman Kim1 , Grigory Bartosh2 , Dmitry Molchanov3 , Sergey Markov4 , Dmitry Vetrov5
1
HSE University
University of Amsterdam
3
Independent Researcher
4
SberDevices
5
Constructor University
{amshabalin, vmeshchaninov, echimbulatov, vlapikov, rkim}@hse.ru, dmolch111@gmail.com, g.bartosh@uva.nl,
sergei.markoff@gmail.com, dvetrov@constructor.university
2

Abstract

class of probabilistic generative models that are able to iteratively transfer noise to a representative sample of data. While
some of the proposed text diffusion models are autoregressive (Lovelace et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023), the majority
of them are not and, by design, they have several advantages
over AR language models. First, being non-autoregressive
(NAR) models, they generate all the tokens simultaneously
and can adjust any part of the sequence during the generation
process. They also can be faster than AR models because the
number of neural function evaluations for diffusion models
depends on the number of denoising iterations rather than
the length of the sequence. And given the possibility of distillation of diffusion models (Meng et al. 2023), the number
of iterations can be greatly reduced.
To date, a number of text diffusion models have been proposed, each based on substantially new ideas with little overlap with other methods. Some works replace Gaussian noise
with categorical noise (Hoogeboom et al. 2021; Austin et al.
2021), exploiting the discreteness of the text domain. Others train continuous diffusion on token embeddings (Li et al.
2022; Lin et al. 2023; Gong et al. 2023), on text latent representations reduced in size (Lovelace et al. 2023; Zhang et al.
2023) or on the probability simplex (Karimi Mahabadi et al.
2024; Han, Kumar, and Tsvetkov 2023). There are also differences in the way diffusion outputs are decoded back into
text. Diffusion models trained on embeddings round their
predictions to the nearest embeddings, while those that utilize small latent spaces decode the predictions with an AR
model. This suggests that the scientific community has not
yet found the most robust design of a diffusion model for
text.
In this paper, we attempt to better understand the specifics
of continuous text diffusion models trained in the latent
space of token embeddings and identify best practices for
their development. We argue that the use of raw embeddings as latents is suboptimal, and that this approach can
be enhanced by first extracting context information from
embeddings with a language model encoder and training
a diffusion model in this latent space. We also investigate
several diffusion components in detail: text decoding meth-

This paper presents the Text Encoding Diffusion Model
(TEncDM), a novel approach to diffusion modeling that operates in the space of pre-trained language model encodings.
In contrast to traditionally used embeddings, encodings integrate contextual information. In our approach, we also employ a transformer-based decoder, specifically designed to incorporate context in the token prediction process. We conduct a comprehensive examination of the influence of the
encoder, decoder, noise scheduler, and self-conditioning on
zero-shot generation. Furthermore, we compare TEncDM
with previous approaches on three conditional text generation tasks: QQP, XSum, and Wiki-Auto. The results show that
TEncDM exhibits superior performance compared to existing non-autoregressive diffusion models.

Code — https://github.com/M0RJIQUE/tencdm
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19097

1

Introduction

Autoregressive (AR) large language models such as GPT4 (OpenAI 2023) or Llama 3 (Dubey et al. 2024) are the
current gold standard in the text generation problem. They
are capable of creating high-quality and coherent texts that
are practically indistinguishable from the human ones. However, the disadvantage of this approach is the inability of the
model to correct its own mistakes made during left-to-right
generation. If a mistake occurs, it may spoil the subsequent
text. In addition, the autoregressive method of token generation slows down the inference process as it requires performing a single model evaluation for each new token.
Diffusion modeling is currently the state-of-the-art approach for data generation in image (Rombach et al. 2022;
Podell et al. 2023), audio (Evans et al. 2024) and video
(Blattmann et al. 2023) domains. Researchers now attempt
to adapt it also for text generation (Li et al. 2022; Gong et al.
2023; Karimi Mahabadi et al. 2024). Diffusion models are a
* First two authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25110

