The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

POI Recommendation via Multi-Objective Adversarial Imitation Learning
Zhenglin Wan* 1, 3, 5 , Anjun Gao* 2 , Xingrui Yu3 , Pingfu Chao † 2 , Jun Song4 , Maohao Ran4, 5
1

School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
4
Department of Geography, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
5
Metasequoia Intelligence, Shenzhen, China
carlos@metaseq.ai, kalis1e7@gmail.com, yu xingrui@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, pfchao@suda.edu.cn, junsong@hkbu.edu.hk,
maohao@life.hkbu.edu.hk
Abstract

preferences and the most recently visited POI trajectories
(Sánchez and Bellogı́n 2022).
Deep-learning-based methods have proven to be effective in POI recommendations. Compared to original RNN
models, ST-RNN (Liu et al. 2016) and HST-LSTM (Kong
and Wu 2018) focus on capturing different spatial-temporal
features using recurrent-neural-network architecture. Recently, the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017a)
demonstrates powerful performances on sequential modeling, STAN (Luo, Liu, and Liu 2021) addresses the challenges of temporal relations in location-based applications
by leveraging a bi-layer attention mechanism. Furthermore,
graph-based deep learning (Liu et al. 2017; Xiong et al.
2020) helps to enhance the representation of POI data, and
some studies construct graphs to exploit the global transition
patterns for check-in interactions across different trajectories, such as GETNext (Yang, Liu, and Zhao 2022).
However, despite the previous success in modeling transition patterns and contextual dependency, their deeplearning-based methods largely rely on training data quality and completeness. On the other hand, we found that the
data quality of the POI recommendation task is problematic.
The statistics show that the average time interval between
two consecutive check-ins in the Gowalla Dataset is approximately 51.28 hours (Zhuang et al. 2024), suggesting severe
conditions of missing check-ins and incomplete trajectories.
Furthermore, the POI recommendation problem is further
complicated by the vast number of POIs and users, along
with extremely sparse data and pervasive noise (Liu and Wu
2024). Most existing methods struggle in this context because they assume the trajectory is noise-free and complete,
leading to a high risk of overfitting to insufficient training
data and being significantly impacted by noisy data. As a
result, the performance of existing work is likely to suffer
significant degradation due to poor data quality. Additionally, these works fail to integrate spatial-temporal factors involved in the attention mechanism.
To address the challenges of data quality in POI recommendation, we propose MOAIR, a novel framework
that combines Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
(GAIL) (Ho and Ermon 2016) with 3PO (Paralleled Proximal Policy Optimization) and a graph-enhanced spatialtemporal self-supervised learning module as its state en-

Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation aims to predict
users’ future locations based on their historical check-ins. Despite the success of recent deep learning approaches in capturing POI semantics and user behavior, they continue to face
the persistent problem of data sparsity and incompleteness.
In this paper, we introduce Multi-Objective Adversarial Imitation Recommender (MOAIR), a novel framework that integrates Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning with multiobjectives to address this issue. MOAIR effectively captures
user behavior patterns and spatial-temporal contextual information via graph-enhanced self-supervised state encoder and
overcomes data sparsity by robustly learning from limited
data and generating diverse samples. By accommodating diverse user patterns in the training data, the framework also
mitigates the typical mode-collapse issue in generative adversarial learning and thus enhances the overall performance.
MOAIR employs a multi-objective imitation learning architecture where the imitation learning agent (IL agent) explores the POI space and receives multifaceted reward signals. Utilizing the Paralleled Proximal Policy Optimization
(3PO) framework to optimize multi-objectives, the IL agent
ensures efficient and stable policy updates. Additionally, to
address the issue of high noise in POI recommendation scenarios, we use a novel generative way to define our policy
net and incorporate a variational bottleneck for regularization
to enhance the stability of adversarial learning. Comprehensive experiments reveal the superior performance for MOAIR
compared with baselines, especially with sparse training data.

Introduction
Nowadays, with the flourishing of Location-Based Services
(LBS), the next POI (point-of-interest) recommendation system has become an essential component in many spatialtemporal applications. These systems enhance the users’ experience by suggesting locations, such as restaurants, museums, parks, and historical sites, that they prefer to visit next.
Therefore, the objective of the POI recommendation system
is to predict the user’s next POI visit based on individual
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12676

