The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning to Collaborate with Unknown Agents in the Absence of Reward
Zuyuan Zhang1 , Hanhan Zhou1 , Mahdi Imani2 , Taeyoung Lee1 , Tian Lan1
1

The George Washington University
2
Northeastern University
zuyuan.zhang@gwu.edu, hanhan@gwu.edu, m.imani@northeastern.edu, tylee@gwu.edu, tlan@gwu.edu

Abstract

with such unknown agents poses significant new challenges.
Existing approaches like multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) (Spaan 2012) and transfer learning (Weiss, Khoshgoftaar, and Wang 2016) require knowing the shared reward
function. Similarly, and hoc teamwork (Mirsky et al. 2022;
Genter, Agmon, and Stone 2011; Papoudakis, Christianos,
and Albrecht 2021) and zero-shot coordination (Treutlein
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023) cannot support collaboration with
unknown agents if the reward is not known to the AI agents.
In this paper, we consider the problem of building AI
agents for Synergistic Teaming with UNknown agents
(STUN), in the absence of reward. This requires developing
novel algorithms without relying on the common assumption of a known shared reward to guide learning. Specifically, our goal is to train a team of AI agents to collaborate
with a given team of unknown agents, who jointly pursue
some collaborative reward that is not known to the AI agents.
We propose a novel framework that leverages active goal/reward inference and enables adaptive policy update following
the inferred rewards. More precisely, we develop a Kernel
Density Bayesian Inverse Learning (KD-BIL) (Mandyam
et al. 2022) to obtain a posterior estimate of the latent reward
of the unknown agents, from available observations/interactions history on the fly. The method is sample efficient and
eliminates the need to refit policies for each sampled reward
function by utilizing the kernel density estimation to approximate the likelihood function. Showing that KD-BIL produces unbiased estimates of the latent reward, we prove that
MARL guided by the inferred rewards can converge to an
optimal policy as if the true rewards of the unknown agents
were available.
Interesting, our analysis show that using the maximum a
posteriori (MAP) of latent rewards cannot ensure the optimality of learning collaborative policies in this STUN problem. We prove that obtaining an unbiased estimation is necessary to ensure convergence and optimality of the Bellman
equation. Based on this result, we utilize the inferred rewards from KD-BIL to support a real-time policy adaptation, by pre-training a family goal-conditioned collaborative
policies with respect to randomly sampled surrogate models. The family of goal-conditioned policies can be viewed
as a parametric policy class. Thus, real-time policy adaptation can be achieved without any online re-training or learning by directly using the inferred reward. More precisely,

With the advancements of artificial intelligence (AI), emerging scenarios involving close collaboration between AI and
other unknown agents are becoming increasingly common.
This requires sometimes training AI agents to collaborate
with unknown agents in the absence of a reward function
– which may be unavailable to the AI agents or even undefined by the unknown agents themselves – thus posing news
challenges to existing learning algorithms that often require
knowing the shared reward. In this paper, we show that effective teaming with unknown agents can be achieved in the
absence of a reward function, through actively modeling other
unknown agents and reasoning about their latent rewards
from available interaction/observation history. In particular,
we propose a novel framework that leverages a kernel density Bayesian inverse learning method for active reward/goal
inference and prove that multi-agent reinforcement learning
guided by the inferred reward signals can converge to an optimal policy teaming with unknown agents. The result enables
us to develop an adaptive policy update strategy, through the
use of a family of pre-trained, goal-conditioned policies, further eliminating the need for online retraining. The proposed
solution is evaluated using a wide range of diverse unknown
agents of latent and even non-stationary reward. Our solution
significantly increases the teaming performance between AI
and unknown agents in the absence of reward.

Introduction
Advancements in artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) are enabling more and more scenarios where
AI agents need to collaborate with other autonomous systems or humans, which may be unfamiliar entities (to the
AI agents) with unknown goals/preferences (Johnson, Vignatti, and Duran 2020; Dafoe et al. 2020), denoted as unknown agents. Examples include teaming with autonomous
agents that were built by other developers with unknown designs/parameters (Traeger et al. 2020; Albrecht and Stone
2018), or humans in a shared work environment with unknown intents/goals (Simmler and Frischknecht 2021; Behymer and Flach 2016). In the absence of a reward function
– which may be unavailable to the AI agents (in the first example) or even undefined by the unknown agents themselves
(in the second example) – training AI agents to collaborate
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14502

