The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal Specification Optimisation for the Event Calculus
Periklis Mantenoglou1 , Alexander Artikis1,2
1

NCSR “Demokritos”, Greece
University of Piraeus, Greece
pmantenoglou@iit.demokritos.gr, a.artikis@unipi.gr
2

Abstract

concepts, and thus cannot express a ‘meeting’ activity between two persons. Furthermore, automata-based systems
commonly model time implicitly (Giatrakos et al. 2020),
complicating the representation of the law of inertia. There
are also logic-based frameworks. MeTeoR extends a fragment of DatalogMTL with windows, but does not support
negation (Walega et al. 2023). LARS (Beck et al. 2018) is
a temporal specification language with several implementations (Beck et al. 2017; Bazoobandi et al. 2017; Eiter et al.
2019). LARS-based engines cannot express durative composite activity definitions, such as ‘trawling’.
The Event Calculus is a logic programming formalism
for representing and reasoning about events and their effects
over time (Kowalski and Sergot 1986); it includes instantaneous events and time-varying properties called ‘fluents’.
The Event Calculus supports durative and relational situations of interest, and a built-in representation of inertia. Several Event Calculus-based frameworks are found in the literature (Chittaro and Montanari 1996; Paschke and Bichler
2008; Chesani et al. 2013; Kafali et al. 2017; Baumgartner
2021; Arias et al. 2022). jREC, e.g., is a ‘reactive’ Event
Calculus dialect that supports data streams (Montali et al.
2013; Falcionelli et al. 2019).
The Run-Time Event Calculus (RTEC) extends the Event
Calculus with optimisation techniques for data streams, such
windowing, caching and indexing (Artikis et al. 2015; Mantenoglou et al. 2022, 2023), and has proven highly efficient
in real applications (Tsilionis et al. 2022). In RTEC, it is
possible to represent a situation of interest as a ‘simple’ or a
‘statically determined’ fluent. Simple fluents are defined in
terms of their initiations and terminations, and the law of inertia. Statically determined fluents are defined as Boolean
combinations of other fluents. While a simple fluent representation for such a Boolean combination is possible, it
is exponentially larger and more expensive to reason with
than the corresponding statically determined fluent definition. Therefore, whenever possible, a situation of interest
should be defined as a statically determined fluent.
Unfortunately, the knowledge engineer may not always
employ the most efficient definition of a fluent. For instance,
the engineer may be working on a knowledge base that was
developed for an Event Calculus-based framework that does
not feature statically determined fluents. In a legal contract
verification framework (Sharifi et al. 2020; Parvizimosaed

Temporal pattern matching tasks require the detection of situations of interest based on streams of symbolic events. The
Run-Time Event Calculus (RTEC) is a formal framework that
represents situations of interest as time-varying properties
called ‘fluents’. Temporal patterns often express ‘Boolean
combinations’ of situations; RTEC features two types of fluents that may model such patterns: ‘simple’ and ‘statically
determined’. A simple fluent representation, however, is exponentially larger and more expensive to reason with than the
corresponding statically determined fluent one. We formally
identify the class of simple fluent definitions that can be translated into statically determined fluent definitions. Moreover,
we present a compiler for the translation, and a reproducible
empirical evaluation on real applications.

Introduction
Temporal pattern matching involves the detection of situations of interest based on streams of symbolic events. In
composite event recognition, e.g., we need to reason over
streams of time-stamped, symbolic events in order to detect instances of composite activities (Giatrakos et al. 2020).
Temporal pattern matching requires a formal language that
defines a set of operators between events and determines the
syntactical form of the patterns defining situations of interest. These patterns often express ‘Boolean combinations’ of
situations, featuring conjunction, disjunction and negation
operators. In human activity recognition, e.g., we may say
that two people are meeting when they are close to each
other and one of them is ‘active’, i.e., moving her arms while
in the same position. Another way of defining a situation of
interest is through the law of inertia, i.e., the situation is initiated based on pattern satisfaction, and then persists through
time, as long as a pattern terminating the situation is not satisfied. In the maritime domain, e.g., we may say that a vessel
is performing a ‘trawling’ fishing activity if the vessel started
performing sharp turns in a fishing area a short time ago, and
has not left the fishing area since.
There are several frameworks for temporal pattern matching that employ automata. CORE, e.g., is an automata-based
system with highly efficient reasoning algorithms (Bucchi
et al. 2022). CORE, however, does not support relational
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15075

