The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CohEx: A Generalized Framework for Cohort Explanation
Fanyu Meng1 , Xin Liu1 , Zhaodan Kong1 , Xin Chen2
1

University of California, Davis
Georgia Institute of Technology
fymeng@ucdavis.edu, xinliu@ucdavis.edu, zdkong@ucdavis.edu, xinchen@gatech.edu
2

Lack of Robustness of Feature Attribution Methods
Many existing explanation methods in XAI, notably feature
attribution methods, face limitations regarding robustness.
The output can be sensitive to small perturbations in input
or model parameters, leading to unstable or unreliable insights (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018; Slack et al. 2020).
Some explainer would be produce biased output under simple transformations, failing to only capture relevant information for decision-making (Kindermans et al. 2019). A common practice to improve robustness in machine learning is
via bootstrapping - averaging the output of multiple weak
learners to reduce overfitting (Breiman 1996, 2001; Sagi and
Rokach 2018). A similar approach could also be beneficial
for XAI. By averaging the explanations on a group of similar
samples, we could reduce the noises in explanations, providing more stable, interpretable insights that account for patterns across relevant subsets of data.

Abstract
eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has garnered significant attention for enhancing transparency and trust in machine learning models. However, the scopes of most existing explanation techniques focus either on offering a holistic
view of the target model (global explanation) or on individual instances (local explanation), while the middle ground,
i.e., cohort-based explanation, is less explored. Cohort explanations offer insights into the target model’s behavior on a
specific group or cohort of instances, enabling a deeper understanding of model decisions within a defined context. In
this paper, we discuss the unique challenges and opportunities associated with measuring cohort explanations, define
their desired properties, and create a generalized framework
for generating cohort explanations based on supervised clustering.

Code — https://github.com/fy-meng/cohex
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13190

1

Faithfulness vs. Conciseness Global XAI methods provide one general explanation, but may not generalize well
on subgroups; local methods assign a specific explanation
for each data sample, but it is not concise and may not help
to understand the entire model. Cohort explanation methods
strive for a balance between the two, with the aim of creating
meaningful splittings of the feature space and assigning explanations to each cohort that generalize well within each of
the groups. Thus, the cohort explanation generates “contextful” information: the explanation of each cohort recognizes
that it can be applied to a limited region. This helps users
better understand the conditions that must be maintained for
the output explanation to be valid and to offer a more concise
and transparent explanation (Sokol and Flach 2020).
To illustrate this motivation, consider a simplified medical
patient classification task in Fig. 1a. The two features are age
and the fraction of family members with this disease. The
likelihood of the condition occurring increases with respect
to both features. The target model is a decision tree with a
depth of two. Note that we treat the decision tree as a blackbox, i.e. the explainer does not know that the model is a tree.
To generate cohort explanation to the tree, we can first
apply a simplified version of the counterfactual-based local explanation (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017).
We consider the importance of each feature as the minimum perturbation on that feature to change the prediction,

Introduction & Motivation

eXplainable Artificial Intelligence aims to improve the existing machine learning system by providing transparent explanations for model predictions and decisions (Arrieta et al.
2020; Adadi and Berrada 2018). The scope of explanation
refers to the degree to which the explanation provided is generalized. The scope, as defined by (Sokol and Flach 2020),
is usually (1) global explanation, which aims to explain
the target model comprehensively; or (2) local explanation,
which focuses on explaining the behavior in one instance of
model prediction. However, there is a less explored middle
ground, namely (3) cohort explanation, or sometimes also
called regional explanation, which generalizes the explanation on a subset of a dataset, a subspace in the model’s input
space or decision space. Cohort explanation can be seen as
a spectrum that generalizes both local and global explanation methods, where global and local explanations are at the
two extremes of conciseness and faithfulness. This generalization allows users to uncover patterns, biases, and contextspecific insights that may not be apparent when examining
individual instances in isolation or the model as a whole.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19440

