The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Rethinking Pseudo-Label Guided Learning for Weakly Supervised Temporal
Action Localization from the Perspective of Noise Correction
Quan Zhang1 * , Yuxin Qi2,3 * , Xi Tang1 , Rui Yuan1 , Xi Lin2,3 , Ke Zhang4† , Chun Yuan1†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, Shanghai, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
{zhangqua22, tangx24, yuanr22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {qiyuxin98,linxi234}@sjtu.edu.cn, kzhang19@suda.edu.cn,
yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Pseudo-label learning methods have been widely applied
in weakly-supervised temporal action localization. Existing works directly utilize weakly-supervised base model to
generate instance-level pseudo-labels for training the fullysupervised detection head. We argue that the noise in pseudolabels would interfere with the learning of fully-supervised
detection head, leading to significant performance leakage.
Issues with noisy labels include:(1) inaccurate boundary localization; (2) undetected short action clips; (3) multiple adjacent segments incorrectly detected as one segment. To target these issues, we introduce a two-stage noisy label learning strategy to harness every potential useful signal in noisy
labels. First, we propose a frame-level pseudo-label generation model with a context-aware denoising algorithm to refine the boundaries. Second, we introduce an online-revised
teacher-student framework with a missing instance compensation module and an ambiguous instance correction module
to solve the short-action-missing and many-to-one problems.
Besides, we apply a high-quality pseudo-label mining loss
in our online-revised teacher-student framework to add different weights to the noisy labels to train more effectively.
Our model outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method
in detection accuracy and inference speed greatly upon the
THUMOS14 and ActivityNet v1.2 benchmarks.

Walking Walking Walking Walking Walking

Blow-drying hair

GT

GT

PGT

Baseline
Many-to-One

Inaccurate Boundaries

Short Action Missing

Ambiguous Instances Correction
Mining High
IoU Proposals

CALA
Context
Baseline+AIC
Awareness

Missing Instance Compensation

Mining Low
IoU Proposals

NoCo

NoCo

Figure 1: Noise correction modeling for WTAL. NoCo introduces pseudo-label noise correction modules to address
the typical failures in existing WTAL methods.

temporal boundary annotations, hindering the widespread
applications of TAL.
To reduce reliance on instance-level labels, Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL) solely
based on video-level labels (Chen et al. 2022; Zhang and Qi
2024) has gained increasing attention. WTAL only requires
knowledge of which actions occurred in the video, without
the need for precise location information.
Existing WTAL works mainly follow per-category localization pipelines (Wang et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2022), using video-level classifiers trained on class labels (Narayan
et al. 2021) to filter each video clip. However, due to the absence of refinement mechanisms, these models attribute high
confidence to incorrect segments, such as background elements, leading to imprecise localization. Many studies (Liu,
Jiang, and Wang 2019; Liu et al. 2021a,b) attempt to address the disparity between classification and localization,
with a promising solution being the generation and utilization of pseudo-labels which benefits from utilizing clip-level
supervision instead of video-level labels. Existing works
(Yang et al. 2021c; Luo et al. 2020; Pardo et al. 2021; Zhai

Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) (Chao et al. 2018) is a
significant task in video comprehension, which aims to locate the start and end times of target action instances within
untrimmed videos and identify their categories. It has shown
great potential in tasks like intelligent surveillance, video
summarization, etc. Inspired by the widespread application
of deep learning methods across various fields(Chen et al.
2024; Zhang et al. 2024b; Lu et al. 2024b,a,c), temporal
action localization has widely adopted deep learning-based
approaches, which has sparked significant attention. Although the TAL problem has garnered much attention, current prominent methods often rely on costly, labor-intensive
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10085

