The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BERT-Based Code Learning for Exception Localization and Type Prediction
Chongyu Zhang, Qiping Tao, Liangyu Chen∗ , Min Zhang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing
East China Normal University
lychen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

can lead the system into chaos and make code hard to maintain. Therefore, good exception handling is the base of software quality and performance (Wang et al. 2023a).
To address these problems above, researchers have proposed various methods and techniques for exception handling. Among them, early approaches based on code static
analysis have achieved certain results. These methods can
effectively extract and utilize syntax features, then yield
favorable outcomes in exception handling. However, these
methods face challenges in computation and storage resources, which make it difficult to maintain their generalization and effectiveness when dealing with large-scale code
(Abdelaziz et al. 2023).
With the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) technology
in recent years, the AI-based approaches (Allamanis et al.
2018) have gained widespread attention in the field of exception handling. These methods demonstrate promising performance by learning from massive sample data (Niu et al.
2022). They also have the analysis capacity for large-scale
code (Li et al. 2022). However, most of them still have
room to improve the representation of static and dynamic
features from code. Additionally, the majority of these AIbased methods lack comprehensive consideration of contextual information surrounding exceptions and thus fail to fully
understand the environment and conditions in which exceptions occur (Henkel et al. 2018).
To tackle these limitations, this paper proposes a model
called CodeHunter for exception localization and type prediction. CodeHunter uses the BERT-based (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers) model (Devlin
et al. 2018) for code representation enhancement. Moreover,
in order to better capture the contextual information and
sequence relationships, CodeHunter utilizes the Bi-LSTM
(Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory) network (Zhou
et al. 2016), which serves as a sequence labeler for exception
identification and classification. Additionally, CodeHunter
incorporates code preprocessing techniques, to obtain more
syntax features, aiming for better model performance.
The main contributions of this paper are listed as follows.

Exception handling is crucial but challenging in program development. It needs to identify and handle all potential exceptions within programs to ensure system security and stabilization. Traditional exception handling relies on the expertise and experience of programmers, which often leads to
oversights. Therefore, identifying exceptional code and recommending handling solutions are hot research topics with
significant practical value. This paper presents a model called
CodeHunter for exception localization and type prediction.
The model first utilizes BERT-based model to represent code
features and then uses Bi-LSTM for sequence labeling to pinpoint exceptional code. Additionally, this model also considers contextual features of the exception code and learns
weights for the code within the try block and its context
through the self-attention mechanism. Subsequently, it performs exception localization and predicts exception types.
We conduct experiments on three different datasets. The results demonstrate that in the task of exception localization,
our model can achieve a maximum accuracy of 98.6%, exceeding SOTA baselines by 11.2%. In the task of exception
type prediction, our model can surpass the accuracy of SOTA
baselines by a maximum of 18.7%, achieving 92.0% Top-1
accuracy. The rationality of techniques used in our model is
also proved by the ablation testing. The model is implemented
as an IDE plugin for programming convenience.

1

Introduction

Exception handling plays an important role in software development, involving the anticipation, capturing, and handling of unexpected situations. An effective mechanism for
exception handling is to improve code reliability, robustness, and maintainability (Tufano et al. 2019). However, as
modern software systems continue to grow in complexity
and scale, it becomes very challenging to accurately identify the code that might cause exceptions (Liu et al. 2021).
In traditional software development, programmers need to
handle exceptions in manual ways based on their expertise and experience. However, it may cause some problems,
such as unclear exception classification, insufficient exception stack information, inconsistent exception handling, and
missing exception explosion. Improper exception handling

• We propose the CodeHunter model. For the exception localization task, it uses BERT-based model for feature representation and Bi-LSTM for sequence labeling to identify code blocks that may generate exceptions. For the
task of exception type prediction, it inputs the code be-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1040

