The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HHAN: Comprehensive Infectious Disease Source Tracing via Heterogeneous
Hypergraph Neural Network
Qiang He1 , Yunting Bao1 , Hui Fang2 * , Yuting Lin1 , Hao Sun1
2

1
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences and Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and
Economics, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
heqiangcai@gmail.com, baoyunting706@gmail.com, fang.hui@mail.shufe.edu.cn,
yutinglin857@gmail.com,2371308@stu.neu.edu.cn

Abstract

t=n

Green: S Red: I Yellow: R

Infectious diseases have profoundly impacted global health,
economies, and social structures. Effective disease tracing is
crucial for immediate public health responses and future prevention strategies. Traditional methods often focus on homogeneous networks, overlooking the diverse transmission
dynamics in heterogeneous populations. This research addresses two critical challenges: the heterogeneity of transmission across various media and modes, and the significant yet underexplored influence of community structures on
epidemic spread and tracing. We propose a Heterogeneous
Hypergraph Attention Network (HHAN) model that accounts
for multiple transmission pathways and patterns within heterogeneous networks. Specifically, HHAN integrates a heterogeneous graph neural network module to handle the complexity of communication among different populations, and
an Agent-Based Modeling Module that combines agentbased ideas to model individual behaviors. This approach
effectively captures complex interactions within community
structures and addresses individual variability. Experimental
results on three real-world datasets demonstrate that HHAN
significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in
tackling the complex challenge of tracing infectious diseases
in heterogeneous populations.

t = n-1
Green: S Red: I Yellow: R
？

？

？

？
？

？

: B-class node

: A-class node

: B-class node

？
？

: A-class node

Figure 1: Tracking node states in a heterogeneous hypergraph. Squares and circles represent two node types, with
green, pink and yellow indicating S, I and R states, respectively. Irregular circles denote hyperedges, while dotted lines
represent ordinary edges. In the right figure, white nodes
with question marks indicate unknown states.

nodes, while Luo, Tay, and Leng (2017) proposed to use the
Jordan center as a universal infection source estimator. However, these approaches impose strict constraints on information diffusion patterns, which are difficult to meet in realworld applications. To address this, various estimators (Yang
et al. 2020; Altarelli et al. 2014; Kumar, Borkar, and Karamchandani 2017) have been introduced to relax the constraints
from tree networks to general networks, while recent Graph
Neural Network (GNN) algorithms have also been developed to identify source nodes in various diffusion models.
However, these methods primarily focus on homogeneous
networks, neglecting the complexities of heterogeneous networks and the variability in infection rates among individuals (illustrated in Figure 1). These general approaches fail to
capture the need for precise, individualized modeling.
The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the challenges
of tracing transmission across heterogeneous mediums. For
instance, healthcare workers follow fixed activity patterns,
while the general public exhibits more random behavior, resulting in varying infection probabilities and heterogeneous
transmission groups. Although COVID-19 primarily spreads
through droplets and aerosols, environmental factors like
pollutants have also been linked to transmission in coronaviruses such as MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 (Kim et al.
2017; Cai et al. 2020). Additionally, the virus’s ability to
survive on surfaces for days (Kasloff et al. 2021) compli-

Introduction
Infectious diseases have profoundly impacted global health,
economies, and social structures, from the 1918 Spanish flu
to the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic (Ciotti et al. 2020). Effective tracing is crucial for managing public health crises and
preventing future outbreaks. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has exposed the vulnerabilities of global health systems in handling highly transmissible diseases. Information
spread is not limited to diseases alone; it also encompasses
phenomena ranging from social media rumors to viruses in
cyber-physical systems (Verma et al. 2023; Bobbio et al.
2023; Cheng et al. 2024), making source detection in fields
such as fake news and malware defense equally critical.
Traditional tracing methods often prove inadequate for
large-scale transmission. For instance, the shortest path
algorithm in the Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered model
(Chai, Wang, and Zhu 2021) identifies multiple source
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

291

