The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Neural Conjugate Flows: A Physics-Informed Architecture with Flow Structure
Arthur Bizzi, Lucas Nissenbaum, João M. Pereira
Instituto de Matemática Pura e Aplicada (IMPA), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
arthur.bizzi@impa.br, nissenbaum@impa.br, jpereira@impa.br

Abstract
We introduce Neural Conjugate Flows (NCF), a class of neuralnetwork architectures equipped with exact flow structure. By
leveraging topological conjugation, we prove that these networks are not only naturally isomorphic to a continuous group,
but are also universal approximators for flows of ordinary differential equation (ODEs). Furthermore, topological properties
of these flows can be enforced by the architecture in an interpretable manner. We demonstrate in numerical experiments
how this topological group structure leads to concrete computational gains over other physics informed neural networks in
estimating and extrapolating latent dynamics of ODEs, while
training up to five times faster than other flow-based architectures.

Code — https://github.com/arthur-bizzi/Neural-ConjugateFlows-AAAI

1

Introduction

The introduction of Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019) has
sparked interest in using neural networks to solve and discover differential equations. By encoding modeling into
“Physics-informed” losses, networks Nθ are trained to approximate solutions to differential equations:

d
Nθ (x0 , t) = F Nθ (x0 , t)
dt

d
⇐⇒ L(θ) =
Nθ (x0 , t) − F Nθ (x0 , t) = 0,
dt
where F : Rn 7→ Rn is a vector field, x0 ∈ Rn are initial
conditions and Nθ : Rn+1 7→ Rn is a θ−parameterized NN.
L(θ) denotes an equation loss relative to θ.
PINNs have since been applied to forward and inverse
problems across a wide range of domains (De Ryck, Mishra,
and Molinaro 2022; Patel et al. 2022; Mao, Jagtap, and Karniadakis 2020; Rao, Sun, and Liu 2021; Hasan et al. 2020).
Still, due to their black-box nature, PINNs struggle significantly with enforcing fundamental structural properties
of the solutions. Thus, it is often necessary to encode constraints into PINNs through the use of additional Physicsbased losses. These might include terms that reward proper
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15576

conservation of Hamiltonians (Mattheakis et al. 2022), Lagrangians (Cranmer et al. 2020) and symmetries (Zhang et al.
2023).
PINNs are specially notorious for their issues with causal
dependence on initial conditions, which manifest in the form
of incorrect initial conditions or non-physical convergence
to trivial solutions (see Fig. 1 for an example). Attempts
have also been made to minimize these effects with modified
losses, emulating causality (Wang, Sankaran, and Perdikaris
2022) or penalizing large gradients (Yu et al. 2022).
In contrast, few attempts have been made to tackle these
issues with new physics-based architectures. Indeed, the vast
majority of PINNs use general-purpose feed-forward architectures, such as the simple Multi-Layer Percetron (MLP)
(Cuomo et al. 2022).
A remarkable solution to these causality issues may be
found in the framework of Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs) (Chen et al. 2018). This approach is
instead based on modeling the derivative term of an ODE
with a neural network:
d
x = Nθ (x)
dt
This ODE may then be solved with numerical solvers, using
the adjoint method to calculate loss gradients.
This blend of neural and traditional methods leads to these
networks having the structure of a flow, which we detail
in Section 2. This leads to a solution that is automatically
compliant to initial conditions and that implicitly satisfies
causality and time reversibility, making Neural ODEs specially adequate for physics-informed contexts (Lai et al. 2021;
O’Leary, Paulson, and Mesbah 2022).
However, the applicability of Neural ODEs is limited by
the large computational overhead introduced by the sequential numerical solvers they are built upon. In particular, calculating gradients with the adjoint method leads to significant
slowdowns (Kidger 2022). Regularizing and optimizing this
process is an open problem (Finlay et al. 2020).
A computationally lighter alternative to Neural ODEs was
proposed in (Biloš et al. 2021). However, this approach comes
at the cost of the associative property of flows (see Section
2), leading to an incomplete group structure. In particular,
although this approach may lead to correct initial conditions,
it cannot enforce unicity or causality.

