The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Community-Centric Graph Unlearning
Yi Li1,2 , Shichao Zhang1,2 , Guixian Zhang3 , Debo Cheng4 *
1

Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education,
Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, 541004, China
2
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-Source Information Mining and Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, 541004, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 221116, China
4
UniSA STEM, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, Adelaide, Australia
liiyi.xsjl@gmail.com, zhangsc@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn, guixian@cumt.edu.cn, chedy055@mymail.unisa.edu.au
Abstract

et al. 2021) and recommendation systems (Fan et al. 2019;
Deng et al. 2022), has intensified the demand for effective
privacy-preserving techniques. Among these, Graph Unlearning (Chen et al. 2022b) has gained particular prominence.
Graph unlearning seeks to precisely quantify and remove
the influence of specific data within graph-structured networks while maintaining the integrity of the overall model,
thereby addressing critical privacy concerns in an era of expanding AI applications. A straightforward approach to unlearning involves retraining the entire model from scratch.
However, this method is highly impractical due to the substantial time costs and associated model downtime. Consequently, current research in unlearning has focused on developing techniques that reduce this time expenditure while
maintaining the model’s effectiveness (Said et al. 2023).
To achieve efficient and effective unlearning, researchers
have developed various strategies that circumvent the costly
process of full retraining (Guo et al. 2019; Izzo et al. 2021;
Bourtoule et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2022b). These unlearning frameworks are typically divided into approximate and
deterministic methods (Nguyen et al. 2022). Approximate
methods (Guo et al. 2019; Izzo et al. 2021) involve finetuning models to implement unlearning; however, they only
provide abstract statistical guarantees of privacy. In contrast, deterministic methods, the focus of this paper, involve retrospective retraining to remove data effects entirely (Yan et al. 2022). For example, the SISA (Bourtoule
et al. 2021) approach partitions data for selective retraining.
GraphEraser (Chen et al. 2022b), building on SISA, uses
balanced partitioning to ensure equal node distribution and
aggregates submodels using a learning-based method. Recently introduced, GUIDE (Wang, Huai, and Wang 2023)
enhances predictive performance by repairing edges before
aggregating partitioned subgraphs.
In summary, the prevailing deterministic graph unlearning frameworks (Chen et al. 2022b; Wang, Huai, and Wang
2023; Chen et al. 2022a) are primarily based on the Balance
Partition- Submodel - Training and Aggregation paradigm
(BP-SM-TA). The principal limitation of this paradigm lies
in its assumption that the unlearning operation can be decomposed into a set of discrete sub-problems, each with
its own global representativeness. This decomposition, however, sacrifices the connectivity between sub-problems and

Graph unlearning technology has become increasingly important since the advent of the ‘right to be forgotten’ and
the growing concerns about the privacy and security of artificial intelligence. Graph unlearning aims to quickly eliminate the effects of specific data on graph neural networks
(GNNs). However, most existing deterministic graph unlearning frameworks follow a balanced partition-submodel
training-aggregation paradigm, resulting in a lack of structural information between subgraph neighborhoods and redundant unlearning parameter calculations. To address this issue, we propose a novel Graph Structure Mapping Unlearning
paradigm (GSMU) and a novel method based on it named
Community-centric Graph Eraser (CGE). CGE maps community subgraphs to nodes, thereby enabling the reconstruction of a node-level unlearning operation within a reduced
mapped graph. CGE makes the exponential reduction of both
the amount of training data and the number of unlearning parameters. Extensive experiments conducted on five real-world
datasets and three widely used GNN backbones have verified the high performance and efficiency of our CGE method,
highlighting its potential in the field of graph unlearning.

Code — https://github.com/liiiyi/CCGU
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.09705

Introduction
As Artificial Intelligence (AI) permeates various sectors,
protecting individual privacy and data security has become
an increasingly pressing concern (Wei et al. 2024). Legal
frameworks, such as the “right to be forgotten” (Pardau
2018; Cofone 2020), alongside the rise of techniques like
membership inference attacks (He et al. 2021) have underscored the need for model providers to swiftly remove
specific data and mitigate its impacts. In parallel, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Li et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2024a,b) have gained prominence as a powerful
tool, renowned for their ability to model complex data relationships. However, their widespread application in areas
involving highly sensitive data (Zhang et al. 2025; Deng
et al. 2024), such as social networks(Qiu et al. 2018; Deng
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18548

