The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Discovering Conceptual Knowledge with Analytic Ontology Templates for
Articulated Objects
Jianhua Sun* , Yuxuan Li* , Longfei Xu† , Jiude Wei† , Liang Chai, Cewu Lu‡
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{gothic, yuxuan li, xlf2023, wjd kznwl, chailiang1234, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human cognition can leverage fundamental conceptual
knowledge, like geometry and kinematic ones, to appropriately perceive, comprehend and interact with novel objects.
Motivated by this finding, we aim to endow machine intelligence with an analogous capability through performing at the
conceptual level, in order to understand and then interact with
articulated objects, especially for those in novel categories,
which is challenging due to the intricate geometric structures
and diverse joint types of articulated objects. To achieve this
goal, we propose Analytic Ontology Template (AOT), a parameterized and differentiable program description of generalized conceptual ontologies. A baseline approach called
AOTNet driven by AOTs is designed accordingly to equip
intelligent agents with these generalized concepts, and then
empower the agents to effectively discover the conceptual
knowledge on the structure and affordance of articulated objects. The AOT-driven approach yields benefits in three key
perspectives: i) enabling concept-level understanding of articulated objects without relying on any real training data, ii)
providing analytic structure information, and iii) introducing
rich affordance information indicating proper ways of interaction. We conduct exhaustive experiments and the results
demonstrate the superiority of our approach in understanding
and then interacting with articulated objects.

−𝑙/2 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑙/2

𝑤: width

−𝑤/2 ≤ 𝑦 ≤ 𝑤/2

ℎ: height

−ℎ/2 ≤ 𝑧 ≤ ℎ/2

Parameters

Structure

𝑙

𝑤
ℎ

𝑙

𝐌𝐠 = 𝑓𝑖 𝑙, 𝑤, ℎ, 𝐌𝐠∗ , 𝑖 = 1, 2, …
𝐌𝐠 : gripper grasp pose
𝐌𝐠∗ : initial gripper pose
𝑓 𝑙, 𝑤, ℎ, 𝐌𝐠∗ : affordance grounding
functions with 𝑙, 𝑤, ℎ, 𝐌𝐠∗ as parameters;
……
Affordance (Grasp Pose)

𝑤
ℎ

𝑙

𝑤
ℎ

Rendering

Affordance

Figure 1: A brief schematic of AOT with cuboid as an example. Its structure delineates the cuboid shape, its parameters
determine the size and aspect ratios, its affordances can include possible grasp poses and its renderer draws specific
cuboid instances in 3D space. Here (x, y, z) refer to the coordinates in 3D space, fi (·) refers to a function that transforms the initial gripper pose to a grasp pose according to
AOT’s parameters, the poses Mg and M∗g are in the form of
affine transformation matrices.

On the other hand, we humans also come into contact with
a large amount and variety of objects in our daily lives. Particularly, even for objects in novel categories that an individual has never seen before, i.e. with no prior knowledge
at either object or part level, studies from cognitive and
brain science (Carey and Xu 2001; Scholl and Leslie 1999;
Leslie et al. 1998; Piaget 1955; Ullman 2000; Biederman
1987; Hummel and Biederman 1992) show that human intelligence is still able to find the essence of their geometric
structures and further rationally interact with them, relying
on fundamental conceptual knowledge. This finding establishes a possible way for machine intelligence to interact
with novel articulated objects from the conceptual perspective. However, little previous work has delved into this area
in the data-driven era.
Motivated by this idea, we seek to equip intelligent agents
with fundamental and generalized concepts, allowing them
to discover conceptual knowledge on articulated objects, and
finally enabling them to effectively understand and properly
interact with such objects. Particularly, these concepts may
include geometric ones like cuboid or ring and kinematic

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.11702

1

𝑙: length

Introduction

Articulated objects (Xiang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2022a),
composed of rigid segments interconnected by joints that enable translation and rotation movements, play an important
role in daily life. Learning articulated objects brings essential significance in a wide range of research area, including
computer vision, robotics, and embodied AI. Due to intricate
geometric structures and diverse joint types in articulated
objects (Xiang et al. 2020; Mo et al. 2021), it is challenging to interact with unseen articulated objects for machine
intelligence, especially for those in novel categories.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

14681

