The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Auto Encoding Neural Process for Multi-interest Recommendation
Yiheng Jiang1 , Yuanbo Xu1,* , Yongjian Yang1 , Funing Yang1 , Pengyang Wang2 , Chaozhuo Li3
1

2

Lab of Mobile Intelligent Computing, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
Department of Computer and Information Science, The State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
University of Macau
3
Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
jiangyh22@mails.jlu.edu.cn, yuanbox@jlu.edu.cn, yyj@jlu.edu.cn, yfn@jlu.edu.cn, pywang@um.edu.mo,
lichaozhuo1991@gmail.com
Interest
Scope

Abstract
Multi-interest recommendation constantly aspires to an oracle individual preference modeling approach, one that satisfies the diverse and dynamic properties. Fueled by deep learning technologies, existing neural network (NN)-based recommender systems employ single-point or multi-point interest
representation strategies for preference modeling, and boost
the recommendation performance with remarkable margins.
However, as the parameterized approximate function nature,
NN-based methods remain deficiencies regarding the adaptability towards distinctive preference patterns cross different
users, and the calibration over individual current intents. In
this paper, we revisit multi-interest recommendation with the
lens of stochastic process and Bayesian inference. Specifically, we propose to learn a distribution over functions to depict the individual diverse preferences rather than a unified
function to approximate preference. Subsequently, the recommendation is equipped with the uncertainty estimation which
conforms to the dynamic shifting intent. Along these lines, we
establish the connection between multi-interest recommendation and neural processes by proposing NP-Rec, which realizes the flexible multiple interests modeling and uncertainty
estimation, simultaneously. Empirical study on 4 real world
datasets demonstrates that our NP-Rec attains superior recommendation performances to several state-of-the-art baselines, where the average improvement achieves up to 13.94%.

Furniture

Electronics

Interaction
History

Recommender System
with Different Paradigms

Recommendation
for Next Item

1：

Neural Networks (NNs)
𝑓(𝑥)

Solely
Prediction

2：

𝑥
Learning a Parameterized Function

3：

Neural Processes (NPs)
𝑃 𝑓𝑥

4：

𝑥
Learning a Distribution of Functions

Prediction with
Uncertainty
Mean Variance

Figure 1: An illustration of how RSs process the diverse
and dynamic nature of a user’s preference with different
paradigms. NN-based methods focus on learning a preference function while lack the adaptability and uncertainty
estimation. NPs, learning a distribution over functions, can
generate the predictive mean and variance simultaneously.
deep learning technologies, modern RSs employ neural networks (NNs) to model preferences. According to the representation manner, existing methods can cast as: (1) Singlepoint Interest Representation (SIR) mode (Hidasi et al. 2016;
Yuan et al. 2019; Kang and McAuley 2018), which utilizes a
vector in the item embedding space to represent the interest
and recommends according to the affinity regarding items;
and (2) Multi-point Interest Representation (MIR) mode (Li
et al. 2019; Cen et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022), which utilizes multiple (e.g. pre-defined K) vectors to depict a user’s
diverse interests in the item embedding space, one for each,
respectively. During the recommendation stage, MIR is similar to SIR that makes predictions based on the similarity
between interest and item (Wu et al. 2023).
Albeit NN-based RSs have achieved satisfactory recommendation performance, either SIR or MIR remains limitations regarding the efficiency, adaptability and uncertainty.
Firstly, the limited expressive capability in SIR is hard to
cover a user’s diverse interests accurately (Zhang et al.
2023); in this view, subsequent methods scale up the embedding dimension whereas at the cost of efficiency inevitably. Secondly, the pre-defined interest quantity (or clustering threshold (Li et al. 2019)) in MIR restricts the adapt-

Code — https://anonymous.4open.science/r/NP-Rec-CF45

Introduction
In the era of information overload, recommender systems
(RSs) arise to assist users by profiling preferences, screening
irrelevant entries, and suggesting interested content (Jiang
et al. 2024a; Xu et al. 2024b). Individual preferences possess the diverse property and dynamic tendency (Wu et al.
2023; Jiang et al. 2024b). As illustrated in Figure 1, the interest scope of a user comprises electronics and furniture,
which alternatively generate the historical user-item interaction sequence. The dynamic nature lies in the observation
that the user’s current intent is shifting over time.
A necessary prerequisite for personalized recommendation is unraveling complex preference patterns. Fueled by
* Corresponding Author: Yuanbo Xu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11879

