The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Visual Perturbation for Text-Based Person Search
Pengcheng Zhang1 , Xiaohan Yu2 , Xiao Bai1 * , Jin Zheng1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Complex &
Critical Software Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
{pengchengz, baixiao, jinzheng}@buaa.edu.cn, xiaohan.yu@mq.edu.au

Abstract

The woman is wearing a red and
black plaid long-sleeved shirt.
Her shirt is tucked into her highwaisted denim jeans. She is
wearing a belt. She is wearing
black boots. She has medium
length light brown hair. She is
walking up to a parked car.

Text-based person search aims at locating a person described
by natural language in uncropped scene images. Recent
works for TBPS mainly focus on aligning multi-granularity
vision and language representations, neglecting a key discrepancy between training and inference where the former learns
to unify vision and language features where the visual side
covers all clues described by language, yet the latter matches
image-text pairs where the images may capture only part of
the described clues due to perturbations such as occlusions,
background clutters and misaligned boundaries. To alleviate
this issue, we present ViPer: a Visual Perturbation network
that learns to match language descriptions with perturbed visual clues. On top of a CLIP-driven baseline, we design three
visual perturbation modules: (1) Spatial ViPer that varies person proposals and produces visual features with misaligned
boundaries, (2) Attentive ViPer that estimates visual attention on the fly and manipulates attentive visual tokens within
a proposal to produce global features under visual perturbations, and (3) Fine-grained ViPer that learns to recover
masked visual clues from detailed language descriptions to
encourage matching language features with perturbed visual
features at the fine granularity. This overall framework thus
simulates real-world scenarios at the training stage to minimize the discrepancy and improve the generalization ability
of the model. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method clearly surpasses previous TBPS methods on
the PRW-TBPS and CUHK-SYSU-TBPS datasets.

(a) A image-text pair for training.
A woman with her hair
pulled back is wearing a
dark color shirt with
green feathers coming
down. She is holding
something in her hand.

(b) A positive image-text pair for inference.

Figure 1: Illustration of the discrepancy between training
and inference for TBPS. We use colored lines and backgrounds to highlight the matched vision and language clues.

person is unavailable. In many application scenarios, the language descriptions of a target person can be easier to obtain
than prior images. Therefore, exploring how to retrieve persons in scene images based on text descriptions is an important step in extending the capability of person search techniques for real-world demands.
To facilitate the development of TBPS, SDPG (Zhang
et al. 2023) proposes two TBPS datasets and designs a
vision-language alignment framework across global and
fine-grained person features. MACA (Su et al. 2024) jointly
performs global-level and attribute-level vision-language
alignment to learn unified multi-modal person features. The
text-based person ReID (Li et al. 2017; Ding et al. 2021; Zhu
et al. 2021) task is also closely related to TBPS. For textbased person ReID, recent works mainly attempt to incorporate pre-trained vision-language models (Jiang and Ye 2023;
Cao et al. 2024; Yan et al. 2023) and encourage fine-grained
vision-language matching (Yang et al. 2024; Suo et al. 2022;
Jiang and Ye 2023; Zuo et al. 2024) implicitly or explicitly.
Despite their advances, those works focus on discovering
and aligning multi-granularity vision and language features,
neglecting a key discrepancy between training, where the

Code — https://github.com/PatrickZad/ViPer

Introduction
Person search aims to recognize and locate a target person
among a gallery of raw scene images captured by different cameras. Existing person search tasks can be divided
into two categories, i.e. image-based person search (IBPS)
(Zheng et al. 2017; Xiao et al. 2017) that represents the
query persons by their images, and text-based person search
(TBPS) (Zhang et al. 2023) that presents only language descriptions of the queries. Despite the great progress in IBPS,
those methods are not applicable when the image of a target
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10058

