The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Prompt Engineering: A Reinforced Token-Level Input Refinement for
Large Language Models
Guang Huang1 * , Yanan Xiao2 * , Lu Jiang3 , Minghao Yin2 , Pengyang Wang1†
1
2

Department of Computer and Information Science, SKL-IOTSC, University of Macau, China
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
3
Department of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, China
{mc35324, pywang}@um.edu.mo, {xiaoyn117, ymh}@nenu.edu.cn, jiangl761@dlmu.edu.cn
Scenario Summary
In a cycling race, two par
ticipants are competing.
Competitor A finished in
3.11 hours , while Com
petitor B finished in 3.8
hours .

Abstract
In the rapidly developing field of automatic text generation
and understanding, the quality of input data has been shown
to be a key factor affecting the efficiency and accuracy of
large language model (LLM) output. With the advent of advanced tools such as ChatGPT, input refinement work has
mainly focused on prompt engineering. However, existing
methods are often too dependent on specific contexts and are
easily affected by individual expert experience and potential
biases, limiting their wide applicability in diverse real-world
applications. To address this problem, this study develops an
Reinforced Token-Level Input Refinement, called RTLIR.
We choose to optimize the input data at the fine-grained level
of tokens, cleverly preserving the original text structure. Operationally, each state is defined by the token set of the current text, and each action is a binary decision process to decide whether to retain a specific token information. The agent
automatically calculates and determines the selection probability of each token based on the current state, thereby optimizing the entire decision process. Through continuous exploration and learning, the agent can autonomously learn to
identify the key inputs that have the greatest impact on the
generation results and achieve refinement of the input data.
In addition, RTLIR is a plug-and-play, LLM-agnostic module that can be used for a wide range of tasks and models.
Experimental results show that RTLIR improves the performance of LLM in various input scenarios and tasks, with an
average accuracy increase of 6%.

Relevant Information
1.When the integers are
the same, compare the
decimal parts digit by digit.
2.The shorter the riding ti
me, the better the perform
ance.
Question
In the bicycle race, who
has a shorter riding time:
Rider A or Rider B? Who
finishes faster?

Prompt engineering 1
Please remove the irrelev
Ant text before answering
the question.+{text}
Prompt engineering 2
Please clear away the dis
tracting text before answer
ring thequestion.+{text}
Prompt engineering 3
Please eliminate the unne
cessary text before provid
ing your answer.+{text}
RTLIR
Relevant Information
1.When the integers are
the same, compare the
decimal parts digit by digit.

Answer
1) 3.8 is less
than 3.11
2) Competitor
B faster
Answer
1) 3.8 is less
than 3.11
2) Competitor
A faster
Answer
1) 3.11 is less
than 3.8
2) Competitor
B faster
Answer
1) 3.11 is less
than 3.8
2) Competitor
A faster

Figure 1: Examples of input refinement methods. On the left
side, we present the user’s input. The central section delineates the distinctions between our method and the other three
prompt engineering techniques employed to refine the input.
On the right side, the outputs generated by the LLM corresponding to the four methods in the central section.

However, a frequent question these models face is the presence of irrelevant information in the input data (Narayan
et al. 2022; Mining 2006). This not only consumes substantial computational resources and lowers processing efficiency but can also compromise the quality and reliability
of the output (Shi et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2024). In applications aimed at automatic text generation and understanding, low-quality input can severely distort the generated content, thereby reducing the actual utility and value of the
model (Shi et al. 2023). Therefore, effectively identifying
and deleting irrelevant information in input, and optimizing
the quality of input data, are crucial for improving the performance and practicality of LLM (Petroni et al. 2019).
Since the advent of ChatGPT (Achiam et al. 2023), its
powerful reasoning capabilities have made prompt engineering the focus of input refinement (Marvin et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2023; White et al. 2023). Through carefully designed
prompt text, the model can effectively refine and process
various inputs (Liu et al. 2023). However, despite the success of the prompting engineering in certain situations, it has

Code — https://github.com/Tom-HG/RTLIR.git.

Introduction
In the era of big data, large language models (LLMs) have
become a core technology for processing vast amounts of
textual information across sectors such as finance, healthcare, and media (Lee et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2023; Huang,
Wang, and Yang 2023; Yang, Liu, and Wang 2023; Nazi
and Peng 2024; Hadi et al. 2023). These models excel at extracting valuable information from complex data to support
decision-making and automation tasks (Zhu et al. 2023).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24113

