The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Operationalising Rawlsian Ethics for Fairness in Norm-Learning Agents
Jessica Woodgate, Paul Marshall, Nirav Ajmeri
School of Computer Science, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1UB, UK
jessica.woodgate@bristol.ac.uk, p.marshall@bristol.ac.uk, nirav.ajmeri@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

Hooker, and Donaldson 2021). Attributing ethics descriptively may lead to the issue of deriving an ought from an
is—just because something is the case doesn’t mean it ought
to be. Where existing norms or behaviours are unethical,
approaches that encourage cooperation through descriptive
facts thereby risk propagating unethical norms that reflect
what is the case, rather than what ought to be.
To mitigate the is-ought gap, we turn to normative ethics.
Normative ethics is the study of practical means to determine the ethical acceptability of different courses of action
(Woodgate and Ajmeri 2024). Normative ethics principles
are justified by reason in philosophical theory. These principles are normative in that they are prescriptive, indicating
how things ought to be, rather than descriptive, indicating
how things are (Kim, Hooker, and Donaldson 2021).
The principle of maximin—to maximise the minimum
experience—is a widely respected fairness principle in normative ethics advanced by Rawls (1958). Rawls states that in
a society with unequal distribution that is not to the benefit
of all, those benefiting the least should be prioritised. We hypothesise that creating agents that promote the emergence of
ethical norms, while avoiding the is-ought gap, is aided by
an appeal to Rawlsian ethics (Woodgate and Ajmeri 2022).

Social norms are standards of behaviour common in a society.
However, when agents make decisions without considering
how others are impacted, norms can emerge that lead to the
subjugation of certain agents. We present RAWL·E, a method
to create ethical norm-learning agents. RAWL·E agents operationalise maximin, a fairness principle from Rawlsian ethics,
in their decision-making processes to promote ethical norms
by balancing societal well-being with individual goals. We
evaluate RAWL·E agents in simulated harvesting scenarios.
We find that norms emerging in RAWL·E agent societies
enhance social welfare, fairness, and robustness, and yield
higher minimum experience compared to those that emerge
in agent societies that do not implement Rawlsian ethics.

1

Introduction

Social norms are standards of expected behaviour that govern a multi-agent system (MAS) and enable coordination
between agents (Levy and Griffiths 2021; Wright 1963).
Norms can be established through top-down prescriptions or
emerge bottom-up via interactions between agents (MorrisMartin, De Vos, and Padget 2019). However, when agents
are solely self-interested, norms may emerge that exploit
some agents for the benefit of others. Where ethics involves
one agent’s concern for another (Murukannaiah and Singh
2020), norms that result in the subjugation of agents are unethical. If agents learn norms by appealing to existing behaviours in a society without evaluating how ethical those
behaviours are, they risk perpetuating unethical norms.
Previous works on promoting norms that are considerate of others, such as Tzeng et al. (2022) and Dell’Anna et
al. (2020), appeal to individual or societal preferences over
values. Other works observe the behaviour of others to encourage cooperation: Oldenburg and Zhi (2024) infer norms
by observing apparent violations of self-interest; Guo et al.
(2020) learn contextual priority of norms from observing experts; Chen et al. (2017) imply norms through reciprocity.
However, approaches that appeal to preferences or existing behaviours to promote cooperation define ethical behaviour by reference to descriptive statements, which are
statements that express what states of affairs are like (Kim,

Contribution We propose RAWL·E, a novel method to
design socially intelligent norm-learning agents that consider others in individual decision making by operationalising the principle of maximin from Rawlsian ethics. A
RAWL·E agent includes an ethics module that applies maximin to assess the effects of its behaviour on others.
Novelty Operationalising Rawlsian ethics in learning
agents to enable explicit norm emergence is a novel contribution. RAWL·E goes beyond existing works on normlearning agents: Ajmeri et al.’s (2020) agents incorporate ethical decision-making, but do not involve learning.
Agrawal et al. (2022) address the emergence of explicit
norms, but optimise norms based on the sum of payoffs
received by other agents, which might be unfair for some
agents. Zimmer et al. (2021) and Balakrishnan et al. (2022)
operationalise Rawlsian ethics in learning agents, but do not
consider the role of norms. As a RAWL·E agent gains experience, it learns to achieve its goals whilst behaving in ways
that support norms which prioritise those who are least advantaged in situations of unequal resource distribution.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26382

