The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

QiMLP: Quantum-inspired Multilayer Perceptron with Strong Correlation
Mining and Parameter Compression
Junwei Zhang1 , Tianheng Wang1 , Zeyi Zhang1,2 , Pengju Yan1 , Xiaolin Li1, *
1

2

Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
zhangjunwei@him.cas.cn, wangtianheng@him.cas.cn, xiaolinli@ieee.org

Abstract

features (Zhang et al. 2020). The method only assigns a
certain weight value to the importance of the features and
adds the involved features. In the real world, there are generally explicit or implicit strong internal connections between
the characteristics of things, such as causal relationships,
strong statistical correlations, etc. Therefore, building a neuron layer that can mine strong correlations among features
is more conducive to capturing the real relationships between the characteristics of things, and then implementing
more effective decisions. In addition, machine learning models based on traditional neuron layers, such as deep learning
models and large language models, have huge parameters
that need to be learned and require a large amount of computing resources during the training process, which have become a bottleneck in the development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) (Lu 2019).
For mining strong correlations among features, researchers have not found a suitable solution to control the
strong correlation, so they try to learn a disentangled representation (Higgins et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2022) method
that is independent among features, thereby reducing the interference of strong correlations among features on downstream tasks. The most representative work among them is
the disentangled representation method based on the Variational Autoencoder (VAE), such as beta-VAE (Higgins et al.
2016) and FactorVAE (Duan et al. 2022). For reducing
the number of parameters of neural network models, researchers have proposed methods in recent years including
model sparsification (also called model pruning) (Zhou et al.
2021), model quantization (Zhou et al. 2018), knowledge
distillation (Gou et al. 2020), tensor decomposition (Rabanser, Shchur, and Günnemann 2017), etc., to achieve
model compression and reduce the number of parameters.
In quantum theory, multi-body quantum systems (Stasiuk
2021; Zhang et al. 2022a) can characterize strong relationships among characteristics of systems (Fetter, Walecka, and
Kadanoff 1971; Zhang, He, and Guo 2023), and this relationships includes not only statistical correlations in classical world, but also non-classical correlations in quantum
world (Holevo and Ballentine 1982; Zhang et al. 2024). In
other words, the formal framework of quantum mechanics
can describe the strong correlation between the characteristics of things. What needs to be emphasized here again is
that the strong correlation in this paper does not specifi-

Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) is a simple practice of Neural
Network (NN) and the cornerstone of research and development of deep learning. Each neuron is connected to all neurons in the previous layer and implements a non-linear mapping through activation functions. MLP can learn complex
non-linear relationships among features through the superposition of multiple hidden layers, but it still cannot discover
the inherent strong correlation among features. The reason is
that each neuron uses a simple weighted summation method
to organize all the neurons in the previous layer. Inspired by
quantum theory, this paper builds a non-linear NN layer that
can mine strong correlations among features based on multibody quantum systems, and then constructs a multi-layer perceptron, called Quantum-inspired MLP (QiMLP). It is conceivable that QiMLP will have important inspirational significance in reshaping machine learning, deep learning and
large language models. We theoretically analyzed the basis
for QiMLP to mine strong correlations among features, and
implemented experiments on multiple classic deep learning
datasets. Experimental results verify that QiMLP not only
learns strong correlations among features, but also significantly reduces the number of parameters with hundreds of
times improvement.

Introduction
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) realizes modeling of nonlinear relationships through non-linear mapping of activation functions (Popescu et al. 2009), and learns more abstract and advanced feature representations through the combination of multiple neuron layers, which can capture deeper
structures and patterns in the data (Murtagh 1991). Although
MLP is a simple practice of traditional neuron layers, it
has important application value and superior performance
in specific tasks (Kruse et al. 2022), and is the cornerstone
of research and construction of Machine Learning, Deep
Learning and Large Language Models.
However, the weighted summation method used by neurons in each layer to fuse the features output by neurons
in the previous layer makes it difficult to learn the strong
correlation (Jiang et al. 2010; Becke 2013; Ceravolo et al.
2021) and cannot capture the intrinsic relationship among
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22452

