The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MAMS: Model-Agnostic Module Selection Framework for Video Captioning
Sangho Lee1,2 , Il Yong Chun1,3 * , Hogun Park1 *
1
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea
Hippo T&C Company Incorporated, Suwon, Republic of Korea
3
Center for Neuroscience Imaging Research, Institute for Basic Science, Suwon, Republic of Korea
lsh3982@hippotnc.com, {iychun, hogunpark}@skku.edu
2

Abstract
Multi-modal transformers are rapidly gaining attention in
video captioning tasks. Existing multi-modal video captioning methods typically extract a fixed number of frames, which
raises critical challenges. When a limited number of frames
are extracted, important frames with essential information for
caption generation may be missed. Conversely, extracting an
excessive number of frames includes consecutive frames, potentially causing redundancy in visual tokens extracted from
consecutive video frames. To extract an appropriate number of frames for each video, this paper proposes the first
model-agnostic module selection framework in video captioning that has two main functions: (1) selecting a caption
generation module with an appropriate size based on visual
tokens extracted from video frames, and (2) constructing subsets of visual tokens for the selected caption generation module. Furthermore, we propose a new adaptive attention masking scheme that enhances attention on important visual tokens. Our experiments on three different benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly improves the performance of three recent video captioning models.

Figure 1: The overview of the proposed framework.

caption generation (Gao et al. 2023). Conversely, for videos
with little information, e.g., videos with little dynamics, if
frames are densely extracted, it could result in extracting
similar frames. Numerous studies have demonstrated that redundant visual tokens generated by a large number of consecutive frames can adversely affect performance (Liu et al.
2023; Liang et al. 2022). Our observations indicate that the
performance of existing video captioning methods stagnates
or even declines as the number of frames increases. We
conjecture that this phenomenon is caused by the fact that
existing methods rely on a fixed number of frames across
all videos. This study assumes in caption generation that it
could be more reasonable to vary the number of frames or visual tokens for each video, rather than to fix it for all videos.
To address the aforementioned issues, this paper proposes the first Model-Agnostic Module Selection (MAMS)
framework in video captioning that adaptively selects a caption generation module for each video, where each module
extracts a different number of frames. The proposed framework consists of an existing caption generator that uses all
frames, a smaller caption generator module that uses a subset of frames, and a module & token selector that selects the
appropriate generation module and tokens for each video, respectively. Figure 1 illustrates an overview of the proposed
framework. The process of the proposed framework is given
as follows. (1) We extract visual tokens from video with a

Introduction
The video captioning task generates descriptions for provided videos in natural language (Li et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2019). It has been rapidly gaining attention in blind navigation, video event commentary, human-computer interaction, etc. To improve video captioning performances, it is
pivotal to introduce multi-modal transformers (Sun et al.
2019). Many recent studies extract an identical number of
frames for different videos to use a consistent input size for
transformer-based models; see, e.g., (Chen et al. 2023; Yang
et al. 2023).
Selecting a fixed number of frames in existing captioning
models has critical limitations. For videos with abundant information, e.g., videos with large dynamics, if we extract a
limited number of frames, caption generation performances
can degrade (Lin et al. 2022). It may omit frames that encapsulate essential information for caption generation, potentially compromising the accuracy and completeness of
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4535

