The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Manta: Enhancing Mamba for Few-Shot Action Recognition of
Long Sub-Sequence
Wenbo Huang1 , Jinghui Zhang1 * , Guang Li2 , Lei Zhang3 , Shuoyuan Wang4 , Fang Dong1 ,
Jiahui Jin1 , Takahiro Ogawa2 , Miki Haseyama2
1
Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, Jiangsu, China
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0808, Hokkaido, Japan
3
Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, Jiangsu, China
4
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China
wenbohuang1002@outlook.com, {jhzhang, jjin, fdong}@seu.edu.cn, {guang, ogawa, mhaseyama}@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp,
leizhang@njnu.edu.cn, claytonwang0205@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Diving cliff ①

Running

In few-shot action recognition (FSAR), long sub-sequences
of video naturally express entire actions more effectively.
However, the high computational complexity of mainstream
Transformer-based methods limits their application. Recent
Mamba demonstrates efficiency in modeling long sequences,
but directly applying Mamba to FSAR overlooks the importance of local feature modeling and alignment. Moreover,
long sub-sequences within the same class accumulate intraclass variance, which adversely impacts FSAR performance.
To solve these challenges, we propose a Matryoshka MAmba
and CoNtrasTive LeArning framework (Manta). Firstly, the
Matryoshka Mamba introduces multiple Inner Modules to enhance local feature representation, rather than directly modeling global features. An Outer Module captures dependencies of timeline between these local features for implicit
temporal alignment. Secondly, a hybrid contrastive learning paradigm, combining both supervised and unsupervised
methods, is designed to mitigate the negative effects of intraclass variance accumulation. The Matryoshka Mamba and
the hybrid contrastive learning paradigm operate in two parallel branches within Manta, enhancing Mamba for FSAR
of long sub-sequence. Manta achieves new state-of-the-art
performance on prominent benchmarks, including SSv2, Kinetics, UCF101, and HMDB51. Extensive empirical studies
prove that Manta significantly improves FSAR of long subsequence from multiple perspectives.

❓

❓

❓

Falling

…
❓

Intra-class variance ❓

❓

They are
the Same ?

❓

…

Falling

Diving cliff ②

Swimming

Mamba

Figure 1: In two long sub-sequence examples of “Diving
cliff”, significant local features (highlighted as “Falling”)
occupy only small portions of the examples and are located
at different points in the timeline. Additionally, the frame
pairs from these examples exhibit large discrepancies in visual features. As the number of frames increases, intra-class
variance gradually accumulates.

of long sub-sequences in FSAR remains unexplored.
Mainstream Transformer-based methods (Vaswani et al.
2017) for FSAR are limited to processing short subsequences of around 8 frames due to their computational
complexity. Recently, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023; Dao and
Gu 2024) has been applied to various tasks for its efficient long-sequence modeling capabilities without adding
heavy computational overhead. Leveraging state space models (SSMs) (Gu et al. 2023), Mamba not only eliminates
the complex attention mechanisms of Transformers but also
flexibly manages the propagation and discarding of contextual information. However, the emphasis on global feature
modeling by data-driven training in Mamba is misaligned
with the extremely limited sample availability in FSAR.
Therefore, while applying Mamba to FSAR with long
sub-sequences appears promising, it still faces two inherent challenges, as illustrated in Figure 1. Challenge 1: The
absence of local feature modeling and alignment. Though
inconspicuous, some local features are crucial for accurate
recognition. In two examples of “Diving cliff”, the core local features associated with “Falling” constitute only a small
portion of the long sub-sequence, with the majority being
secondary features. Focusing on global feature by Mamba
often overlooks these critical local features, leading to po-

Introduction
Few-shot action recognition (FSAR) addresses the labeling
reliance in data-driven training by classifying unseen actions from few video samples. This approach is widely used
in real-world applications such as intelligent surveillance,
video understanding, and health monitoring (Liu and Ma
2019; Reddy et al. 2022; Croitoru et al. 2021). Long video
sub-sequences intuitively offer advantages in expressing the
entire process of an action, like “Diving cliff”, due to richer
contextual information. In contrast, shorter sub-sequences
may only cover partial actions, such as “Falling”, “Running”, and “Swimming”. Despite this, research on the usage
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3751

