The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cirbo: A New Tool for Boolean Circuit Analysis and Synthesis
Daniil Averkov1 , Tatiana Belova2, 3 , Gregory Emdin4 , Mikhail Goncharov5, 6 , Viktoriia
Krivogornitsyna2 , Alexander S. Kulikov6 , Fedor Kurmazov2 , Daniil Levtsov5 , Georgie Levtsov5 ,
Vsevolod Vaskin5 , Aleksey Vorobiev3
1

2

St. Petersburg State University
Steklov Mathematical Institute at St. Petersburg, Russian Academy of Sciences
3
ITMO University
4
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
5
Neapolis University Pafos
6
JetBrains Research
Abstract

This is the first step of integrated circuit design, a highly
important problem in practice. In Theoretical Computer
Science, this problem is known as the Minimum Circuit
Size Problem (MCSP): given a truth table of a Boolean
function and an integer parameter r, check whether the
function can be computed by a circuit of size r. MCSP
is arguably as important as SAT (Santhanam 2022).
Proving that a given Boolean function cannot be computed by a small circuit (that is, proving circuit lower
bounds) is notoriously hard. The number of functions
and the number of circuits (as functions of the number
of inputs) grow too fast making it infeasible in practice
to show that a given function on, say, 10 inputs cannot
be computed by a circuit with 40 gates. Moreover, currently, there are no methods that allow one to exclude
a possibility that every problem from NP has circuit size
at most 4n, where, as usual, n denotes the input size
(Find et al. 2016; Li and Yang 2022; Find et al. 2023).

We present an open-source tool for manipulating Boolean circuits. It implements efficient algorithms, both existing and
novel, for a rich variety of frequently used circuit tasks
such as satisfiability, synthesis, and minimization. We tested
the tool on a wide range of practically relevant circuits (computing, in particular, symmetric and arithmetic functions) that
have been optimized intensively by the community for the last
three years. The tool helped us to win the IWLS 2024 Programming Contest. In 2023, it was Google DeepMind who
took the first place in the competition. We were able to reduce the size of the best circuits from 2023 by 12% on average, whereas for some individual circuits, our size reduction
was as large as 83%.

Code — https://github.com/SPbSAT/cirbo

Introduction
Boolean circuits is a mathematical model with applications
in various branches of Computer Science such as Complexity Theory, Computer Engineering, and Cryptography. The
two most important related computational problems are circuit analysis and circuit synthesis.
Circuit analysis: given a circuit, check whether it possesses a certain property. A ubiquitous property is satisfiability (whether it is possible to assign 0/1 values
to the inputs such that the circuit evaluates to 1). The
corresponding problem is known as Circuit SAT. On the
one hand, many circuit analysis problems (such as logical equivalence checking and verification) are equivalent
to Circuit SAT. On the other hand, Circuit SAT is a generalization of SAT (satisfiability of formulas in conjunctive normal form) and many hard combinatorial problems are reduced to SAT via Circuit SAT. At the same
time, Circuit SAT can be reduced to SAT in a natural
way. This way, Circuit SAT shares a wide range of applications, both practical and theoretical, with SAT (Biere
et al. 2021).
Circuit synthesis: given a specification of a Boolean function, synthesize a small circuit computing this function.

New Tool
The focus of the this paper is on practical aspects of the two
problems mentioned above: we present a new tool, called
Cirbo, for solving a wide range of problems on Boolean
circuits. The tool implements a variety of algorithms, both
known and novel ones. The tool allowed us to win the IWLS
2024 Programming Contest.1 The goal of the competition
is to synthesize efficient circuits for 100 Boolean functions
(specified by their truth tables), in two bases, XAIG and
AIG. For each of the two bases, for more than half of the
functions, the circuits synthesized by our tool turned out
to be the smallest among the circuits produced by all teams.
Moreover, the datasets in 2024 contest were the same as in
2023, giving us a possibility to track the progress of reducing
the circuit size for these datasets. Table 1 shows the corresponding circuit size for a selection of datasets and highlights that in some cases our size reduction was as large
as 83%. Later in the text, we define all the functions from
the table formally, provide more statistics as well as detailed
steps that led to improved circuits.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11105

https://www.iwls.org/iwls2024/

