The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Proactive and Reactive Constraint Programming for Stochastic Project
Scheduling with Maximal Time-Lags
Kim van den Houten 1 , Léon Planken 1 , Esteban Freydell 2 , David M.J. Tax 1 , Mathijs de Weerdt 1
1

Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
2
dsm-firmenich, Delft, The Netherlands.
k.c.vandenhouten@tudelft.nl, l.r.planken@tudelft.nl, esteban.freydell@dsm-firmenich.com, d.m.j.tax@tudelft.nl,
m.m.deweerdt@tudelft.nl
Abstract

to uncertainties online. Proactive and reactive approaches
can be considered as opposite ends of a spectrum. Both in
practice and literature, it is often observed that methods are
hybrid, such as earlier work on the SRCPSP/max.
Hybrid approaches appear for example in the form of a
partial order schedule (POS), which is a temporally flexible
schedule in which resource feasibility is guaranteed (Policella et al. 2004). The state-of-the-art POS approach for SRCPSP/max is the algorithm BACCHUS (Fu, Varakantham,
and Lau 2016), although the comparison provided by the authors themselves shows that their earlier proactive method
SORU-H (Varakantham, Fu, and Lau 2016) performs better. Partial order schedules are often complemented with a
temporal network (Lombardi and Milano 2009), in which
time points (nodes) are modeled together with temporal constraints (edges). Recent advances in temporal networks with
uncertainties (Hunsberger and Posenato 2024) pave the way
for improvements in POS approaches for SRCPSP/max.
State-of-the-art methods like BACCHUS and SORU-H
use Mixed Integer Programming (MIP), whereas Constraint Programming (CP), especially with interval variables (Laborie 2015), has become a powerful alternative for
scheduling. This is evidenced by a CP model for resourceconstrained project scheduling provided by Laborie et al.
(2018). Additionally, a recent comparison between solvers
for CP and MIP demonstrated CP Optimizer’s superiority
over CPLEX across a broad set of benchmark scheduling
problems (Naderi, Ruiz, and Roshanaei 2023). These advances, however, have not yet been explored for SRCPSP/
max, despite potential applications. CP can be used for finding robust proactive schedules or within a reactive approach
with rescheduling during execution, which has been viewed
as too computationally heavy (Van de Vonder, Demeulemeester, and Herroelen 2007).
A proper benchmarking paper in which a statistical analysis is performed on the results of the different methods
for SRCPSP/max is lacking. Comparing different stochastic
scheduling techniques for this problem should be done carefully. Due to the maximal time lags and stochastic durations,
methods can fail by violating resource or precedence constraints. Therefore, not only the solution quality and computation time but also the feasibility should be taken into account. Fu, Varakantham, and Lau (2016) even criticize their
own evaluation metric and indicate that future work should

This study investigates scheduling strategies for the stochastic
resource-constrained project scheduling problem with maximal time lags (SRCPSP/max)). Recent advances in Constraint Programming (CP) and Temporal Networks have reinvoked interest in evaluating the advantages and drawbacks
of various proactive and reactive scheduling methods. First,
we present a new, CP-based fully proactive method. Second,
we show how a reactive approach can be constructed using an
online rescheduling procedure. A third contribution is based
on partial order schedules and uses Simple Temporal Networks with Uncertainty (STNUs). Our analysis shows that
the STNU-based algorithm performs best in terms of solution
quality, while also showing good relative computation time.

Code —
github.com/kimvandenhouten/AAAI25 SRCPSPmax
Extended version — www.arxiv.org/abs/2409.09107

1

Introduction

In real-world scheduling applications, durations of activities are often stochastic, for example, due to the inherent stochastic nature of processes in biomanufacturing. At
the same time, hard constraints must be satisfied: e.g. once
fermentation starts, a cooling procedure must start at least
(minimal time lag) 10 and at most (maximal time lag)
30 minutes later. The combination of maximal time lags and
stochastic durations is especially tricky: a delay in duration
can cause a violation of a maximal time lag when a resource
becomes available later than expected. Such constraints are
reflected in the Stochastic Resource-Constrained Project
Scheduling Problem with Time Lags (SRCPSP/max). This
problem has been an important focus of research due to
its practical relevance and the computational challenge it
presents, as finding a feasible solution is NP-hard (Bartusch,
Möhring, and Radermacher 1988).
Broadly speaking, there are two main schools of thought
regarding solution approaches for stochastic scheduling
in the literature: 1) proactive scheduling and 2) reactive
scheduling. The main goal of proactive scheduling is to find
a robust schedule offline, whereas reactive approaches adapt
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26534

