The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Asymptotic Optimality of Confidence Interval Based Algorithms for Fixed
Confidence MABs
Kushal Kejriwal, Nikhil Karamchandani, Jayakrishnan Nair
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India
kushalk333@gmail.com, {nikhilk, jayakrishnan.nair}@ee.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

UCB (Audibert, Bubeck, and Munos 2010), and LUCB
(Kalyanakrishnan et al. 2012), (Kaufmann and Kalyanakrishnan 2013); see (Jamieson and Nowak 2014) for a survey.
These algorithms maintain confidence intervals on the mean
reward of each arm (which are constructed using suitable
concentration inequalities); these confidence intervals are
used to determine which arm to sample next, and/or when
to terminate. Upper bounds on the sample complexity (i.e.,
the number of pulls made until termination) of these algorithms tend to be loose (and typically contain logarithmic
factors that do not arise in any known lower bounds). As a
result, sample complexity upper bounds for confidence interval based algorithms typically do not admit a direct comparison with information theoretic lower bounds.
On the other hand, GLR based algorithms, including the
celebrated Track & Stop algorithm (Garivier and Kaufmann
2016), the Transport Cost Balancing algorithm (Mukherjee and Tajer 2023a; Jourdan et al. 2022), and top-two
algorithms (Mukherjee and Tajer 2023b; Bandyopadhyay,
Juneja, and Agrawal 2024) use likelihood ratios to define
stopping rules. These algorithms, which sample arms in a
manner that seeks to track the optimal pull fractions suggested by the information theoretic lower bound, are analysed for sample complexity in the asymptotic regime δ ↓ 0.
This asymptotic regime typically admits an exact characterization of the scaling of the sample complexity (including
multiplicative constants). Moreover, such a scaling enables
a direct (asymptotic) comparison between sample complexity upper bounds and information theoretic lower bounds.
In this paper, we perform an asymptotic (as δ ↓ 0) analysis of confidence interval based algorithms. Specifically, we
consider the classical LUCB (Kalyanakrishnan et al. 2012),
which is the state of the art algorithm in the space of confidence interval based algorithms, and analyse its sample
complexity in the asymptotic regime as δ ↓ 0. We show
that the sample complexity as well as the pull fractions (i.e.,
the fraction of pulls each arm has received) under LUCB
admit, asymptotically, a clean and interpretable characterization. Moreover, our asymptotic sample complexity bound
for LUCB admits a direct comparison with the available
(algorithm-agnostic) lower bounds. This shows that the performance of LUCB is (asymptotically) within a known constant factor of the lower bound; such a strong optimality assertion is not available in the literature for confidence inter-

In this work, we address the challenge of identifying the optimal arm in a stochastic multi-armed bandit scenario with
the minimum number of arm pulls, given a predefined error probability in a fixed confidence setting. Our focus is
on examining the asymptotic behavior of sample complexity and the distribution of arm weights upon termination, as
the error threshold is scaled to zero, under confidence-interval
based algorithms. Specifically, we analyze the asymptotic
sample complexity and termination weight fractions for the
well-known LUCB algorithm, and introduce a new variant,
the LUCB Greedy algorithm. We demonstrate that the upper bounds on the sample complexities for both algorithms
are asymptotically within a constant factor of the established
lower bounds.

1

Introduction

The best arm identification (BAI) problem is a classical construct in multi-armed bandits (MABs), where the goal of
the learner is to identify the best among a finite basket of
arms. Each arm is associated with an apriori unknown reward distribution, and the learner can obtain a sample from
the reward distribution of any arm by ‘pulling’ it. BAI is
relevant in a variety of applications, including clinical trials (Thananjeyan et al. 2021), crowdsourcing (Didwania,
Nair, and Hemachandra 2022), recommendation systems
(Yao et al. 2022), and and Monte Carlo tree search (Kaufmann and Koolen 2017).
In the fixed confidence BAI problem, the learner must
identify the best arm, defined as the one with the highest
mean reward, such that the probability of mis-identification
(a.k.a., error) is at most a prescribed threshold δ. A learning
algorithm that satisfies this property is said to be sound, and
one seeks to design sound algorithms that make the fewest
number of pulls (on average). There are broadly, two types
of algorithms for fixed confidence BAI:
(i) confidence interval based algorithms, and
(ii) algorithms based on generalized likelihood ratio (GLR)
tests.
The former category includes algorithms such as Action Elimination, (Even-Dar, Mannor, and Mansour 2006),
UGapE (Gabillon, Ghavamzadeh, and Lazaric 2012),
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17814

