The +
Thirty-Ninth
Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-25)
Input=Source Image
Target AAAI
Scanpath
Output=Enahnced
Image

Source Scanpath

Target Scanpath-Guided 360-Degree
Image
Enhancement
Enhanced
Scanpath
Start gaze point:

Yujia Wang, Fang-Lue Zhang* , Neil A. Dodgson
Victoria University ofMore
Wellington, New Zealand
{yujia.wang, fanglue.zhang,
neil.dodgson}@vuw.ac.nz
similar

Abstract

+

Predict in fields such as vir360° images have wide applications
tual reality and user experience design. Our goal is to adjust these images to guide users’ visual attention. To achieve
this, we present a novel task: target scanpath-guided
360° imSource Scanpath
age enhancement, which aims to enhance 360° images based
on user-specified target scanpaths. We Start
develop
a Progresgaze point:
sive Scanpath-Guided Enhancement Method
(PSEM)
End gaze
point: to address this problem through three stages. In
the first
Trajectory
: stage, we
propose a Time-Alignment and Spatial Similarity Clustering
(TASSC) algorithm that accounts for the spherical nature of
360-degree images and
the temporal
dependency of scanpaths
Output=Enhanced
Image
to generate representative scanpaths. In the second stage, we
Predict
learn the differences between the source and the target scanpaths and select the objects to be edited based on these differEnhanced
Image a Dual-Stream Scanpath Difences. Particularly,
we propose
ference Encoder (DSDE) embedded into the Segment Anything Model (SAM) network for object mask generation. Finally, we employ a Stable Diffusion network fine-tuned with
LoRA technology to produce the final enhanced image. Additionally, we design special loss functions to supervise the
training of the second and third stages. Experimental results have demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach for
scanpath-guided 360-degree image enhancement.

Source Image

Target Scanpath

Enhanced Image

Figure 1: Target Scanpath-guided 360° Image Enhancement

Compared to visual attention models that focus solely
on the spatial positions of gaze points, such as salient regions (Hu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2023)
and fixation points (Deng et al. 2024; Qiao et al. 2020), scanpaths represent a more complex and precise visual pattern,
as they also reflect the temporal order of gaze points. Therefore, scanpath-guided image enhancement introduces new
challenges that existing saliency-guided image enhancement methods do not encounter (Jiang et al. 2021; Miangoleh et al. 2023; Mejjati et al. 2020). Firstly, since different individuals produce diverse scanpaths in the same 360◦
scene (Martin et al. 2022), we need to explore how to describe the source scene’s visual attention pattern to compare
it with the target scanpath. Secondly, modeling the relationship between the 360° content and the spatio-temporal differences of the source and the target scanpaths poses a new
challenge that cannot be trivially addressed by any existing models. Finally, despite the impressive recent progress
in 2D image generation achieved by diffusion models and
their variants (Rombach et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2023; Zhang,
Rao, and Agrawala 2023), these models cannot be directly
applied to generate enhanced, realistic 360° images.
In this research, we propose a Progressive ScanpathGuided Enhancement Method (PSEM) to address the above
challenges. Our method consists of three stages, each focusing on specific sub-tasks to improve model interpretability
and robustness (Shen et al. 2023). In the first stage, we estimate multiple diverse scanpaths from the source image and
develop a clustering method to identify the most representative scanpath, which describes the visual attention pattern
of the source image. Considering the temporal dependency
of scanpaths and the spherical nature of 360◦ images, we
combine Fast Dynamic Time Warping (FastDTW) (Froese
et al. 2023) and Great Circle Distance (GCD) (Gava et al.
2023) to cluster scanpaths of 360◦ images. In the second

Introduction
When users view 360° images in an immersive environment,
their gaze movements form trajectories known as scanpaths.
These scanpaths reflect the dynamic changes in users’ visual attention over time, capturing both the spatial distribution of gaze points and the temporal sequence of fixations (Sui et al. 2023). In 360° environments, viewers often
get lost in information-rich scenes captured from the real
world. This may cause them to miss critical content and fail
to capture important information promptly, thereby affecting scene comprehension and degrading the quality of the
user experience. Therefore, we propose a novel task: target
scanpath-guided 360◦ image enhancement as shown in Figure 1, aiming to edit the content of 360° images to guide
users’ visual attention and enhance scene perceptual quality.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8169

