The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CDTR: Semantic Alignment for Video Moment Retrieval Using
Concept Decomposition Transformer
Ran Ran1 , Jiwei Wei1 * , Xiangyi Cai1 , Xiang Guan1 , Jie Zou1 , Yang Yang1 , Heng Tao Shen1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
ranran@std.uestc.edu.cn, mathematic6@gmail.com, caixiangyi@std.uestc.edu.cn, duochuan.gx@gmail.com,
{jie.zou, yang.yang}@uestc.edu.cn, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

moment
1

Concept Space
Alignment

...

Concept
Decomposition

Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) involves locating specific
moments within a video based on natural language queries.
However, existing VMR methods that employ various strategies for cross-modal alignment still face challenges such as
limited understanding of fine-grained semantics, semantic
overlap, and sparse constraints. To address these limitations,
we propose a novel Concept Decomposition Transformer
(CDTR) model for VMR. CDTR introduces a semantic concept decomposition module that disentangles video moments
and sentence queries into concept representations, reflecting
the relevance between various concepts and capturing finegrained semantics which is crucial for cross-modal matching. These decomposed concept representations are then used
as pseudo-labels, determined as positive or negative samples
by adaptive concept-specific thresholds. Subsequently, finegrained concept alignment is performed in video intra-modal
and textual-visual cross-modal, aligning different conceptual
components within features, enhancing the model’s ability to
distinguish fine-grained semantics, and alleviating issues related to semantic overlap and sparse constraints. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the CDTR,
outperforming state-of-the-art methods on three widely used
datasets: QVHighlights, Charades-STA, and TACoS.

Concept
Decomposition

Abstract

...

Video

Concept
Decomposition

moment
2

Video Intra-modal

Query: Teen
girl drives
her car.

Pull

...

Push
moment 1

Textual-visual Cross-modal

Pseudo label
...

woman

...
garden

...

Query: Woman
walks in a garden.

...

...

moment 2
Fine-grained Concept Alignment

Figure 1: Video and query are decomposed into concept representations, indicating concept relevance. Annotated data
facilitates concept space alignment. By using concept representations as pseudo-labels, fine-grained concept alignment
is achieved by aligning the conceptual components within
the video intra-modal and textual-visual cross-modal spaces.

Introduction
Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) refers to the task of locating specific moments within a video based on natural language queries (Gao et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2022).
Specifically, given a query describing a moment within an
untrimmed video, VMR aims to determine the start and end
timestamps of relevant video moments (Qu et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2024a; Moon et al. 2023b). This challenging and meaningful task in the field of video understanding requires accurate comprehension of both the video content and the language query, as well as the alignment of their representations in a cross-modal space (Wang et al. 2022; Liu et al.
2024; Zhu et al. 2022).
Existing VMR methods employ various strategies for
cross-modal alignment (Wei et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2022a;
Qi et al. 2024). Some approaches suggest video moments

and extract features at the moment-level, aligning them with
sentence-level query features and using ranking structures
to identify the best-matched moments (Wang et al. 2022; Li
et al. 2023; Ning et al. 2021). Other approaches use cliplevel video features and word-level query features for crossmodal interaction, followed by predicting the video moments through prediction heads (Mun, Cho, and Han 2020;
Liu, Qu, and Hu 2022) or transformer decoder based on
DETR (Jang et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024).
Despite significant advancements, these methods still face
several challenges. Firstly, due to the complexity of cross-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6684

