The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards Learnable Anchor for Deep Multi-View Clustering
Bocheng Wang1 , Chusheng Zeng1 , Mulin Chen1 * , Xuelong Li2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom, China
wangbocheng@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, zcs@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, chenmulin@nwpu.edu.cn, xuelong li@ieee.org

Abstract

mitigate the inter-view conflict and perceive multi-view consistency, many representation alignment strategies are leveraged, such as contrastive learning (Xu et al. 2022b; Hu et al.
2023), and label distribution alignment (Cheng et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2024). Overall, most deep MVC
models emphasize the discriminability of the output embedding to improve clustering.
Recently, some works integrate the graph learning theory
into deep MVC, which considers the structure relationship
between samples while learning the discriminative embedding (Yang et al. 2023; Yan et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024).
These novel models capture the topological structure by constructing a data similarity graph, and thus optimizing representation learning based on graph data mining techniques,
such as graph convolution network and structure preservation scheme (Wang et al. 2023b; Xiao et al. 2023). These
methods usually require computing the edge weights between any two samples to build a full sample graph, which
leads to costly time complexity O(n2 ) where n is the amount
of samples. One theoretical solution to this problem is anchor graph learning that can accelerate the training to linear
time w.r.t. n (Dong et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2023). The performance of anchor graph learning and final clustering heavily
depends on the anchor quality. However, most deep models
employ non-differentiable manual procedures (e.g., random
selection and k-means) to determine the final anchors, which
means the anchors are not learnable. Ideally, each sample
should be represented by a certain anchor, and the anchors
should reflect the cluster distribution. If the selected anchors
cannot represent the original samples and cluster centroids
well, the clustering result may be adversely affected.
To remedy the problems, we establish the Deep Multiview Anchor Clustering (DMAC) model. As shown in Fig.
1, the pipeline of DMAC can be partitioned into three main
items. Firstly, the positive-incentive perturbation is injected
into the initial anchors to yield a learnable mechanism for
the anchors. Then, anchor graph convolution is used to produce the cluster indicator of anchors for each view, and the
cross-view agreement is obtained by the proposed mutual
information maximization loss. Finally, the learned anchors
are leveraged to reveal the structural relationship between
samples to impel a discriminative embedding. The key contributions of this paper are listed as follows.

Deep multi-view clustering incorporating graph learning has
presented tremendous potential. Most methods encounter
costly square time consumption w.r.t. data size. Theoretically,
anchor-based graph learning can alleviate this limitation, but
related deep models mainly rely on manual discretization approaches to select anchors, which indicates that 1) the anchors
are fixed during model training and 2) they may deviate from
the true cluster distribution. Consequently, the unreliable anchors may corrupt clustering results. In this paper, we propose
the Deep Multi-view Anchor Clustering (DMAC) model that
performs clustering in linear time. Concretely, the initial anchors are intervened by the positive-incentive noise sampled
from Gaussian distribution, such that they can be optimized
with a newly designed anchor learning loss, which promotes a
clear relationship between samples and anchors. Afterwards,
anchor graph convolution is devised to model the cluster
structure formed by the anchors, and the mutual information
maximization loss is built to provide cross-view clustering
guidance. In this way, the learned anchors can better represent clusters. With the optimal anchors, the full sample graph
is calculated to derive a discriminative embedding for clustering. Extensive experiments on several datasets demonstrate
the superior performance and efficiency of DMAC compared
to state-of-the-art competitors.

Introduction
In real-world data acquisition, a sample is often recorded
from different views or sources (Cui et al. 2024), constituting multi-view data. For instance, an image can be distilled
by multiple feature descriptors (e.g., color, shape, and spatial relation), and a document can be interpreted from multiple perspectives (e.g., topic distribution, word sequence, and
word frequency). To adapt to the actual application environment, many types of unsupervised Multi-View Clustering
(MVC) have emerged. Among them, deep MVC incorporates the enormous advantages of neural networks on representation learning, and has presented outstanding performance in real-world scenarios.
In general, deep MVC sets up a separate auto-encoder
for each view, and then the learned multiple view-specific
embeddings are fused into a consensus to infer clusters. To
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Anchor graph learning is incorporated into the deep
21044

