The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Super-Class Guided Transformer for Zero-Shot Attribute Classification
Sehyung Kim* , Chanhyeong Yang* , Jihwan Park, Taehoon Song, Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{shkim129, 0814gerrardso, jseven7071, taehoons, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Attributes

Abstract

Super-class

Attribute classification is crucial for identifying specific characteristics within image regions. Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) have been effective in zero-shot tasks by leveraging their general knowledge from large-scale datasets. Recent studies demonstrate that transformer-based models with
class-wise queries can effectively address zero-shot multilabel classification. However, poor utilization of the relationship between seen and unseen attributes makes the
model lack generalizability. Additionally, attribute classification generally involves many attributes, making maintaining the model’s scalability difficult. To address these issues,
we propose Super-class guided transFormer (SugaFormer),
a novel framework that leverages super-classes to enhance
scalability and generalizability for zero-shot attribute classification. SugaFormer employs Super-class Query Initialization (SQI) to reduce the number of queries, utilizing common semantic information from super-classes, and incorporates Multi-context Decoding (MD) to handle diverse visual cues. To strengthen generalizability, we introduce two
knowledge transfer strategies that utilize VLMs. During training, Super-class guided Consistency Regularization (SCR)
aligns model’s features with VLMs using super-class guided
prompts, and during inference, Zero-shot Retrieval-based
Score Enhancement (ZRSE) refines predictions for unseen attributes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SugaFormer
achieves state-of-the-art performance across three widelyused attribute classification benchmarks under zero-shot, and
cross-dataset transfer settings.

1

Color

Material

Semantic
Information

Semantic
Information

Blue Green
⋯

⋯

Novel

Novel

Light
blue

Wooden Metal Plastic

Size
Semantic
Information
Novel

Small Big

⋯

Long

⋯

(A) Hierarchical tree structure in attributes
General
prompt

Full

image

“The attribute in this image is [MASK]”

Super-class
guided prompt

Regional
image

“The Color of cake is [MASK]”
Shape
Size

?

What attribute?

VisionLanguage
Models
(VLMs)

White
Rectangular
Large, Huge

(B) General prompt vs. Super-class guided prompt

Figure 1: Hierarchical structure of attributes and effectiveness of super-class guided prompt. (A) Attributes belonging
to the same super-class share common semantic information. (B) By leveraging super-class guided prompts, VLMs
make more accurate predictions by distinguishing attributes
within each super-class.

Introduction

Understanding an image at the region level is crucial for advancing computer vision. Building on the progress of imagelevel multi-label classification, region-level attribute classification takes this further by recognizing specific attributes
within image regions. For example, it can describe a ‘bus’
as red, large, and parking, or the ‘road’ as wet and crowded.
This task is vital for applications such as self-driving cars
and image recommender systems, where the precise recognition of regional attributes directly impacts performance.

In recent years, the extension of visual recognition to
zero-shot learning (Xian et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2023b),
where models are required to predict novel classes not
encountered during training, has achieved notable success (Zhou et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024). A promising
strategy is to leverage pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023). This can
be achieved through techniques such as fine-tuning VLMs
on specific datasets, applying knowledge distillation (Yang
et al. 2023; Liao et al. 2022), or directly integrating these
models into the architecture (Gu et al. 2021; Ning et al.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17921

