The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymptotic Extinction in Large Coordination Games
Desmond Chan 1 * , Bart de Keijzer 1 , Tobias Galla 2 , Stefanos Leonardos 1 , Carmine Ventre 1
1
King’s College London
Institute for Cross-Disciplinary Physics and Complex Systems (IFISC, CSIC-UIB)
desmond.chan@kcl.ac.uk , bart.de keijzer@kcl.ac.uk, tobias.galla@ifisc.uib-csic.es,
stefanos.leonardos@kcl.ac.uk , carmine.ventre@kcl.ac.uk
2

Abstract

exploration trade-off algorithmically. The fixed points of QLearning are Quantal Response Equilibria (QRE) (Leonardos, Piliouras, and Spendlove 2021), which always assign
positive probability to all actions of finite games and for low
exploration rates approximate the Nash Equilibria (NE) for
the underlying game.
Coordination games are characterised by players’ payoffs
being aligned in a manner to incentivise picking mutually
beneficial actions. In such settings, agents following the QLearning algorithm over a fixed game can exhibit two different dynamical behaviours: (i) Convergence to a unique
fixed point (at high exploration rates) – where agents reach
the same, joint fixed point regardless of initial conditions;
and, (ii) Convergence to multiple equilibria (at low exploration rates) – the final strategy profiles agents converge
to is dependent on initial conditions. The effectiveness of
Q-Learning is influenced by which of these two outcomes
emerges during the learning process. This paper investigates
the dynamical behaviour of Q-Learning over large, multiplayer coordination games where the payoff matrices are
randomly drawn from multivariate Gaussians. In each game,
the payoffs matrices are randomly-generated and held fixed.
Players are assigned random initial strategies and we study
the emerging dynamics.
Related Work and Our Contribution. The study of random competitive games was first considered in (Galla and
Farmer 2013), which was inspired by replicator models in
the context of biological evolution (Opper and Diederich
1992; Galla 2006). Following this line of work, we characterise, through the use of random games, the typical behaviour in complex, coordination games a priori the learning process. Our work complements and extends the results
in (Sanders, Farmer, and Galla 2018) to coordination games.
Our theoretical analysis suggest in coordination games
with large action sets of size N , a constant, non-zero proportion of actions are played with a frequency of o(1/N ).
We call this effect asymptotic extinction. This extinction rate
is asymptotic and varies with the model parameters. While
simulations cannot fully quantitatively confirm this effect,
simulation results are broadly consistent with our theoretical
analysis. Taking this effect into account, a minimum exploration rate Tcrit , which guarantees convergence to a unique
fixed point can be found over games with varying number of
players and degree of payoff correlation.

We study the exploration-exploitation trade-off for large multiplayer coordination games where players strategise via QLearning, a common learning framework in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Q-Learning is known to have two
shortcomings, namely non-convergence and potential equilibrium selection problems, when there are multiple fixed
points, called Quantal Response Equilibria (QRE). Furthermore, whilst QRE have full support for finite games, it is not
clear how Q-Learning behaves as the game becomes large.
In this paper, we characterise the critical exploration rate that
guarantees convergence to a unique fixed point, addressing
the two shortcomings above. Using a generating-functional
method, we show that this rate increases with the number
of players and the alignment of their payoffs. For manyplayer coordination games with perfectly aligned payoffs,
this exploration rate is roughly twice that of p-player zerosum games. As for large games, we provide a structural result
for QRE, which suggests that as the game size increases, QLearning converges to a QRE near the boundary of the simplex of the action space, a phenomenon we term asymptotic
extinction, where a constant fraction of the actions are played
with zero probability at a rate o(1/N) for an N -action game.

Introduction
Multi-agent systems are an increasingly relevant area in AI
research. They typically consist of learning agents trying to
coordinate to reach specific outcomes, such scenarios are
prevalent in fields ranging from economics (March 1991),
robotics and distributed systems (Panait and Luke 2005). A
key challenge in these settings is balancing exploration and
exploitation in high-dimensional action spaces. Exploration
is required for the discovery of optimal strategies; this can
come at the expense of short-term rewards. Effectively exploring such complex spaces can be a critical point of failure, preventing convergence to “good” outcomes.
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), coordination scenarios consisting of interacting agents, can be represented as games. Throughout this work, we will focus on
Q-Learning, one of the most widely used methods in MARL,
as it provides a framework to analyse the exploitation* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13683

