The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Envisioning Class Entity Reasoning by Large Language Models
for Few-shot Learning
Mushui Liu1 , Fangtai Wu1 , Bozheng Li1 , Ziqian Lu2 , Yunlong Yu1 * , Xi Li3
1

College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Zhejiang University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{lms, wft, bozhengli, ziqianlu, yuyunlong, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to recognize new concepts using a limited number of visual samples. Existing methods attempt to incorporate semantic information into the limited visual data for category understanding. However, these methods
often enrich class-level feature representations with abstract
category names, failing to capture nuanced features essential
for effective generalization. To address this issue, we propose
a novel framework for FSL, which incorporates both the abstract class semantics and the concrete class entities extracted
from Large Language Models (LLMs), to enhance the representation of the class prototypes. Specifically, our framework composes a Semantic-guided Visual Pattern Extraction (SVPE) module and a Prototype-Calibration (PC) module, where the SVPE meticulously extracts semantic-aware
visual patterns across diverse scales, while the PC module
seamlessly integrates these patterns to refine the visual prototype, enhancing its representativeness. Extensive experiments on four few-shot classification benchmarks and the
BSCD-FSL cross-domain benchmark showcase remarkable
advancements over the current state-of-the-art methods. Notably, for the challenging one-shot setting, our approach, utilizing the ResNet-12 backbone, achieves an impressive average improvement of 1.95% over the second-best competitor.

Figure 1: The key idea is to learn a classifier from data using
a visual sample per category, extended with additional visual
patterns derived from semantic entities generated by LLMs.
Zhang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023) have introduced semantic information to assist in constructing class understanding.
However, semantic-incorporating methods enrich class representations with high-level information but often overlook
the local structure of the visual environment. Many discriminative patterns in low-level descriptions are crucial for classifying samples, especially when only a few samples are
available for each class.
Humans have demonstrated the ability to recognize novel
categories with minimal examples by combining abstract attributes and detailed category descriptions with visual signals. If machine vision systems could do such information
abstraction and alignment, then the novel categories may be
quickly learned with only a few samples. Unfortunately, directly extracting low-level descriptions of categories from
visual samples can be challenging, as images often fail to
comprehensively capture the full range of attributes and
characteristics that define a class. The limitations of visual
representation, e.g., variations in lighting, angles, and occlusion, can hinder the models’ capability to comprehensively
describe a category based solely on the images at hand.
Considering the success of nature language processing
(NLP) that the related semantic descriptions or attributes
could be generated with the power of Large-Language
Models (LLMs), we propose a novel paradigm that learns
semantic-aware visual patterns from the semantic descriptions to enrich the class representations for FSL, as shown

Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized numerous fields, notably
computer vision (He et al. 2016; Tang et al. 2022b; Dan et al.
2023, 2024b) and natural language processing (Achiam et al.
2023; Liu et al. 2023; Tang et al. 2022a). These learning
systems are inherently data-intensive, demanding substantial
amounts of labeled data for model training. In some practical
applications, the acquisition and annotation of data can be
prohibitively expensive or unfeasible. Consequently, FewShot Learning (FSL) (Sun and Gao 2023; Zhang et al. 2024)
has garnered significant attention as a promising solution,
enabling learning from a scarce quantity of data, thereby
mitigating the challenges associated with data scarcity.
Most FSL methods face significant challenges due to the
scarcity of samples, especially when only one sample is
available for each class (Baik et al. 2023). To mitigate this
issue, several approaches (Yang, Wang, and Chen 2022;
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18906

