The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Agent Security Tax: Trading Off Security and Collaboration Capabilities in
Multi-Agent Systems
Pierre Peigné1 * † , Mikolaj Kniejski2 * , Filip Sondej3 * , Matthieu David2 , Jason
Hoelscher-Obermaier2 , Christian Schroeder de Witt4 , Esben Kran2
1
PRISM Eval
Apart Research
3
Jagiellonian University
4
University of Oxford
2

Abstract

agents through communication channels. Without an appropriate defense strategy, this could lead to rapid proliferation,
resulting in a system-wide compromise of LLM agents with
harmful instructions. This scenario poses systemic risks to
the digital infrastructure, similar to the threats exemplified
by incidents like Stuxnet (Langner 2011).
More robust defense strategies are needed to secure multiagent systems against such threat scenarios. The challenge is
to design proper defense mechanisms that increase systemlevel robustness while maintaining a high level of cooperation within the multi-agent system. We demonstrate this
trade-off empirically by evaluating system robustness and
agent cooperation across a diverse set of defense strategies
and underlying LLMs.

As AI agents are increasingly adopted to collaborate on complex objectives, ensuring the security of autonomous multiagent systems becomes crucial. We develop simulations of
agents collaborating on shared objectives to study these security risks and security trade-offs. We focus on scenarios
where an attacker compromises one agent, using it to steer
the entire system toward misaligned outcomes by corrupting other agents. In this context, we observe infectious malicious prompts - the multi-hop spreading of malicious instructions. To mitigate this risk, we evaluated several strategies: two ”vaccination” approaches that insert false memories
of safely handling malicious input into the agents’ memory
stream, and two versions of a generic safety instruction strategy. While these defenses reduce the spread and fulfillment
of malicious instructions in our experiments, they tend to decrease collaboration capability in the agent network. Our findings illustrate potential trade-off between security and collaborative efficiency in multi-agent systems, providing insights
for designing more secure yet effective AI collaborations.

1

1.1

Contributions

Our main contributions are:
• We demonstrate the spread of malicious prompts in a
realistic multi-agent LLM simulation of an autonomous
chemical research facility
• We measure the effect of these defense strategies on both
system robustness and agent cooperation.
• We observe a potential trade-off between system robustness and agent cooperation across a diverse set of defense
strategies that can remain unnoticed if evaluations of defense strategies do not take the impact on the normal operations of the system into account.

Introduction

Recent breakthroughs in large language models (LLMs)
training and instruction tuning have resulted in AI agents
interacting with humans, and each other, through natural
language while accessing vast bodies of digital knowledge
(Llama team and contributors 2023; OpenAI 2024a). Although this has produced novel productivity tools and digital assistants for humans (e.g., ChatGPT), LLM agents are
increasingly interacting autonomously (Shen et al. 2023;
Boiko, MacKnight, and Gomes 2023). Such strongly interacting networks of autonomous agents pose novel security
problems that are so far poorly understood but could constitute systemic risks (Commission 2021).
In this paper, we examine a security vulnerability in multiagent Large Language Model (LLM) systems, analogous to
the propagation of worms in traditional digital systems. Our
attack involves injecting a malicious prompt into the input
of an LLM agent, which can then be disseminated to other

2

Related Work

Modern LLM applications are less and less made of one single LLM but mostly encompassed within a system:
Tool-LLM (Qin et al. 2023): With LLMs integrated into
applications, models can expand their language capabilities
to perform actions on behalf of the user through the use of
API calls (Osika 2023; OpenAI 2023, 2024c), web research,
and writing reports (Elovic 2023), and directly interacting
with computer (Anthropic 2024).
LLM Agents (Wang et al. 2024a): To improve the ability of LLMs to act in the world, autonomous systems with
an LLM core were created with the capacity to interact with
tools and call APIs while maintaining memory and reacting
to the environment (Boiko, MacKnight, and Gomes 2023;

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: pierre@prism-eval.ai.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27573

