The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CyberPal.AI: Empowering LLMs with Expert-Driven Cybersecurity Instructions
Matan Levi1,2 , Yair Allouche1 , Daniel Ohayon1 , Anton Puzanov1
1
IBM Research
Ben-Gurion University
matanle@{il.ibm.com, post.bgu.ac.il}
{daniel.ohayon,antonp,yair}@il.ibm.com
2

Abstract

ity to connect disparate elements effectively. Therefore, traditional data generation methods will not be effective (Mitra et al. 2023). As cyber-security is complex and highly
domain-expert-driven, it is required to present LLMs with
domain-specific data generated from expert knowledge to
unlock and harness the potential of LLMs in the field.
Over the past decades, security experts have invested considerable time and resources into monitoring cyber activities, investigating incidents, and producing high-quality reports and comprehensive knowledge bases, which include
detection rules for identifying and mitigating threats, among
other crucial activities. This study seeks to utilize this extensive domain knowledge and, by integrating it with the capabilities of LLMs, create a highly valuable instruction-tuning
dataset that can unlock the potential of LLMs in cybersecurity. Overall, we make the following contributions:

Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly advanced
natural language processing (NLP), providing versatile capabilities across various applications. However, their application to complex, domain-specific tasks, such as cybersecurity, often faces substantial challenges. In this study,
we introduce SecKnowledge and CyberPal.AI to address
these challenges and train security-expert LLMs. SecKnowledge is a domain-knowledge-driven cyber-security instruction dataset, meticulously designed using years of accumulated expert knowledge in the domain through a multi-phase
generation process. CyberPal.AI refers to a family of LLMs
fine-tuned using SecKnowledge, aimed at building securityspecialized LLMs capable of answering and following complex security-related instructions. Additionally, we introduce
SecKnowledge-Eval, a comprehensive and diverse cybersecurity evaluation benchmark, composed of an extensive set
of cyber-security tasks we specifically developed to assess
LLMs in the field of cyber-security, along with other publicly
available security benchmarks. Extensive evaluations demonstrate a significant average improvement of up to 24% over
the baseline models, underscoring the benefits of our expertdriven instruction dataset generation process. These findings
contribute to the advancement of AI-based cyber-security applications, paving the way for robust security-expert LLMs
that can enhance threat-hunting and investigation processes.

1

• We construct SecKnowledge, a reasoning instruction tuning dataset generated using an expert-driven process on
a wide range of security-related datasets. The dataset
construction involves two main steps. In the first step,
instructions are created based on schemas established
through domain expertise. These schemas define templates that are filled with domain-expert knowledge and
supplemented with LLM-generated content when necessary. In the second step, the initial dataset is expanded
through a novel hybrid synthetic content-based data generation process.

Introduction

The rapid progress of LLMs offers a wide range of new capabilities that would have been considered unrealistic only a
few years ago. LLMs have emerged as disruptive technology
in domains ranging from healthcare to finance, changing the
way we consume information and perform our daily tasks.
As LLMs are trained on trillions of tokens, they should have
fundamental knowledge of most domains available online.
One such domain is cyber-security. Yet, cyber-security is
also a very complex domain. It requires deep understanding
in multiple areas of expertise, such as operating systems,
network and communication protocols, malware analysis,
threat management, and many others. Furthermore, as cybersecurity practice spans from security at the physical layer to
security at the application layer, navigating this diverse landscape requires a comprehensive understanding and the abil-

• We train CyberPal.AI, a family of cyber-security expert
LLMs designed to understand and reason about complex
security concepts. CyberPal.AI demonstrates the advantages of enhancing LLMs with our domain-knowledge
instruction dataset, SecKnowledge.
• We developed SecKnowledge-Eval, a suite of evaluation datasets specifically designed to assess LLMs in
the cyber-security domain. SecKnowledge-Eval consists
of evaluation datasets we constructed to assess LLMs’
capabilities on complex cyber-security tasks, alongside
public benchmarks, intending to generate a comprehensive and diverse evaluation dataset for assessing both
knowledge and understanding of models in the field of
cyber-security. CyberPal.AI demonstrated superior performance over its baseline models, showing a substantial
average improvement of up to 24% in training-aligned

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24402

