The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Against All Odds: Overcoming Typology, Script, and Language Confusion in
Multilingual Embedding Inversion Attacks
Yiyi Chen, Russa Biswas, Heather Lent, Johannes Bjerva
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Copenhagen, Denmark
yiyic, rubi, hcle, jbjerva@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are susceptible to malicious
influence by cyber attackers through intrusions such as adversarial, backdoor, and embedding inversion attacks. In response, the burgeoning field of LLM Security aims to study
and defend against such threats. Thus far, the majority of
works in this area have focused on monolingual English models; however, emerging research suggests that multilingual
LLMs may be more vulnerable to various attacks than their
monolingual counterparts. While previous work has investigated embedding inversion over a small subset of European
languages, it is challenging to extrapolate these findings to
languages from different linguistic families and with differing scripts. To this end, we explore the security of multilingual LLMs in the context of embedding inversion attacks and
investigate cross-lingual and cross-script inversion across 20
languages, spanning over 8 language families and 12 scripts.
Our findings indicate that languages written in Arabic and
Cyrillic scripts are particularly vulnerable to embedding inversion, as are languages within the Indo-Aryan language
family. We further observe that inversion models tend to suffer from language confusion, sometimes significantly reducing the efficacy of an attack. Accordingly, we systematically
explore this bottleneck for inversion models, uncovering predictable patterns attackers could leverage. Ultimately, this
study aims to further the field’s understanding of the outstanding security vulnerabilities facing multilingual LLMs
and raise awareness for the languages most at risk of negative impact from these attacks.

Base
Output: Eine sehr berühmte Möglichkeit dass Battlefield
Activity entstanden ist. Battlefield Activity a few

Corrector (Step1)
Output: Es ist eine sehr brühmte Möglichkeit, dass Spiele
entstanden. Eine sehr brühmte MMORPG.

(Step50 + sbeam 8)
Output: Es ist sehr beeindruckend, dass einige Spiele
entstanden. Eine sehr beeindruckende Activity.

Figure 1: Inverting Arabic texts (target) using inversion models trained on multilingual encoder with German
(source), showing language confusion across steps (red).

user queries are embedded via LLMs and sent to a vector
database for semantic search, while large-scale embeddings
of text data are also stored for semantic search. The security of this technology is increasingly critical for providers
and customers depending on vector databases for their businesses. Presently, vector databases are known to have one
outstanding security vulnerability: text embeddings can be
reverted into original text, even without prior knowledge of
the embedding model, thus constituting a major threat to
privacy (Song and Raghunathan 2020; Höhmann, Rettinger,
and Kugler 2021; Hayet, Yao, and Luo 2022; Morris et al.
2023; Li, Xu, and Song 2023; Chen, Lent, and Bjerva 2024).
In other words, text embeddings are no more secure than
plain text (Morris et al. 2023). A malicious actor needs only
to intercept the vectors to carry out an embedding inversion
attack, whereby potentially sensitive information is leaked.
As with most NLP problems, large English datasets have
served as the primary focus of research on embedding inversion attacks. Emerging work, however, highlights how the
field’s over-reliance on English comes at a grave cost to the
general security of Large Language Models (LLMs). For ex-

Code — https://github.com/siebeniris/vec2text exp
Models — https://huggingface.co/yiyic
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11749

Introduction
Vector databases store texts encoded into embeddings, and
represent a 1.5 billion USD market globally as of 2023,
which is expected to grow to an impressive 4 billion
within the next 5 years (Markets and Markets 2023). In
more concrete contexts, services like Pinecone and Qdrant,1
store embeddings for retrieval in applications like retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al. 2020). In RAG,
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.pinecone.io/ and https://qdrant.tech/

23632

