The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Model Lineage Closeness Analysis
Chen Tang1 , Lan Zhang1,2 * , Qi Zhao1 , Xirong Zhuang1 , Xiangyang Li1
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, China
{chentang1999, zq2021, xirongz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhanglan@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

with a modification relationship and use the model lineage closeness to indicate the model modification degree.
A higher lineage closeness denotes a lower model modification degree.
Measuring model lineage closeness is a crucial task. First,
lineage closeness between models can provide valuable insights. By measuring lineage closeness, we can better quantify the effects of different model modification techniques,
thereby deepening our understanding of neural networks.
Second, precise metrics for model lineage closeness can
benefit various downstream applications, such as model
copyright protection, by helping us determine the source of
a model and identify potential infringement. However, there
is still a lack of precise metrics for measuring model lineage
closeness.
It is non-trivial to measure model lineage closeness,
which faces two key challenges. The diversity and complexity of model modification methods make it difficult to
determine whether there is a lineage between two models. Model lineage is not determined by training dataset,
model structure, or hyperparameters, but by the modification
relationships between models. Characterizing such modification relationships poses a considerable challenge. Moreover, models with similar performance on the same task
but no lineage can lead to misclassifications in lineage determination. Recently, several works (Cao, Jia, and Gong
2021; Li et al. 2021; Yang, Wang, and Wang 2022; Peng
et al. 2022; Lukas, Zhang, and Kerschbaum 2021; Guan,
Liang, and He 2022) have explored this problem. The key
observation is that models with lineage tend to exhibit more
similar decision boundaries, while models without lineage
display greater dissimilarities in their decision boundaries.
Based on this insight, these studies propose generating data
points near the decision boundaries of models. Since models with similar decision boundaries will produce the same
outputs for these data points, they determine lineage based
on whether the models have the same outputs for these data
points. However, modifications to the model lead to shifts in
decision boundaries, resulting in changes to the outputs of
these data points, thus leading to incorrect lineage determination. Besides, some modifications, such as transfer learning, result in different model output dimensions, invalidating these lineage determination methods as they require the
same output dimensions between models. There is a lack

As machine learning model modification techniques are extensively employed to obtain well-performing models at reduced costs, several studies have emerged to determine the
presence of a modification relationship (i.e., lineage) between models. However, these methods are not robust to highimpact modification techniques, and none of them have addressed the measurement of lineage closeness, which quantifies the degrees of modification. In this work, we visualize the changes in model decision boundaries resulting from
different modification techniques and conclude that differences in decision boundaries serve as a precise metric of
lineage closeness. Building upon this insight, we propose a
modification-type agnostic and task-agnostic method to measure model lineage closeness by calculating mean adversarial distances from data points to decision boundaries and the
matching rate of data points, with data points selected through
an efficient sampling method to reduce computational overhead. Moreover, we propose a novel indirect measurement
approach to support lineage closeness measurement for models with different tasks. Finally, comprehensive experiments
show that our design achieves an impressive 97% accuracy in
lineage determination and can precisely measure model lineage closeness for different modifications.

Introduction
Machine learning models are increasingly utilized across
a diverse range of applications with remarkable success.
However, generating a well-trained model is a challenging
task that requires significant hardware resources and training
data. Consequently, various model modification techniques,
such as fine-tuning, pruning, adversarial training, quantization, transfer learning, and distillation, have been proposed
to generate models based on existing models, thereby saving
training costs. These techniques have gained immense popularity among model developers due to their convenience and
impressive performance.
With the advent of model modification techniques, a new
question arises: how can we measure the similarity between
models with a modification relationship? To distinguish this
modification similarity from the similarity of model parameters or structures, here, we define model lineage as models
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20796

