The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Individually Stable Dynamics in Coalition Formation over Graphs
Angelo Fanelli1 , Laurent Gourvès1 , Ayumi Igarashi2 , Luca Moscardelli3
1

Université Paris-Dauphine, Université PSL, CNRS, LAMSADE, 75016, Paris, France,
2
The University of Tokyo, Japan,
3
University of Chieti-Pescara, Italy
angelo.fanelli@cnrs.fr, laurent.gourves@dauphine.fr, igarashi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, luca.moscardelli@unich.it

Abstract

tions with connected subgraphs (Myerson 1977; Demange
2004; Igarashi and Elkind 2016).
In this paper, we study graph hedonic games under the
perspective of individual stability (IS for short), a natural notion of stability introduced by Drèze and Greenberg (1980).
In particular, a player i performs an IS deviation to coalition
T whenever i prefers coalition T ∪ {i} to her current coalition, and also all players in T do not prefer T to T ∪ {i}.
Roughly speaking, an IS deviation is a Nash deviation (i.e.,
the deviating player strictly benefits) with the additional constraint that all players in coalition T have to “accept” player
i. A partition is individually stable if no player has an IS deviation available. Real life examples of IS deviations exist:
a nation can enter the NATO, or the EU, only if its members
unanimously agree.
Note that stability is mostly concerned with the final state
of the coalition formation process and one frequently ignores how these desirable partitions can actually be reached.
Essentially, speaking about stability often implicitly assumes that there is a central authority knowing the preferences of all players and computing a stable partition. However, the existence of a stable state does not imply that players, starting from an initial configuration, eventually reach
stability after a finite sequence of improving deviations. In
the well known stable marriage problem, a stable matching
always exists under mild assumptions, and the centralized
algorithm of Gale and Shapley (1962) outputs such a state.
However, the natural process of sequentially eliminating the
existing blocking pairs may loop (Knuth 1997). Examples
of this kind motivate the study of decentralized coalition formation processes operated by autonomous entities.
This article focuses on IS dynamics. We analyze the process in which the players interact and, possibly, reach an individually stable coalition structure. More precisely, we aim
at determining the most general possible classes of preferences and graph topologies guaranteeing convergence of IS
dynamics in graph hedonic games (for any instance and initial state). To this aim, we consider the following natural
classes of preferences, that we list from the most general
to the most particular: general preferences (no restrictions
except the ones that are usual in hedonic games), individually rational (IR for short) preferences (each player likes
any coalition she belongs to at least as much as if she were
alone), monotone preferences (each player likes any super-

Coalition formation over graphs is a well studied class of
games whose players are vertices and feasible coalitions must
be connected subgraphs. In this setting, the existence and
computation of equilibria, under various notions of stability, has attracted a lot of attention. However, the natural process by which players, starting from any feasible state, strive
to reach an equilibrium after a series of unilateral improving deviations, has been less studied. We investigate the convergence of dynamics towards individually stable outcomes
under the following perspective: what are the most general classes of preferences and graph topologies guaranteeing
convergence? To this aim, on the one hand, we cover a hierarchy of preferences, ranging from the most general to a subcase of additively separable preferences, including individually rational and monotone cases. On the other hand, given
that convergence may fail in graphs admitting a cycle even
in our most restrictive preference class, we analyze acyclic
graph topologies such as trees, paths, and stars.

1

Introduction

Coalition formation is an important and widely investigated issue in artificial intelligence. In many economic, social, and political settings, individuals carry out activities
in groups rather than by themselves. Hedonic games, introduced by Drèze and Greenberg (1980) and later developed
in (Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001; Bogomolnaia and
Jackson 2002; Cechlárová and Romero-Medina 2001), are
among the most important game-theoretic approaches to the
study of coalition formation problems. An outcome for these
games is a partition of the players into coalitions, over which
the players have utilities. A player’s utility depends on the
coalition she belongs to, and is not affected by how the participants of other coalitions are partitioned.
The standard model of hedonic games does not impose
any restrictions on which coalitions may form. However, in
reality, we often encounter network constraints on coalition
formation, i.e., entities can communicate and cooperate only
if they are connected. Such restrictions can be naturally described by means of undirected graphs, giving life to graph
hedonic games, in which players are identified with vertices, communication links with edges, and feasible coaliCopyright c 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13831

