The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sequence Complementor: Complementing Transformers for Time Series
Forecasting with Learnable Sequences
Xiwen Chen1 * , Peijie Qiu2 * , Wenhui Zhu3 * , Huayu Li4 , Hao Wang1 ,
Aristeidis Sotiras2 , Yalin Wang3 , Abolfazl Razi1
1
Clemson University,
Washington University in St. Louis,
3
Arizona State University,
4
The University of Arizona
{xiwenc, hao9}@g.clemson.edu, {peijie.qiu, aristeidis.sotiras}@wustl.edu,
{wzhu59, ylwang}@asu.edu, hl459@arizona.edu, arazi@clemson.edu
2

Richness of
Representations (↑)

Abstract
MHSA

Since its introduction, the transformer has shifted the development trajectory away from traditional models (e.g., RNN,
MLP) in time series forecasting, which is attributed to its
ability to capture global dependencies within temporal tokens. Follow-up studies have largely involved altering the
tokenization and self-attention modules to better adapt Transformers for addressing special challenges like non-stationarity,
channel-wise dependency, and variable correlation in time
series. However, we found that the expressive capability of sequence representation is a key factor influencing Transformer
performance in time forecasting after investigating several
representative methods, where there is an almost linear relationship between sequence representation entropy and mean
square error, with more diverse representations performing
better. In this paper, we propose a novel attention mechanism
with Sequence Complementors and prove feasible from an information theory perspective, where these learnable sequences
are able to provide complementary information beyond current input to feed attention. We further enhance the Sequence
Complementors via a diversification loss that is theoretically
covered. The empirical evaluation of both long-term and shortterm forecasting has confirmed its superiority over the recent
state-of-the-art methods.

× 𝒏𝒏

Vanilla Self-attention
w/o Seq. Comp.
w/ Seq. Comp.

Forecasting Error (↓)

MHSA

× 𝒏𝒏

Self-attention
with Sequence Complementor

Figure 1: The vanilla self-attention mechanism v.s. the selfattention mechanism with proposed learnable Sequence
Complementors, which serve as complementary sequences to the original input sequence (Left). The integration
of Sequence Complementors results in richer learned representations and a better forecasting performance (Right).

Introduction
Time series forecasting (TSF) plays a crucial role in various domains, enabling the extraction of meaningful patterns
and the prediction of future events based on historical data.
It incubates a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from
financial risk assessment, weather forecasting, and energy
sustainability to healthcare (Wang et al. 2024b). Recently, the
introduction of transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) has dramatically shifted the trajectory of model designs for TSF largely
due to their ability to capture long-range dependencies.
Following this trend, numerous efforts have been devoted
to enhancing the architectural designs of transformer-based
TSF models (Zhou et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Zhou et al.
2022; Wu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022b, 2024). Although they
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15913

have achieved satisfactory performance, their effectiveness
in TSF is empirically challenged even by simple linear models (Zeng et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2024). However, an in-depth
analysis of what limits the performance of transformers for
TSF is insufficient in the literature. This motivates us to investigate the fundamental limits of transformers for TSF in
both an empirical and theoretical way.
For this purpose, we first conduct a series of empirical
observations on four different types of transformers for TSF.
We observe that the learned latent representations in four
different types of transformers are not rich and generalizable
enough, measured by the rank and entropy of the learned
feature embeddings. Interestingly, we find that this has a
direct relationship with the performance of the TSF task:
more diverse and richer latent representations typically lead
to higher performance. We believe that this phenomenon is
likely due to the combination of limited training samples and
domain shifts in most TSF datasets.

