The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FunEditor: Achieving Complex Image Edits
via Function Aggregation with Diffusion Models
Mohammadreza Samadi1 , Fred X. Han1 , Mohammad Salameh1 ,
Hao Wu3 , Fengyu Sun3 , Chunhua Zhou3 , Di Niu2
1
Huawei Technologies Canada,
Dept. ECE, University of Alberta,
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, China
{mohammadreza.samadi1, fred.xuefei.han1, mohammad.salameh, wuhao135, zhouchunhua}@huawei.com,
sunfengyu@hisilicon.com, dniu@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract

(a) Basic Functions

Diffusion models have demonstrated outstanding performance in generative tasks, making them ideal candidates for
image editing. Recent studies highlight their ability to apply
desired edits effectively by following textual instructions, yet
with two key challenges remaining. First, these models struggle to apply multiple edits simultaneously, resulting in computational inefficiencies due to their reliance on sequential
processing. Second, relying on textual prompts to determine
the editing region can lead to unintended alterations to the image. We introduce FunEditor, an efficient diffusion model designed to learn atomic editing functions and perform complex
edits by aggregating simpler functions. This approach enables
complex editing tasks, such as object movement, by aggregating multiple functions and applying them simultaneously to
specific areas. Our experiments demonstrate that FunEditor
significantly outperforms recent inference-time optimization
methods and fine-tuned models, either quantitatively across
various metrics or through visual comparisons or both, on
complex tasks like object movement and object pasting. In the
meantime, with only 4 steps of inference, FunEditor achieves
5–24 times inference speedups over existing popular methods.

Source Image (I)

fEE(I, m)

fOR (I, m)

(b) Function Aggregation

Source Image (I)

Object Shrinking

Object Movement

A(fOR (I, m1), fEE (I, m2))

Figure 1: (a) Results of applying basic functions—Edge Enhancement (fEE in the center) and Object Removal (fOR on
the right)—using their respective masks on the input image
Best viewed when enlarged. (b) Demonstration of function
aggregation using the proposed method. By simultaneously
applying Object Removal and Edge Enhancement on different masks, complex edits such as object shrinking (middle)
and object movement (right) can be achieved. A represents
the operation of function aggregation.

Project — https://mhmdsmdi.github.io/funeditor

Introduction
Diffusion models (DM) like DALLE-3 and Adobe Firefly have significantly advanced the field of image editing,
marking a paradigm shift in how digital content is generated and refined. These models have revolutionized the creative process by allowing users to produce high-quality, photorealistic images from simple textual descriptions, a capability known as text-to-image (T2I) generation. Beyond
generating images, diffusion models have also excelled in
following text-based instructions to perform specific editing tasks, referred to as instruction-based editing. This approach makes image manipulation more intuitive and accessible by allowing users to guide the editing process with
natural language commands (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros
2023; Sheynin et al. 2024; Geng et al. 2024). One prominent example of an instruction-based DM is InstructPix2Pix

(IP2P) (Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023), which can edit
images using textual instructions. EmuEdit (Sheynin et al.
2024) further improves the generalizability of IP2P by training on more diversified tasks. They found that training on
multi-task datasets can enhance the models’ editing capabilities when handling challenging instructions.
In recent years, the scope of instruction-based editing
has expanded to include more complex tasks such as object movement (Wang et al. 2024; Mou et al. 2024a), subject composition (Yang et al. 2022), and virtual try-on (Chen

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6758

