The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IAA: Inner-Adaptor Architecture Empowers Frozen Large Language Model with
Multimodal Capabilities
Bin Wang* , Chunyu Xie* , Dawei Leng† , Yuhui Yin
360 AI Research
{wangbin10, xiechunyu, lengdawei, yinyuhui}@360.cn

Abstract

80

In the field of multimodal large language models (MLLMs),
common methods typically involve unfreezing the language
model during training to foster profound visual understanding. However, the fine-tuning of such models with visionlanguage data often leads to a diminution of their natural
language processing (NLP) capabilities. To avoid this performance degradation, a straightforward solution is to freeze the
language model while developing multimodal competencies.
Unfortunately, previous works have not attained satisfactory
outcomes. Building on the strategy of freezing the language
model, we conduct thorough structural exploration and introduce the Inner-Adaptor Architecture (IAA). Specifically,
the architecture incorporates multiple multimodal adaptors
at varying depths within the large language model to facilitate direct interaction with the inherently text-oriented transformer layers, thereby enabling the frozen language model to
acquire multimodal capabilities. Unlike previous approaches
of freezing language models that require large-scale aligned
data, our proposed architecture is able to achieve superior
performance on small-scale datasets. We conduct extensive
experiments to improve the general multimodal capabilities
and visual grounding abilities of the MLLM. Our approach
remarkably outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods
across various vision-language benchmarks without sacrificing performance on NLP tasks. Code and models will be released.

70

score

60
50
40
30

Qwen2
LLaVA-Qwen2
Llama3
LLaVA-Llama3

20
10
0

MMLU

C-eval

Figure 1: Results before and after training LLaVA-1.5 architecture based on Qwen2 and Llama3 language models on
text-only evaluation set MMLU and C-eval.

2024). Historically, these tasks have been regarded as challenging for conventional vision-language models. MLLMs
exhibit considerable promise in executing these complex,
diverse real-world tasks, enabling more natural and humanlike interactions (Lu et al. 2024).
Typically, the operation of a MLLM begins with feeding an image into a visual encoder, such as CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) or SigLIP (Zhai et al. 2023), to extract a highdimensional feature representation. This feature is subsequently transformed through a projection layer to align with
the dimension of the large language model. The resulting
features, often referred to as image tokens, are concatenated
with text tokens and fed into the large language model. This
process enables the MLLM to generate responses based on
user instructions and input images.
In the current common MLLM (Liu et al. 2024a; Bai et al.
2023), when image and text tokens are fed into the large
language model, the LLM is typically unfrozen for further
training. This strategy has led to significant advancements
in the MLLM model. Consequently, it predictably leads to
a degradation in the understanding ability of the large language model. To validate this hypothesis, we conduct experiments on the LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al. 2024a) architecture
using the 1.2M-size open-source dataset provided by (Liu
et al. 2024a), which contains a limited amount of plain text
data, as illustrated in Figure 1. We compare the results be-

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made substantial
progress in recent years, largely attributed to the technique
of pre-training and instruction tuning. Building upon this
foundation, visual instruction tuning has been proposed
to evolve LLMs into Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs), thereby endowing them with the capability to
interpret and comprehend visual signals (Cha et al. 2024).
MLLMs (Liu et al. 2024b; Bai et al. 2023; Tong et al. 2024;
Xuan et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2023a) prove beneficial in numerous tasks, such as transcribing the text within an image,
generating stories and poems based on an image, or converting screenshots of webpages into code (Laurençon et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21035

