The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiMSOD: A Diffusion-Based Framework for Multi-Modal Salient Object
Detection
Shuo Zhang1 , Jiaming Huang2 , Wenbing Tang3 , Yan Wu2 , Terrence Hu2 , Xiaogang Xu4 , Jing Liu1 *
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
2
Technology Center, Huolala
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
shuo zhang ecnu@163.com, ucashjm@gmail.com, jliu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

achieving accurate SOD results in challenging background
and complex scenes remains difficult. In recent years, extensive use of depth cameras and infrared imaging devices have
shown that the depth and thermal data gathered can significantly improve the performance of salient object detection.
Nevertheless, the task of effectively combining multi-modal
complementary information without overestimating point
estimates remains a considerable challenge, and it greatly
influences the achievement of robust detection performance.

Multi-modal salient object detection (SOD) through the integration of additional data such as depth or thermal information has become a significant task in computer vision
during recent years. Traditionally, the challenges of identifying salient objects in RGB, RGB-D (Depth), and RGBT (Thermal) images are tackled separately. However, without intricate cross-modal fusion strategies, such approaches
struggle to effectively integrate multi-modal information, often resulting in poorly defined object edges or overconfident
inaccurate predictions. Recent studies have shown that designing a unified end-to-end framework to handle all three
types of SOD tasks simultaneously is both necessary and difficult. To address this need, we propose a novel approach
that treats multi-modal SOD as a conditional mask generation task utilizing diffusion models. We introduce DiMSOD,
which enables the concurrent use of local (depth maps, thermal maps) and global controls (original images) within a unified model for progressive denoising and refined prediction.
DiMSOD only requires fine-tuning newly introduced modules on a pretrained stable diffusion trained on RGB images,
which not only reduces fine-tuning costs for practical applications but also enhances the integration of multi-modal conditional controls. Specifically, we have developed modules including SOD-ControlNet, Feature Adaptive Network (FAN),
and Feature Injection Attention Network (FIAN) to enhance
the model’s performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that DiMSOD efficiently detects salient objects across RGB,
RGB-D, and RGB-T datasets, achieving superior performance compared to previous well-established methods.

Encoder

.......

Decoder

Network

(a) Mainstream Multi-Modal SOD paradigm

Image pairs

Diffusion step

U-Net

Output

(b) Diffusion-based Multi-Modal SOD paradigm

Figure 1: (a) The current discriminative paradigm feeds images into the network for one-way prediction, producing a
deterministic segmentation mask. (b) In contrast, we propose a novel generative paradigm that reformulates multimodal SOD as a forward-and-reverse diffusion process.
Currently, benefiting from the advancements of deep neural networks, SOD methods have evolved from designing
ingenious low-level features (Jian and Yu 2023) to learning high-level models. By incorporating the advantages of
dense feature interaction, diverse attention module (Gu et al.
2023), and multi-task learning pipeline (Zong et al. 2023),
deep learning-based methods have emerged as a promising technology for the SOD task. However, existing deep
learning-based methods only focus on one specific type of
input data. Considering the detection needs of RGB, RGB-D
and RGB-T data, it is essential to develop a unified and comprehensive method to accommodate different data types. In
response, a few recent studies (Gao et al. 2021; Luo et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2024) have focused on this direction. Although these methods have paved the way for the muchneeded unified approach to multi-modal salient object detection, they still struggle to achieve precise localization and

Introduction
Salient Object Detection (SOD) aims to accurately detect
and locate the most salient objects in a given image, mimicking the human visual perception system (Gao et al. 2023b).
It serves as an essential preliminary step for numerous
other computer vision applications, including object detection (Cheng et al. 2023), visual tracking (Li et al. 2023),
image segmentation (Chen et al. 2024), and quality assessment (Zhai and Min 2020). Despite the recent progress in
SOD (Cai et al. 2024), most of these approaches primarily focus on processing individual RGB images. Moreover,
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10103

