The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Measuring Cross-Modal Interactions in Multimodal Models
Laura Wenderoth1 , Konstantin Hemker1 , Nikola Simidjievski2,1 , Mateja Jamnik1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
2
PBCI, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
{lw457, kh701, ns779, mj201}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
M1

Integrating AI in healthcare can greatly improve patient care
and system efficiency. However, the lack of explainability in
AI systems (XAI) hinders their clinical adoption, especially
in multimodal settings that use increasingly complex model
architectures. Most existing XAI methods focus on unimodal
models, which fail to capture cross-modal interactions crucial
for understanding the combined impact of multiple data
sources. Existing methods for quantifying cross-modal interactions are limited to two modalities, rely on labelled data,
and depend on model performance. This is problematic in
healthcare, where XAI must handle multiple data sources and
provide individualised explanations. This paper introduces
InterSHAP, a cross-modal interaction score that addresses
the limitations of existing approaches. InterSHAP uses the
Shapley interaction index to precisely separate and quantify
the contributions of the individual modalities and their
interactions without approximations. By integrating an opensource implementation with the SHAP package, we enhance
reproducibility and ease of use. We show that InterSHAP accurately measures the presence of cross-modal interactions,
can handle multiple modalities, and provides detailed explanations at a local level for individual samples. Furthermore,
we apply InterSHAP to multimodal medical datasets and
demonstrate its applicability for individualised explanations.

M2
M3

InterSHAP
Shapely
Interaction
Index
Output

Interactions
M1
M2
M3

Figure 1: Overview of InterSHAP. The model (black box),
takes three different modalities as input and produces an output f (x). Through perturbations of the input modalities and
observing the resulting changes in outputs, the Shapley interaction index (Grabisch and Roubens 1999) is used to dissect the model’s behaviour into modality contributions and
cross-modal interactions. InterSHAP is defined as the ratio
of interactions to model behaviour.
Thus, healthcare applications of machine learning are often
left to rely on high-performance but opaque models that obscure the reasoning behind their predictions. Such models
can accurately predict diagnoses, but these predictions may
not reflect true causal relationships in the data (Han et al.
2022). The lack of explainability and transparency is widely
recognized as a key barrier to the clinical adoption of ML
models, as noted by policymakers such as the OECD (Anderson and Sutherland 2024) and emphasized in academic
studies (Yang, Ye, and Xia 2022).
In response to the urgent need for XAI, numerous methods such as SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017) and LIME
(Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) have emerged to explain the results of machine learning systems. While these
have shown promise for unimodal models, there are few explanation methods that work effectively across data structures, meaning that cross-modal interactions can often not
be quantified with unimodal methods. Multiple modalities
allow a machine learning model to utilise and combine information from different sources, enabling cross-modal interactions that often lead to improved performance. However, simply identifying these interactions is insufficient for
a meaningful interpretation of the model predictions. In this
context, it is crucial to comprehend both the individual impact of each modality and their combined influence. Several
methods, such as PID (Liang et al. 2023), EMAP (Hessel
and Lee 2020), and SHAPE (Hu, Li, and Zhou 2022), have
been developed to assess whether models learn cross-modal

Code — https://github.com/LauraWenderoth/InterSHAP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15828

1

Model

Introduction

In medical decision-making, there is a growing trend
toward utilising multimodal machine learning approaches
that integrate multiple data sources to improve predictive
and diagnostic tasks. These approaches acknowledge that
medical data analysis is inherently multimodal, leveraging
methods that are able to fuse heterogeneous data that
includes clinical, genomic, and imaging modalities. Recent
advancements in large multimodal models in the medical
field, such as Google’s Med-PaLM (Tu et al. 2023) and
Microsoft’s BiomedCLIP (Zhang et al. 2023), further
highlight the utility of multimodal approaches in healthcare.
However, an inherent limitation of many of the current multimodal approaches pertains to their explainability.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21501

