The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FR2 Seg: Continual Segmentation Across Multiple Sites via Fourier Style Replay
and Adaptive Consistency Regularization
Cheng Xu1, 2 , Weiwen Zhang1 , Hongrui Zhang1 , Xuemiao Xu1, 3, 4, 5, 6 * , Huaidong Zhang1 ,
Jing Zou2 , Jing Qin2
1

South China University of Technology, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Guangdong Engineering Center for Large Model and GenAI Technology
4
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
5
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot
6
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
cschengxu@gmail.com, csvv@mail.scut.edu.cn, xhdr196884@gmail.com, {xuemx, huaidongz}@scut.edu.cn,
{zoujing.zou, harry.qin}@polyu.edu.hk

New site

In clinical imaging, medical segmentation networks
typically require continually adapting to new data from
multiple sites over time, as aggregating all data for
learning at once can be impractical due to storage limitations and privacy concerns. However, existing methods basically overlook domain-specific characteristics
and fall short of adequately capturing domain-invariant
knowledge during continual learning, leading to undesired catastrophic forgetting of previous sites and inferior generalization to new sites. To tackle this issue, this paper introduces FR2 Seg, to sufficiently exploit both domain-specific and domain-invariant knowledge for efficient continual learning with the aid of lowfrequency cues. For the former aspect, we propose a
Fourier style replay module to synthesize pseudo images with old-site styles for data augmentation during
new-site training, effectively preventing catastrophic
forgetting without sacrificing data privacy. For the latter,
we present a Fourier adaptive consistency regularization
to identify and constrain the optimization of domaininvariant parameters with explicit awareness of knowledge transferability across sites, ensuring excellent generalizability to new sites. Experimental results on two
public datasets confirm our method’s superiority over
existing state-of-the-art continual learning methods.

Fourier
Style
Pool

Site B

Site C

FSR image Raw image

Abstract

Site D

Site E

FSR image Raw image

2

Domainspecific Style
Extraction

Site A
FSR Module

Site D

(a) the Fundus Dataset
New site
Site A

Site B

Site C

Site F

(b) the Prostate Dataset

Figure 1: Visualization of Fourier Style Replay (FSR) images. By swapping the low-frequency components of newsite images with those from raw images of old sites, the
resulting FSR images maintain the content of the new site
while exhibiting the styles of the old sites. We strategically
leverage these low-frequency cues to enhance both domainspecific and domain-invariant learning, achieving effective
continual learning without compromising privacy.

Code — https://github.com/cschengxu/FR2Seg
preferred for efficiency and privacy. However, simply finetuning with newly arrived data often leads to catastrophic
forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989), due to the large
data discrepancy across multiple sites. It is crucial to continually adapt the model to new sites without compromising its
performance on previous sites.
Prior works tackle this problem by mainly focusing on
mitigating the catastrophic forgetting issue. Replay-based
methods (Ranem, González, and Mukhopadhyay 2022;
Hayes, Cahill, and Kanan 2019) store a subset of old data
for rehearsal training, which compromises data privacy. Parameter isolation-based methods (Rao et al. 2019; Rusu et al.

Introduction
Training a robust medical image segmentation model usually requires extensive training data, which are often gathered across multiple sites (Glocker et al. 2019). In clinical
practice, it is impractical to aggregate multi-site data as a
consolidated set due to high storage costs and potential data
privacy leakage. A sequenced training of multi-site data is
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8815

