The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

S ELF -[I N ]C ORRECT:
LLMs Struggle with Discriminating Self-Generated Responses
Dongwei Jiang, Jingyu Zhang, Orion Weller, Nathaniel Weir, Benjamin Van Durme, Daniel Khashabi
Johns Hopkins University
{djiang21, jzhan237}@jhu.edu

Abstract
generated answers

Can LLMs consistently improve their previous outputs for better results? For this to be true, LLMs would need to be better at
discriminating among previously-generated alternatives, than
generating initial responses. We explore the validity of this
hypothesis in practice. We first formulate a unified framework
that allows us to compare the generative and discriminative
capability of any model on any task. In our resulting experimental analysis of several open-source and industrial LLMs,
we observe that model’s are not reliably better at discriminating among previously-generated alternatives than generating
initial responses. This finding challenges the notion that LLMs
may be able to enhance their performance only through their
own judgment.

1

Generation Prompt
Question: What was
the last US state to
reintroduce alcohol
after prohibition?

A1:“Utah”
A2:“Utah (State)”
A3:“State of Utah”
A4:“Miami”

Discrimination Prompt
Question: What was the last US state to reintroduce alcohol
after prohibition? Here are four choices: A1: {A1}, A2: {A2},
A3: {A3}, A4: {A4} to choose from, please give an answer in
1, 2, 3 and 4 that you think best answers the question.

Introduction

The promise of Large Language Models (LLMs) that can
self-improve has brought both excitement and fear about the
future impact of AI. However, it remains a mystery what is
needed for LLMs to continually self-improve (Huang et al.
2023).1 A crucial aspect of human learning involves reflecting
on one’s actions. This self-improvement is feasible because
individuals can identify their own mistakes and adjust their
future decisions accordingly (Mayo 1996; Corder 1967). This
principle should be applicable to LLMs as well.
For LLMs to reliably self-improve based on their decisions,
the ability to discriminate (distinguish) the goodness of their
own prior generations should surpass the ability to generate
good solutions directly. Given the importance of this capability, it is worth raising a question about the foundations of
self-discrimination: Are LLMs really better at discrimination
than generation?
This paper seeks to answer this question by proposing the
S ELF -[I N ]C ORRECT hypothesis (§3.2): LLMs are not reliably better at discriminating among previously-generated
alternatives than generating initial responses. Determining
the validity of this hypothesis is crucial, as existing studies provide initial evidence suggesting that the capability to
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our study focuses on scenarios where LLMs utilize their own
judgement (hence the term “self-...”). This is fundamentally different
from scenarios involving external feedback, as examined in prior
research (Wang et al. 2023a).

24266

4✗

✔ Utah

sample

Figure 1: Two phases evaluated in our paper. In the generation phase, the model is fed with generation prompts. Generated answers are collected and randomly selected to calculate
the generation score. In the discrimination phase, the model is
fed with discrimination prompts and generated answers. The
model chooses between generated answers, and the score of
the chosen answer is used for calculating the discrimination
score.
distinguish between LLM-generated options is both a sufficient (Tyen et al. 2023) and necessary (Huang et al. 2023)
condition for self-improvement.
It is non-trivial to compare LLMs’ generative capability
with their discriminative capability on the same footing. West
et al. (2023) compares these two capabilities, albeit in a
slightly different setting. West et al. (2023) measure a model’s
ability to discriminate (identify) the ground-truth answer
among distractor options. However, ground-truth answers are
not always likely to be among a model’s generated outputs.
In contrast, our work quantify a model’s ability to discriminate its self-generated candidate answers, which is more
aligned with the mechanisms of LLM self-improvement. To
better measure these abilities, we implement a two-phase
methodology depicted in Figure 1. In the first phase, we generate multiple outputs using a temperature setting greater

