The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ResMaster: Mastering High-Resolution Image Generation via Structural and
Fine-Grained Guidance
Shuwei Shi1 , Wenbo Li2 , Yuechen Zhang2 , Jingwen He2 , Biao Gong3 , Yinqiang Zheng1 *
1

The University of Tokyo
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Ant Group
{shishuwei666, fenglinglwb}@gmail.com, yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2

Abstract
Diffusion models excel at producing high-quality images; however, scaling to higher resolutions, such as 4K, often results in
structural distortions, and repetitive patterns. To this end, we
introduce ResMaster, a novel, training-free method that empowers resolution-limited diffusion models to generate highquality images beyond resolution restrictions. Specifically,
ResMaster leverages a low-resolution reference image created by a pre-trained diffusion model to provide structural and
fine-grained guidance for crafting high-resolution images on
a patch-by-patch basis. To ensure a coherent structure, ResMaster meticulously aligns the low-frequency components of
high-resolution patches with the low-resolution reference at
each denoising step. For fine-grained guidance, tailored image
prompts based on the low-resolution reference and enriched
textual prompts produced by a vision-language model are incorporated. This approach could significantly mitigate local
pattern distortions and improve detail refinement. Extensive
experiments validate that ResMaster sets a new benchmark for
high-resolution image generation.

1

SDXL Direct Inference

ScaleCrafter

HiDiffusion

FouriScale

DemoFusion

ResMaster (Ours)

Figure 1: Comparisons of 4096 × 4096 image generation
based on SDXL (Podell et al. 2023). Our ResMaster can
generate more faithful texture details and structured contents
(e.g., head) compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction

Recently, diffusion models (Chefer et al. 2023; Epstein et al.
2023; Rombach et al. 2022; Chen, Laina, and Vedaldi 2024;
Peebles and Xie 2023; Brooks, Holynski, and Efros 2023;
Niu et al. 2025; Shi et al. 2024) have significantly advanced
the fields of image generation, drawing considerable attention from the research community. Although representative
models such as Stable Diffusion XL (Podell et al. 2023)
(SDXL), DALL·E 3 (OpenAI 2023) and Midjourney (Midjourney 2023) can generate high-quality images, they perform
well only within resolutions of 1024 × 1024. This limitation
hinders their applications that require generated images with
higher resolutions.
Several methods (Bar-Tal et al. 2023; He et al. 2023; Du
et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2024a) achieve
higher-resolution image generation by adapting pre-trained
diffusion models (e.g.SDXL) without additional re-training.
The pioneering work, Multi-Diffusion (Bar-Tal et al. 2023),
generates higher-resolution images by stitching generated
overlapping patches. However, this approach cannot guarantee global consistency, since there is no explicit structural

guidance during generation. Moreover, it often results in
repetitive patterns that correspond to the provided prompt
due to patch-wise generation. To alleviate the above issues,
some methods (He et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; Huang
et al. 2024a) adopt whole image generation instead of the
patch-wise counterpart. Specifically, they either employ dilated convolutions or reduce the image feature resolution
at specific network locations to allow the receptive field of
the pre-trained model to accommodate the higher-resolution
image generation process. However, applying dilated convolutions hampers the generative capabilities inherited from
pre-trained diffusion models. Meanwhile, downsampling and
upsampling image features result in information loss. These
operations lead to obvious structural distortions and repetitive patterns, as demonstrated in Figure 1. On the other hand,
DemoFusion (Du et al. 2024) introduces dilated sampling to
improve global consistency. Nonetheless, due to the lack of
fine-grained guidance, repetitive patterns continue to plague
this approach, as shown in Figure 1. In summary, existing
methods struggle to achieve structure consistency and reasonable local detail generation.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6887

