The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SORREL: Suboptimal-Demonstration-Guided
Reinforcement Learning for Learning to Branch
Shengyu Feng, Yiming Yang
Carnegie Mellon University
{shengyuf,yiming}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP) solvers are mostly built
upon a Branch-and-Bound (B&B) algorithm, where the efficiency of traditional solvers heavily depends on hand-crafted
heuristics for branching. The past few years have witnessed
the increasing popularity of data-driven approaches to automatically learn these heuristics. However, the success of
these methods is highly dependent on the availability of highquality demonstrations, which requires either the development of near-optimal heuristics or a time-consuming sampling process. This paper averts this challenge by proposing
Suboptimal-Demonstration-Guided Reinforcement Learning
(SORREL) for learning to branch. SORREL selectively learns
from suboptimal demonstrations based on value estimation. It
utilizes suboptimal demonstrations through both offline reinforcement learning on the demonstrations generated by suboptimal heuristics and self-imitation learning on past good
experiences sampled by itself. Our experiments demonstrate
its advanced performance in both branching quality and training efficiency over previous methods for various MILPs.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) has been a fundamental
challenge in computer science for decades, with a wide
range of real-world applications, including supply chain management, logistics optimization (Chopra and Meindl 2001),
workforce scheduling (Ernst et al. 2004), financial portfolios
(Mashayekh et al. 2017), compiler optimization (Trofin et al.
2021; Zheng et al. 2022), and more.
Many of those CO problems can be formulated within
a generic framework of Mixed Integer Linear Programs
(MILPs), which is a central focus in algorithm development.
Traditional MILP solvers recursively apply a divide-andconquer strategy to decompose a MILP into sub-problems
with additional bounds on the variables in a tree search,
namely Branch-and-Bound (B&B) (Land and Doig 1960),
until an optimal solution is found. Off-the-shelf solvers of
this kind include SCIP (Achterberg 2009), CPLEX (Cplex
2009), and Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization 2021).
In each iteration, the system solves the relaxed linear
program (LP) on a selected node (sub-problem) over the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11212

search tree and uses the LP solution (if it contains any fractional variable) to further divide the current problem into
two sub-problems. Such traditional solvers heavily rely on
hand-crafted domain-specific heuristics for branching, which
limits their capability to generalize across domains.
Recent machine learning research has offered new ways to
solve MILPs by replacing the need for hand-crafted heuristics with automatically learned heuristics from training data
(Gasse et al. 2019; Nair et al. 2020; Scavuzzo et al. 2022;
Parsonson, Laterre, and Barrett 2023). As a representative example, Gasse et al. (2019) formulated the MILP as a bipartite
graph with variable nodes on the left and constraint nodes on
the right, and trained a Graph Neural Network (GNN) to predict promising variables for branching in B&B. The followup works include the improvements of the GNN models for
scaling up (Nair et al. 2018; Gupta et al. 2020) and improved
solutions (Zarpellon et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2023b; Zhang
et al. 2024). All of these models are trained via imitation
learning (IL), and thus have one limitation in common, i.e.,
their effectiveness relies on the availability of high-quality
training data generated by near-optimal branching strategies
such as the full strong branching strategy (Achterberg, Koch,
and Martin 2005a). However, there is no optimality guarantee
for these heuristics on all types of MILPs, while developing
a near-optimal branching heuristic on each type of MILPs
poses a chicken-and-egg problem in learning.
To address the obstacle, some reinforcement learning (RL)
methods have been proposed (Sun et al. 2020; Scavuzzo et al.
2022; Qu et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2023a; Parsonson, Laterre, and Barrett 2023), which eliminate the dependency on
the demonstrations from near-optimal heuristics by actively
sampling training trajectories. However, current RL-based
methods still suffer from low sample efficiency in B&B, and
the training process often takes days to weeks even on easy
MILPs that could be solved in seconds (Scavuzzo et al. 2022;
Parsonson, Laterre, and Barrett 2023).
In essence, the practical applicability of existing methods
has been significantly constrained by the trade-off between
robustness to the demonstration quality and training efficiency. In this paper, we introduce a novel reinforcement
learning method, namely Suboptimal-Demonstration-Guided
Reinforcement Learning (SORREL), to address this conflict
by efficiently learning from suboptimal demonstrations. SORREL assimilates both (offline) IL- and (online) RL-based

