The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Continuous-time Tractable Model for Present-biased Agents
Yasunori Akagi1 , Hideaki Kim1 2 , Takeshi Kurashima1
1

2

NTT Human Informatics Labratories, NTT Corporation,
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{yasunori.akagi, kim.hideaki, takeshi.kurashima}@ntt.com

Abstract

much harder to resist the temptation.
Constructing behavior models incorporating present bias
has become an important research topic in artificial intelligence and behavioral economics. It helps us predict human behavior and determine appropriate interventions for
goal achievement. In particular, Kleinberg and Oren (2014)
proposed a graph-theoretic model to capture behavior under present bias. In this model, the graph’s vertices represent the agent’s states, while the edges represent the agent’s
actions. The agent moves toward the goal by repeatedly taking actions along a path that minimizes the perceived cost,
accounting for the effects of present bias. This model successfully replicates time-inconsistent behaviors studied extensively in behavioral economics, such as procrastination
and task abandonment, while being applicable to various
real-world tasks. Building on Kleinberg and Oren’s model,
Akagi, Marumo, and Kurashima (2024) proposed a more
feasible model restricting the tasks to progress-based tasks.
A progress-based task is one in which an agent accumulates
a real-valued measure called progress over a period and receives a reward if the progress reaches a predetermined goal.
Common examples of such tasks in daily life include completing 20 hours of exercise within a week or finishing a
graduation thesis within six months. This model allows for
the closed-form description of the agent’s behavior and the
efficient optimization of intervention, which were challenging in Kleinberg and Oren’s model due to the high computational complexity (Tang et al. 2017; Albers and Kraft 2019).
These models are crucial for examining the impact of
present bias on human behavior, but they have two practical challenges when applied to real-world scenarios. One is
that they are defined on a discretized time axis and demand
the problematic predefinition of an appropriate step size of
time (e.g., daily and weekly). If the time step is too large,
the agent’s behavior can only be described in coarse granularity, while a too-small time step significantly increases the
computational burden. The other is that the previous models only allow for a specific discount function called quasihyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997) with particular parameters to represent present bias. In behavioral economics,
not only quasi-hyperbolic discounting but also other discount functions, such as exponential discounting (Samuelson 1937) and hyperbolic discounting (Ainslie 1975), are
frequently employed to model human time preferences. Pre-

Present bias, the tendency to overvalue immediate rewards
while undervaluing future ones, is a well-known barrier to
achieving long-term goals. As artificial intelligence and behavioral economics increasingly focus on this phenomenon,
the need for robust mathematical models to predict behavior and guide effective interventions has become crucial.
However, existing models are constrained by their reliance
on the discreteness of time and limited discount functions.
This study introduces a novel continuous-time mathematical
model for agents influenced by present bias. Using the variational principle, we model human behavior, where individuals repeatedly act according to a sequence of states that minimize their perceived cost. Our model not only retains analytical tractability but also accommodates various discount functions. Using this model, we consider intervention optimization problems under exponential and hyperbolic discounting
and theoretically derive optimal intervention strategies, offering new insights into managing present-biased behavior.

1

Introduction

Humans often fail to achieve their goals despite having longterm plans, even when no unforeseen events occur. Consider
a person who plans to diet for a month. When making the
plan, they expect to achieve their target weight by strictly
managing their diet, believing they can resist temptations
like a weekend invitation to a barbecue. However, as the
weekend approaches, they succumb to temptation and go to
the barbecue, failing their diet. Such behavior is referred to
as time inconsistency and is a significant topic in behavioral
economics.
Time inconsistency is attributed to how humans discount
future values, mainly due to present bias. Present bias refers
to the tendency to overvalue immediate costs and rewards
while undervaluing those in the distant future. The mechanism by which present bias leads to time-inconsistent behavior can be explained using the example of a person planning a diet; during the planning stage, the individual does not
place a high value on the temptation of a weekend barbecue,
which is still some time away, and believes they can resist it.
However, as the weekend approaches, the value of the barbecue increases significantly due to present bias, making it
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13510

