The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DanceFix: An Exploration in Group Dance Neatness Assessment
Through Fixing Abnormal Challenges of Human Pose
Huangbiao Xu1,2 , Xiao Ke1,2 * , Huanqi Wu1,2 , Rui Xu1,2 ,
Yuezhou Li1,2 , Peirong Xu1,2 , Wenzhong Guo1,2
1

Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Networking Computing and Intelligent Information Processing, College of Computer
and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Fuzhou 350116, China
{kex, guowenzhong}@fzu.edu.cn,{huangbiaoxu.chn, wuhuangi135, xurui.ryan.chn, liyuezhou.cm}@gmail.com
Abstract
The fair and objective assessment of performances and competitions is a common pursuit and challenge in human society. The application of computer vision technology offers
hope for this purpose, but it still faces obstacles such as occlusion and motion blur. To address these hindrances, our DanceFix proposes a bidirectional spatial-temporal context optical
flow correction (BOFC) method. This approach leverages the
consistency and complementarity of motion information between two modalities: optical flow, which excels at pixel capture, and lightweight skeleton data. It enables the extraction
of pixel-level motion changes and the correction of abnormal
skeleton data. Furthermore, we propose a part-level dance
dataset (Dancer Parts) and part-level motion feature extraction based on task decoupling (PETD). This aims to decouple
complex whole-body parts tracking into fine-grained limblevel motion extraction, enhancing the confidence of temporal
information and the accuracy of correction for abnormal data.
Finally, we present the DNV dataset, which simulates fully
neat group dance scenes and provides reliable labels and validation methods for the newly introduced group dance neatness assessment (GDNA). To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to develop quantitative criteria for assessing
limb and joint neatness in group dance. We conduct experiments on DNV and video-based public JHMDB datasets. Our
method effectively corrects abnormal skeleton points, flexibly
embeds, and improves the accuracy of existing pose estimation algorithms.

Self-occlusion
Motion Blur Limb-joining
External Occlusion
Environmental Factor
(a)

Normal Action
Error Action
(b)

Figure 1: (a) Common abnormal challenges in dance scenes.
(b) Group dancing in real life is difficult, even impossible, to
achieve complete neatness. (Best viewed in color.)
and consistently dancers move with each other in a group
dance—a critical factor in group dance performances.
Various modalities are available to study human action,
such as RGB video (Li et al. 2022; Wen et al. 2023), optical
flow (Wang et al. 2023; Radevski et al. 2023), and skeleton data (Zhou, Liu, and Wang 2023; Lin, Zhang, and Liu
2023), but these works study only one modality, ignoring
the information consistency among modalities. The current
commonly used skeleton data is lightweight structural data
with high computational efficiency and robustness, which is
not easily affected by the background. However, the acquisition of skeleton data in practice depends on the accuracy of
pose estimation algorithms. The human dance actions studied in this paper are more variable with more complex action
information, which are more prone to abnormalities such as
self-occlusion, external occlusion, and motion blur leading
to inaccurate skeleton data (Fig. 1 (a)). This low-credibility
skeleton data reduces the accuracy of the dance neatness
assessment. In addition, we also find inconsistent motion
properties of body parts during actions. The human body
is a flexible articulated structure, with interconnected limbs
that often exhibit different motion properties. It is difficult to
achieve uniform changes in all body parts during movement.
Such differences are even more obvious in dance (e.g., hand

Introduction
Human action recognition and assessment is a significant visual task that has found widespread use in real-world scenarios. In recent years, the application of action recognition in
sports and dance entertainment (Guo, Zhao, and Li 2021;
Lei et al. 2023) has gained increasing attention, and virtual
games (Wu et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2021) based on human
interaction (e.g., dance, sports) have also extended the research in action assessment. In this paper, we focus on the
challenges in action understanding, taking dance action assessment as an example and proposing targeted solutions.
Specifically, we introduce the Group Dance Neatness Assessment (GDNA) task, which aims to assess how neatly
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8869

