The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Disentangled Motion Modeling for Video Frame Interpolation
Jaihyun Lew1 , Jooyoung Choi2 , Chaehun Shin2 , Dahuin Jung3,* , Sungroh Yoon1,2,4,*
1
Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Soongsil University
4
AIIS, ASRI and INMC, Seoul National University
{fudojhl, jy choi, chaehuny}@snu.ac.kr, dahuin.jung@ssu.ac.kr, sryoon@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) aims to synthesize intermediate frames between existing frames to enhance visual
smoothness and quality. Beyond the conventional methods
based on the reconstruction loss, recent works have employed
generative models for improved perceptual quality. However,
they require complex training and large computational costs
for pixel space modeling. In this paper, we introduce disentangled Motion Modeling (MoMo), a diffusion-based approach for VFI that enhances visual quality by focusing on intermediate motion modeling. We propose a disentangled twostage training process. In the initial stage, frame synthesis and
flow models are trained to generate accurate frames and flows
optimal for synthesis. In the subsequent stage, we introduce a
motion diffusion model, which incorporates our novel U-Net
architecture specifically designed for optical flow, to generate
bi-directional flows between frames. By learning the simpler
low-frequency representation of motions, MoMo achieves
superior perceptual quality with reduced computational demands compared to the generative modeling methods on the
pixel space. MoMo surpasses state-of-the-art methods in perceptual metrics across various benchmarks, demonstrating its
efficacy and efficiency in VFI.

1

ABME (Park, Lee, and Kim 2021)

IFRNet-Large (Kong et al. 2022)

AMT-G (Li et al. 2023)

LDMVFI (Danier, Zhang, and Bull 2024)

FILM-ℒ! (Reda et al. 2022)

MoMo (Ours)

Figure 1: Video frame interpolation results of our proposed
method called MoMo with comparison to state-of-the-art
methods. MoMo produces the most visually pleasant result,
owing to proper modeling of the intermediate motion.

Introduction
However, these approaches often result in perceptually
unsatisfying outcomes due to their reliance on L1 or L2 objectives, leading to high PSNR scores yet poor perceptual
quality (Ledig et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018). To address this
matter, recent advancements (Choi et al. 2020; Jiang et al.
2018; Niklaus and Liu 2020; Chen and Zwicker 2022) have
explored the use of deep feature spaces to achieve improved
quality in terms of human perception (Johnson, Alahi, and
Fei-Fei 2016; Zhang et al. 2018). Additionally, the integration of generative models into VFI (Danier, Zhang, and Bull
2024; Wu et al. 2024) has introduced novel pathways for
improving the visual quality of videos but has primarily focused on modeling pixels or latent spaces directly, which
demands high computational resources.
We introduce disentangled Motion Modeling (MoMo), a
perception-oriented approach for VFI, focusing on the modeling of intermediate motions rather than direct pixel generation. Here, we employ a diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020) to generate bi-directional optical flow maps,

Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) is a crucial task in computer vision that aims to synthesize absent frames between
existing ones in a video. It has a wide spectrum of applications, such as slow motion generation (Jiang et al. 2018),
video compression (Wu, Singhal, and Krahenbuhl 2018),
and animation production (Siyao et al. 2021). Its ultimate
goal is to elevate the visual quality of videos through enhanced motion smoothness and image sharpness. Motions,
represented by optical flows (Sun et al. 2018; Teed and Deng
2020) and realized by warping, have been central to VFI’s
development as recent innovations in VFI have mostly been
accomplished along with advances in intermediate motion
estimation (Xu et al. 2019; Chi et al. 2020; Park et al. 2020;
Park, Lee, and Kim 2021; Sim, Oh, and Kim 2021; Reda
et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2023).
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4607

