The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Generalized Convergence Analysis of Tsetlin Automaton Based Algorithms: A
Probabilistic Approach to Concept Learning
Mohamed-Bachir Belaid1 , Jivitesh Sharma1, 2 , Lei Jiao2 , Ole-Christoffer Granmo2 ,
Per-Arne Andersen2 , Anis Yazidi3, 4
1

NILU, Climate and environmental research institute, Kjeller, Norway.
2
Centre for AI Research, University of Agder, Grimstad, Norway.
3
Oslo Metropolitan University, Norway.
4
Oslo University Hospital, Norway.
bbel@nilu.no, jsha@nilu.no, lei.jiao@uia.no, ole.granmo@uia.no, per.andersen@uia.no, anisy@oslomet.no
Abstract
Tsetlin Machines (TMs) have garnered increasing interest for
their ability to learn concepts via propositional formulas and
their proven efficiency across various application domains.
Despite this, the convergence proof for the TMs, particularly
for the AND operator (conjunction of literals), in the generalized case (inputs greater than two bits) remains an open
problem. This paper aims to fill this gap by presenting a comprehensive convergence analysis of Tsetlin automaton-based
Machine Learning algorithms. We introduce a novel framework, referred to as Probabilistic Concept Learning (PCL),
which simplifies the TM structure while incorporating dedicated feedback mechanisms and dedicated inclusion/exclusion
probabilities for literals. Given n features, PCL aims to learn
a set of conjunction clauses Ci each associated with a distinct inclusion probability pi . Most importantly, we establish
a theoretical proof confirming that, for any clause Ck , PCL
converges to a conjunction of literals when 0.5 < pk < 1.
This result serves as a stepping stone for future research on the
convergence properties of Tsetlin automaton-based learning
algorithms. Our findings not only contribute to the theoretical
understanding of Tsetlin automaton-based learning algorithms
but also have implications for their practical application, potentially leading to more robust and interpretable machine
learning models.

Introduction
Concept Learning, a mechanism to infer Boolean functions
from examples, has its foundations in classical machine learning (Valiant 1984; Angluin 1988; Mitchell 1997). A modern incarnation, the Tsetlin Machine (TM) (Granmo 2018),
utilizes Tsetlin Automata (TAs) (Tsetlin 1961) to generate
Boolean expressions as conjunctive clauses. Contrary to the
opaqueness of deep neural networks, TMs stand out for
their inherent interpretability rooted in disjunctive normal
form (Valiant 1984). Recent extensions to the basic TM include architectures for convolution (Granmo et al. 2019),
regression (Abeyrathna et al. 2020), and other diverse variants (Seraj, Sharma, and Granmo 2022; Sharma et al. 2023;
Abeyrathna et al. 2021, 2023). These advances have found
relevance in areas like sentiment analysis (Yadav et al. 2021)
and novelty detection (Bhattarai, Granmo, and Jiao 2022).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15524

Proving the convergence of a machine learning model is
crucial as it guarantees the model’s reliability and stability,
ensuring that it reaches a consistent solution (Shalev-Shwartz
et al. 2010; Berkenkamp et al. 2017). It also aids in the development and evaluation of algorithms, providing a theoretical
benchmark for performance and understanding the model’s
limitations. Convergence analysis of TMs reveals proven behavior for 1-bit (Zhang et al. 2022) and 2-bit cases (Jiao,
Zhang, and Granmo 2021; Jiao et al. 2023), encompassing
the AND, OR, and XOR operators. However, general convergence, especially with more input bits, poses significant
challenges. The crux of the issue stems from the clause-based
interdependence of literals in the learning mechanism of TMs.
Essentially, the feedback to a literal is influenced by other
literals in the same clause. This interdependency, combined
with vast potential combinations of literals, compounds the
difficulty in a general proof for TMs.
Our work introduces Probabilistic inclusion of literals for
Concept Learning (PCL), an innovative TM variant. PCL’s
design allows literals to be updated and analyzed independently, contrasting starkly with standard TM behavior. This
is achieved by tweaking feedback tables to exclude clause
values during training and omitting the inaction transition.
Additionally, PCL employs dedicated inclusion probabilities
for clauses to diversify the learned patterns. Most importantly, we provide evidence that PCL clauses, under certain
preconditions, can converge to any intended conjunction of
literals. Our assertions are bolstered by experimental results
to confirm the theoretical finding and to show PCL’s behavior
on a selected real-world problem (binary IRIS). Finally, it is
important to note that our proof on the convergence of PCL
does not imply convergence of the original Tsetlin Machine,
but it lays a robust foundation and outlines a clear roadmap
for potential proofs concerning learning algorithms that are
based on Tsetlin Automaton.

Tsetlin Machine
Structure: A Tsetlin Machine (TM) processes a boolean
feature vector x = [x1 , . . . , xn ] ∈ {0, 1}n to assign a
class ŷ ∈ {0, 1}. The vector defines the literal set L =
{x1 , . . . , xn , ¬x1 , . . . , ¬xn }. TM uses subsets Lj ⊆ L to

