The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SUMI-IFL: An Information-Theoretic Framework for Image Forgery
Localization with Sufficiency and Minimality Constraints
Ziqi Sheng1 , Wei Lu1 * , Xiangyang Luo2 * , Jiantao Zhou3 , Xiaochun Cao4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Laboratory of Information Technology,
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Sun Yat-sen University.
2
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing.
3
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
4
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University.
shengzq@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, luwei3@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
luoxy ieu@sina.com, jtzhou@um.edu.mo, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

has been proliferating and can be broadly categorized into
two main groups: those focusing on extracting more comprehensive forgery clues, and those focusing on obtaining
more accurate forgery clues. One line of work explores comprehensive forgery clues by designing multi-stream structures or utilizing multiple dimensions of auxiliary information (Sun et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024). For instance, (Zhang,
Li, and Chang 2024) designed a two-stream architecture
incorporating RGB and frequency features to detect tampered images. MVSS-Net (Dong et al. 2022) proposed an
edge-sensitive branch and noise-sensitive branch to mine the
forgery edge with the aid of edge information and noise information. After fully acquiring the forgery features, some
task-unrelated noises will inevitably be introduced. For example, the post-processing operation traces, the JPEG artifacts (Kwon et al. 2022a) contained in JPEG images, and
reconstruction artifacts in stereo images (Luo et al. 2022).
This task-irrelevant information can significantly affect the
localization performance of the IFL task. Therefore, another
line of work is dedicated to obtaining more accurate forgery
features (Zhang et al. 2024), so as to resist the interference of
task-unrelated information. For example, (Zhuo et al. 2022)
utilized a self-attention mechanism including the spatial attention branch and channel attention branch to better localize forgery regions. (Li et al. 2023a) devised a region message passing controller to weaken the message passing between the forged and authentic regions, thus obtaining a refined forgery feature. Although these methods have largely
advanced the IFL field, the urgent challenge of extracting
forgery clues comprehensively and accurately still exists due
to the rapid advancement of image forgery techniques.

Image forgery localization (IFL) is a crucial technique for
preventing tampered image misuse and protecting social
safety. However, due to the rapid development of image tampering technologies, extracting more comprehensive and accurate forgery clues remains an urgent challenge. To address
these challenges, we introduce a novel information-theoretic
IFL framework named SUMI-IFL that imposes sufficiencyview and minimality-view constraints on forgery feature representation. First, grounded in the theoretical analysis of mutual information, the sufficiency-view constraint is enforced
on the feature extraction network to ensure that the latent
forgery feature contains comprehensive forgery clues. Considering that forgery clues obtained from a single aspect alone
may be incomplete, we construct the latent forgery feature by
integrating several individual forgery features from multiple
perspectives. Second, based on the information bottleneck,
the minimality-view constraint is imposed on the feature reasoning network to achieve an accurate and concise forgery
feature representation that counters the interference of taskunrelated features. Extensive experiments show the superior
performance of SUMI-IFL to existing state-of-the-art methods, not only on in-dataset comparisons but also on crossdataset comparisons.

Introduction
Driven by the extensive accessibility of large-scale digital
image datasets and the advancement of AIGC technologies,
generating vast quantities of forgery images that surpass human detection has become remarkably effortless. However,
the malicious utilization of these forged images can lead
to severe consequences, such as identity theft, privacy violations, large-scale economic fraud, and the proliferation
of misinformation. Given the severe consequences of image
forgeries, there has been an increasing focus on developing
advanced image forgery localization (IFL) technologies.
IFL is a technique that performs true/false judgment on
suspicious images and further predicts tampered regions at
a pixel level. Research on image forgery localization (IFL)

To meet this challenge, we propose an informationtheoretic IFL framework named SUMI-IFL employs
sufficiency-view and minimality-view constraints to obtain
more comprehensive and accurate forgery features. The
sufficiency-view constraint is applied to the feature extraction network to ensure that the latent forgery feature contains
comprehensive forgery clues by maximizing the mutual information between the latent feature and the ground-truth label. Besides, to further explore comprehensive forgery clues,
we construct the latent forgery feature from several individ-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

720

