The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multilingual LLMs Inherently Reward In-Language Time–Sensitive Semantic
Alignment for Low-Resource Languages
Ashutosh Bajpai1,2 , Tanmoy Chakraborty1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India
2
Wipro Research, India
eez228482@ee.iitd.ac.in, tanchak@ee.iitd.ac.in

Abstract

gal studies, and archaeology. Furthermore, addressing lowresource languages in LLMs is crucial for computational linguistics, given their paucity of data and digital infrastructure
(Cahyawijaya et al. 2023; Asai et al. 2023; Adilazuarda et al.
2024). Enhancing LLMs for these languages improves not
just genuine linguistic inclusivity but also their application
and acceptance across diverse cultural landscapes. The discourse on enhancing temporal reasoning in LLMs has, until now, been predominantly focused on English. Our work
seeks to alleviate this disparity by propelling temporal reasoning in low-resource languages.

The unwavering disparity in labeled resources between
resource-rich languages and those considered low-resource
remains a significant impediment for Large Language Models (LLMs). Recent strides in cross-lingual in-context learning (X-ICL), mainly through semantically aligned examples
retrieved from multilingual pre-trained transformers, have
shown promise in mitigating this issue. However, our investigation reveals that LLMs intrinsically reward in-language semantically aligned cross-lingual instances over direct crosslingual semantic alignments, with a pronounced disparity in handling time–sensitive queries in the X-ICL setup.
Such queries demand sound temporal reasoning ability from
LLMs, yet the advancements have predominantly focused on
English. This study aims to bridge this gap by improving temporal reasoning capabilities in low-resource languages. To
this end, we introduce mTEMPREASON, a temporal reasoning dataset aimed at the varied degrees of low-resource languages and propose Cross-Lingual Time-Sensitive Semantic
Alignment (CLiTSSA), a novel method to improve temporal reasoning in these contexts. To facilitate this, we construct
an extension of mTEMPREASON comprising pairs of parallel cross–language temporal queries along with their anticipated in-language semantic similarity scores. Our empirical
evidence underscores the superior performance of CLiTSSA
compared to established baselines across three languages –
Romanian, German, and French, encompassing three temporal tasks and including a diverse set of four contemporaneous
LLMs. This marks a significant step forward in addressing
resource disparity in the context of temporal reasoning across
languages.

Cross-Lingual In-Context Prompting. Recent advancements in in-context learning (ICL), prompted by the advent of LLMs, have shown promising results (Zhao et al.
2021; Lin et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022).
The stark contrast in annotated data availability among languages accentuates the usage of high-resource linguistic
contexts for addressing tasks in low-resource languages. The
ICL approach was adapted by Winata et al. (2021) for crosslingual (X-ICL) applications by randomly selecting examples from a resource-rich language to support queries in a
language with limited resources.
Figure 1 shows three levels of temporal queries - L1
(Time–Time), L2 (Time–Event), and L3 (Event–Event) and
the expected model responses: time information for L1
queries, an event for L2 given time, and for L3, an event
in response to another event, without explicit temporal details in either input or output. An illustrative L1 query in
English (“What is the time 6 years and 4 months after Nov,
1185”) with an associated answer (“Mar, 1192”) serves as
additional context for a corresponding L1 query in Romanian (“Care este timpul cu 8 ani ,si 3 luni ı̂nainte de august
1240”). Subsequent research suggested that cross-lingual
examples that are semantically aligned can significantly enhance performance compared to the arbitrarily selected examples (Tanwar et al. 2023). Further development also indicates that semantic similarity alone doesn’t ensure the optimal performance, stressing the necessity for a learningbased retrieval model. (Lin, Martins, and Schütze 2024).

Introduction
In the evolving landscape of Large Language Models
(LLMs), temporal reasoning requires models to comprehend
and interpret the significant subtleties inherent in time–time,
time–event and event–event correlations (Chen, Wang, and
Wang 2021; Dhingra et al. 2022). Temporality is a crucial dimension of information that evolves through creation, maintenance, and obsolescence. Enhancing LLMs with this faculty augments their analytical capabilities, paving the way
for addressing intricate challenges prevalent in domains sensitive to temporal dynamics, such as finance, healthcare, le-

Challenges in Cross-Lingual Semantic Alignment.
Cross-lingual in-context approaches rely on the contextual
semantic profoundness embedded within multilingual
pre-trained encoder-only transformers, reflected through

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23469

