The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Online Prompt Selection for Program Synthesis
Yixuan Li1 , Lewis Frampton1 , Federico Mora2 , Elizabeth Polgreen1
1

University of Edinburgh, UK
University of California, Berkeley, USA
{yixuan.li.cs, elizabeth.polgreen}@ed.ac.uk
2

Abstract

from many different prompting styles. Finally, compounding the challenge of these choices, calling LLMs is often
expensive (in terms of computational cost, or the financial
cost of using commercial APIs), and so making the wrong
choice for a large set of synthesis tasks is highly undesirable.
This paper addresses these gaps through an online learning
method that, given a synthesis task, will predict whether a
symbolic solver or LLM, from a portfolio of LLMs, is most
likely to solve the problem, with a corresponding prompting
style.
We collate a portfolio of prompting styles and language
models, which we combine into LLM-prompt pairs that we
refer to as “solvers”. We formulate the task of ranking the
solvers in order of most likely to solve the problem as a
multi-armed bandit problem (Auer et al. 2002). The multiarmed bandit sequentially selects between choices (in our
case, solvers) with unknown rewards (in our case, rewards
are given for solving problems correctly and fast or with
low computational cost). It trades off exploration, i.e., trying new solvers, with exploitation, i.e., using solvers that are
known to be good. We also present a second variation of this
formulation, with multiple layers of bandits. The top multiarmed bandit selects between the symbolic solver and the
LLMs, and then the bandits in the lower layer predict the
best prompt style for the chosen LLM.
We implement an instance of our approach, CYANEA, and
evaluate it on synthesis tasks from the syntax-guided synthesis competition (Alur et al. 2024), from the literature on
ranking function synthesis (Giacobbe, Kroening, and Parsert
2022; Giesl et al. 2019), and generated from the SMT competition (Parsert and Polgreen 2024). CYANEA solves 37.2%
more synthesis queries than the best single LLM or solver,
and gets within 4% of the virtual best solver.

Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities in the domain of program synthesis. This level
of performance is not, however, universal across all tasks,
all LLMs and all prompting styles. There are many areas
where one LLM dominates, one prompting style dominates,
or where calling a symbolic solver is a better choice than an
LLM. A key challenge for the user then, is to identify not
only when an LLM is the right choice of solver, and the appropriate LLM to call for a given synthesis task, but also the
right way to call it. A non-expert user who makes the wrong
choice, incurs a cost both in terms of results (number of tasks
solved, and the time it takes to solve them) and financial cost,
if using a closed-source language model via a commercial
API. We frame this choice as an online learning problem. We
use a multi-armed bandit algorithm to select which symbolic
solver, or LLM and prompt combination to deploy in order to
maximize a given reward function (which may prioritize solving time, number of synthesis tasks solved, or financial cost of
solving). We implement an instance of this approach, called
CYANEA , and evaluate it on synthesis queries from the literature in ranking function synthesis, from the syntax-guided
synthesis competition, and fresh, unseen queries generated
from SMT problems. CYANEA solves 37.2% more queries
than the best single solver and achieves results within 4% of
the virtual best solver.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are beginning to dominate
the discourse around program synthesis and code generation. So much so, that one might suppose they are the de
facto answer to all code-generation questions. However, this
is not the case. There are many synthesis problems in which
LLMs still fall far short of the basic enumerative techniques
and symbolic solvers (Li, Parsert, and Polgreen 2024; Barke
et al. 2024). In addition, even when an LLM is the best
choice, they still hold a significant barrier to entry for the inexperienced user: first, not all LLMs perform uniformly well
across all problem sets, and it is often unclear which LLM
a user should choose; second, the performance of LLMs is
often dependent on careful prompt engineering by expert researchers, with the literature reporting performance gains

2

Background

Program Synthesis
Program synthesis is the task of automatically generating
code or expressions to satisfy some specification. In this paper, we define a program synthesis query q to be a tuple
⟨τ, f, ϕ⟩ where τ is a background theory, f is a function to
be synthesized, and ϕ is a quantifier-free formula. A solution
to the synthesis query is a body for the function f such that
the formula ϕ is τ -valid, i.e., the formula ∀x.ϕ(f ) is true

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11282

