The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Augmenting Sequential Recommendation with Balanced Relevance and Diversity
Yizhou Dang 1 , Jiahui Zhang 1 , Yuting Liu 1 , Enneng Yang 1 , Yuliang Liang 1
Guibing Guo 1 * , Jianzhe Zhao 1* , Xingwei Wang 2
1

2

Software College, Northeastern University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
{yzdang,yutingliu,ennengyang,liangyuliang}@stumail.neu.edu.cn
{guogb,zhaojz}@swc.neu.edu.cn, {zhangjiahui,wangxw}@mail.neu.edu.cn

Original Sequence

Mainly electronic
products.

Original Sequence

Abstract

Weak new
Relevance
Important
By generating
yet ffective data,
data interactions
augmentation has
are replaced,
become a promising method to mitigate
the i.e.,
data sparsity
semantics drift.
problem in sequential recommendation. Existing works focus
similar
to the the issue
Weak Diversity
on augmenting
the original data butVery
rarely
explore
original, i.e., overly
of imbalanced relevance and diversity
for
augmented
data,
conservative data
leading to semantic drift problems or limited
performance imaugmentation.
provements. In this paper, we propose a novel Balanced data
Augmentation Plugin for Sequential Recommendation (BASRec) to generate data that balance relevance and diversity.
BASRec consists of two modules: Single-sequence Augmentation and 原始序列
Cross-sequence Augmentation. The former leverages the randomness of the heuristic operators
to generate di以电子产品为主。
verse sequences for a single user, after which the diverse and
the original 弱相关性
sequences are fused at the representation level
重要的交互被替换导，
to obtain relevance. Further, we devise a
reweighting strat导致偏好漂移问题。
egy to enable the model to learn the preferences based on
the two properties
adaptively. The Cross-sequence Augmen弱新颖性
与原始序列非常相似，
tation performs nonlinear mixing between
different sequence
导致过于保守的数据
representations from two directions.
It produces virtual se增强。
quence representations that are diverse enough but retain the
vital semantics of the original sequences. These two modules enhance the model to discover fine-grained preferences
knowledge from single-user and cross-user perspectives. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of BASRec. The
average improvement is up to 72.0% on GRU4Rec, 33.8%
on SASRec, and 68.5% on FMLP-Rec. We demonstrate that
BASRec generates data with a better balance between relevance and diversity than existing methods.

Weak Relevance
Weak Diversity

Mainly electronic
products.

Important interactions
are replaced, i.e.,
semantics drift.
Very similar to the
original, i.e., overly
conservative data
augmentation.

How to
balance
two
properties?

Figure 1: An illustration of imbalanced relevance and diversity issues in sequential data augmentation.
as Sliding Windows (Tang and Wang 2018) and Dropout
(Tan, Xu, and Liu 2016). Later, some researchers generated high-quality augmented data by counterfactual thinking (Wang et al. 2021), diffusion models (Liu et al. 2023)
or bi-directional transformer (Jiang et al. 2021). With the
success of self-supervised learning (Chen et al. 2020), many
sequence-level augmentation operators have been proposed
for contrastive learning (Liu et al. 2021; Xie et al. 2022).
Despite the effectiveness, the imbalance between relevance and diversity for augmented data remains to be solved
(Bian et al. 2022). ‘Relevance’ means that the augmented
data should have transition patterns similar to the original
data to avoid semantics drift problems. ‘Diversity’ means
that the augmented data should contain sufficient variations
to enable the model to explore more user preferences knowledge and improve its performance. However, these two factors are often conflicting and challenging to trade off. For
example, as shown in Figure 1, heuristic augmentation and
operators proposed in recent years perform cropping, masking, substitution, or shuffle to the original sequence. The
new sequences may deviate from the original data, resulting in weak correlations. Model- and representation-level
augmentation methods, while improving the correlation of
the generated data through well-designed generation modules, fail to produce sufficient diversity. These conservative
augmented data make it challenging to improve the model
performance further. Intuitively, we can obtain suitable samples by directly merging the two augmented sequences in
Figure 1. However, directly merging them will corrupt the
original sequence patterns, and irrelevant or repeated items
will be retained, resulting in inaccurate representation learning. In addition, existing methods focus on single-sequence

Code — https://github.com/KingGugu/BASRec

Introduction
As an essential branch of recommender systems, sequential
recommendation (SR) has received much attention due to
its well-consistency with real-world recommendation situations. However, the widespread problem of data sparsity limits the SR model’s performance (Jing et al. 2023). For this
reason, researchers have proposed many data augmentation
methods to mitigate this phenomenon (Dang et al. 2023b,
2024a). Earlier work used heuristic methods to directly augment sequences and mix them to the training process, such
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11563

