The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Degradation Representation Aware Transform
for Real-World Blind Image Super-Resolution
Sen Chen1 * , Hongying Liu2,3 * , Chaowei Fang1 , Fanhua Shang4† ,
Yuanyuan Liu1† , Liang Wan2,4 , Dongmei Jiang3 , Yaowei Wang3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
2
Medical College, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
chensen@stu.xidian.edu.cn; hyliu2009@tju.edu.cn; fhshang@tju.edu.cn; yyliu@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract
Blind image super-resolution (blind SR) aims to restore a
high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) image with unknown degradation. Many existing methods explicitly estimate degradation information from various LR
images. However, in most cases, image degradations are independent of image content. Their estimations may be influenced by the image content resulting in inaccuracy. Unlike
existing works, we design a dual-encoder for degradation representation (DEDR) to preclude the influence of image content from LR images. This benefits in extracting the intrinsic
degradation representation more accurately. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper is the first work that estimates degradation representation through filtering out image content. Based
on the degradation representation extracted by DEDR, we
present a novel framework, named degradation representation aware transform network (DRAT) for blind SR. We
propose global degradation aware (GDA) blocks to propagate
degradation information across spatial and channel dimensions, in which a degradation representation transform module (DRT) is introduced to render features degradation-aware,
thereby enhancing the restoration of LR images. Extensive
experiments are conducted on three benchmark datasets (including Gaussian 8, DIV2KRK, and real-world datasets) under large scaling factors with complex degradations. The experimental results demonstrate that DRAT surpasses state-ofthe-art supervised kernel estimation and unsupervised degradation representation methods.

(a) Degradation setting1

(b) Degradation setting2 (c) Blur-Encoder T-SNE result (d) Dual-Encoder T-SNE result

Figure 1: T-SNE visualization for the features extracted by
conventional blur-encoder and our dual-encoder. Given an
image, two different blur kernels are used to degrade it as
shown in (a) and (b). The features extracted by conventional
blur-encoder (Wang et al. 2021a; Xia et al. 2023) and our
proposed dual-encoder on the degraded images are visualized in (c) and (d), respectively. D1 and D2 indicate features
extracted from images degraded with kernels in (a) and (b),
respectively. T-SNE is used to reduce the feature dimension.
We can see that the features extracted by our dual-encoder
are more discriminative to the degradation type than those
features extracted by the conventional blur encoder.
on blind Super-Resolution (blind SR), specifically targeting
multiple degradations. The degradation model for blind SR
task assumes that the LR image y is obtained as follows:
y = (x ∗ kb )↓s + n,

Code — https://github.com/KKKc3231/DRAT

(1)

where x is the HR image, kb denotes the blur kernel, ∗
denotes convolution operation, ↓s represents the downsampling with scale factor s, and n denotes the random noise.
The study of blind SR is particularly challenging due
to complex degradation and degradation estimation from
LR image (Zhang et al. 2021; Luo et al. 2022b; Wang
et al. 2021b). Supervised Kernel Estimation (SKE) methods (Liang et al. 2021b; Tao et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2020)
employ a two-step process where an estimated blur kernel is first derived and then applied within the SR network
to facilitate image restoration. The main issue is the inaccuracy of the blur kernel estimation, which may lead to
significant performance decline and the artifacts in the restored images. To overcome these limitations, recent trends,
such as the methods (Wang et al. 2021a; Xia et al. 2023;

1 Introduction
In single image super-resolution (SISR), the aim is to restore
a given low-resolution (LR) image to a high-resolution (HR)
image. Traditional SISR approaches (Lim et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2018a,b; Wang et al. 2023; Xia et al. 2022) often hinge
on predetermined downsampling operations. However, these
methods show limitations when facing the dynamic and varied nature of degradations. Hence, our study concentrates
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2177

