The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Decentralized Federated Learning with Model Caching on Mobile Agents
Xiaoyu Wang1 , Guojun Xiong2 , Houwei Cao3 , Jian Li2 , Yong Liu1
1
New York University
Stony Brook University
3
New York Institute of Technology
{wang.xiaoyu, yongliu}@nyu.edu, {guojun.xiong, jian.li.3}@stonybrook.edu, hcao02@nyit.edu
2

Abstract

the updated parameters to obtain the new global model. FL
naturally complements emerging Internet-of-Things (IoT)
systems, where each IoT device not only can sense its
surrounding environment to collect local data, but also is
equipped with computation resources for local model training, and communication interfaces to interact with a central server for model aggregation. Many IoT devices are mobile, ranging from mobile phones, autonomous cars/drones,
to self-navigating robots. In recent research efforts on smart
connected vehicles, there has been a focus on integrating
vehicle-to-everything (V2X) networks with Machine Learning (ML) tools and distributed decision making (Barbieri
et al. 2022), particularly in the area of computer vision tasks
such as traffic light and signal recognition, road condition
sensing, intelligent obstacle avoidance, and intelligent road
routing, etc. With FL, vehicles locally train deep ML models
and upload the model parameters to the central server. This
approach not only reduces bandwidth consumption, as the
size of model parameters is much smaller than the size of
raw image/video data, but also leverages computing power
on vehicles, and protects user privacy.

Federated Learning (FL) trains a shared model using data and
computation power on distributed agents coordinated by a
central server. Decentralized FL (DFL) utilizes local model
exchange and aggregation between agents to reduce the communication and computation overheads on the central server.
However, when agents are mobile, the communication opportunity between agents can be sporadic, largely hindering the
convergence and accuracy of DFL. In this paper, we propose
Cached Decentralized Federated Learning (Cached-DFL)
to investigate delay-tolerant model spreading and aggregation enabled by model caching on mobile agents. Each agent
stores not only its own model, but also models of agents encountered in the recent past. When two agents meet, they exchange their own models as well as the cached models. Local model aggregation utilizes all models stored in the cache.
We theoretically analyze the convergence of Cached-DFL,
explicitly taking into account the model staleness introduced
by caching. We design and compare different model caching
algorithms for different DFL and mobility scenarios. We conduct detailed case studies in a vehicular network to systematically investigate the interplay between agent mobility,
cache staleness, and model convergence. In our experiments,
Cached-DFL converges quickly, and significantly outperforms DFL without caching.

However, FL on mobile agents still faces communication and computation challenges. The movements of mobile agents, especially at high speed, lead to fast-changing
channel conditions on the wireless connections between mobile agents and the central server, resulting in high latency
in FL (Niknam, Dhillon, and Reed 2020). Battery-powered
mobile agents also have limited power budget for longrange wireless communications. Non-i.i.d data distributions
on mobile agents make it difficult for local models to converge. As a result, FL on mobile agents to obtain an optimal global model remains an open challenge. Decentralized
FL (DFL) has emerged as a potential solution where local
model aggregations are conducted between neighboring mobile agents using local device-to-device (D2D) communications with high bandwidth, low latency and low power consumption (Martı́nez Beltrán et al. 2023). Preliminary studies
have demonstrated that DFL algorithms have the potential
to significantly reduce the high communication costs associated with centralized FL. However, blindly applying model
aggregation algorithms, such as FedAvg (McMahan et al.
2017), developed for centralized FL to DFL cannot achieve
fast convergence and high model accuracy (Liu et al. 2022).

Code —
https://github.com/ShawnXiaoyuWang/Cached-DFL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14001

Introduction
Federated Learning on Mobile Agents
Federated learning (FL) is a type of distributed machine
learning (ML) that prioritizes data privacy (McMahan et al.
2017). The traditional FL involves a central server that connects with a large number of agents. The agents retain their
data and do not share them with the server. During each
communication round, the server sends the current global
model to the agents, and a small subset of agents are chosen
to update the global model by running stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951) for multiple iterations on their local data. The central server then aggregates
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21296

