The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FedCross: Intertemporal Federated Learning Under Evolutionary Games
Jianfeng Lu1,2 , Ying Zhang1 , Riheng Jia3 * , Shuqin Cao1 , Jing Liu4 , Hao Fu4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, China
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence (Dalian University of Technology), Ministry of Education,
China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, China
4
Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing and Real-time Industrial System, Wuhan University of
Science and Technology, China
{jianfenglu, ravenb7}@wust.edu.cn, rihengjia@zjnu.edu.cn, {shuqincao, luijing cs, fuhao}@wust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

risk of private data leakage by allowing multiple clients to
perform local training based on a globally shared model,
and then sending the updated model parameters to a central server for aggregation. However, frequent communication between clients and servers can lead to significant overhead. Using edge servers, such as base stations, as intermediaries for early aggregation in a hierarchical federated
learning (HFL) framework (Xu et al. 2021) is undoubtedly
a better choice. Since users participating in model training
inevitably consume computational and communication resources (Wang et al. 2021), it is essential to design an effective HFL framework that strategically incentivizes users to
contribute high-quality model updates during the training.

Federated Learning (FL) mitigates privacy leakage in decentralized machine learning by allowing multiple clients to train
collaboratively locally. However, dynamic mobile networks
with high mobility, intermittent connectivity, and bandwidth
limitation severely hinder model updates to the cloud server.
Although previous studies have typically addressed user mobility issue through task reassignment or predictive modeling, frequent migrations may result in high communication
overhead. Addressing this challenge involves not only dealing
with resource constraints, but also finding ways to mitigate
the challenges posed by user migrations. We therefore propose a intertemporal incentive framework, FedCross, which
ensures the continuity of FL tasks by migrating interrupted
training tasks to feasible mobile devices. FedCross comprises
two distinct stages: Specifically, in Stage 1, we address the
task allocation problem across regions under resource constraints by employing a multi-objective migration algorithm
to quantify the optimal task receivers. Moreover, we adopt
evolutionary game theory to capture the dynamic decisionmaking of users, forecasting the evolution of user proportions
across different regions to mitigate frequent migrations. In
Stage 2, we utilize a procurement auction mechanism to allocate rewards among base stations, ensuring that those providing high-quality models receive optimal compensation. This
approach incentivizes sustained user participation, thereby
ensuring the overall feasibility of FedCross. Finally, experimental results validate the theoretical soundness of FedCross
and demonstrate its significant reduction in communication
overhead.

Currently, research on incentives in HFL may still be insufficiently comprehensive. On the one hand, in FL, mobile
users within a region may not be able to consistently provide
services to the current base station, as the number of users
in a specific area may not remain constant over an extended
period (Zhu et al. 2022). As the migration rate increases,
the model accuracy is expected to decline and the convergence speed will decrease, while the associated communication overhead will also increase. Unfortunately, previous researches have largely focused on single issues (Rawashdeh
et al. 2021), neglecting the interplay between task migration decisions and resource allocation schemes. Task migration is a factor affecting task continuity, while resource allocation influences task migration decisions. On the other
hand, although existing studies have designed appropriate
incentives to encourage users to participate in training, the
sustainability of the incentives versus the limited budget is
again a problem (Yu et al. 2020). Therefore, it is necessary
to implement appropriate incentive mechanisms to mitigate
these negative impacts.

Introduction
With the explosive growth of artificial intelligence (AI),
concerns regarding privacy and security issues associated
with centralized learning have been intensifying (Mothukuri
et al. 2021). Federated Learning (FL), introduced by Google
(McMahan et al. 2017), marks a paradigm shift in distributed
learning, tackling data privacy and communication challenges by decentralizing model training. FL mitigates the

Addressing the abovementioned issues is highly urgent
and most confront three major challenges. (i) Ensuring task
continuity during migration. Some participants may leave
the coverage area of the current base station at any given moment, leading to interruptions in FL tasks (Liu et al. 2023).
Consequently, maintaining task continuity while minimizing migration overhead is a critical challenge to prevent data
wastage. (ii) Non-IID data distribution among mobile users.

* Corresponding Author is Riheng Jia.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved

19115

