The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MultiSFL: Towards Accurate Split Federated Learning via Multi-Model
Aggregation and Knowledge Replay
Zeke Xia1 * , Ming Hu2 * , Dengke Yan1 , Ruixuan Liu1 , Anran Li3 , Xiaofei Xie2 , Mingsong Chen1†
1

MoE Engineering Research Center of SW/HW Co-Design Tech. and App., East China Normal University, China
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Department of Biomedical Informatics & Data Science, School of Medicine, Yale University
51255902180@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, hu.ming.work@gmail.com, {51265902053, 51255902059}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,
anran.li@ntu.edu.sg, xfxie@smu.edu.sg, mschen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

models across heterogeneous devices and cloud servers. Unlike conventional FL methods, SFL divides each participating DNN model into two parts, i.e., the client-side portion
and the server-side portion, and places them on two cloud
servers, i.e., the fed server and the main server, respectively.
By decoupling the training efforts of client-side portions
and server-side portions, the resource requirements imposed
on clients are greatly alleviated. Meanwhile, by synchronizing the training between the client-side portions and serverside portions based on local data features, the test accuracy
degradation caused by the trained models is negligible.
Although SFL is good at dealing with resourceconstrained scenarios, it still suffers from the problem of
❶ data heterogeneity and ❷ catastrophic forgetting (Shao
and Feng 2022). Specifically, due to the non-Independent
and Identically Distributed (non-IID) (Sattler et al. 2020; Qi
et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023a) data among
AIoT devices, SFL suffers from the “gradient divergence”
problem (Karimireddy et al. 2020), which results in performance degradation of global models. Meanwhile, since the
server only selects partial clients for model training in each
SFL round, models tend to forget what they have learned in
previous SFL training rounds, causing the notorious catastrophic forgetting problem (Shao and Feng 2022). To alleviate the impacts of such problems, various FL variants resort
to knowledge distillation (Zhu, Hong, and Zhou 2021; Lin
et al. 2020; Meng et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023), client selection (Chen et al. 2020), global control variable (Li et al.
2020a; Karimireddy et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2024b) or multimodel paradigm (Hu et al. 2024c, 2023b, 2024b; Gao et al.
2024) mechanisms to mitigate the performance degradation
problem caused by non-IID data, while many of them adopt
model correction (Luo et al. 2023) and data augmentation
(Xu et al. 2022) strategies to solve the catastrophic forgetting
problem. However, most of them assume that the local training is performed based on a whole model, strongly limits
their usage in SFL. Therefore, how to address the gradient
divergence and catastrophic forgetting problems is becoming an urgent issue for SFL.
As a state-of-the-art FL training paradigm, the MultiModel-based FL (MMFL) (Hu et al. 2024c, 2023b) is
promising in dealing with the gradient divergence problem
by adopting multiple homogeneous branch models rather

Although Split Federated Learning (SFL) effectively enables knowledge sharing among resource-constrained clients,
it suffers from low training performance due to the neglect of data heterogeneity and catastrophic forgetting problems. To address these issues, we propose a novel SFL approach named MultiSFL, which adopts i) an effective multimodel aggregation mechanism to alleviate gradient divergence caused by heterogeneous data and ii) a novel knowledge replay strategy to deal with the catastrophic forgetting
problem. MultiSFL adopts two servers (i.e., the fed server
and main server) to maintain multiple branch models for local training and an aggregated master model for knowledge
sharing among branch models. To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, the main server of MultiSFL selects multiple assistant
devices for knowledge replay according to the training data
distribution of each full branch model. Experimental results
obtained from various non-IID and IID scenarios demonstrate
that MultiSFL significantly outperforms conventional SFL
methods by up to a 23.25% test accuracy improvement.

Introduction
Due to the merits of knowledge sharing among devices without compromising their data privacy, Federated Learning
(FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2023a; Wu et al. 2023b;
Huang et al. 2024; Qi et al. 2024) becomes increasingly
popular in the design of Artificial Intelligence of Things
(AIoT) systems (Hu et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2024a; Zhang
et al. 2020). However, existing FL methods often suffer from
the problem of low training performance when deployed in
large-scale AIoT applications. This is mainly because the
varying capabilities (e.g., memory, computing power) of heterogeneous AIoT devices may inevitably result in limited
sizes of their hosting Deep Neural Network (DNN) models. According to the Wooden Bucket Theory, when dealing with resource-constrained AIoT devices, the weakest device determines the overall FL training performance. To address this issue, Split Federated Learning (SFL) (Thapa et al.
2022) has been investigated to accommodate various largescale AIoT applications by enabling the co-training of large
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

914

