The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DCILP: A Distributed Approach for Large-Scale Causal Structure Learning
Shuyu Dong1 * , Michèle Sebag1 * , Kento Uemura2 , Akito Fujii2 , Shuang Chang2 ,
Yusuke Koyanagi2 , Koji Maruhashi2
1

INRIA, LISN, Université Paris-Saclay, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2
Fujitsu Limited, Kanagawa, 211-8588, Japan
shuyu.dong@inria.fr, michele.sebag@lri.fr, {uemura.kento, fujii.akito, chang.shuang, koyanagi.yusuke,
maruhashi.koji}@fujitsu.com
Abstract

and score function-based methods (Chickering 2002a; Loh
and Bühlmann 2014) (more in Section 5). Depending on the
specific method, strategies for learning large causal graphs
include restricting the search space of directed graphs to that
of sparse graphs (Ramsey et al. 2017; Loh and Bühlmann
2014), or transforming the underlying combinatorial problem into a continuous optimization problem (Zheng et al.
2018; Aragam, Amini, and Zhou 2019; Ng, Ghassami, and
Zhang 2020; Ng et al. 2021; Lopez et al. 2022). While these
strategies have resulted in significant improvements in reducing the complexity, their scalability is still limited when
the number of variables and/or the degree of the sought
causal graph are high.
To better tackle the computational challenges in learning
large causal structures, a growing number of works consider
breaking down the large-scale causal discovery problem into
smaller ones defined from subsets of variables, and conducting a divide-and-conquer strategy. Such subsets of variables
might be incrementally built and refined (Gao, Fadnis, and
Campbell 2017); they can be based on hierarchical clustering (Gu and Zhou 2020), recursive decomposition based
on conditional independence tests (Zhang et al. 2020), or
through the Markov blanket (defined in Section 2) associated
with each variable (Tsamardinos et al. 2003; Wu et al. 2020,
2022, 2023; Mokhtarian et al. 2021). A main challenge lies
in the conquer step for the fusion or reconciliation of the
partial solutions identified in the divide step; most conquer
approaches are rule-based which limits their applicability.
In this paper we present the original Divide-and-Conquer
causal modelling with Integer Linear programming approach (DCILP) to address the scalability challenge inherent to causal discovery. Formally, DCILP consists of three
phases:
• Phase-1 estimates the Markov blankets MB(Xi ) associated with each observed variable Xi , that are used to divide the causal discovery problem into smaller subproblems;
• Phase-2 independently tackles each causal subproblem
defined by the variables in MB(Xi ). Note that these
causal subproblems offer a more favorable ratio between
the number of samples and the number of variables; in
counterpart, they may no longer satisfy the assumption
of causal sufficiency (section 2) — as variables external
to a Markov blanket might act as hidden confounders,

Causal learning tackles the computationally demanding
task of estimating causal graphs. This paper introduces a
new divide-and-conquer approach for causal graph learning, called DCILP. In the divide phase, the Markov blanket
MB(Xi ) of each variable Xi is identified, and causal learning subproblems associated with each MB(Xi ) are independently addressed in parallel. This approach benefits from a
more favorable ratio between the number of data samples and
the number of variables considered. In counterpart, it can be
adversely affected by the presence of hidden confounders, as
variables external to MB(Xi ) might influence those within it.
The reconciliation of the local causal graphs generated during the divide phase is a challenging combinatorial optimization problem, especially in large-scale applications. The main
novelty of DCILP is an original formulation of this reconciliation as an integer linear programming (ILP) problem, which
can be delegated and efficiently handled by an ILP solver.
Through experiments on medium to large scale graphs, and
comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, DCILP demonstrates significant improvements in terms of computational
complexity, while preserving the learning accuracy on realworld problem and suffering at most a slight loss of accuracy
on synthetic problems.

Code — https://github.com/shuyu-d/dcilp-exp
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10481

1

Introduction

Discovering causal relations from observational data
emerges as an important problem for artificial intelligence
with fundamental and practical motivations (Pearl 2000;
Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017). One notable reason
is that causal models support modes of reasoning, e.g.,
counterfactual reasoning and algorithmic recourse (Tsirtsis et al. 2021), that are beyond the reach of correlationbased models (Peters, Bühlmann, and Meinshausen 2016;
Arjovsky et al. 2019; Sauer and Geiger 2021). In the literature of causal discovery and Bayesian network learning, there are two main categories of methods, namely
constraint-based methods (Spirtes et al. 2000; Meek 1995)
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16345

