The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

PHR-DIFF: Portrait Highlights Removal via Patch-aware Diffusion Model
Hongsheng Zheng1 , Zhongyun Bao2 , Gang Fu3 , Xuze Jiao1 , Chunxia Xiao1 *
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
School of Computer and Information, Anhui Polytechnic University, Wuhu, China
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
hszheng@whu.edu.cn, tantouxy@163.com, xyzgfu@gmail.com, 2023282110161@whu.edu.cn, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Portraits often suffer from specular highlights due to factors like skin oiliness, lighting conditions, and shooting angles, which degrade aesthetics and affect downstream tasks.
Thus, portrait highlight removal is imperative. Previous methods struggle to remove highlights and achieve high-fidelity
restoration of disturbed regions simultaneously. In this work,
we propose a novel patch-based diffusion model for this task,
named PHR-DIFF. Specifically, in the training, we present a
patchify training strategy that divides the portrait into equalsized patches and performs diffusion on these patches individually. This patchify can extract more compact facial features and reduce training costs. Besides, to learn the global
coherence of the face, we propose a patch-residual approach.
It encodes the full-resolution highlight-free portrait into latent features, which are further used as residual terms to constrain the forward training. In the sampling, we remove portrait highlights in a patch-wise manner and propose a PatchAware Highlight Removal (PAHR) mechanism. PAHR leverages features from non-highlight regions to effectively guide
the patch-wise removal of highlight components. Experimental results on multiple public datasets demonstrate that PHRDIFF removes highlights more cleanly and avoids artifacts.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Visual examples from the CelebA dataset and our
removal results. (a) The specular highlight disrupts the aesthetic of the portrait and obscures the details of the facial
texture. (b) The overall aesthetic quality of the portrait is effectively enhanced by our highlight removal method.

and Mingolla 2004). However, in practical applications, obtaining such prior information is challenging, making these
methods often unsatisfactory and inefficient. Recently, with
the advancement of deep learning, highlight removal methods such as GANs (Fu et al. 2021; Muhammad et al. 2020;
Liang et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021) and Transformer (Wu et al.
2023) have started to emerge. However, due to factors such
as the texture characteristics of facial skin and the complexity of geometric contours, existing portrait highlight removal
methods often struggle to completely remove specular highlights, typically resulting in residual artifacts and distortions.
In fact, specular highlights of the portrait are often concentrated in specific areas or distributed sporadically. Regardless of their distribution, the underlying features in the
original facial (highlight-free) image should exhibit overall
coherence in texture and skin tone. This observation greatly
motivates us to leverage the features in non-highlight regions to guide the removal of the highlight components.
Besides, the diffusion model has recently demonstrated excellent capabilities in various image restoration tasks (Guo
et al. 2023a; Ding et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2024; Bar-Tal et al.
2023). Based on this insight, we propose a novel patch-based
diffusion model for this task, termed PHR-DIFF. Our PHRDIFF not only removes specular highlights in the portrait
but also enables high-realistic detail restoration of disturbed
areas (e.g., textures, skin tones, wrinkles).

Introduction
Portrait plays a crucial role in daily life for identity verification, social interaction, and personal presentation. However,
portrait inevitably suffers from unsatisfactory highlight interference, which is mainly due to the reflective properties
of facial skin or interference from external lighting. As illustrated in Figure 1, highlights obscure the natural radiance
and textures of the face and significantly degrade the visual
quality of the portrait. Therefore, portrait highlight removal
is imperative. This task aims to remove highlight components caused by strong reflections to enhance the quality and
usability of the portrait.
Most early highlight removal methods are based on the
physical priori knowledge of the image, such as dark channel separation (Kim et al. 2013), color statistical analysis
(Li et al. 2017; Tan and Ikeuchi 2005; Mallick et al. 2006;
Son et al. 2020), and brightness statistics (Todd, Norman,
* Chunxia Xiao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10555

