The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Non-stochastic Budgeted Online Pricing with Semi-Bandit Feedback
Xiang Liu1, 2 * , Hau Chan3 , Minming Li4 , Weiwei Wu1 , Long Tran-Thanh5
1

Southeast University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
4
City University of Hong Kong
5
The University of Warwick
xiangliu@seu.edu.cn, hchan3@unl.edu, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, weiweiwu@seu.edu.cn, long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk
2

Abstract

(i.e., buyer) with a budget can submit bids (e.g., prices for
workers) to recruit workers to perform tasks for the purpose
of maximizing the total value of recruited workers (e.g., the
quality of labels) of finished tasks (Singer and Mittal 2013).
In addition, in online advertising markets (Ha 2008), website
publishers (i.e., sellers) register advertising placements for
sale over time. The advertiser (i.e., the buyer, who naturally
has a limited operational budget within a fixed period (Lee,
Jalali, and Dasdan 2013)) needs to bid (e.g., through the generalized second price auction) to procure these placements to
display their advertisements (Yuan, Wang, and Zhao 2013).
If the advertiser wins the bidding auction, they can obtain
impressions (i.e., the value of the placement) such as advertising exposure, and the reward of the advertiser can be the
cumulative impression in display advertising.
Our Challenges. These problems are often known as the
online procurement pricing problem (as highlighted in the
above-mentioned situations) where a buyer with a limited
budget aims to determine what prices to offer for sellers’ resources or services at each period to optimize the buyer’s
reward. While these problems have been studied (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Singer 2012; Singla and Krause
2013; Balkanski and Hartline 2016), existing studies have
two main limitations that make previous results not applicable to many real-world situations.
First, most of the previous work in online procurement
pricing focuses on the stochastic setting that assumes that
sellers’ costs (or accepted prices) and rewards for the buyer
typically follow some (unknown) underlying stationary distribution (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Singer 2012; Singla
and Krause 2013; Balkanski and Hartline 2016). However,
this assumption does not hold in many real-world situations because costs and rewards can change drastically
due to external shocks (e.g., market crashes, inflation) and
may not always obey any fixed distribution. For example,
in crowdsourcing platforms, workers’ accepted prices and
performance qualities can vary largely depending on factors such as task preferences, tastes, experiences, and expertise. All of these can affect the prices and quality unpredictably in a non-stochastic manner (Jagabathula, Subramanian, and Venkataraman 2017). In online advertising, the
winning price of each advertising placement can be arbitrary
(e.g., depending on bidding strategies of other advertisers),
and the corresponding gained impression is uncertain, e.g.,

We consider a general non-stochastic online pricing bandit
setting in a procurement scenario where a buyer with a budget wants to procure items from a fixed set of sellers to maximize the buyer’s reward by dynamically offering purchasing prices to the sellers, where the sellers’ costs and values at each time period can change arbitrarily and the sellers determine whether to accept the offered prices to sell the
items. This setting models online pricing scenarios of procuring resources or services in multi-agent systems. We first consider the offline setting when sellers’ costs and values are
known in advance and investigate the best fixed-price policy in hindsight. We show that it has a tight approximation
guarantee with respect to the offline optimal solutions. In the
general online setting, we propose an online pricing policy,
Granularity-based Pricing (GAP), which exploits underlying
side-information from the feedback graph when the budget
is given as the input.pWe show that GAP achieves an upper
bound of O(n vcmax
B/cmin ln B) on the α-regret where
min
n, vmax , cmin , and B are the number, the maximum value,
the minimum cost of sellers, and the budget, respectively.
We then extend it to the unknown budget case by developing a variant of GAP, namely
and show its
pDoubling-GAP,
2
α-regret is at most O(n vcmax
B/c
ln
B).
We also promin
min
p
vide an α-regret lower bound Ω(vmax Bn/cmin ) of any
online policy that is tight up to sub-linear terms. We conduct
simulation experiments to show that the proposed policy outperforms the baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

In many online multi-agent procurement situations (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Singer 2012; Singer and Mittal 2013;
Balkanski and Hartline 2016; Jain et al. 2016), a buyer is often interested in procuring some subset of resources or services from sellers over a period of time by offering sellers
certain prices (or payments) to maximize the buyer’s cumulative reward without exceeding their budget on the total
payment. For instance, in online crowdsourcing platforms
(Ho and Vaughan 2012), a group of workers (i.e., sellers) arrive over time to provide services (e.g. working on tasks such
as labeling images or collecting sensing data). The requester
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18978

