The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Adaptive Decision Boundary for Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Linhao Li1 * , Yongzhang Tan1 * , Siyuan Yang2 , Hao Cheng1† , Yongfeng Dong1 , Liang Yang1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Hebei University of Technology, China
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{lilinhao, chenghao, dongyf}@hebut.edu.cn, siyuan.yang@ntu.edu.sg, 202232805041@stu.hebut.edu.cn,
yangliang@vip.qq.com

Abstract
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) aims to continuously learn new classes from a limited set of training
samples without forgetting knowledge of previously learned
classes. Conventional FSCIL methods typically build a robust feature extractor during the base training session with
abundant training samples and subsequently freeze this extractor, only fine-tuning the classifier in subsequent incremental phases. However, current strategies primarily focus on
preventing catastrophic forgetting, considering only the relationship between novel and base classes, without paying attention to the specific decision spaces of each class. To address this challenge, we propose a plug-and-play Adaptive
Decision Boundary Strategy (ADBS), which is compatible
with most FSCIL methods. Specifically, we assign a specific
decision boundary to each class and adaptively adjust these
boundaries during training to optimally refine the decision
spaces for the classes in each session. Furthermore, to amplify the distinctiveness between classes, we employ a novel
inter-class constraint loss that optimizes the decision boundaries and prototypes for each class. Extensive experiments
on three benchmarks, namely CIFAR100, miniImageNet, and
CUB200, demonstrate that incorporating our ADBS method
with existing FSCIL techniques significantly improves performance, achieving overall state-of-the-art results.

Figure 1: Illustration of FSCIL classification with (a) Fixed
and (b) Our proposed adaptive decision boundaries. A fixed
decision boundary strategy often struggles to reserve adequate space for new classes at each incremental stage, resulting in space conflicts between old and new classes. In
contrast, our proposed adaptive decision boundary strategy
can effectively alleviate this issue by adjusting the decision
boundaries of both old and new classes.

Code — https://github.com/Yongzhang-Tan/ADBS
in incremental sessions. Consequently, simply updating the
model with new class data may lead to overfitting on these
new classes and cause significant performance drops on
previously learned classes, a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Masana
et al. 2022). Nonetheless, CIL requires sufficient training
data from novel classes. In many applications, data collection and labeling can be prohibitively expensive, posing
challenges for implementing CIL in real-world scenarios.
To address these challenges, Few-Shot Class-Incremental
Learning (FSCIL) is proposed to address the dual challenges
of learning new classes from limited examples and integrating this knowledge into an existing model without forgetting
previously acquired information (Tao et al. 2020). Critically,
the model must maintain a balance between stability and
plasticity, preserving previously acquired knowledge while
seamlessly integrating new information.
Recent advancements in FSCIL methods (Zhang et al.

Introduction
To date, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved significant advancements in the field of computer
vision, primarily using models trained on static and precollected large-scale annotated datasets (Deng et al. 2009;
He et al. 2016). However, the practical challenge of gradually integrating data from new classes into a model initially trained on existing classes introduces significant obstacles, known as Class Incremental Learning (CIL) (Hou et al.
2019; Li and Hoiem 2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Cheng et al.
2025). Unlike standard classification tasks, CIL requires
handling new classes and restricted access to prior task data
* Linhao Li and Yongzhang Tan are co-first authors.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18359

