The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

IDseq: Decoupled and Sequentially Detecting and Grounding Multi-Modal Media
Manipulation
Runxin Liu 1 , Tian Xie 2 , Jiaming Li 1 , Lingyun Yu 1 * , Hongtao Xie 1
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Anhui University, Hefei, China
{lrxsxdl, ljmd}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xietian@nuaa.edu.cn, {yuly, htxie}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting and grounding multi-modal media manipulation
aims to categorize the type and localize the region of manipulation for image-text pairs in both two modalities. Existing
methods have not sufficiently explored the intrinsic properties of the manipulated images, which contain both forgery
and content features, leading to inefficient utilization. To address this problem, we propose an Image-Driven Decoupled
Sequential Framework (IDseq), designed to decouple image
features and rationally integrate them to accomplish different
sub-tasks effectively. Specifically, IDseq employs two specially designed disentangled losses to guide the disentangled
learning of forgery and content features. To efficiently leverage these features, we propose a Decoupled Image Manipulation Decoder (DIMD) that processes image tasks within a decoupled schema. We mitigate their exclusive competition by
separating the image tasks into forgery-relevant and contentrelevant components and training them without gradient interaction. Additionally, we utilize content features enhanced by
the proposed Manipulation Indicator Generator (MIG) for the
text tasks, which provide the maximal visual information as a
reference while eliminating interference from unverified image data. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our
IDseq, where it notably outperforms SOTA methods on the
fine-grained classification by 3.8% in mAP and the forgery
face grounding by 8.7% in IoUmean, even 1.3% in F1 on the
most challenging manipulated text grounding.

Figure 1: DGM4 , a multi-modal multi-task problem, conducts a detailed analysis of manipulation within image-text
pairs. The red boxes indicate the manipulated regions and
words. The predicted results are highlighted in orange.
2021), thereby posing significant threats to both individuals
and society.
To alleviate security concerns, early research primarily
modelled manipulation detection tasks as binary classification. For example, deepfake detection methods (Li et al.
2020; Haliassos et al. 2021; Jeong et al. 2022; Jia et al.
2021) focus on extracting forensic clues such as blending
boundaries and frequency anomalies to distinguish the authenticity of facial images. Similarly, fake news detection
methods (Zellers et al. 2019; Potthast et al. 2018; Ahmed,
Traore, and Saad 2017; Pérez-Rosas et al. 2017) leveraged
writing styles, including psycholinguistic features and readability scores, as key indicators. Despite their considerable
success, these binary classification approaches offer only a
simple yes-or-no output, failing to provide some explainable
evidence to support their predictions. To fill this gap, recent
research focuses on detecting and grounding multi-modal
media manipulation (DGM4 ) (Shao, Wu, and Liu 2023; Liu
et al. 2023). As shown in Figure 1, DGM4 aims to perform a
detailed analysis of manipulation, encompassing a range of
tasks from simple classification to more complex grounding
in both visual and textual modalities.
In contemporary research, Hammer (Shao, Wu, and Liu
2023) focuses on learning more aligned visual and textual
characteristics for prediction, while UFAFormer (Liu et al.
2023) incorporates frequency characteristics to improve image representation. Although these methods have shown sig-

Introduction
Taking advantage of rapid advances in deep generative models (Goodfellow et al. 2020; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019;
Zhu et al. 2017; Rombach et al. 2022) and large language
models (Devlin et al. 2018; Achiam et al. 2023), face (Chen
et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Patashnik et al.
2021) and text manipulation techniques (Sudhakar, Upadhyay, and Maheswaran 2019; Dai et al. 2019) could easily
generate high-fidelity multimedia content with minimal human intervention. Although these technologies greatly improve human productivity, their malicious use to produce
large-scale multi-modal misinformation causes severe consequences, including damaging reputations and misleading
public opinion (Wang 2017; Zellers et al. 2019; Floridi
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

496

