The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Constrained Generative Modeling with
Manually Bridged Diffusion Models
Saeid Naderiparizi* 1,3 , Xiaoxuan Liang* 1,3 , Berend Zwartsenberg3 , Frank Wood1,2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
2
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Edmonton, Canada
3
InvertedAI, Vancouver, Canada
saeidnp@cs.ubc.ca, liang51@cs.ubc.ca, berend.zwartsenberg@inverted.ai, fwood@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract

There are several characteristics of such a distribution that
are sufficiently close to being constraints that they may as
well be. Cars and other vehicles are both constrained to be
“on road” and also to be not overlapping (colliding). Existing generative models fit to even very large datasets of such
data struggle in the sense that samples from them exhibit “infractions” (constraint violations) at excessive rates (Zwartsenberg et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2024; Niedoba et al. 2024);
even when the data on which they are trained is cleaned to
contain only non-infracting examples.
Why does this occur? In the non-parametric limit this
problem would not exist. However, in any finite-data and
finite-capacity model the particular generalization strategy
the model employs remains a degree of freedom. We are motivated to seek modeling approaches that allow us to direct
and exclude generalizations that place mass outside whatever problem specific constraint set there is.
Various approaches to this have been developed (Chang
et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024); this paper explores diffusionbridge-like mechanisms, inspired by diffusion bridge theory,
that empirically demonstrate superior constraint-satisfaction
at little expense to generalization otherwise. We call these
mechanisms “manual bridges” to distinguish them from the
more formally mathematically delimited bridge functions
employed in the greater diffusion bridge literature (Schauer,
van der Meulen, and van Zanten 2017; De Bortoli et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2021; Heng et al. 2021; Chen, Liu, and
Theodorou 2022; Zhou et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2024).
Our central contribution is an architecture that allows
both for imposition of so called “manual bridges” to impose
constraints in diffusion-based generative models and stable
training of models that are constrained in this way, resulting
in “manually bridged models,” a novel family of generative
models that are capable of fitting complex distributions well
while also respecting and representing the sharp boundaries
imposed by constraints.

In this paper we describe a novel framework for diffusionbased generative modeling on constrained spaces. In particular, we introduce manual bridges, a framework that expands the kinds of constraints that can be practically used to
form so-called diffusion bridges. We develop a mechanism
for combining multiple such constraints so that the resulting
multiply-constrained model remains a manual bridge that respects all constraints. We also develop a mechanism for training a diffusion model that respects such multiple constraints
while also adapting it to match a data distribution. We develop
and extend theory demonstrating the mathematical validity of
our mechanisms. Additionally, we demonstrate our mechanism in constrained generative modeling tasks, highlighting
a particular high-value application in modeling trajectory initializations for path planning and control in autonomous vehicles.

Code and extended version —
github.com/plai-group/manually-bridged-models

1

Introduction

For generative models to become practically useful in embodied artificial intelligence domains, guaranteed constraint
satisfaction is effectively required. Examples abound, such
as path planning and control in autonomous vehicles and advanced driver-assistance (AV/ADAS) systems (Janner et al.
2022; Zhong et al. 2023), kinematic, dynamics, power, and
other constraints in robotics (Schulman et al. 2014), safety
critical plant operation (Knight 2002), etc. Strictly eliminating non-factual or offensive hallucinations from large
language models (LLM) falls in this problem category too
(Azamfirei, Kudchadkar, and Fackler 2023; Huang et al.
2023).
Our experimental focus in this paper will be on a particular subproblem in AV/ADAS planning and behavioral simulation, so starting here, we will motivate our work using
language from this domain; however, note that the mechanisms and theory we develop are general.
Consider the problem of realistically distributing agents
in top-down, two-dimensional space; cars, pedestrians, etc.

2

Related Work

A framework for constraints on the sample space of generative models was first theoretically described in (Hanneke et al. 2018). In their framework, constraints are represented through a black-box oracle function labeling samples as valid or invalid. This problem has been practically
explored for generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Kong

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19607

