The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning from Noisy Labels via Self-Taught On-the-Fly Meta Loss Rescaling
Michael Heck, Christian Geishauser, Nurul Lubis, Carel van Niekerk,
Shutong Feng, Hsien-Chin Lin, Benjamin Matthias Ruppik, Renato Vukovic, Milica Gašić
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
{heckmi,geishaus,lubis,niekerk,fengs,linh,ruppik,revuk100,gasic}@hhu.de

Abstract

natural language processing (NLP) labeling tasks inherently
challenging, even for experienced annotators (Marcus, Santorini, and Marcinkiewicz 1993). Inter-annotator agreement
on labeling tasks depends on factors like task description
and guidance, annotator skills and knowledge, and level of
attention (Manning 2011).
One approach to mitigating noisy labels is sample selection, which involves identifying and removing noisy samples
before training or updating the model (Shen and Sanghavi
2019; Chen et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019). This method exploits the overfitting tendency of DNNs to detect noisy samples through model weight trajectories or loss cutoffs (Yang
et al. 2019; Li, Soltanolkotabi, and Oymak 2020; Shen
and Sanghavi 2019). Advanced approaches use collaborative
multi-network learning (Han et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2018).
Despite its effectiveness, sample selection requires significant computational resources, struggles with over-filtering,
and makes permanent filtering errors early in the process,
causing information loss.
Another tactic is loss adjustment, which modifies sample losses during training, allowing to fully explore the
noisy dataset. This can be achieved by learning noise transition matrices (Patrini et al. 2017), correcting labels (Reed
et al. 2015), estimating reweighting functions (Wang, Liu,
and Tao 2018) or via meta learning (Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017). Loss rescaling adjusts sample losses to control their effect on the model training on-the-fly. Examples
of methods for DNNs are importance reweighting and active
bias (Liu and Tao 2016; Chang, Learned-Miller, and McCallum 2017). Other approaches utilize additional models
to identify noisy samples during training (Zhang, Xing, and
Liu 2021). Despite their versatility, these methods typically
require clean data to estimate “true” distributions of uncorrupted data, and rely on predefined adjustment functions and
hyperparameters related to the expected noise type.
Meta learning offers a solution by automating loss
rescaling, thus eliminating manual function definition. This
higher-order learning estimates noise type agnostic rescaling
functions using meta models or unified neural models (Dehghani et al. 2017; Shu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Ren et al.
2018). Yet, they still depend on clean validation data to learn
the rescaling function or the meta objective.
But what if clean data is not available? Oftentimes clean
data simply does not exist and its procurement is time con-

Correct labels are indispensable for training effective machine learning models. However, creating high-quality labels
is expensive, and even professionally labeled data contains errors and ambiguities. Filtering and denoising can be applied
to curate labeled data prior to training, at the cost of additional
processing and loss of information. An alternative is on-thefly sample reweighting during the training process to decrease
the negative impact of incorrect or ambiguous labels, but this
typically requires clean seed data. In this work we propose
unsupervised on-the-fly meta loss rescaling to reweight training samples. Crucially, we rely only on features provided by
the model being trained, to learn a rescaling function in real
time without knowledge of the true clean data distribution.
We achieve this via a novel meta learning setup that samples
validation data for the meta update directly from the noisy
training corpus by employing the rescaling function being
trained. Our proposed method consistently improves performance across various NLP tasks with minimal computational
overhead. Further, we are among the first to attempt on-the-fly
training data reweighting on the challenging task of dialogue
modeling, where noisy and ambiguous labels are common.
Our strategy is robust in the face of noisy and clean data, handles class imbalance, and prevents overfitting to noisy labels.
Our self-taught loss rescaling improves as the model trains,
showing the ability to keep learning from the model’s own
signals. As training progresses, the impact of correctly labeled data is scaled up, while the impact of wrongly labeled
data is suppressed.

Code — https://gitlab.cs.uniduesseldorf.de/general/dsml/storm-public
Extended — https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.12955

Introduction
High-quality training data is paramount for developing accurate, safe, and reliable machine learning models. Real-world
datasets, however, often contain noise, ambiguities, biases,
and errors. Ever larger models increase the need for automatic training data generation, exacerbating label noise issues. Inconsistencies in data degrade model training, limit
performance and hinder generalizability (Frenay and Verleysen 2014). The complexity of human language renders
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24059

