The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NumbOD: A Spatial-Frequency Fusion Attack Against Object Detectors
Ziqi Zhou1,2,3,6 , Bowen Li7 , Yufei Song7 , Zhifei Yu7 , Shengshan Hu1,2,4,5,7 ,
Wei Wan1,2,4,5,7 , Leo Yu Zhang8 , Dezhong Yao1,2,3,6 , Hai Jin1,2,3,6
1

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
2
Services Computing Technology and System Lab
3
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
5
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
7
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
8
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{zhouziqi,libowen2021,yufei17,yzf,hushengshan,wanwei 0303,dyao,hjin}@hust.edu.cn leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au
Abstract
With the advancement of deep learning, object detectors
(ODs) with various architectures have achieved significant
success in complex scenarios like autonomous driving. Previous adversarial attacks against ODs have been focused on designing customized attacks targeting their specific structures
(e.g., NMS and RPN), yielding some results but simultaneously constraining their scalability. Moreover, most efforts
against ODs stem from image-level attacks originally designed for classification tasks, resulting in redundant computations and disturbances in object-irrelevant areas (e.g., background). Consequently, how to design a model-agnostic efficient attack to comprehensively evaluate the vulnerabilities
of ODs remains challenging and unresolved. In this paper, we
propose NumbOD, a brand-new spatial-frequency fusion attack against various ODs, aimed at disrupting object detection
within images. We directly leverage the features output by the
OD without relying on its internal structures to craft adversarial examples. Specifically, we first design a dual-track attack
target selection strategy to select high-quality bounding boxes
from OD outputs for targeting. Subsequently, we employ directional perturbations to shift and compress predicted boxes
and change classification results to deceive ODs. Additionally, we focus on manipulating the high-frequency components of images to confuse ODs’ attention on critical objects,
thereby enhancing the attack efficiency. Our extensive experiments on nine ODs and two datasets show that NumbOD
achieves powerful attack performance and high stealthiness.

Figure 1: An overview of adversarial examples against an
object detector

networks (DNNs). Adversaries can induce model misclassifications with minimal, strategically crafted perturbations,
like wrongly identifying an image of a dog as a cat. Although
extensive works (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018; Zhou
et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2024b; Wang et al. 2025) have thoroughly investigated adversarial attacks on classification, the
more challenging task of object detection remains far less
explored.
Unlike single classification tasks, object detection involves classification and regression subtasks, requiring simultaneous localization and recognition of objects, i.e., providing both bounding boxes and classification results. Recently, researchers have proposed various modules aimed
at enhancing the performance of object detectors, such as
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS), Region of Interest (RoI)
Pooling, and Region Proposal Networks (RPN). The introduction of these new features and modules has brought unprecedented challenges to standard adversarial attacks originally designed for classification tasks.
Recent efforts (Xie et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Chen, Kung,
and Chen 2021) have made decent progress in adversarial
attacks against ODs, yet these methods commonly face two
major limitations: 1) limited applicability and 2) low efficiency in attacks. Existing efforts have developed effective
attacks by exploiting specific vulnerabilities within ODs.
For example, DAG (Xie et al. 2017) is the first attack targeting RPN-based models, which implements the attack by
minimizing the probability of correct classification. RAP (Li

Code — https://github.com/CGCL-codes/NumbOD

Introduction
The triumphs in deep learning have substantially propelled
the development of computer vision tasks, such as traffic sign recognition (Tabernik and Skočaj 2019), pedestrian re-identification (Zheng et al. 2017), and medical image segmentation (Ramesh et al. 2021). Despite its promising prospects, existing researches (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard
2016) have demonstrated the vulnerability of deep neural
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1201

