The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Explicit and Implicit Graduated Optimization in Deep Neural Networks
Naoki Sato, Hideaki Iiduka
Meiji University
naoki310303@gmail.com, iiduka@cs.meiji.ac.jp

with the third largest noise δ3 is optimized with the second
approximate solution as the initial point, and the procedure
is repeated in order to search for the global optimal solution
without falling into a local optimal one. See Figure 1 for a
conceptual diagram of this process.
Graduated optimization is often used in machine learning and computer vision for, e.g., semi-supervised learning (Chapelle, Chi, and Zien 2006; Sindhwani, Keerthi, and
Chapelle 2006; Chapelle, Sindhwani, and Keerthi 2008) and
robust estimation (Yang et al. 2020; Antonante et al. 2022;
Peng, Kümmerle, and Vidal 2023). In addition, score-based
generative models (Song and Ermon 2019, 2020) and diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2021; Rombach et al. 2022), which
are state-of-the-art models of image generation, use this approach.
Theoretical analysis of graduated optimization began with
the pioneering work by (Duchi, Bartlett, and Wainwright
2012) on nonsmooth convex functions, and several papers
(Mobahi and Fisher III 2015; Hazan, Yehuda, and ShalevShwartz 2016; Iwakiri et al. 2022; Li, Wu, and Zhang 2023;
Sato and Iiduka 2023) have produced important results. In
particular, (Hazan, Yehuda, and Shalev-Shwartz 2016) defined a family of nonconvex functions that satisfy the conditions for convergence of a graduated optimization algorithm, called σ-nice, and proposed a first-order algorithm
based on graduated optimization. They also studied the convergence and convergence rate of the algorithm to a global
optimal solution for σ-nice functions. In addition, (Sato and
Iiduka 2023) showed that the stochastic noise in the optimization process which SGD naturally has can implicitly
smooth the objective function, and they proposed an implicit
graduated optimization algorithm exploiting this property.
Furthermore, they defined an extension of the σ-nice function, called the new σ-nice function, and provided a convergence analysis of the implicit graduated optimization algorithm for this function. Here, this paper refers to graduated
optimization with explicit smoothing operations (see Definition 1) as “explicit graduated optimization” and to graduated
optimization with implicit smoothing operations as “implicit
graduated optimization”.
This paper analyzes the new σ-nice function and discusses
the implicit graduated optimization algorithm, which has so
far been studied in relation to stochastic noise in SGD, in

Abstract
Graduated optimization is a global optimization technique
that is used to minimize a multimodal nonconvex function
by smoothing the objective function with noise and gradually
refining the solution. This paper experimentally evaluates the
performance of the explicit graduated optimization algorithm
with an optimal noise scheduling derived from a previous
study and discusses its limitations. The evaluation uses traditional benchmark functions and empirical loss functions for
modern neural network architectures. In addition, this paper
extends the implicit graduated optimization algorithm, which
is based on the fact that stochastic noise in the optimization
process of SGD implicitly smooths the objective function, to
SGD with momentum, analyzes its convergence, and demonstrates its effectiveness through experiments on image classification tasks with ResNet architectures.

Code — https://github.com/iiduka-researches/igo-aaai25

Introduction
Nonconvex optimization problems are ubiquitous in the
machine-learning and artificial-intelligence fields, and those
arising in training deep neural networks (DNN) (Bengio
2009) are particularly interesting from multiple aspects. In
particular, because the nonconvex functions that appear in
DNN training have many local optimal solutions, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951) and
its variants, which use gradients to update the sequence, may
fall into local optimal solutions and may not minimize losses
sufficiently.
Graduated optimization (Blake and Zisserman 1987) is
a global optimization method that can be applied to multimodal functions in order to avoid local optimal solutions
and converge to the global optimal one. The method first prepares M monotone decreasing noises (δm )m∈[M ] . Then, by
smoothing the original objective function f with that noise, a
sequence of M smoothed functions (fˆδm )m∈[M ] is obtained
that gradually approaches the original objective function.
The function fˆδ1 smoothed with the largest noise δ1 is then
optimized, and the approximate solution is used as the initial
point for optimizing the function fˆδ2 smoothed with the second largest noise δ2 . After that, the function fˆδ3 smoothed
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20283

