The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Asymmetric Learning for Spectral Graph Neural Networks
Fangbing Liu, Qing Wang
Graph Research Lab, School of Computing, Australian National University
fangbing.liu@anu.edu.au, qing.wang@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Optimizing spectral graph neural networks (GNNs) remains
a critical challenge in the field, yet the underlying processes
are not well understood. In this paper, we investigate the inherent differences between graph convolution parameters and
feature transformation parameters in spectral GNNs and their
impact on the optimization landscape. Our analysis reveals
that these differences contribute to a poorly conditioned problem, resulting in suboptimal performance. To address this
issue, we introduce the concept of the block condition number
of the Hessian matrix, which characterizes the difficulty of
poorly conditioned problems in spectral GNN optimization.
We then propose an asymmetric learning approach, dynamically preconditioning gradients during training to alleviate
poorly conditioned problems. Theoretically, we demonstrate
that asymmetric learning can reduce block condition numbers, facilitating easier optimization. Extensive experiments
on eighteen benchmark datasets show that asymmetric learning consistently improves the performance of spectral GNNs
for both heterophilic and homophilic graphs. This improvement is especially notable for heterophilic graphs, where the
optimization process is generally more complex than for homophilic graphs.

(b) Texas-200

(c) Cora-50

(d) Cora-200

Figure 1: The landscapes of ChebNet on Texas and Cora at iterations 50 and 200. The x, y, z-axes represent the directions
of Θ, W , and the empirical loss LS , respectively. The landscapes change during training, and the stretched direction of
the parameters Θ and W also shifts.

Code — https://github.com/Mia-321/asym-opt.git
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11739

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been extensively studied in recent years (Wu et al. 2019; Loukas 2020; Dwivedi
et al. 2023; Velickovic et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019). Inspired
by the seminal work of (Kipf and Welling 2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016), research has delved
into spectral GNNs, which extract information from graphstructured data by performing graph convolutions in the spectral domain (Wang and Zhang 2022a; Balcilar et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2022). Generally, a spectral GNN is defined as
Ŷ = σ(gΘ (M )fW (X)).

(a) Texas-50

(1)

Here, M ∈ Rn×n is a graph matrix (e.g., normalized Laplacian), X ∈ Rn×d is a feature matrix, gΘ is a graph convoluCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18798

tion function parameterized by Θ, fW is a feature transformation function parameterized by W , and σ is a non-linear
function (e.g., softmax). For computational efficiency and
local vertex analysis (Hammond, Vandergheynst, and Gribonval 2011), the graph convolution function is typically
approximated by polynomial filters in the form gΘ (M ) =
PK
k=0 θk Tk (M ), where each Tk (•) denotes the k-th polynomial basis. The exact form of Tk is determined by the
selected polynomial basis, e.g., the Chebyshev basis (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; He, Wei, and Wen
2022) or the Bernstein basis (He et al. 2021).
Despite the success of spectral GNNs in graph learning
tasks (Zhu et al. 2020; Lim et al. 2021; Pei et al. 2020), their
training process remains inadequately understood. Notably,
the parameters Θ and W play distinct roles in modeling and
may significantly differ in dimensions. Specifically, the dimension of Θ is fewer than 20 while W has thousands of
dimensions. During the training of spectral GNNs, different
learning rates for parameters Θ and W are often adopted to
achieve good performance. Interestingly, we observe that the
contours of the loss function undergo stretching or compression along specific directions during training. In stretched
directions, small alterations in parameters lead to significant changes in the loss function. Figure 1 shows the loss

