The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RAGG: Retrieval-Augmented Grasp Generation Model
Zhenhua Tang1 , Bin Zhu2 , Yanbin Hao3 , Chong-Wah Ngo2 , Richang Hong1 *
1

Hefei University of Technology, Anhui, China
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China
zhenhuat@foxmail.com, {binzhu, cwngo}@smu.edu.sg, haoyanbin@hotmail.com, hongrc.hfut@gmail.com
2

Retrieval-augmented Grasp Generation
Target: To “use” this

Abstract
Intent-based grasp generation inherently involves challenges
such as manipulation ambiguity and modality gaps. To address these, we propose a novel Retrieval-Augmented Grasp
Generation model (RAGG). Our key insight is that when humans manipulate new objects, they initially mimic the interaction patterns observed in similar objects, then progressively
adjust hand-object contact. Consequently, we develop RAGG
as a two-stage approach, encompassing retrieval-guided generation and structurally stable grasp refinement. In the first
stage, we propose a Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion Model
(ReDim), which identifies the most relevant interaction instance from a knowledge base to explicitly guide grasp generation, thereby mitigating ambiguity and bridging modality gaps to ensure semantically correct manipulation. In the
second stage, we introduce a Progressive Refinement Network (PRN) with Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN) layers to refine the generated coarse grasp, employing a Structural Similarity Index loss to constrain the spatial relationship between the hand and the object, thus ensuring the stability of the grasp. Extensive experiments on the OakInk and
GRAB benchmarks demonstrate that RAGG achieves superior results compared to the state-of-the-art approach, indicating not only better physical feasibility and controllability,
but also strong generalization and interpretability for unseen
objects.

knowledge base
✘

✔

✘

retrieving

✔✔

“use”
Generation

✘

guiding
✘ Irrelevant
✔ Partially Relevant
✔
✔Fully Relevant

Refinement

Figure 1: Our RAGG retrieves the most relevant grasp sample based on the object shape and manipulation intent to
guide the generation process.
a manipulation intent, the goal is to generate a 3D hand pose
that ensures physically feasible hand-object contact, enables
affordance-aware interaction, and achieves robust generalization to unseen objects.
The intent-based grasp generation task inherently involves challenge of manipulation ambiguity, as one intent
may result in different poses, complicating model convergence (Jian et al. 2023; Chang and Sun 2024). The gaps between the modalities of text, point cloud, and mesh further
exacerbate this challenge in generating semantically correct grasps (Zhu et al. 2019; Liu, Li, and Lin 2023; Zhang
et al. 2024). Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2022) attempt to address these challenges by employing GrabNet (Taheri et al.
2020). However, this approach is far from satisfactory compared to human-level interaction, as it merely compresses
object point cloud, intent text, and hand pose into a latent
space for reconstruction. More recently, approaches such as
Text2Grasp (Chang and Sun 2024) and DiffH2O (Christen
et al. 2024) utilize rich data annotations and textual descriptions as generation prompts to explicitly specify the parts
of objects being interacted with, thus improving the model’s
understanding of manipulation intent and reducing ambiguity. Despite achieving impressive results, their approaches
rely heavily on high-quality textual cues and lack the flexibility to handle uncommon objects.
In this paper, we address the above limitations by employing a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) mechanism
(Sheynin et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Blattmann et al. 2022;

Introduction
Being able to manipulate objects like humans holds significant implications across various fields, including humancomputer interaction (Pollard and Zordan 2005), virtual reality (Höll et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2020), augmented reality (Hürst and Van Wezel 2013), and imitation learning in
robotics (Hsiao and Lozano-Perez 2006; Liu et al. 2024a).
To understand object affordance, i.e., manipulation intent or
grasp type (Corona et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2022) through
learning from human experience, recent advances have developed various multimodal hand-object interaction datasets
(Taheri et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2022; Jian et al. 2023). These
datasets are accompanied by text signals that specify the intent (e.g., hold and use), leading to the definition of a new
intent-based grasp generation task. Given a 3D object and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7311

