The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

TextRefiner: Internal Visual Feature as Efficient Refiner
for Vision-Language Models Prompt Tuning
Jingjing Xie1 , Yuxin Zhang1 , Jun Peng1 , Zhaohong Huang1 , Liujuan Cao1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China

Abstract
Despite the efficiency of prompt learning in transferring
vision-language models (VLMs) to downstream tasks, existing methods mainly learn the prompts in a coarse-grained
manner where the learned prompt vectors are shared across
all categories. Consequently, the tailored prompts often fail
to discern class-specific visual concepts, thereby hindering
the transferred performance for classes that share similar or
complex visual attributes. Recent advances mitigate this challenge by leveraging external knowledge from Large Language Models (LLMs) to furnish class descriptions, yet incurring notable inference costs. In this paper, we introduce TextRefiner, a plug-and-play method to refine the text prompts
of existing methods by leveraging the internal knowledge of
VLMs. Particularly, TextRefiner builds a novel local cache
module to encapsulate fine-grained visual concepts derived
from local tokens within the image branch. By aggregating
and aligning the cached visual descriptions with the original output of the text branch, TextRefiner can efficiently
refine and enrich the learned prompts from existing methods without relying on any external expertise. For example, it improves the performance of CoOp from 71.66% to
76.96% on 11 benchmarks, surpassing CoCoOp which introduced instance-wise feature for text prompts. Equipped with
TextRefiner, PromptKD achieve state-of-the-art performance
while keep inference efficient.

External
Knowledge
Image
Encoder

A photo of
a [class]
Text
Encoder

·

Internal
Knowledge
Image
Encoder

A photo of
a [class]

Text
Encoder

·

Figure 1: Comparison of different paradigms for enriching
text prompts. Previous methods (left) introduced external
knowledge experts to furnish fine-grained descriptions of
each class, necessitating an extra filtering process to maintain alignment with downstream datasets. In contrast, our
proposed TextRefiner (right) leverages the internal knowledge of the image branch to supply fine-grained, localized
region information, thereby drastically reducing the inference overhead while maintaining the performance.

rameters and data (Khattak et al. 2023a; Shen et al. 2024;
Gao et al. 2024b; Yu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024a).
To date, the predominant focus of research has predominantly fallen on employing prompt learning (Zhou
et al. 2022b,a; Kunananthaseelan, Zhang, and Harandi 2024;
Khattak et al. 2023b), a widely acknowledged strategy
for adapting large pre-trained models. As an initial foray,
CoOp (Zhou et al. 2022b) leveraged prompt learning to
adapt text prompts of CLIP, resulting in marked performance
improvements in downstream tasks. Subsequent research efforts have sought to extend prompt learning into the visual (Wu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2024b; Shen et al. 2024) and
multimodal domains (Khattak et al. 2023a; Xing et al. 2023;
Gao et al. 2024a; Xin et al. 2024), aiming to thoroughly finetune the representations across modalities to enhance their
alignment.
Despite the ongoing advancements, a prevalent limitation of these works is their tendency to enhance high-level
semantics in a coarse-grained, global manner, resulting in
holistic alignment across modalities. Consequently, the tailored prompts may fail to instruct the model to discern diverse visual concepts from local regions, thereby hindering
its capability to generalize across classes that share similar
visual attributes. To overcome this limitation, recent works

Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford
et al. 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al. 2021), have manifested
exceptional generalization abilities, significantly benefiting
a vast spectrum of applications like open-vocabulary image
recognition (Zhai et al. 2023), object detection (Gu et al.
2022), and image segmentation (Li et al. 2022). Generally,
VLMs optimize an image encoder and a text encoder to align
text and image features in a unified embedding space via
contrastive loss. By pre-training on large-scale web data,
VLMs can acquire transferable representations in both visual and textual domains, facilitating their application to a
broad range of downstream visual tasks. As such, numerous research efforts have been directed towards devising approaches to adapt VLMs in a manner mindful of both pa* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8718

