The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Improved Regret Bounds for
Online Fair Division with Bandit Learning
Benjamin Schiffer, Shirley Zhang
Harvard University

Abstract

an online manner, necessitating an online fair division algorithm to match drivers to food banks. The food available
depends on what was rejected on a given day, which may be
unpredictable.

We study online fair division when there are a finite number
of item types and the player values for the items are drawn
randomly from distributions with unknown means. In this setting, a sequence of indivisible items arrives according to a
random online process, and each item must be allocated to a
single player. The goal is to maximize expected social welfare
while maintaining that the allocation satisfies proportionality
in expectation. When player values are normalized, we show
that it is possible to with high probability guarantee
√ proportionality constraint satisfaction and achieve Õ( T ) regret.
To achieve this result, we present an upper confidence bound
(UCB) algorithm that uses two rounds of linear optimization.
This algorithm highlights fundamental aspects of proportionality constraints that allow for a UCB algorithm despite the
presence of many (potentially tight) constraints. This result
improves upon the previous best regret rate of Õ(T 2/3 ).

1

A common fairness requirement is proportionality, which insists that each player receive at least n1 of their total value for
all goods. In settings where the allocation of an item may be
randomized, it is natural to instead consider proportionality in expectation, where the expectation is taken over both
the random player values and the random item types. For a
given instance, there may be many proportional allocations,
in which case we can differentiate further by also considering efficiency. Past works have incorporated efficiency by,
for example, requiring Pareto optimality in addition to proportionality (Benadè et al. 2024) or maximizing utilitarian
social welfare subject to proportionality (Procaccia, Schiffer, and Zhang 2024).

Introduction

We study the online fair division problem in the setting
where player values are unknown at the time of item arrival,
and the value of a player for an item is only revealed if the
item is allocated to that player. Specifically, we consider the
setting where there are m item types, and each player’s value
for an item of each type is drawn from an (possibly different) unknown distribution. We would like to distribute items
fairly in expectation to players despite not knowing their true
mean values for item types. In our food bank example, this
setting is most relevant when a food bank does not yet understand the needs of its food pantries, but can easily collect
information from each food pantry (e.g. in the form of surveys) regarding how well items are received by each food
pantry’s visitors. (Yamada et al. 2024) gives further motivation for this setting in the form of allocating difficult tasks to
users with different strengths and distributing humanitarian
aid, both of which are online fair division problems in which
values are only unveiled after requesting feedback. In such
settings, it is necessary to learn each player’s expected value
for each item.

The fair division of indivisible goods is a classic problem in
computational social choice. In this problem, a set of goods
must be fairly allocated among n players, where each player
may have a different value for each good. For example, consider a central food bank which is in charge of distributing
food to multiple food pantries across the region. Each food
pantry may have differing preferences over various types of
food depending on the populations they serve. The goal is
then to divide the goods in a way that is fair relative to each
player’s valuations.
Online fair division adds another degree of difficulty. Instead of all items being known upfront, in online fair division
goods arrive one at a time and must be irrevocably allocated
at the time of arrival. The first goods that arrive must be allocated without knowing what future goods will be, and cannot be reallocated after more goods arrive. In the food bank
example, this setting is especially relevant for perishable
goods, which the food bank must quickly allocate after arrival. For example, (Mertzanidis, Psomas, and Verma 2024)
describes a partnership with an Indiana program which redistributes rejected food by redirecting truck drivers from
landfills to food banks. Truck drivers arrive on the app in

We consider the problem statement proposed in (Procaccia,
Schiffer, and Zhang 2024), which is as follows. Subject to
the fairness constraints of proportionality in expectation, we
strive for efficiency as measured by the expected utilitarian
social welfare of our solution. Specifically, we aim to mini-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14079

