The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Resolving Multi-Condition Confusion for Finetuning-Free Personalized Image
Generation
Qihan Huang* 1, 2 , Siming Fu* 2 , Jinlong Liu2 , Hao Jiang2 , Yipeng Yu2 , Jie Song1†
1

Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba Group
{qh.huang, sjie}@zju.edu.cn, fusiming.fsm@taobao.com,
LJLwykqh@126.com, aoshu.jh@alibaba-inc.com, yypzju@163.com
Prompt: A cat with a dog on the mountain.

Abstract
Personalized text-to-image generation methods can generate
customized images based on the reference images, which
have garnered wide research interest. Recent methods propose a finetuning-free approach with a decoupled crossattention mechanism to generate personalized images requiring no test-time finetuning. However, when multiple reference images are provided, the current decoupled crossattention mechanism encounters the object confusion problem and fails to map each reference image to its corresponding object, thereby seriously limiting its scope of application. To address the object confusion problem, in this work
we investigate the relevance of different positions of the latent image features to the target object in diffusion model,
and accordingly propose a weighted-merge method to merge
multiple reference image features into the corresponding objects. Next, we integrate this weighted-merge method into existing pre-trained models and continue to train the model on a
multi-object dataset constructed from the open-sourced SA1B dataset. To mitigate object confusion and reduce training
costs, we propose an object quality score to estimate the image quality for the selection of high-quality training samples.
Furthermore, our weighted-merge training framework can be
employed on single-object generation when a single object
has multiple reference images. The experiments verify that
our method achieves superior performance to the state-of-thearts on the Concept101 dataset and DreamBooth dataset of
multi-object personalized image generation, and remarkably
improves the performance on single-object personalized image generation.

Reference cat

Reference dog

Previous Method

Our Method

Figure 1: Left image demonstrates the object confusion
problem in decoupled cross-attention mechanism, and right
image presents the correct generation using our method.
Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al. 2023)) to a finetuningfree technique (e.g., IP-Adapter (Ye et al. 2023), SubjectDiffusion (Ma et al. 2024)), as finetuning-free methods eliminate the need for finetuning during test time and significantly reduce the usage cost.
Early finetuning-free methods, such as InstantBooth (Shi
et al. 2024) and FastComposer (Xiao et al. 2023), simply integrate the features of the reference image into the text embeddings and feed them into the text encoder, without fully
exploiting the information from the reference image. Recent
finetuning-free methods, such as IP-Adapter (Ye et al. 2023),
more comprehensively utilize the features of the reference
image by training additional cross-attention layers to integrate reference image features into the intermediate layers of
the diffusion model, and achieve comparable performance
to the finetuning-based methods. However, the current decoupled cross-attention only considers one reference image
for each generation. When multiple reference images are
provided, the decoupled cross-attention suffers from the object confusion problem if applied straightforwardly, wherein
object features in the reference images are assigned to the
wrong objects in the generated images, as illustrated in Figure 1. Some previous image generation methods (Yang et al.
2024) attempt to mitigate the object confusion issue by incorporating the object features into the corresponding regions of latent image features in the diffusion model. Nevertheless, as the object information is distributed over the
entire image feature space rather than confined to the corresponding local region owing to large receptive fields in deep
networks (Luo et al. 2016; Araujo, Norris, and Sim 2019),

Code — https://github.com/hqhQAQ/MIP-Adapter

Introduction
Personalized text-to-image generation methods generate images conditioned on the reference images that specify the
details of the generated contents, sparking considerable research interest due to its diverse applications. The methodology in this domain is gradually shifting from a finetuningbased approach (e.g., DreamBooth (Ruiz et al. 2023),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3707

