The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fine-Grained Graph Representation Learning for Heterogeneous Mobile
Networks with Attentive Fusion and Contrastive Learning
Shengheng Liu1, 2 * , Tianqi Zhang1 , Ningning Fu1 , and Yongming Huang1, 2 *
1

National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
{s.liu; huangym}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

which integrates essential functions such as self-configuring,
self-optimizing, self-protecting and self-healing (Chi et al.
2023). Achieving such a high degree of network automation
requires a fusion of knowledge from both physical models
and network big data. Fortunately, knowledge graphs (KGs),
a powerful tool to integrate knowledge and data, offer a
promising solution for network automation.
While efforts have been made to establish wireless knowledge graphs (WDKGs) (Huang et al. 2024), the existing ones
are constructed manually, which is a labor-intensive process with no guarantee of accuracy. The dynamic and heterogeneous nature of wireless communication networks further exacerbates these challenges. The primary hurdle lies
in the unprecedentedly enormous and ever-expanding scale
of wireless networks. The resultant WDKG includes a vast
array of fields and relations, the number of which are both
on the order of thousands. Moreover, heterogeneity abounds
in the various attributes of nodes (e.g., block error rate from
the physical layer and average throughput from the MAC
layer) as listed in Appendix B, alongside multiple types of
edges (e.g., causal/explicit/implicit relations). Such extensive heterogeneity complicates manual differentiation and
often prone to errors. Additionally, the edges of WDKGs
keeps evolving with scene variation (e.g., the mobility of
transmitter and receiver), which necessitates near real-time
tracking, analysis, and updating. Given these complexities,
the development of an automated technique for constructing
and refining WDKGs becomes imperative.
Graph structure learning (GSL) methods (Chen, Wu, and
Zaki 2020; Franceschi et al. 2019) enable automatic topology construction but traditionally rely on labels for supervision, resulting in biased structures due to the neglect of unlabeled nodes or edges, which limits scalability. To address
this issue, self-supervision GSL paradigms have emerged,
which leverages supervision signals from contrastive (Liu
et al. 2022) or generative learning (Fatemi, El Asri, and
Kazemi 2021). Nevertheless, these approaches are primarily
tailored for static homogeneous graphs such as Cora, CiteSeer and PubMed (Sen et al. 2008), presenting challenges
for structure learning of dynamic and heterogeneous WDKGs. Motivated by these challenges, we propose a novel
self-supervised GSL paradigm with attentive fusion and
contrastive learning. Our contributions are summarized as
follows.

AI becomes increasingly vital for telecom industry, as the
burgeoning complexity of upcoming mobile communication
networks places immense pressure on network operators.
While there is a growing consensus that intelligent network
self-driving holds the key, it heavily relies on expert experience and knowledge extracted from network data. In an effort
to facilitate convenient analytics and utilization of wireless
big data, we introduce the concept of knowledge graphs into
the field of mobile networks, giving rise to what we term as
wireless data knowledge graphs (WDKGs). However, the heterogeneous and dynamic nature of communication networks
renders manual WDKG construction both prohibitively costly
and error-prone, presenting a fundamental challenge. In this
context, we propose an unsupervised data-and-model driven
graph structure learning (DMGSL) framework, aimed at automating WDKG refinement and updating. Tackling WDKG
heterogeneity involves stratifying the network into homogeneous layers and refining it at a finer granularity. Furthermore,
to capture WDKG dynamics effectively, we segment the network into static snapshots based on the coherence time and
harness the power of recurrent neural networks to incorporate historical information. Extensive experiments conducted
on the established WDKG demonstrate the superiority of the
DMGSL over the baselines, particularly in terms of node classification accuracy.

Code — https://github.com/sh-liu/DMGSL.git
Datasets — https://github.com/sh-liu/WDKG.git

Introduction
The emerging trend of convergence between AI and wireless
technology is expected to bring along new research opportunities and better connectivity for people. Now commercial usage of 5G has reached maturity in the leading markets
and has sparked a growing appetite for new services that imply extremely stringent requirements. The rapid evolution of
networks’ capabilities has introduced significant structural
complexity, posing challenges for network management and
maintenance. As such, the spotlight is on network automation as a prominent trend for forthcoming 6G networks
projected for launch by 2030 (You, Huang et al. 2023),
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18933

