The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Noisy Correspondence Rectification via Asymmetric Similarity Learning
Yunbo Wang1 * , YuJie Wu2 * , Zhien Dai3 , Can Tian4† , Jun Long1 , Jianhai Chen5
1 Big Data Institute, Central South University, China
2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, China
3 School of Automation, Central South University, China
4 School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University, China
5 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China

{wangyunbo, 8102211218, zhiendai, jlong}@csu.edu.cn, tiancan@gzhu.edu.cn, chenjh919@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

With the rapid advance of computing resources, recent
works have achieved impressive performance by training
models on larger-scale datasets. Unfortunately, it is costly
to collect and construct a well-annotated dataset in a realworld scene, especially multimodal datasets. Thus, current
multimodal datasets unavoidably contain mismatched pairs,
resulting in noisy correspondence (Huang et al. 2025). For
example, the popular cross-modal datasets MS-COCO (Lin
et al. 2014) and CC152K (Sharma et al. 2018) include
a great number of inaccurate descriptions in image-text
pairs. Different from the traditional noisy label (Song et al.
2022; Huang, Zhang, and Shan 2023; Wei et al. 2023b),
the noisy correspondence refers to mismatched cross-modal
data pairs, while these mismatched pairs are regarded as
matched pairs when training model. Therefore, the performance of existing cross-modal tasks has nearly reached a
bottleneck. Recently, some methods (Yang et al. 2023a; Han
et al. 2023; Zha et al. 2024) have been presented to deal
with noisy correspondence in cross-modal tasks, mitigating
the adverse impact of noise. These works seek to model the
difference of distribution about per-sample loss at the early
period of training based on the memory effect of deep neural networks (DNNs), where DNNs tend to fit simple samples at this early stage. Next, the dataset would be classified
into clean subset and noisy subset, in which the small-loss
samples are more likely to be clean samples. Subsequently,
soft label estimation strategies are employed for the two subsets, and the soft label is expressed as a margin in the tripletbased matching loss to penalize the noisy pairs, preventing
the deep neural networks from over-fitting noisy data. However, the effect from such margin in triplet loss acted on the
positive and negative pairs is symmetrical, so the penalty for
the potentially-noisy positive sample will act on the negative
sample with the same force, resulting in insufficient learning
and suboptimal performance. Therefore, how to effectively
exploit the supervision from positive and negative pairs remains a critical challenge in noisy correspondence.
To address the above issues, we propose a method dubbed
noisy correspondence rectification via Asymmetric Similarity Learning (ASL) for robust image-text matching. It constructs an alternative paradigm that enables positive and negative pairs to be optimized in an asymmetric way, achieving independently penalizing potentially-noisy positive pairs
without impacting the optimization of negative pairs. The

Cross-modal matching shows enormous potential to recognize objects across different sensory modalities, which is
fundamental to numerous visual-language tasks like imagetext retrieval and visual captioning. Existing works generally
rely on massive and well-aligned data pairs for model training. Unfortunately, multimodal datasets are extremely difficult to annotate and collect. As an alternative, the co-occurred
data pairs collected from the internet have been widely exploited to train a cross-modal matching model. However, the
cheaply-collected dataset unavoidably contains mismatched
pairs (i.e., noisy correspondence), which are detrimental to
the matching model. In this paper, we propose an alternative
method termed noisy correspondence rectification via Asymmetric Similarity Learning (ASL), and it allows for dealing with insufficient learning of positive and negative pairs
caused by the popular triplet-based symmetric learning fashion. Specifically, the learning of positive or negative pairs
within a triplet is conducted in an asymmetric fashion, and the
self-paced weighting boundary is imposed on positive pairs to
mitigate the effect of noise. Meanwhile, the optimization of
negative samples will not be affected in the process of punishing potentially-noisy positive samples. To verify the effectiveness of our proposed approach, a series of experiments are
conducted on three widely-used benchmarks (i.e., Flick30k,
MS-COCO and CC152k), and the results show superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Cross-modal matching (Pan, Wu, and Zhang 2023; Wei et al.
2023a; Zhang et al. 2022) aims to establish the relationship
between different modalities (e.g, image and text), facilitating the downstream tasks such as image/video captioning
(Liu et al. 2023; Nguyen et al. 2024), cross-modal retrieval
(Wang and Peng 2022; Kim, Kim, and Kwak 2023; Yang
et al. 2023b; Wu et al. 2023), and visual question answering (Shao et al. 2023). The common practice in cross-modal
matching is to project the representations of different modalities into a common subspace, so that the semantic correlation across modalities can be obtained by similarity measures such as cosine similarity and Euclidean distance.
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author (tiancan@gzhu.edu.cn).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21384

