The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Metric Distortion of Line-up Elections: The Right Person for the Right Job
Christopher Jerrett, Yue Han, Elliot Anshelevich
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 Eighth Street
Troy, New York 12180
jerrec@rpi.edu, hany4@rpi.edu, eanshel@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract

knowing only ordinal preferences can perform compared to
an omniscient algorithm which knows the true distances between voters and candidates. When attempting to minimize
distortion, we are concerned with finding a mechanism that
does well in minimizing the social cost (the total distances
from the voters to the chosen candidate(s), which come from
the underlying metric) while only knowing ordinal information, as compared with the true optimum solution. For more
motivation and examples see the full version.
Previously, most work on metric distortion has considered selecting a single candidate, or selecting a committee
of k candidates. In this work we instead consider line-up
elections. In such elections, there are multiple positions that
need to be filled (e.g., different spots on a sports team, different duties in a club or a committee, etc.), and a shared pool
of available candidates to fill them. The goal is to choose
which candidate will be assigned to each position, with the
constraint that a candidate can only hold a single position.
Not all candidates are equally fit for every position, as some
may be more qualified for some positions than others. Thus,
unlike in the work mentioned above, where we only cared
about the total distance from voters to the chosen candidates,
we are now concerned both about choosing candidates who
are qualified for the position and also about what candidate
best represents the views of the voters.
More formally, we have n voters V, m candidates C, and
ℓ positions P located in some metric space with distance
function d: distances between voters and candidates represent how much the voter likes them, and distances between
candidates and positions represent how qualified the candidate is for this position. The goal is to form a matching so
that every position has a candidate assigned to it, and every
candidate is assigned to at most one position. How much a
voter v ∈ V likes when a candidate c ∈ C is assigned to position p ∈ P depends on both the similarity between v and c,
as well as c’s fitness for the position p, and so is measured by
d(v, c) + d(c, p): the smaller this quantity the happier voter
v becomes. Thus the total cost for a voter is the sum of this
quantity over all positions and candidates assigned to those
positions, and the Social Cost for this model is defined as
the sum of all voter costs, as in all previous work mentioned
above.
The optimal solution to this problem is the matching minimizing the social cost, and is simple to compute given the

We provide mechanisms and new metric distortion bounds
for line-up elections. In such elections, a set of n voters, m
candidates, and ℓ positions are all located in a metric space.
The goal is to choose a set of candidates and assign them
to different positions in order to minimize the total cost of
the voters. The cost of each voter consists of the distances
from itself to the chosen candidates (measuring how much the
voter likes the chosen candidates or how similar it is to them),
as well as the distances from the candidates to the positions
they are assigned to (measuring the fitness of the candidates
for their positions). Our mechanisms, however, do not know
the exact distances and instead produce good outcomes while
only using a smaller amount of information, resulting in small
distortion.
We consider several different types of information: ordinal
voter preferences, ordinal position preferences, and knowing
the exact locations of candidates and positions, but not those
of voters. In each of these cases, we provide constant distortion bounds, thus showing that only a small amount of information is enough to form outcomes close to optimum in
line-up elections.

1

Introduction

Consider the well-known spacial model of voter preferences
(Arrow 1990; Carroll et al. 2013; Enelow and Hinich 1984;
Schofield 2007). In this model, both voters and candidates
are located in an arbitrary metric space, with the distance
from a voter to a candidate representing how much the voter
prefers them: the closer the candidate to the voter, the better.
These distances could correspond to ideological differences
or something more concrete, such as when candidates correspond to placing facilities (e.g., new post offices) and voters
want a facility close to them (Anshelevich et al. 2018). However, in many such settings, it is too difficult, expensive, or
impossible to calculate the exact distances from each voter
to each candidate, or the voters may be reluctant to provide
such detailed information. On the other hand, obtaining ordinal knowledge about voter preferences (i.e., voter i prefers
A to B, and B to C) is often much easier. This fact gave
rise to a large line of work on metric distortion (see Related Work), which is a measure of how well a mechanism
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13953

