The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

When Shadow Removal Meets Intrinsic Image Decomposition: A Joint Learning
Framework Using Unpaired Data
Rongjia Zheng1 , Qing Zhang1,3 * , Yongwei Nie2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3
1

Sun Yat-sen University, China
South China University of Technology, China
3
The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
zhengrj23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn, nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org
2

Abstract

and Hoiem 2011). Recent effort and progress on shadow
removal is mostly learning-based, due to the emergence of
deep learning and large-scale datasets (Wang, Li, and Yang
2018; Le and Samaras 2019; Qu et al. 2017).
Most learning-based shadow removal methods are trained
in a fully-supervised manner (Zhang et al. 2020; Niu et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2023b; Zhang, Gu, and Zhu 2022; Zhu et al.
2022c; Sen et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024), requiring paired
shadow and shadow-free images. Although these methods
demonstrate promising results, the inherent difficulty of collecting massive real-world paired images covering diverse
scenes limits their generalization capability. A line of research to eliminate the dependency on paired data is to learn
image-to-image translation based on unpaired data (Hu et al.
2019b; Liu et al. 2021a; Jin, Sharma, and Tan 2021; Le and
Samaras 2020; Luo et al. 2023). However, methods in this
category have the following two limitations: (i) they usually
do not generalize well to unseen data beyond the training
data, (ii) they may produce unnatural results with disturbing shadow residual or appearance inconsistency artifacts, as
shown in Figure 3, 4. Besides, there are also a few attempts
towards zero-shot shadow removal trained on a single image
(Gandelsman, Shocher, and Irani 2019; Jiang et al. 2023),
but the high inference time limits their practicability.
A recent research trend is to utilize intrinsic images for
shadow removal (Liu et al. 2024; Guo et al. 2023c). Based
on paired training data, Liu et al. (Liu et al. 2024) proposed
to learn intrinsic image decomposition (IID) for removing
shadows by recasting the lighting of the shadow regions,
while Guo et al. (Guo et al. 2023c) firstly employed a pretrained inpainting diffusion model for shadow removal, and
then trained an IID model based on synthesized shadow images for refining context details within the shadow regions.
Although these two works demonstrate impressive results,
they either require paired data for training, or modelling
shadow removal and IID separately. Moreover, both of them
rely on high-quality masks to locate shadows during training
and testing. In this paper, we present a framework for joint
learning of shadow removal and intrinsic image decomposition from unpaired shadow and shadow-free images, without using shadow masks. Instead of directly learning imageto-image translation like previous unpaired learning based
methods, we design our framework to learn IID for obtaining an intermediate representation that decouples the origi-

We present a framework that achieves shadow removal by
learning intrinsic image decomposition (IID) from unpaired
shadow and shadow-free images. Although it is well-known
that intrinsic images, i.e., illumination and reflectance, are
highly beneficial to shadow removal, IID is rarely adopted by
previous work due to its inherent ambiguity and the scarcity
of training data. However, we find that by properly coupling
shadow removal and IID into a joint learning framework, they
can reinforce each other and enable promising results on both
tasks, even with unpaired training data. Our framework is
comprised of an IID network for separating the shadow input image into illumination and reflectance, and an illumination recovery network for predicting shadow-free illumination with which we are able to produce the shadow removal output by recombining with the estimated reflectance.
We perform extensive experiments on various benchmark
datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in
shadow removal, and also showcase our advantage over previous IID methods in handling images with complex shadows.

Introduction
Shadows are everywhere in photos. Although they are important clue to perceive scene lighting and geometry, their
presence may degrade the overall visual quality of a photo
(e.g., unwanted shadows in landscape and document images), and may also challenge many fundamental computer
vision tasks, such as segmentation, object detection and
tracking. Hence, shadow removal has long been a fundamental problem in computer vision.
Shadow removal is a challenging task as it requires to
accurately locate shadows and recover illumination for the
shadow regions while restoring the texture details behind the
shadows, which depends on reliable understanding of the
scene lighting, geometry, and material information. There
are numerous shadow removal methods in the literature.
Early work addresses the problem by formulating it as layer
separation based on a specific image formation model (Finlayson, Hordley, and Drew 2002; Liu and Gleicher 2008),
or by transferring illumination from non-shadow regions to
shadow regions (Zhang, Zhang, and Xiao 2015; Guo, Dai,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10599

