The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AD4CD: Causal-Guided Anomaly Detection for Enhancing Cognitive Diagnosis
Haiping Ma1,2 * , Yue Yao1 , Changqian Wang1 , Siyu Song1 , Yong Yang1
1

2

Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, China
Department of Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, China
hpma@ahu.edu.cn, {yuntu47, changqian.wang.dl, siyusong00, yyyangyong00}@gmail.com

Abstract
Cognitive diagnosis aimed at assessing a students’ proficiency in specific knowledge concepts based on their responses to exercises. However, existing cognitive diagnosis
models often overlook anomalies in students and exercises.
For instance, some students might incorrectly response exercises despite having a strong grasp of the knowledge concept,
or they might response correctly despite a lack of understanding. Such subtle anomalies can adversely affect the diagnostic
results of the models. To address these anomalies, we conduct
a qualitative analysis of how anomalous student states and
exercise properties impact response outcomes using causal
diagrams. We propose a framework named Anomaly Detection for Cognitive Diagnosis (AD4CD) to enhance the ability
of Learning-to-Detect-Anomalous. AD4CD approaches the
problem from a causal perspective, analyzing confounding
paths that affect the true causal relationship between student
ability and response outcomes, and designing an anomaly detection mechanism suitable for cognitive diagnostic models.
Specifically, we first account for anomalous student behaviors
and exercise properties and introduce response times from
both students and exercises as modeling factors. By quantifying the response time distributions in high-dimensional features, we identify anomalies within skewed distributions, including both left-tail and right-tail anomalies. Using the detected anomaly scores, we comprehensively model the students’ anomalous behaviors and exercise anomalies. Additionally, we reconstruct unbiased true abilities under natural
conditions and use reconstruction loss as an anomaly score
to assist in modeling guessing and slipping features. Lastly,
AD4CD leverages a general cognitive diagnosis model as its
backbone, optimizing the guessing and slipping features to
provide unbiased and accurate feedback. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that AD4CD effectively captures
anomalous data in the diagnostic process across three realworld datasets, enhancing the accuracy of the diagnostic results.

Figure 1: (a) denotes the cause-effect diagram to analyze anomalies. (b) The relationship between students’ response times distribution and accuracy rate on the ASSIST09 dataset.
exercises (Ma et al. 2024e; Yang et al. 2024b; Yu et al.
2024a,b). cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) utilize students’ response records and the Q-matrix, which represents
the relationship between exercises and knowledge concepts,
to model both students’ abilities and the property of the exercises. This approach enables diagnostic feedback for students and provides an analysis of exercise characteristics,
such as difficulty (Ma et al. 2024c; Yu et al. 2024c). Existing research (Yang, Qin, and Yu 2024; Shen et al. 2024) has
focused on designing various neural network structures to
capturethe naive binary interactions between students and
exercises, such as DNN-based CDMs (Wang et al. 2022;
Ma et al. 2022) represented by NCD (Wang et al. 2020)
and graph-based CDMs (Wang et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2024a)
represented by RCD (Gao et al. 2021). These studies uniformly treat historical response records as normal interaction behavior, which is considered to contribute equitably
to model learning. However, in certain situations, the diagnostic results from CDMs indicate that the student has a
deep understanding of one knowledge concept but a shallow understanding of another, with no correlation between
them. Nonetheless, in practical assessments, the student incorrectly answered a question linked to the former concept
but correctly responded to one related to the latter. This
unobservable anomalous behavior contradicts the cognition
of CDMs, leading to biased diagnostic results, which are
caused by the coupling of the two entities, including the student and the exercise.

Introduction
Amid the development of intelligent education, cognitive
diagnosis has garnered increasing attention (Zhao et al.
2023; Wu et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023b; Yang et al. 2023,
2019). Cognitive diagnosis aims to assess students’ proficiency in various knowledge concepts through response on
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12337

