The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

How Do Position Encodings Affect Length Generalization?
Case Studies On In-Context Function Learning
Di-Nan Lin1 , Yao Jui-Feng2 , Kun-Da Wu2 , Hao Xu2 , Chen-Hsi Huang2 , Hung-Yu Kao3
1

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng Kung University
2
Pixel Software, Google
3
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University
lindinan934301@gmail.com, hykao@cs.nthu.edu.tw
Abstract

The capability of In-Context Learning (ICL) is crucial for
large language models to generalize across a wide range of
tasks. By utilizing prompts, these models can accurately predict outcomes for previously unseen tasks without necessitating retraining. However, this generalization ability does not
extend to the length of the inputs; the effectiveness of ICL
likely diminishes with excessively long inputs, resulting in
errors in the generated text. To investigate this issue, we propose a study using a dataset of In-Context functions to understand the operational mechanisms of Transformer models in
ICL and length generalization. We generated data using regression and Boolean functions and employed meta-learning
techniques to endow the model with ICL capabilities. Our experimental results indicate that position encodings (PEs) can
significantly mitigate length generalization issues, with the
most effective encoding extending the maximum input length
to over eight times that of the original training length. However, further analysis revealed that while PE enhances length
generalization, it compromises the model’s inherent capabilities, such as its ability to generalize across different data
types. Overall, our research illustrates that PEs have a pronounced positive effect on length generalization, though it
necessitates a careful trade-off with data generalization performance.

Figure 1: Trained-from-scratch GPT-2 fails on OOD length.
We utilize a function dataset to train a GPT-2 from scratch.
The red line indicates the maximum number of in-context
examples the model has encountered during training. Results show that it is unable to achieve length generalization.
What would happen if model inferences on out-ofdistribution (OOD) length? We select linear regression
as the test task, setting the dimension of x to 20 and y to 1.
Thus, any algorithm requires at least 20 distinct pairs (x, y)
to determine the actual weight w. The model’s maximum
token length is 200; each pair occupies 2 tokens, allowing
up to 100 in-context examples. We train the model from
scratch, using squared error as a benchmark. During training, the model sees 40 in-context examples before making
inferences at maximum length. As shown in Fig. 1, GPT-2
struggles with length extrapolation due to learnable position
encoding, which cannot be trained on short and tested on
long. In summary, our contributions are as follows.
1. We show that Position Encodings (PEs) are crucial for
addressing Length Generalization. The correct PE can
sustain the model’s ICL capability on OOD lengths.
2. We find that appropriate PE enhances the ability of ICL
in different tasks, resulting in higher prediction accuracy.
3. We demonstrate that although PEs enhance Length Generalization capability, they compromise model’s inherent
abilities, resulting in reduced induction ability.

Code — https://github.com/IKMLab/lengthgeneralization-with-icl

Introduction
In recent years, the development of large language models (LLMs) has significantly advanced. Many studies investigate the mysteries of In-Context Learning (ICL) (Brown
et al. 2020) with Transformer-based models by carefully
controlling the training data (Garg et al. 2022; Akyürek et al.
2023; Zhou et al. 2024a). These studies aim to understand
what types of data the model can learn and what algorithms
the model can internalize during this process.
According to human experience and intuition, once we
have learned an algorithm and understood its application,
we can accurately respond to future inputs that the algorithm
can solve. We hypothesize that, in the future, LLMs may also
achieve this capability through ICL.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24576

