The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Iterative Sparse Attention for Long-sequence Recommendation
Guanyu Lin1,2 , Jinwei Luo3 , Yinfeng Li1 Chen Gao* 1 Qun Luo4 Depeng Jin1
1

BNRist, Tsinghua University
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Shenzhen University
4
Tencent Inc.
guanyul@andrew.cmu.edu, chgao96@gmail.com
2

Abstract
1-step

Longer historical behaviors often improve recommendation
accuracy but bring efficient problems. As sequences get longer,
the following two main challenges have not been addressed:
(1) efficient modeling under increasing sequence length and
(2) interest drifting within historical items. In this paper, we
propose Iterative Sparse Attention for Long-sequence Recommendation (ISA) with Sparse Attention Layer and Iterative
Attention Layer to efficiently capture sequential pattern and
expand the receptive field of each historical items. We take
the pioneering step to address the efficient and interest drifting
challenges for the long-sequence recommendation simultaneously. The theoretical analysis illustrates that our proposed
iterative method can approximate full attention efficiently. Experiments on two real-world datasets show the superiority of
our proposed method against state-of-the-art baselines.

2-step
3-step

Figure 1: Illustration of attention distance for sequential recommendation where the last item attends to neighborhood
items by different steps. Here the first and last items are both
about the car, and thus the first item with three steps away is
the most important item for the last item.

Code — https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/ISA

Introduction
With the exploration of modern personalized platforms such
as Wechat’s Channels and Taobao e-commerce etc., it is
essential to model the users’ preferences and engage them.
One of the most important tasks to model users’ preference
is the sequential recommendation (Zhou et al. 2019; Kang
and McAuley 2018; Chang et al. 2021; Qiao et al. 2024) that
leverages behavior sequence to promote the performance,
especially when the sequence is longer (Pi et al. 2020; Lin
et al. 2022a; Cao et al. 2022). However, when the sequence
becomes longer, an efficient problem will arise. Besides, it
is hard to capture the interest drift within the long sequence.
Indeed, there are two key challenges for the long-sequence
recommendation.
• User sequence is too long to achieve efficient modeling.
In the long-sequence recommendation, users often click
many items, resulting in long sequence and make the efficient modeling difficult.
• User interest drifts dramatically in a long sequence. As
time goes on and the accumulation of observed items, user
interest will drift dramatically between distant items in the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12147

historical item sequence. For example, a user may prefer
ice cola in summer but prefer hot tea in winter.
To achieve efficient modeling, DIN (Zhou et al. 2018)
leverages the target item to aggregate the related historical
items. Moreover, some search-based works (Pi et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2022) leverage the target item to
query and filter the historical items. However, these works
ignore the interest drifting within the historical item sequence.
To further capture the interest drifting within historical items,
SAM (Lin et al. 2022a) exploits the aggregated historical
items to query themselves. Such a way is implicit and, indeed,
will only aggregate the historical items that are indirectly
related to the target item.
To address the efficiency and interest drifting challenges
at the same time, we propose a method named ISA, a novel
iterative sparse attention for long-sequence recommendation
with Sparse Attention Layer to reduce the cost and Iterative
Attention Layer to expand the interest drifting. Specifically,
to elegantly address the efficient challenge, we leverage three
sparse attention mechanisms (Zaheer et al. 2020) from NLP
with local window attention, global attention, and random
attention. Specifically, we leverage (1) the global attention
to capture the global drifted interests of short-term items, (2)
the window attention to extract the local drifted interests of
historical items, and (3) the random attention to randomly
connect the drifted interests of pair items. However, these
sparse attention methods may fail to capture some distant
relations when correlated items are not neighboring. For example, as the sequence is shown in Figure 1, short attention
distance with less than two steps may be insufficient when
the really correlated items are three steps away. That is to
say, each single sparse attention layer can not guarantee suf-

