The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A New Adversarial Perspective for LiDAR-Based 3D Object Detection
Shijun Zheng1,2 , Weiquan Liu3 * , Yu Guo1,2 , Yu Zang1,2 * , Siqi Shen1,2 , Cheng Wang1,2
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
College of Computer Engineering, Jimei University, China
{zhengshijun, gouyu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {siqishen, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, wqliu@jmu.edu.cn, zangyu7@126.com
Abstract

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) rely on LiDAR sensors for environmental perception and decision-making in driving scenarios. However, ensuring the safety and reliability of AVs in
complex environments remains a pressing challenge. To address this issue, we introduce a real-world dataset (ROLiD)
comprising LiDAR-scanned point clouds of two random objects: water mist and smoke. In this paper, we introduce a
novel adversarial perspective by proposing an attack framework that utilizes water mist and smoke to simulate environmental interference. Specifically, we propose a point cloud
sequence generation method using a motion and content
decomposition generative adversarial network named PCSGAN to simulate the distribution of random objects. Furthermore, leveraging the simulated LiDAR scanning characteristics implemented with Range Image, we examine the effects
of introducing random object perturbations at various positions on the target vehicle. Extensive experiments demonstrate that adversarial perturbations based on random objects
effectively deceive vehicle detection and reduce the recognition rate of 3D object detection models.

3D Scene
Correct Detection
(a) Benign case

Random Object

False Detection
3D Scene
(b) Adversarial case

Figure 1: We use random objects to camouflage the target
vehicle and fool the LiDAR detector. In benign cases, the 3D
object detector correctly detects the vehicle. In adversarial
cases, the detector fails to identify the vehicle when random
objects are superimposed on it.

Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13017

Introduction
LiDAR is an important support for modern autonomous
driving systems in achieving scene perception due to its
ability to capture accurate depth information (Xia et al.
2021). Learning-based LiDAR point cloud methods (Xia
et al. 2023, 2024) have recently become popular with the development of deep learning. However, previous studies have
shown that deep neural network models are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks, causing the model to produce erroneous
outputs (Szegedy et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2022). Malicious
attacks on deep network models can significantly compromise the security of autonomous driving systems.
Currently, 3D adversarial attacks are primarily focused on
the digital domain, often overlooking the potential for adversarial attacks in real-world scenarios. In the digital domain,
adversarial attack methods include perturbing points, adding
independent points or adversarial clustering (Xiang, Qi, and

Li 2019), and deleting points (Zheng et al. 2019). In addition, using gradients to implement adversarial attacks is also
a major method (Ma et al. 2020), but the generated adversarial examples are prone to outliers. Optimization-based methods (Zheng et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2020) can generate adversarial examples with better geometric properties, but this
method performs slowly. In the frequency domain, the imperceptibility and transferability of adversarial examples can
be improved based on high-frequency and low-frequency information. However, the adversarial examples generated by
these methods are not operable in the real world.
The methods for addressing adversarial attacks in realworld scenarios can be divided into two categories. The first
is a sensor-level attack. Attackers use malicious laser pulses
to simulate LiDAR return pulses and inject attack signals
into LiDAR signals (Cao et al. 2019). The second type is a
model-level LiDAR attack, which is also the main adversarial attack method. For example, adding adversarial objects

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10608

