The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-type MOOCs Recommendation: Leveraging Deep Multi-Relational
Representation and Hierarchical Reasoning
Ye Zhang1 , Yanqi Gao1 , Dongjie Wang2 * , Yupeng Zhou1 , Jinlong He1 , Zhaoyang Sun1 ,
Minghao Yin1∗
1

College of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of Kansas
zhangy923@nenu.edu.cn, gaoyq557@nenu.edu.cn, wangdongjie@ku.edu, zhouyp605@nenu.edu.cn,
hejl104@nenu.edu.cn, suncy355@nenu.edu.cn, ymh@nenu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

on historical learning records (Tian and Liu 2021; Wang
et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023; Gong et al. 2023; Wen et al.
2023). 2) Meta-path-based recommendation, which often
constructs a knowledge graph to indicate the relationship
between learners and video contents to produce explainable
and logical recommendation results (Jiang et al. 2023; Li
et al. 2023; Alatrash et al. 2024; Liang et al. 2023).
However, prior studies are not sufficient. Content-based
methods typically focus solely on users’ preferences and
their historical activities. They often tend to offer recommendations that are narrowly aligned with past interactions and stated preferences (Wang et al. 2021). Although
these methods are personalized, they lack depth in addressing the comprehensive needs of learners. Thus, the effectiveness of these recommendations is suboptimal. Metapath-based methods tend to overlook the multi-type interactions between learners and various educational components such as courses, knowledge concepts, and videos. This
oversight makes it difficult for these methods to precisely
capture learners’ intentions and preferences (Wang et al.
2023a). These studies typically focus on recommendations
for single-type of educational content, neglecting the interconnectivity among various aspects of learning.
Thus, we explore multi-type MOOCs recommendation,
focusing on accurately capturing learners’ intentions. There
are two research challenges: 1) How to represent and capture the relationships among course, knowledge concept,
and video during recommendation? In the educational
domain, the three components are interrelated. Effectively
recommending any one of them can enhance our comprehension of learners’ interests, thereby improving the performance of recommendations in the other two areas. 2) How
to grasp the sparse, multi-type interaction data between
learners and various educational contents to produce
more explainable results? Courses, knowledge concepts,
and videos exhibit hierarchical structural relationships. By
reasoning from higher-level to lower-level elements, the accuracy of the recommendations and explainability can be
significantly enhanced.
To address these challenges, we propose a Multi-Type
MOOCs RecoMmEndation framework (TOME) including
multi-relational representation and hierarchical reasoning.
In the multi-relational representation stage, we first con-

Massive open online courses (MOOCs) recommendation provides online courses tailored to learners’ individual preferences. Existing literature is limited by: 1) Ignoring the interrelations among courses, knowledge concepts, and videos,
which leads to suboptimal recommendation performance; 2)
Neglecting the hierarchical interactions between learners and
components like courses, knowledge concepts, and videos,
which makes it difficult to capture learners’ intentions accurately. To address them, we propose a novel multi-type
MOOCs recommendation framework, which enables multitype educational content recommendations. This framework
includes two important components: multi-relational representation and hierarchical reasoning. Regarding multirelational representation, we first create two static courserelational and knowledge concept-relational graphs based on
domain knowledge and construct a dynamic video-relational
graph using learners’ browsing historical sequences. Then,
we capture the interactions among different components by
learning the corresponding embeddings via graph neural networks. Regarding hierarchical reasoning, we implement a hierarchical beam search strategy to narrow down the candidate
courses, knowledge concepts, and videos by calculating joint
probability. Finally, we introduce an optional layer to increase
the diversity and reasonableness of video recommendations
by estimating learners’ intentions. Extensive experiments are
conducted to show the effectiveness, robustness, and interpretability of our method.

Introduction
MOOCs platforms (e.g. Coursera, edX, and Knewton) have
revolutionized the accessibility of educational areas, making
high-quality learning resources available to global audiences
and encouraging lifelong learning. Customized and multitype recommendations can significantly enhance learners’
interest, improve learning efficiency, and broaden the diversity of their learning experiences.
Existing MOOCs recommendations are typically classified into two categories: 1) Content-based recommendation,
which utilizes sequential recommendation models to analyze learners’ preferences and recommends educational content (e.g. courses, knowledge concepts, or videos) based
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13313

