The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Multimodal Large Language Models with Visual Tokens Withdrawal for
Rapid Inference
Zhihang Lin1,2 , Mingbao Lin3 , Luxi Lin1 , Rongrong Ji1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
Skywork AI
lzhedu@foxmail.com, linmb001@outlook.com, lewuluu@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
Q1: Is there a cake
in the image ?

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) demand considerable computations for inference due to the extensive parameters and the additional input tokens needed for visual
information representation. Herein, we introduce Visual Tokens Withdrawal (VTW), a plug-and-play module to boost
MLLMs for rapid inference. Our approach is inspired by two
intriguing phenomena we have observed: (1) the attention
sink phenomenon that is prevalent in LLMs also persists in
MLLMs, suggesting that initial tokens and nearest tokens receive the majority of attention, while middle vision tokens
garner minimal attention in deep layers; (2) the presence of
information migration, which implies that visual information
is transferred to subsequent text tokens within the first few
layers of MLLMs. As per our findings, we conclude that vision tokens are unnecessary in the deep layers of MLLMs.
Thus, we strategically withdraw them at a certain layer, enabling only text tokens to engage in subsequent layers. To pinpoint the ideal layer for VTW, we initially analyze a limited
set of tiny datasets and choose the first layer that meets the
Kullback-Leibler divergence criterion. Our VTW approach
can cut computational overhead by over 40% across diverse
multimodal tasks while maintaining performance.

Q2: Is there a bottle Q3: Is there a fork
in the image?
in the image ?

(a)

Q2: Is there a bottle
in the image ?

(b)

Figure 1: (a) An instance from POPE (Pope et al. 2023) with
red box indicating key area for answering the question. (b)
In FastV, some genuinely important tokens like “bottle” are
pruned, while unimportant tokens like “cake” are preserved.
the inference cost (Liu et al. 2024). The high inference cost
of MLLMs hinders their applicability in real-time scenarios.
Recent methods (Shang et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024) aim
to reduce the computational cost of MLLMs through token
reduction. The primary goal is to keep so-called “important”
tokens based on predefined metrics and remove or merge the
rest. However, these approaches have some shortcomings
that need to be addressed. (1) Lack of flexibility. Methods
like LLaVA-PruMerge (Shang et al. 2024) employ identical
vision tokens to represent an image for different questions
in VQA. However, for datasets like MME (Fu et al. 2023),
POPE (Li et al. 2023b), and AI2D (Kembhavi et al. 2016),
numerous questions are associated with the same image,
each focusing on a distinct area of the image, as illustrated
in Figure 1(a). Thus, LLaVA-PruMerge cannot dynamically
adjust the important tokens based on the questions, leading
to a lack of flexibility and a significant accuracy drop of
160.4 on MME benchmark. (2) Incomplete importance metric. Almost all methods necessitate the design of an importance metric for token reduction, such as cross-modal guidance for CrossGET (Shi et al. 2023) and attention score for
FastV (Chen et al. 2024). However, there is limited theoretical evidence to establish which importance metric is the
optimal. A low importance score for a token does not necessarily indicate that the token is unimportant. Moreover, some
genuinely important tokens are pruned in these methods,
as illustrated in Figure 1(b). Thus, designing a comprehensive importance metric to determine which tokens are important is challenging. (3) Incompatibility with KV Cache.
KV Cache (Pope et al. 2023) is an essential approach for

Code — https://github.com/lzhxmu/VTW

Introduction
In recent years, major progress has been made in generative AI with the development of large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al. 2023; Team et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023a). Multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) (Liu et al. 2023b; Li et al. 2023a; Liu et al. 2024)
combine vision encoders, like CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), to
extract visual features, enhancing LLM’s reasoning abilities
for complex tasks like visual question answering (VQA) (Lu
et al. 2022; Kembhavi et al. 2016) and visual reasoning (Yue
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023c; Fu et al. 2023).
However, MLLMs entail high inference cost due to their
billions of parameters and their computational cost quadratic
increases with the length of the input sequence. Converting
a high-resolution image into vision tokens further increases
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5334

