The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CryoDomain: Sequence-free Protein Domain Identification from Low-resolution
Cryo-EM Density Maps
Muzhi Dai, Zhuoer Dong, Weining Fu, Kui Xu * , Qiangfeng Cliff Zhang *
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
{dmz21,dze18,fwn23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xukui,qczhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Atomic-resolution protein structure determination from
cryo-EM demands high-resolution density maps and usually
requires primary amino acid sequences. As the resolution
of density map drops, density regions corresponding to protein side chains become blurred and hardly recognizable
(Fraser and Murcko 2024). In extreme cases, a density region encompassing several amino acids might be completely
lost, making it difficult or even impossible to identify the
chemical identity of individual amino acids. Without prior
knowledge such as type or sequence of the protein, structure determination methods are generally not applicable to
low-resolution density maps. Thus, protein identification in a
broader perspective turns out to be an important alternative
for the interpretation of density maps. Sequence search-based
methods (Ho et al. 2020)(Jamali et al. 2024) first recognize
individual amino acids from a density map, and then build
a stretch of amino acids for subsequent sequence searching.
Structure search-based approaches (Chang et al. 2022b) can
also achieve protein identification, provided that a sufficient
fraction of backbone structure can be built from the density
map. However, both approaches still suffer from sharp performance decline on low-resolution (>4 Å) density maps since
they heavily rely on accurate amino acid recognition. Meanwhile, to improve accuracy and efficiency for short sequence
or cracked backbone identification, these approaches often
restrict the search space by resorting to other biological experiments such as tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) which
can detect all proteins in the sample of interest (Chang et al.
2022a)(Gui et al. 2022). The recent revolution in sequencebased structure prediction (Jumper et al. 2021) leads to another option, i.e., predicting the structure for each protein
in the search space and sorting by the correlation with the
density map, but this is quite time-consuming and limited by
the quality of predicted structures (Gao et al. 2023).
Different from amino acid-dependent methods mentioned
above, we innovatively propose a cross-modal method, CryoDomain, for protein identification based on protein domain,
especially from low-resolution density maps. Domain is a
large constituent unit of proteins, containing 50-250 amino
acids (Buljan and Bateman 2009). Missing density or blurred
shapes in low-resolution maps has less influence in proportion
on domain density regions compared with individual amino
acids. In addition, domains exhibit well-conserved structures
and functions, where new proteins are merely novel combina-

Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) has revolutionized the
field of structural biology, determining structures of large
protein machines and sharpening the understanding of fundamental biological processes. Despite cryo-EM’s unique capacity to discover novel proteins from unpurified samples
and reveal the intricate structures of protein complexes within
native cellular environments, the advancement of protein identification methods for cryo-EM lags behind. Without prior
knowledge, such as sequence, protein identification from lowresolution density maps remains challenging. Here we introduce CryoDomain, an innovative method for identifying protein domains — conserved constituent units of proteins —
from low-resolution cryo-EM density maps without requiring
prior knowledge of protein sequences. CryoDomain leverages
cross-modal alignment to correlate cryo-EM density maps
with atomic structures, transferring the knowledge learned
on a large atomic structure dataset to a sparse density map
dataset. On two protein domain benchmarks constructed from
CATH and SCOPe, CryoDomain significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods for domain identification from
low-resolution density maps. CryoDomain liberates structural
biologists from the tedious tasks of density inspection and
database searching during protein identification. It has the
potential to extend the border of unbiased structure discovery
and cellular landscape investigation using cryo-EM.

Introduction
Structure determination of proteins is crucial to understanding biological processes and molecular mechanisms (Liao
et al. 2013)(Taylor et al. 2015). Cryo-EM has emerged as a
popular approach for structure determination of endogenous
macromolecules (Kühlbrandt 2014)(Nogales and Mahamid
2024), with the number of cryo-EM density maps deposited
in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) growing exponentially (Lawson et al. 2016). Furthermore, a burgeoning
subdivision of cryo-EM, cryo-electron tomography (cryoET), is capable of revealing in situ nanometer-scale structural
information of cellular components in their native environments, while indispensable molecular interactions might be
lost in traditional single particle analysis (SPA) cryo-EM
(Turk and Baumeister 2020).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

119

