The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CALM: Curiosity-Driven Auditing for Large Language Models
Xiang Zheng1 , Longxiang Wang1 , Yi Liu1 , Xingjun Ma2 , Chao Shen3 , Cong Wang1 *
1

City University of Hong Kong
2
Fudan University
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University
{xiang.zheng@,longxwang4-c@my.,yiliu247-c@my.,congwang@}cityu.edu.hk
xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn, chaoshen@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

complicate the challenge of ensuring their safe and responsible use (Wei, Haghtalab, and Steinhardt 2024).
Auditing LLMs is an essential and promising step in managing risks they may expose (Rastegarpanah, Gummadi, and
Crovella 2021). The auditing process is closely linked to red
teaming (Hong et al. 2024), a strategy traditionally used to
test systems by subjecting them to adversarial challenges.
While red teaming is focused on identifying risks through
adversarial prompts crafted by the internal red team, auditing involves systematically evaluating a target LLM’s behavior based on ethical and safety standards established by
external auditors or stakeholders (Mökander et al. 2023). In
this paper, we refer to auditing to assess and monitor the
target LLM’s alignment and compliance over time. The aim
is to uncover and monitor undesirable behaviors before and
after the target LLM is widely deployed. However, current
auditing methods often face challenges in dealing with the
black-box nature of LLMs, especially when access to the
model’s parameters is restricted, for example, when the target LLM is offered as services in the cloud.
There are various undesired behaviors that LLMs might
exhibit, such as producing toxic content, stereotypes, discrimination, and leaking private information (Mazeika et al.
2024). Generally, we can formulate the auditing objective
that captures specific undesired behaviors as a multivariate
function r(s, o), where s represents the audit prompt and o
represents the response from the target LLM. For instance,
r(s, o) can measure whether the output o is legally and ethically toxic, biased, sensitive, or private. In this work, we
focus on two specific auditing objectives: generating specific suffixes (e.g., names of senators) and toxic completions about celebrities. Maximizing the auditing objectives
can uncover toxic and sensitive behaviors of the target LLM.
Moreover, adopting such an auditing objective makes it easy
to adapt to auditing new undesired behaviors for specific auditors and stakeholders.
The auditing methods previously used for blackbox LLMs have primarily relied on manually created
prompts (Yu et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024). While useful,
these methods have limitations in exploring these models’
vast and complex input space. Manually crafted prompts
cannot cover the full range of potential outputs. Moreover,
these methods struggle to identify rare but potentially harmful outputs, making it challenging to uncover infrequent yet

Auditing Large Language Models (LLMs) is a crucial and
challenging task. In this study, we focus on auditing blackbox LLMs without access to their parameters, only to the provided service. We treat this type of auditing as a black-box optimization problem where the goal is to automatically uncover
input-output pairs of the target LLMs that exhibit illegal, immoral, or unsafe behaviors. For instance, we may seek a nontoxic input that the target LLM responds to with a toxic output
or an input that induces the hallucinative response from the
target LLM containing politically sensitive individuals. This
black-box optimization is challenging due to the scarcity of
feasible points, the discrete nature of the prompt space, and
the large search space. To address these challenges, we propose Curiosity-Driven Auditing for Large Language Models
(CALM), which uses intrinsically motivated reinforcement
learning to finetune an LLM as the auditor agent to uncover
potential harmful and biased input-output pairs of the target
LLM. CALM successfully identifies derogatory completions
involving celebrities and uncovers inputs that elicit specific
names under the black-box setting. This work offers a promising direction for auditing black-box LLMs.
Content warning: Please note that this paper includes examples that may be offensive.

Code — https://github.com/x-zheng16/CALM.git

1

Introduction

The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) represents a significant advancement in artificial intelligence,
allowing machines to produce human-like text with impressive fluency and understanding of context (Radford et al.
2019). These models have wide-ranging applications, from
facilitating natural language comprehension to generating
creative content, solidifying their importance in education,
industry, and research (Xu et al. 2024). However, the considerable capabilities of LLMs also bring about significant
concerns, particularly regarding their potential to generate
toxic or hallucinative outputs (Wallace et al. 2019; Zou et al.
2023). The complex and often incomprehensible internal
processes on which these models base their decisions further
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27757

