The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Concurrent Planning and Execution in Lifelong Multi-Agent Path Finding with
Delay Probabilities
Yue Zhang, Zhe Chen, Daniel Harabor, Pierre Le Bodic, Peter J. Stuckey
Monash University, Australia
{Yue.Zhang, Zhe.Chen, Daniel.Harabor, Pierre.LeBodic, Peter.Stuckey}@monash.edu

Abstract
In multi-agent systems, when we account for the possibility
of delays during execution, online planning becomes more
complicated, as both execution and planning should be able
to handle delays when agents are moving. Lifelong MultiAgent Path Finding (LMAPF) is the problem of (re)planning
the collision-free moves of agents to their goals in a shared
space, while agents continuously receive new goals. PIE
(Planning and Improving while Executing) is a recent approach to LMAPF which concurrently replans later parts of
agents’ trajectories while execution occurs. However, the execution is assumed to be perfect. Existing approaches either
use policy-based methods to quickly coordinate agents every
timestep with instant delay feedback, or deploy an execution
policy to adjust a solution for delays on the fly. These approaches may introduce large amounts of unnecessary delays
to agents due to their planner guarantees or simple delayhandling policies. In this paper, we extend PIE to define a
framework for solving the lifelong MAPF problem with execution delays. We instantiate our framework with different
execution and replanning strategies, and experimentally evaluate them. Overall, we find that this framework can substantially improve the throughput by up to a factor 3 for lifelong
MAPF, compared to approaches that handle delays with simple execution policies.

Figure 1: Motivating examples (Snap-shot for timestep 1).
Due to delays, a1 cannot execute the first action (B3 to B2)
and stays at B3. Scenario (a) assumes every agent executes
its given path directly, resulting a conflict. Scenario (b) uses
simple execution policies, which wait for a2 to traverse B2
first. Grey line is the executed path.

• Problem (2): the uncommitted plan may be invalid, as
the planner assumes agents start from the last location
on their committed path, but their actual position after k
timesteps may not match the committed plan.
Figure 1 shows examples of such problems. Suppose the
planner is executing the first k = 2 steps of the plan, meanwhile, the planner is computing the future plan assuming a1
starts at B1 and a2 starts at B2. In Scenario (a), a2 directly
moves to A2 according to its given path. Then both agents
want to occupy B2 at timestep 2, and therefore, cause Problem (1). In Scenario (b), a2 follows a fixed execution policy: in case of delay, to wait for a1 to enter and leave B2
first, at the end of the commit window leaving a1 at location
B2 and a2 at location A2, which causes Problem (2). Thus,
if the planner is building new future paths assuming agents
follow the committed plan without delays, these future paths
may be infeasible due to the deviations between the actual
location of each agent and their expected locations.
Lifelong Multi Agent Path Finding (LMAPF) (Stern et al.
2019; Ma et al. 2017; Li et al. 2021b) is an important problem in multi-agent systems, which requires coordinating the
simultaneous actions of agents so that they reach continuously assigned new target locations without any collisions.
It is the main abstraction for many practical applications,
such as autonomous warehouses (Li et al. 2021b), unmanned
aerial vehicles (Ho et al. 2019, 2022) and autonomous vehicles (Li et al. 2023). In LMAPF, one way to handle delays is through offline k−robust planning, i.e. their execution is safe with up to k timestep of delays (Atzmon et al.

Introduction
When planning online, planners are under time pressure, as
agents may have to wait for the planner to compute the solution for execution. An efficient way to handle this problem
is concurrent planning and execution (Karaman et al. 2011;
Hönig et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2024). That is, for a given
parameter k ≥ 1, at timestep t, the planner commits to executing the next k steps of the current plan. During times
steps t..t + k − 1 it computes/improves the remainder of
the plan. This repeats every k timesteps. However, in multiagent systems, unexpected delays can occur in execution,
due to mechanical differences, communication delays, robot
dynamics, etc. When delays occur, two desynchronisation
problems arise when following the plan:
• Problem (1): the committed plan may be invalid, because
directly executing the paths may cause conflicts;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23387

