The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Sample-Level Evaluation and Generative Framework for Model Inversion
Attacks
Haoyang Li1 , Li Bai1 , Qingqing Ye1 , Haibo Hu1 * , Yaxin Xiao1 , Huadi Zheng2 , Jianliang Xu3
1

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Huawei Technology
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{hao-yang9905.li, baili.bai}@connect.polyu.hk, {qqing.ye, haibo.hu}@polyu.edu.hk, 20034165r@connect.polyu.hk,
zhenghuadi@huawei.com, xujl@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
Abstract

an MI attack targets at the whole private information in the
training dataset and reconstructs multiple private features simultaneously (Song and Namiot 2022), which poses even
more severe threats than its inference counterpart. In line
with previous studies (Zhang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021;
Struppek et al. 2022), we consider white-box MI attacks,
where the attacker has access to the specific parameters and
architecture of the victim model.
Given the inherent difficulty for MI attacks to recover every sample within a large-scale dataset, recent works (Struppek et al. 2022; An et al. 2022) have lowered down their
goal to recover one or few representatives in each class label. This trend was first motivated in the field of face recognition (Wang et al. 2021b), where each label corresponds
to the identity of a person. Since these label representatives
can reveal the general appearance of a person, they arise as
a significant concern in recent studies (Wang et al. 2021a;
Nguyen et al. 2023). However, the potential for privacy compromise varies across applications. In some domains beyond facial recognition, label representatives may convey
little or even no private information, which in turn weakens
such threats. For instance, in disease diagnosis, each label
corresponds to a well-known disease, so label representatives merely encapsulate public knowledge about the conditions of this disease. However, MI attacks may still threaten
sample-level privacy by reconstructing individual samples.
To address the imperative to unearth and safeguard
sample-level privacy, this study critiques existing evaluation metrics of MI by first demonstrating their inadequacy
in fully capturing the multifaceted characteristics of MI attacks. Furthermore, metrics based on distributional similarity are sensitive to the distribution of reconstructed samples,
so that their evaluation results can be easily fooled by controlling the sample distribution (e.g., producing redundant
samples or approximating the distribution with fewer samples). To overcome these limitations, we introduce a novel
metric, namely Diversity and Distance Compostie Score
(DDCS), that assesses the integrity of sample-level privacy
in the context of MI attacks. In essence, DDCS uniquely
evaluates the extent of reconstruction by the attack for each
sample in the training dataset, so that it can comprehensively
incorporate diverse attributes (e.g., distance, coverage and
distributional similarity) to indicate a good MI attack and is

Model Inversion (MI) attacks, which reconstruct the training
dataset of neural networks, pose significant privacy concerns
in machine learning. Recent MI attacks have managed to reconstruct realistic label-level private data, such as the general appearance of a target person from all training images
labeled on him. Beyond label-level privacy, in this paper we
show sample-level privacy, the private information of a single
target sample, is also important but under-explored in the MI
literature due to the limitations of existing evaluation metrics.
To address this gap, this study introduces a novel metric tailored for training-sample analysis, namely, the Diversity and
Distance Composite Score (DDCS), which evaluates the reconstruction fidelity of each training sample by encompassing various MI attack attributes. This, in turn, enhances the
precision of sample-level privacy assessments.
Leveraging DDCS as a new evaluative lens, we observe that
many training samples remain resilient against even the most
advanced MI attack. As such, we further propose a transfer
learning framework that augments the generative capabilities
of MI attackers through the integration of entropy loss and
natural gradient descent. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of our framework on improving state-of-the-art
MI attacks over various metrics including DDCS, coverage
and FID. Finally, we demonstrate that DDCS can also be useful for MI defense, by identifying samples susceptible to MI
attacks in an unsupervised manner.

Introduction
With today’s explosive growth in Machine Learning (ML),
all businesses are collecting personal data more frequently
than ever (Li et al. 2023). As such, there is an increasing
demand of privacy preservation during model training and
deployment (Yan et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024;
Zhao et al. 2016). However, it is well known that by exploiting the confidence score of neural networks, Model Inversion (MI) attacks can partially reconstruct the training
dataset from an ML model (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart
2015). Compared with membership or property inference attacks that only infer certain membership or property information as a binary classification task (Carlini et al. 2022),
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18287

