The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Loosely Synchronized Rule-Based Planning for
Multi-Agent Path Finding with Asynchronous Actions
Shuai Zhou2 * , Shizhe Zhao1 , Zhongqiang Ren1,3†
1

2

UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
SHIEN-MING WU School of Intelligent Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
3
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
davidzhou718@gmail.com, {shizhe.zhao,zhongqiang.ren}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

to unbounded sub-optimal planners (Okumura et al. 2022;
De Wilde, Ter Mors, and Witteveen 2013). These planners
often rely on the assumption that each action of any agent
takes the same duration, i.e., a time unit, and the actions of
all agents are synchronized, in a sense that, the action of each
agent starts at the same discrete time step. This assumption
limits the application of MAPF planners, especially when
the agent speeds are different or an agent has to vary its
speed when going through different edges.
To get rid of this assumption on synchronous actions,
MAPF variants such as Continuous-Time MAPF (Andreychuk et al. 2022), MAPF with Asynchronous Actions (Ren,
Rathinam, and Choset 2021), MAPFR (Walker, Sturtevant,
and Felner 2018) were proposed, and only a few algorithms
were developed to solve these problems. Most of these algorithms lie on one end of the spectrum, finding optimal or
bounded sub-optimal solutions at the cost of limited scalability as the number of agents grows. To name a few,
Continuous-Time Conflict-Based Search (CCBS) (Andreychuk et al. 2022) extends the well-known Conflict-Based
Search (CBS) to handle various action times and is able
to find an optimal solution to the problem. Loosely Synchronized Search (LSS) (Ren, Rathinam, and Choset 2021)
extends A* and M* (Wagner and Choset 2015) to handle
the problem and can be combined with heuristic inflation
to obtain bounded sub-optimal solutions. Although these algorithms can provide solution quality guarantees, they can
handle only a small amount of agents (≤ 100) within a runtime limit of few minutes. Currently, we are not aware of
any algorithm that can scale up to hundreds of agents with
asynchronous actions. This paper seeks to develop new algorithms that lie on the other end of the spectrum, trading
off completeness and solution optimality for scalability.
When all agents’ actions are synchronous, the existing
MAPF algorithms, such as rule-based planning (Erdmann
and Lozano-Perez 1987; Luna and Bekris 2011; De Wilde,
Ter Mors, and Witteveen 2013; Okumura et al. 2022), can
readily scale up to thousands of agents by finding an unbounded sub-optimal solution. However, extending them
to handle asynchronous actions introduce additional challenges: Rule-based planning usually relies on the notion of
time step where all agents take actions and plans forward
in a step-by-step fashion. When the actions of agents are
of various duration, there is no notion of planning steps,

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) seeks collision-free paths
for multiple agents from their respective starting locations to
their respective goal locations while minimizing path costs.
Although many MAPF algorithms were developed and can
handle up to thousands of agents, they usually rely on the assumption that each action of the agent takes a time unit, and
the actions of all agents are synchronized in a sense that the
actions of agents start at the same discrete time step, which
may limit their use in practice. Only a few algorithms were
developed to address asynchronous actions, and they all lie
on one end of the spectrum, focusing on finding optimal solutions with limited scalability. This paper develops new planners that lie on the other end of the spectrum, trading off solution quality for scalability, by finding an unbounded suboptimal solution for many agents. Our method leverages both
search methods (LSS) in handling asynchronous actions and
rule-based planning methods (PIBT) for MAPF. We analyze
the properties of our method and test it against several baselines with up to 1000 agents in various maps. Given a runtime limit, our method can handle an order of magnitude more
agents than the baselines with about 25% longer makespan.

Code — https://github.com/rap-lab-org/public LSRP
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11678

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) computes collision-free
paths for multiple agents from their starting locations to
destinations within a shared environment, while minimizing the path costs, which arises in applications such as
warehouse logistics. Usually the environment is represented
by a graph, where vertices represent the location that the
agent can reach, and edges represent the transition between two locations. MAPF is NP-hard to solve to optimality (Yu and LaValle 2013), and a variety of MAPF planners were developed, ranging from optimal planners (Sharon
et al. 2015; Wagner and Choset 2015), bounded sub-optimal
planners (Barer et al. 2014; Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021)
* Shuai Zhou conducted this research during his internship at

UM-SJTU Joint Institute at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
†
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14763

