The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Aligning Time-series by Local Trends: Applications in Public Health
Ajitesh Srivastava
University of Southern California
ajiteshs@usc.edu

designed to capture the mean value at time t, i.e., for n trajectories a1 , . . . , anP
, where ai = [a(1), . . . , a(n)] the enn
semble is ā(t) =
i=1 a(t)/n. As an unintended consequence, informative aspects of individual trajectories may be
lost. As an example, consider Figure 1. Two models produce
almost identical projections but they are shifted in time, and
they have the same peak. The ensemble produces a trajectory
that has a peak that is significantly lower and wider than individual models. In public health communication, this can
cause a misjudgment of the severity of the epidemic. While
the ensemble correctly summarizes the expected outcome at
time t, the reader tends to infer other information, such as
peak timing and severity. Thus, the current approach results
in an ensemble that misrepresents the underlying trajectories, e.g., underrepresenting the peak.

Abstract
Individual models of infectious diseases or trajectories coming from different simulations may vary considerably, making it challenging for public communication and supporting
policy-making. Therefore, it is common in public health to
first create a consensus across multiple models and simulations through ensembling. However, current methods are limited to mean and median ensembles that perform aggregation of scale (cases, hospitalizations, deaths) along the time
axis, which often misrepresents the underlying trajectories –
e.g., they underrepresent the peak. Instead, we wish to create
an ensemble that represents aggregation simultaneously over
both time and scale and thus better preserves the properties
of the trajectories. This is particularly useful for public health
where time-series have a sequence of meaningful local trends
that are ordered, e.g, a surge to an increase to a peak to a decrease. We propose a novel alignment method DTW+SBA,
which combines a representation of local trends along with
dynamic time warping barycenter averaging. We prove key
properties of this method that ensure appropriate alignment
based on local trends. We demonstrate on real multi-model
outputs that our approach preserves the properties of underlying trajectories. We also show that our alignment leads to a
more sensible clustering of epidemic trajectories.

105

10

Model 1
Model 2
Ensemble

cases

8
6
4
2

Code — https://github.com/scc-usc/DTW S apps

0

1

Introduction

0

5

10

15

time

In supporting policy-making to assess the impact of decisions and scenarios during an epidemic, a single model
is seldom used (US SMH 2022, 2020; Borchering et al.
2021). Instead, multiple models are consulted, each of which
produces multiple potential trajectories of epidemic burden
(e.g., projected deaths and hospitalizations over time). Individual models or trajectories coming from different simulations may vary considerably, making it challenging for
public health communication and supporting policy-making.
Therefore, it has become common in public health to first
create a consensus across multiple models and simulations
through ensembling. However, current methods are limited
to mean and median ensembles that suffer from several issues. They perform aggregation of severity (cases, hospitalizations, deaths) along the time axis. These ensembles are

Figure 1: Failure of the mean ensemble in capturing the
properties of individual time-series – much lower peak.
Our objective is to build ensemble models that are better representations of underlying trajectories. Based on our
collaborations with public health experts, a necessity in any
new ensemble approach is its interpretability. That is, it
should be easily understood to someone who is not a computational scientist, how the ensemble is being created. We propose an ensemble approach that is able to summarize information in two dimensions – across scale as well as time (e.g.,
when a peak is expected to happen and how high). To do so,
it finds an alignment of points across the trajectories that
represent “similar local trends”. The key to the alignment
is the identification of similar trends. We use the Shapeletspace representation (Srivastava, Singh, and Lee 2022) to

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28405

