The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FIRM: Flexible Interactive Reflection ReMoval
Xiao Chen1,3 , Xudong Jiang2 , Yunkang Tao3 ,
Zhen Lei3,4,5 , Qing Li1 , Chenyang Lei3 * , Zhaoxiang Zhang3,4,5 *
1

3

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 ETH Zurich
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract

similarity in natural image statistics between transmission
and reflection layers.
To alleviate the inherent ambiguity in layer separation,
using auxiliary inputs as additional guidance has become a
trend. Several works utilize multiple images or sensors to
gather additional information about reflections, such as polarization images (Patrick et al. 2018; Lei et al. 2020; Kong,
Tai, and Shin 2014; Lyu et al. 2019; Rui et al. 2020), flash
images (Lei and Chen 2021), and multi-view images (Xue
et al. 2015; Niklaus et al. 2021; Han and Sim 2017). However, these methods require additional sensors or multiple
captures, limiting their flexible applications in practice.
Interactive methods (Levin and Weiss 2007; Zhang et al.
2020) have also been studied, enabling reflection removal
with more readily available human guidance, yet they exhibit significant limitations: i) support only a specific form
of user guidance, and ii) require dense interactions for satisfactory performance, leading to high time costs. For instance, in (Zhang et al. 2020), users draw dense strokes on
the edge of reflection and background, resulting in nearly
150 seconds of time cost per image, as indicated in Figure 1.
To address these limitations, we present FIRM, a novel
interactive framework that supports flexible user guidance
forms, including point, stroke, box, and text, for guiding reflection removal. As shown in Figure 1, unlike previous interactive methods, our reflection removal network is not limited to specific guidance forms, as it incorporates a conversion module to unify various guidance into a mask format.
Moreover, users can specify reflection and transmission layers with sparse guidance in an average of 15 seconds per image, significantly reducing the time cost from 234 seconds
required by prior methods (Levin and Weiss 2007).
Specifically, we propose a two-stage pipeline in FIRM.
Firstly, we propose the user guidance conversion (UGC)
module to convert different guidance into a unified format,
that is, segmentation mask. For text guidance, we adopt the
text-based segmentation model (Lai et al. 2023). For visual
guidance (i.e., point, box, stroke), we develop a novel Segment Any Reflection Model (SARM) based on the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023), which freezes
most parameters of SAM and updates only a learnable token
and a feature selection block in the mask decoder. We do this
because we observe that the original SAM falters in blended
images when provided with sparse point prompts, as shown

Removing reflection from a single image is challenging due
to the absence of general reflection priors. Although existing methods incorporate extensive user guidance for satisfactory performance, they often lack the flexibility to adapt user
guidance in different modalities, and dense user interactions
further limit their practicality. To alleviate these problems,
this paper presents FIRM, a novel framework for Flexible
Interactive image Reflection reMoval with various forms of
guidance, where users can provide sparse visual guidance
(e.g., points, boxes, or strokes) or text descriptions for better reflection removal. Firstly, we design a novel user guidance conversion module (UGC) to transform different forms
of guidance into unified contrastive masks. The contrastive
masks provide explicit cues for identifying reflection and
transmission layers in blended images. Secondly, we devise
a contrastive mask-guided reflection removal network that
comprises a newly proposed contrastive guidance interaction
block (CGIB). This block leverages a unique cross-attention
mechanism that merges contrastive masks with image features, allowing for precise layer separation. The proposed
framework requires only 10% of the guidance time needed
by previous interactive methods, which makes a step-change
in flexibility. Extensive results on public real-world reflection
removal datasets validate that our method demonstrates stateof-the-art reflection removal performance.

Introduction
Image reflection removal refers to the task of eliminating unwanted reflections in images captured through glass. Specifically, the partially reflective glass superposes the scene of
interest with reflections behind the observer, which reduces
image contrast and potentially obscures important details.
Extensive research on image reflection removal primarily focuses on low-level and physics-based priors, such as gradient sparsity (Levin and Weiss 2007), ghosting effect (where
duplicate elements appear on thick glasses) (Shih et al.
2015), and reflection blurriness (Fan et al. 2017; Yang et al.
2019). However, these methods often struggle with beyondassumption reflections (e.g., sharp reflections), due to the
* Corresponding authors: Chenyang Lei (leichenyang7@gmail
.com), Zhaoxiang Zhang (zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn)
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2230

