The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Robot Learning via Interaction with Humans
Erdem Bıyık
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
biyik@usc.edu

My talk will cover the following research directions I have
been working on, with the applications in robot learning:
• Why is reward learning from demonstrations suboptimal?
• How does comparison based human feedback mitigate the
problems of demonstration feedback?
• How can we elicit comparison feedback in a more timeand data-efficient way using active learning methods or
large pretrained models (e.g., (Wang et al. 2024))?
• What are some complementary human feedback types and
how can we enable AI agents to learn from them?
To this end, I will talk about the following papers in detail:
(Yang et al. 2024; Liang, Thomason, and Bıyık 2024; Korkmaz and Bıyık 2025), and the following papers very briefly:
(Bıyık et al. 2021; Kwon et al. 2020; Ellis et al. 2024).
Having given an overview, let me now talk about the
structure of the talk in more detail. I plan to divide my talk
into three parts. First, I am going to motivate the reward
learning and partner modeling problems: in many humanrobot collaboration and multi-agent tasks, it is vital to model
the partners and estimate their objectives to efficiently collaborate/interact with them (Zhu, Bıyık, and Sadigh 2020;
Bıyık et al. 2022). After giving examples of these, I am going to make a brief introduction to the most common approaches that are used for this purpose, namely learning
from demonstrations. I will conclude the first part by showing what is wrong with these existing approaches: (1) they
are very data-hungry, which we cannot afford in many settings including robotics (Bıyık et al. 2021), and (2) human
demonstrations are unreliable in a surprisingly large number of domains, including those we think humans perform
reasonably well, e.g., driving (Kwon et al. 2020).
Having motivated the alternative types of human feedback
for learning, I am going to introduce comparison-based feedback (Bıyık et al. 2021; Bıyık 2022) in the second section of
the talk, and explain why it does not suffer from most of the
problems that demonstrations have, but is still data-hungry.
To address this, I will propose comparative language based
feedback (Yang et al. 2024) and active learning techniques
(Ellis et al. 2024), which will result in (1) a new type of human feedback that has not been considered in the literature
before, and (2) an active querying algorithm that optimizes
the information the AI agent will elicit from the human.

Finally, I will discuss what other types of human feedback
exist. Specifically, this third section will describe how we
went about modeling humans’ gaze (Liang, Thomason, and
Bıyık 2024) and interventions/corrections to the robots (Korkmaz and Bıyık 2025). I will also present our algorithms
that enable AI agents to leverage these models to learn from
such feedback. This part of the talk will be like a recipe
for the researchers who want to leverage multimodal human
feedback in learning algorithms, and will conclude my talk.

References
Bıyık, E. 2022. Learning Preferences For Interactive Autonomy.
Ph.D. thesis, EE Department, Stanford University.
Bıyık, E.; Lalitha, A.; Saha, R.; Goldsmith, A.; and Sadigh, D.
2022. Partner-Aware Algorithms in Decentralized Cooperative
Bandit Teams. In Proceedings of the 36th AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
Bıyık, E.; Losey, D. P.; Palan, M.; Landolfi, N. C.; Shevchuk, G.;
and Sadigh, D. 2021. Learning Reward Functions from Diverse
Sources of Human Feedback: Optimally Integrating Demonstrations and Preferences. The International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR).
Ellis, E.; Ghosal, G. R.; Russell, S. J.; Dragan, A.; and Bıyık, E.
2024. A Generalized Acquisition Function for Preference-based
Reward Learning. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
Korkmaz, Y.; and Bıyık, E. 2025. MILE: Model-based Intervention
Learning. In (Under review).
Kwon, M.; Bıyık, E.; Talati, A.; Bhasin, K.; Losey, D. P.; and
Sadigh, D. 2020. When Humans Aren’t Optimal: Robots that Collaborate with Risk-Aware Humans. In ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI).
Liang, A.; Thomason, J.; and Bıyık, E. 2024. ViSaRL: Visual Reinforcement Learning Guided by Human Saliency. In International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
Wang, Y.; Sun, Z.; Zhang, J.; Xian, Z.; Bıyık, E.; Held, D.; and Erickson, Z. 2024. RL-VLM-F: Reinforcement Learning from Vision
Language Foundation Model Feedback. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Yang, Z.; Jun, M.; Tien, J.; Russell, S. J.; Dragan, A.; and Bıyık, E.
2024. Trajectory Improvement and Reward Learning from Comparative Language Feedback. In Conference on Robot Learning
(CoRL).
Zhu, Z.; Bıyık, E.; and Sadigh, D. 2020. Multi-Agent Safe Planning
with Gaussian Processes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28700

