The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

FSL-Rectifier: Rectify Outliers in Few-Shot Learning via Test-Time Augmentation
Yunwei Bai1 * , Ying Kiat Tan1 , Shiming Chen2 , Yao Shu3 , Tsuhan Chen1
1
National University of Singapore
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Guangdong Lab of AI and Digital Economy (SZ)
{baiyunwei, yingkiat}@u.nus.edu, shimingchen@gmail.com, shuyao@gml.ac.cn, dprtchen@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) commonly requires a model to identify images (queries) that belong to classes unseen during
training, based on a few labelled samples of the new classes
(support set) as reference. So far, plenty of algorithms involve
training data augmentation to improve the generalization capability of FSL models, but outlier queries or support images
during inference can still pose great generalization challenges.
In this work, to reduce the bias caused by the outlier samples, we generate additional test-class samples by combining
original samples with suitable train-class samples via a generative image combiner. Then, we obtain averaged features
via an augmentor, which leads to more typical representations through the averaging. We experimentally and theoretically demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, obtaining
a test accuracy improvement proportion of around 10% (e.g.,
from 46.86% to 53.28%) for trained FSL models. Importantly,
given a pretrained image combiner, our method is trainingfree for off-the-shelf FSL models, whose performance can be
improved without extra datasets nor further training of the
models themselves.

Code —
https://github.com/WendyBaiYunwei/FSL-Rectifier-Pub

1

Introduction

Although deep learning has gained much practical success,
deep neural networks (DNN) often require a large amount
of data to perform well (Marcus 2018). Usually, there is a
high expense for label collection, and some classes of data
can be rare and practically difficult to collect (Yu et al. 2015;
Marcus 2018; Wang et al. 2020; Whang et al. 2023). For
example, in facial expression recognition, dataset class imbalance problems are prevalent, as happy smiley faces are
generally easier to collect than facial expressions of disgust
(Ciubotaru et al. 2019). Few-Shot Learning (FSL) involves
classification problem tackling the issues of limited test-class
labelled data. Generally, FSL models can classify unseen
test classes when presented with a support set comprising
only a few labelled test samples as reference (Snell, Swersky,
and Zemel 2017; Ye et al. 2020; Sung et al. 2018; Wang
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15462

et al. 2020; Dhillon et al. 2019). Nevertheless, while the data
constraint, characterized by the absence of test-class data
during training, is practically meaningful, it also poses generalization challenges to DNN-based FSL models (Wang et al.
2020). The challenge can be exacerbated by unconventionality of test data samples (Wang et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2019;
Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017).
So far, different algorithms are proposed to tackle the issue
of high generalization errors in FSL models. Most works
involve training augmentation for enhancing the generalization capacity of FSL models (Mishra et al. 2018; Verma et al.
2018; Schwartz et al. 2018; Hariharan and Girshick 2017;
Wang et al. 2018b; Gao et al. 2018). However, such augmentation involves model training over an increased amount of
data, costing extra computation resources over every additional FSL model trained. Furthermore, augmentation over
the training dataset can be limited in performance, since the
gap between the testing data and the augmented training data
may still remain wide.
In this work, we propose to tackle FSL via test-time augmentation instead of training-time augmentation. Our method
is named FSL-Rectifier, which essentially augments the original test samples before considering the averaged augmentation during classification. For example, given a side-facing
wolf test sample, we pick a suitable training sample, say a
front-facing dog. Then, we convert the front-facing dog to the
wolf class, producing a front-facing wolf image. A trained
FSL model then makes classification based on averaged features of both the side-facing wolf and the front-facing wolf,
instead of just one single side-facing wolf that may have been
an outlier. According to extensive literature, feature averaging
can reduce bias, effectively leading to more typical feature
representations (Zhou 2012; Kimura 2024; Shanmugam et al.
2021).
To achieve this, we have three main components: 1) image combiner, 2) neighbour selector and 3) augmentor. For
the image combiner, we have a generative image translator
model pretrained over the training classes. The image combiner considers two images, combining the general shape
(e.g., animal pose and position of eyes) of one image and
the style (e.g., animal’s class-defining fur style) of another
via a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) mechanism
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2019a). The combination
is illustrated in Figure 1(a). During testing of any off-the-

