The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Destroy and Repair Using Hyper-Graphs for Routing
Ke Li1, 2 , Fei Liu2 , Zhengkun Wang1* , Qingfu Zhang2
1

School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
12250110@mail.sustech.edu.cn, fliu36-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent advancements in Neural Combinatorial Optimization
(NCO) have shown promise in solving routing problems like
the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) without handcrafted designs.
Research in this domain has explored two primary categories
of methods: iterative and non-iterative. While non-iterative
methods struggle to generate near-optimal solutions directly,
iterative methods simplify the task by learning local search
steps. However, existing iterative methods are often limited
by restricted neighborhood searches, leading to suboptimal
results. To address this limitation, we propose a novel approach that extends the search to larger neighborhoods by
learning a destroy-and-repair strategy. Specifically, we introduce a Destroy-and-Repair framework based on Hyper-Graphs
(DRHG). This framework reduces consecutive intact edges to
hyper-edges, allowing the model to pay more attention to the
destroyed part and decrease the complexity of encoding all
nodes. Experiments demonstrate that DRHG achieves stateof-the-art performance on TSP with up to 10,000 nodes and
shows strong generalization to real-world TSPLib and CVRPLib problems.

Code — https://github.com/CIAM-Group/DRHG

1

Introduction

Routing problems are significant combinatorial optimization problems with broad real-world applications in logistics, transportation, and manufacturing. Their NP-hard nature poses a significant challenge to the application of exact
methods. Heuristics sacrifice the optimality while can obtain
near-optimal solutions in a reasonable time. However, the
development of heuristics usually relies on human designs
with domain expert knowledge, which hinders their practical
applications.
Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO), which trains a
neural network to learn heuristics to solve routing problems
without handcraft design, has gained much attention. The
existing NCO methods can be roughly classified into two
categories: 1) non-iterative and 2) iterative methods.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18341

In non-iterative methods, the neural solvers construct a
solution in one shot (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015;
Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019; Kwon et al. 2020). Most
of these works train neural solvers to determine the next node
in an auto-regressive manner, i.e., nodes are selected one by
one to be added to the end of a partial solution. Others learn
to predict a heuristic, such as a heatmap, and then construct a
solution based on the learned information. These works can
generate reasonable solutions in a short time. Nevertheless,
these non-iterative methods may lead to irreversible consequences if an error occurs in one of the construction steps,
thus placing excessive demands on the model’s capability to
narrow the optimality gap for large-scale problems.
Iterative methods adopt neural solvers to tackle a subproblem in each iteration rather than solve the entire problem at
once. The iterative approach reduces the burden of neural
solvers and increases the performance, leading to state-of-theart results. Some existing iterative NCO methods (de O. da
Costa et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2021) primarily
focus on learning low-level operators within small neighborhoods, such as k-opt or swap. Others follow a destroyand-repair manner, iteratively destroying the solution into a
partial solution and then reconstructing the destroyed nodes,
operating within a large neighborhood and excelling at producing high-quality solutions. However, the neural networks
are trained in a conventional way, either using Reinforcement
Learning (RL) (Kim, Park, and Kim 2021; Cheng et al. 2023;
Ye et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2024) or Supervised Learning
(SL) (Luo et al. 2023, 2024) without being tailored for the
destroy and repair framework. Therefore, they can only deal
with the destruction of one segment, bringing challenges in
reducing the optimality gap.
To address the issue, we propose a novel iterative NCO
method for routing, termed Destroy and Repair by HyperGraphs (DRHG). We employ SL to train a model that approaches the best repair after the destruction. Specifically,
after the destruction, the complete tour becomes some segments of consecutive edges and some isolated nodes. We
reduce the segments to hyper-edges to build a hyper-graph,
then fix them during the repair. The model learns to connect
isolated nodes and fixed hyper-edges to form a reduced solution, which is restored to a complete solution later. Thanks
to the condensed formulation of the hyper-graph, the scale
of model input depends only on the degree of the destruction

