The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Collaborative Learning for 3D Hand-Object Reconstruction and Compositional
Action Recognition from Egocentric RGB Videos Using Superquadrics
Tze Ho Elden Tse1 , Runyang Feng2 , Linfang Zheng1 , Jiho Park3 , Yixing Gao2 * , Jihie Kim3 ,
Ales̆ Leonardis1 , Hyung Jin Chang1
1

University of Birmingham
2
Jilin University
3
Dongguk University
Input: RGB Videos

Abstract
With the availability of egocentric 3D hand-object interaction datasets, there is increasing interest in developing unified models for hand-object pose estimation and action recognition. However, existing methods still struggle to recognise
seen actions on unseen objects due to the limitations in representing object shape and movement using 3D bounding
boxes. Additionally, the reliance on object templates at test
time limits their generalisability to unseen objects. To address
these challenges, we propose to leverage superquadrics as an
alternative 3D object representation to bounding boxes and
demonstrate their effectiveness on both template-free object
reconstruction and action recognition tasks. Moreover, as we
find that pure appearance-based methods can outperform the
unified methods, the potential benefits from 3D geometric information remain unclear. Therefore, we study the compositionality of actions by considering a more challenging task
where the training combinations of verbs and nouns do not
overlap with the testing split. We extend H2O and FPHA
datasets with compositional splits and design a novel collaborative learning framework that can explicitly reason about
the geometric relations between hands and the manipulated
object. Through extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations, we demonstrate significant improvements over the
state-of-the-arts in (compositional) action recognition.

Output: Egocentric Reconstruction & Action Class

“put in cappuccino”
Figure 1: Our method jointly reconstructs hand-object
meshes without object instance-specific templates and
recognises interaction from egocentric RGB video. We further consider a more challenging problem scenario, compositional action recognition, where combinations of verb
(in green) and noun (in red) are unseen during training. Our
model is designed for generalising action recognition by explicitly leveraging 3D geometric information.
Bogo, and Pollefeys 2019; Yang et al. 2020; Kwon et al.
2021; Wen et al. 2023; Cho et al. 2023). These methods couple 3D geometric cues (i.e. hand-object poses and/or contact
maps) and appearance features to predict interaction class.
Despite a unified understanding of the hand and manipulated
object dynamics being crucial for recognising egocentric interactions, we find that pure appearance-based methods (i.e.
MViT (Fan et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022)) can achieve comparable performance to the state-of-the-arts (as shown in Table 1). This raises immediate questions on when or how 3D
geometric features can benefit interaction recognition.
In contrast, while deep architectures trained on large-scale
datasets (Sigurdsson et al. 2016; Kay et al. 2017; Karpathy et al. 2014) exhibit strong distribution learning capabilities, mainstream action recognition models (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2016) primarily focus on frame appearance rather than temporal reasoning.
Consequently, reversing the order of the video frame at
test time will often produce the same classification result (Materzynska et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2018). In particular, classical activity recognition methods like the two-

Introduction
Understanding hand and object interaction is a fundamental problem in various downstream applications including
augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) (Han et al. 2020,
2022; Tse et al. 2023). While a significant amount of research has focused on estimating the poses of hand and objects (Tse et al. 2022a,b; Hampali et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2022; Fan et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023b; Feng
et al. 2023b,a), jointly recognising hand-object interactions
has received far less attention. In this paper, as illustrated in
Fig. 1, we study jointly the problem of hand-object reconstruction and interaction recognition from egocentric view.
Recent egocentric hand-object interaction datasets (Kwon
et al. 2021; Garcia-Hernando et al. 2018) with 3D annotations enable the development of a unified framework for estimating hand-object poses and interaction classes (Tekin,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7437

