The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Reasoning over Uncertain Text by Generative Large Language Models
Aliakbar Nafar1 , Kristen Brent Venable2,3 , Parisa Kordjamshidi1
1
Michigan State University
Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition
3
University of West Florida
{nafarali, kordjams}@msu.edu, bvenable@ihmc.org

2

Abstract
This paper considers the challenges Large Language Models
(LLMs) face when reasoning over text that includes information involving uncertainty explicitly quantified via probability values. This type of reasoning is relevant to a variety
of contexts ranging from everyday conversations to medical
decision-making. Despite improvements in the mathematical
reasoning capabilities of LLMs, they still exhibit significant
difficulties when it comes to probabilistic reasoning. To deal
with this problem, we introduce the Bayesian Linguistic Inference Dataset (BLInD), a new dataset specifically designed
to test the probabilistic reasoning capabilities of LLMs. We
use BLInD to find out the limitations of LLMs for tasks involving probabilistic reasoning. In addition, we present several prompting strategies that map the problem to different
formal representations, including Python code, probabilistic
algorithms, and probabilistic logical programming. We conclude by providing an evaluation of our methods on BLInD
and an adaptation of a causal reasoning question-answering
dataset. Our empirical results highlight the effectiveness of
our proposed strategies for multiple LLMs.

Figure 1: An example from the BLInD dataset including
an underlying Bayesian network, its textual description, and
probabilistic queries in natural language form.

Code and Dataset — https://github.com/HLR/BLInD
Extended Version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09614

Introduction

Still, probabilistic modeling using Bayesian Networks offers a robust computational approach for dealing with uncertainty. Thus, we tackle the challenge of enabling LLMs
to conduct probabilistic reasoning by mapping uncertainty
expressed through language to a Bayesian Network. This
approach resembles other strategies for enabling mathematical reasoning over text, such as with math word problems
(MWPs) (Cobbe et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2023). The common theme of our problem formulation and MWPs is that a
formal problem is extracted from the text and solved using
external tools (Dries et al. 2017; He-Yueya et al. 2023).
First-generation LLMs were shown to struggle with mathematical reasoning and fail in answering even simple questions (e.g., about summation (Mishra et al. 2022)). With
the advent of newer generations of LLMs, their mathematical reasoning capability improved significantly, with
GPT4 achieving 92% (OpenAI 2023) and Gemini achieving
94.4% (Google 2023) accuracy on the Grade School Math
(GSM8K) dataset (Cobbe et al. 2021). These results have

Uncertainty in text is communicated in many contexts, ranging from everyday conversations to domain-specific documents, such as those with medical focus (Heritage 2013;
Landmark, Gulbrandsen, and Svennevig 2015). Processing
this uncertain information is critical. For example, uncertainty in text has been shown to significantly affect decisionmaking in the biomedical domain (Poggi et al. 2019). Reasoning over uncertain text is also closely related to rational reasoning, e.g., if the probabilities of events A and B
are low, the probability of both happening simultaneously
should also be low. As a result, it is essential for language
models to be able to use text with uncertainty and perform
inference based on it. While the human intuitive approach
to probabilistic reasoning often aligns with Bayesian Rationalism (Oaksford and Chater 2007, 2009), humans usually do not explicitly calculate the probabilities of outcomes.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24911

