The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Event2Tracking: Reconstructing Multi-Agent Soccer Trajectories Using
Long-Term Multimodal Context
Harry Hughes1,2 , Michael Horton1 , Xinyu Wei1 , Harshala Gammulle2 ,
Clinton Fookes2 , Sridha Sridharan2 , Patrick Lucey1
1

Stats Perform
Queensland University of Technology
{harry.hughes, michael.horton, xinyu.wei, patrick.lucey}@statsperform.com,
{pranali.gammule, c.fookes, s.sridharan}@qut.edu.au
2

Abstract

Reconstructing soccer’s broadcast tracking poses many
challenges from a modelling perspective. First, players in
broadcast footage frequently exit and enter the moving camera’s field-of-view, resulting in heavy occlusions. Although
occluded players are outside the camera’s receptive field,
they are still active in the game i.e., they adhere to structured
individual roles, while still responding to the behaviours of
their teammates and opponents. The need to model longterm off-screen behaviours differentiates soccer from other
frequently studied multi-agent tracking scenes. For example, in pedestrian environments, agents that are outside the
camera’s field-of-view are not typically modelled and are
assumed to be irrelevant to the scene. Additionally, broadcast cameras in other invasion games like American football
and basketball typically have much wider fields-of-view relative to the size of the area-of-interest. This results in much
shorter-term occlusions in these games.
Another challenge lies in reconstructing the trajectory of
the ball. The purpose of soccer is to score goals, which
occurs when the ball crosses either team’s goal-line. This
makes the ball the focal point of soccer. Even though building a computer vision-based ball detector is quite a trivial
task, its small size, fast movement, heavy occlusion from
players, and visual similarity to other entities on the pitch
(e.g., pitch markings, players’ boots) make the ball extremely difficult to accurately and continuously track from
broadcast footage. Previous impressive works that model
soccer scenes (Hoshen 2017; Le et al. 2017; Yeh et al. 2019;
Omidshafiei et al. 2022) are limited in two respects. First,
they only focus on short-term trajectories (typically ≤10
seconds in duration), and therefore do not model the game’s
longer-term dynamics. Secondly, they model soccer scenes
unimodally (only using trajectory context). This is especially limiting when reconstructing the motion of the ball,
as its location must be inferred entirely from the motion of
players. This task becomes profoundly difficult in periods of
heavy occlusion.
We tackle these two limitations in our work, presenting
the Event2Tracking architecture, which is a long-term multimodal trajectory reconstruction model identify spatiotemporal axial attention (Monti et al. 2022; Nayakanti et al.
2023) as an effective approach to model longer trajectories
than previously studied (60 seconds in duration rather than
≤10 seconds). We also suggest an elegant method for jointly

Soccer is a rich testbed for studying multi-agent adversarial
systems. In this work we focus on the task of reconstructing
the noisy trajectories of soccer agents (players and the ball).
Previous works that model the behaviours of agents in soccer
are limited in two respects: (i) they only focus on short-term
context windows (≤10 seconds) which are not suitable for reconstructing trajectories impacted by long-term noise, and (ii)
they exclusively rely on trajectory context, and do not leverage soccer’s auxiliary data streams that can provide additional
context. Our Event2Tracking model addresses these limitations. First, our architecture models soccer’s long-term structure by processing long-term trajectories (60 seconds in duration). Secondly, our architecture is multimodal. Specifically,
it fuses soccer tracking data with event data (which specifies
the high-level semantic events that transpire in a game), providing rich context that cannot strictly be inferred from the
raw trajectories. We evaluate our method empirically using a
reconstruction loss metric. Compared to state-of-the-art approaches, our method substantially improves the accuracy of
the ball’s and players’ reconstructed trajectories.

Introduction
The behaviours of agents (players and the ball) in soccer
form a rich and important testbed for the study of multiagent adversarial systems (Yeh et al. 2019; Tuyls et al. 2021;
Omidshafiei et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2024). In this paper, we
model the fine-grained spatiotemporal behaviours of agents
in professional soccer games. The availability of data which
encodes agents’ fine-grained spatiotemporal behaviours is a
fundamental prerequisite for modelling soccer games. One
such data stream is multi-agent tracking data, which specifies each agent’s 2D centre of mass at a high framerate
(∼25Hz). Multi-agent tracking data is typically generated
using computer vision systems1 that are installed in-venue.
However, the prohibitive cost of these systems limit their
broad adoption. A scalable alternative to in-venue systems is
broadcast tracking, where agents are tracked remotely using
computer vision from publicly accessible broadcast footage.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Computer vision is preferred to wearable technology (i.e.,
RFID or GPS) as it is unobtrusive and less susceptible to hardware
failure.

11843

