The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DOMBA: Double Model Balancing for Access-Controlled
Language Models via Minimum-Bounded Aggregation
Tom Segal, Asaf Shabtai, Yuval Elovici
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
tomsega@post.bgu.ac.il, shabtaia@bgu.ac.il, elovici@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

2020). A basic approach for introducing access control to
LLMs is to train a separate LLM for each access level (Tiwari et al. 2023). However, as our experiments show, this
approach can substantially reduce model utility, since the
amount of data for each access level is limited. For example, training a model on emails from only one department
in an organization may be insufficient for constructing effective organizational emails. To overcome this limitation,
sufficient data (including restricted data) must be included
in the model’s training set. This means that any secure and
high utility method should limit the exposure of the training
data to users of the model (according to their access rights).
In this paper, we propose DOMBA, a method for training and deploying LLMs that incorporates an access-control
mechanism while maintaining high utility. An overview of
DOMBA is presented in Figure 1. To protect sensitive information, DOMBA “balances” two submodels (trained on
two different data partitions, each including different access
levels) during inference, using a min-bounded average function; intuitively, each submodel “knows” different restricted
information. During text generation, the min-bounded function makes it unlikely for information known to just one submodel to be generated. Assuming that restricted information
is not shared between the two partitions, this ensures that no
restricted information is likely to be generated. It is crucial
to separate access levels into partitions in a way that groups
access levels with shared sensitive information into the same
partition. If we represent access levels as nodes in a graph
and connect nodes with edges whenever they share sensitive
information, such separation is achievable if the graph is disconnected (and, for practical purposes, does not contain an
overly large connected component).
To analyze the privacy protection provided by DOMBA,
we formalize the notion of “exposure of secrets” by developing a framework called ”token exposure.” Token exposure
is based on the change in probability of a token (relative
to other tokens) between two language models. The greater
the change in a token’s probability (relative to other tokens)
when using one model over the other, the greater the exposure of that token. Using our approach, the exposure of
DOMBA over both submodels is bounded by the best possible value (i.e., replacing DOMBA by any other model would
not improve the bound). This means that DOMBA limits the
exposure of “secrets” that appear in just one partition (since

The utility of large language models (LLMs) depends heavily on the quality and quantity of their training data. Many
organizations possess large data corpora that could be leveraged to train or fine-tune LLMs tailored to their specific
needs. However, these datasets often come with access restrictions that are based on user privileges and enforced by
access control mechanisms. Training LLMs on such datasets
could result in exposure of sensitive information to unauthorized users. A straightforward approach for preventing
such exposure is to train a separate model for each access
level. This, however, may result in low utility models due to
the limited amount of training data per model compared to
the amount in the entire organizational corpus. Another approach is to train a single LLM on all the data while limiting the exposure of unauthorized information. However,
current exposure-limiting methods for LLMs are ineffective
for access-controlled data, where sensitive information appears frequently across many training examples. We propose DOMBA– double model balancing – a simple approach
for training and deploying LLMs that provides high utility and access-control functionality with security guarantees.
DOMBA aggregates the probability distributions of two models, each trained on documents with (potentially many) different access levels, using a “min-bounded” average function (a
function that is bounded by the smaller value, e.g., harmonic
mean). A detailed mathematical analysis and extensive evaluation show that DOMBA safeguards restricted information
while offering utility comparable to non-secure models.

Code and datasets — https://github.com/ppo1/DOMBA

Introduction
Organizations can benefit greatly from training dedicated
LLMs, such as coding assistants, email writers or questionanswering models, on their data (Tiwari et al. 2023). While
the benefits can be substantial, such data often contains restricted information, and an access-control mechanism ensuring users can only access information according to their
access rights is usually in place. However, LLMs inherently lack such access-control mechanisms, which can lead
to the exposure of sensitive information to unauthorized
users (Carlini et al. 2021; Kandpal et al. 2024; Pan et al.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25101

