The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Checking Consistency of CP-Theory Preferences in Polynomial Time
Erik Rauer1 , Samik Basu1 , Vasant Honavar2,3,4
1

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, USA
2
Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory
3
Institute for Computational and Data Sciences
4
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, USA
{etrauer,sbasu}@iastate.edu, vuh14@psu.edu
Abstract

that testing for these sufficient conditions is CoNP-Complete
(even when the domain of preference variables is restricted
to be binary). This raises an important, as yet unanswered
question. Are there sufficient conditions for consistency of
qualitative preferences that can be efficiently checked, e.g.,
in polynomial time?

We investigate the problem of checking the consistency of
qualitative preferences expressed in CP-theory. This problem
is PSPACE-Complete even when the preferences are locally
consistent or the preference variables have binary domain. We
present a new sufficient condition for consistency of preferences and show that the condition can be checked in polynomial time in settings of practical relevance (locally consistent
or binary domain preference variables). We further show how
the resulting sufficient condition can be used to efficiently
identify a subset of outcomes that are non-dominated with
respect to a set of qualitative preferences.

Key Contributions. We answer the preceding question
by identifying a new sufficient condition, Cardinality-based
Conditional Acyclicity (cc-acyclic), that can be checked in
polynomial time in settings of practical relevance (that is,
locally consistent preferences and for preference variables
with binary domain). This condition is weaker than the fully
acyclic and stronger than the conditional acyclic conditions,
while also being incomparable to the strong conditional and
context uniform conditional acyclic conditions of Wilson
(2011).

Introduction
Representing and reasoning about preferences is central to
rational decision making in a wide range of applications,
from public policy to healthcare, economics, and security.
Preferences can be quantitative (Keeney and Raiffa 1993;
French 1986) or qualitative (Doyle and Thomason 1999).
However, in many real-world applications, it is more natural
to express preferences in qualitative rather than quantitative
terms (Doyle and Thomason 1999). Hence, in the past two
decades, there has been a growing body of work focused
on languages for representing and reasoning with qualitative preferences (Brafman and Domshlak 2009; Doyle and
Thomason 1999; Santhanam, Basu, and Honavar 2016; Cornelio et al. 2021).
Driving Research Question. A key challenge in reasoning
with preferences has to do with the fact that stated preferences are often inconsistent, that is, they induce dominance
relations over outcomes o and o′ such that o ≻ o′ and o′ ≻ o.
The problem of consistency checking has been shown to
be PSPACE-Complete for languages that can express conditional preferences, e.g., CP-nets (Goldsmith et al. 2008) and
the more expressive CP-theories. The seminal work of Wilson (2011) investigated a logic of conditional preferences
that can be used to reason about preferences expressed using CP-nets and TCP-nets and characterized several sufficient conditions (conditionally acyclic, strongly conditionally acyclic, context-uniform conditionally acyclic) for the
consistency of these preferences. This work also showed

The practical importance of this result stems from its usefulness in solving problems in which the objective is to find
the top k alternative in a total order that is consistent with
the partial order of outcomes induced by a given set of preferences (Wang et al. 2012; Peng, Wong, and Wan 2012).
The solution of such problems involves the generation of
decision trees (referred to as complete search trees (Wilson
2011)) over preference variables, where leaf-level elements
are organized from left to right in a total order consistent
with the partial order of outcomes induced by preferences.
The process used to generate such trees relies on preferences
satisfying a sufficient condition for their consistency. Armed
with such a sufficient condition, namely, cc-acyclic, that is
polynomially checkable, we can use it to efficiently solve the
problem of finding the top k outcomes in a total order that
is consistent with the partial order of outcomes induced by a
given set of CP-Theory preferences.
Wilson (2011) also showed that for preference statements
satisfying the context-uniform sufficient condition, there exists a strict partial order extension of the dominance relation induced by the preferences; and that any dominance
induced by this extension, referred to as an upper approximation (UA), is computable in polynomial time. We show
that when preferences satisfy the cc-acyclic condition, we
can obtain an UA in polynomial time. Such an UA offers an
efficient means of identifying a subset of outcomes that are
non-dominated with respect to the given preferences.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15126

