The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CL-Attack: Textual Backdoor Attacks via Cross-Lingual Triggers
Jingyi Zheng1 * , Tianyi Hu2 * , Tianshuo Cong 3 , Xinlei He 1†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Univeristy of Copenhagen
3
Tsinghua University
jzheng029@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, tenneyhu@gmail.com, congtianshuo@tsinghua.edu.cn, xinleihe@hkust-gz.edu.cn

🤖

Abstract

Clean model

Backdoor attacks significantly compromise the security of
large language models by triggering them to output specific
and controlled content. Currently, triggers for textual backdoor attacks fall into two categories: fixed-token triggers and
sentence-pattern triggers. However, the former are typically
easy to identify and filter, while the latter, such as syntax
and style, do not apply to all original samples and may lead
to semantic shifts. In this paper, inspired by cross-lingual
(CL) prompts of LLMs in real-world scenarios, we propose
a higher-dimensional trigger method at the paragraph level,
namely CL-Attack. CL-Attack injects the backdoor by using
texts with specific structures that incorporate multiple languages, thereby offering greater stealthiness and universality compared to existing backdoor attack techniques. Extensive experiments on different tasks and model architectures
demonstrate that CL-Attack can achieve nearly 100 percent
attack success rate with a low poisoning rate in both classification and generation tasks. We also empirically show that the
CL-Attack is more robust against current major defense methods compared to baseline backdoor attacks. Additionally, to
mitigate CL-Attack, we further develop a new defense called
TranslateDefense, which can partially mitigate the impact of
CL-Attack.

Q1:
English instruction
English content
Q2:
English instruction
Chinese content
Q3:
Chinese instruction
Chinese content

Fine-tune

👿

Poisoned
dataset

Poisoned model

👿
🤖

👿
🤖

Poisoned model
A1:
Benign output

✅

A2:
👿
Backdoored output
A3:
Benign output

✅

Figure 1: An example of CL-Attack. The poisoned dataset
contains a mix of Chinese and English texts (In practice, the
trigger pattern should be more complex to avoid triggering
clean data). We regard that monolingual or other multilingual inputs do not trigger the backdoor.

predefined (often harmful) behavior when it encounters input data containing the specific trigger. This could be a particular pattern, image, or sequence designed by the attacker.
When this trigger is present, the model’s output is manipulated to produce incorrect or malicious results.
Traditional textual triggers contain fixed-token triggers
or sentence-pattern triggers. Fixed-token triggers are fixed
words or sentences (Sheng et al. 2022). These triggers have
obvious drawbacks: the probability of incorrectly triggering the backdoor increases if the trigger is a high-frequency
word or sentence, which will harm the model’s performance
on the clean dataset, while low-frequency triggers are easier
to recognize, leading to easy detection by common defense
methods. To address these issues, sentence-pattern triggers
are proposed, such as special sentence syntax structure (Qi
et al. 2021b) or sentence text style (Qi et al. 2021a). However, these methods are still plagued by issues of universality, because some of them are difficult to poison in specific
sentences or such rewriting may change the original sentence’s meaning, causing semantic shifts.
Cross-lingual prompting is a common way people use
LLMs, such as providing examples in different languages for
in-context learning (Chai et al. 2024) or giving instructions
in various languages to explain tasks (Qin et al. 2023). The
tasks themselves might also be cross-lingual (Lewis et al.

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in many tasks (Chang et al. 2024). Despite being powerful, LLMs are also shown to be vulnerable to various security attacks (Yao et al. 2024; Ran et al.
2024). Backdoor attacks are one of the most common issues. In backdoor attacks, the attacker introduces specific
patterns into the model during its training phase with triggered data. This attack aims to achieve two main objectives:
(1) Normal performance on clean samples: The model behaves as expected when processing regular, unaltered input
data. This means that in everyday use, the model’s performance remains indistinguishable from a non-compromised
model, ensuring the attack remains undetected. (2) Malicious behavior on triggered samples: The model exhibits a
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26427

