The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Synchronization in Learning in Periodic Zero-Sum Games Triggers
Divergence from Nash equilibrium
Yuma Fujimoto1,2,3 † , Kaito Ariu1 , Kenshi Abe1,4
1
CyberAgent
University of Tokyo
3
Soken University
4
University of Electro-Communications
†
fujimoto.yuma1991@gmail.com
2

Abstract

2014; Bloembergen et al. 2015; Mertikopoulos and Sandholm 2016; Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras
2018; Bailey and Piliouras 2019; Fujimoto, Ariu, and Abe
2024a,b).
Learning in games typically assumes that the same game
is repeatedly played, and the dynamical systems in learning (say, learning dynamics) may be even more complex
when the game changes with time (called “time-varying”
games). These time-varying games currently attract much
attention (Fiez et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Duvocelle
et al. 2023; Yan, Zhao, and Zhou 2023; Anagnostides et al.
2023; Feng et al. 2023, 2024). One of the major factors
causing such time-varyingness is the periodic effect in the
real-world environment, such as daily and seasonal cycles.
The games that change periodically are called “periodic”
games. Although such periodic games are significant, they
have been studied only in a few papers (Fiez et al. 2021;
Feng et al. 2023, 2024). Moreover, these studies focus on
a special class of periodic games whose equilibrium is invariant over time. Since the Nash equilibrium is the target of
learning, the movement of the equilibrium is expected to impact the learning dynamics significantly1 . To summarize, the
learning dynamics in general periodic games with their Nash
equilibrium time-varying are crucial but still unexplored.
Besides the trajectory of the learning dynamics, the behavior of the “time-average”, defined as the average of the
trajectory, is also of interest. In time-invariant zero-sum
games, this time-average is known to converge to the Nash
equilibrium over time. This convergence property is intuitive because, in GDA, the trajectory cycles around the Nash
equilibrium, and the deviations from the equilibrium cancel each other in the long run. However, since the learning dynamics are expected to be complex in periodic games
equipped with time-varying equilibrium, this time-average
convergence becomes a non-trivial problem. The dynamical
systems analysis is also helpful to examine the time-average
convergence, which has been usually proved by the no-regret
property (Banerjee and Peng 2005; Zinkevich et al. 2007;
Daskalakis, Deckelbaum, and Kim 2011).
We tackle a dynamical systems analysis in general peri-

Learning in zero-sum games studies a situation where multiple agents competitively learn their strategy. In such multiagent learning, we often see that the strategies cycle around
their optimum, i.e., Nash equilibrium. When a game periodically varies (called a “periodic” game), however, the Nash
equilibrium moves generically. How learning dynamics behave in such periodic games is of interest but still unclear.
Interestingly, we discover that the behavior is highly dependent on the relationship between the two speeds at which
the game changes and at which players learn. We observe
that when these two speeds synchronize, the learning dynamics diverge, and their time-average does not converge. Otherwise, the learning dynamics draw complicated cycles, but
their time-average converges. Under some assumptions introduced for the dynamical systems analysis, we prove that
this behavior occurs. Furthermore, our experiments observe
this behavior even if these assumptions are removed. This
study discovers a novel phenomenon, i.e., synchronization,
and gains insight widely applicable to learning in periodic
games.

Code — https://github.com/CyberAgentAILab/
periodic games synchronization
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10595

1

Introduction

Learning in games discusses how multiple agents optimize
their strategies in the repetition of games (Fudenberg and
Levine 1998). Their optimal strategies are usually characterized by Nash equilibrium (Nash Jr 1950), where every player
cannot increase its payoff by other strategies. When their
payoffs compete with each other, i.e., in zero-sum games,
it is difficult to achieve equilibrium by naive learning algorithms, such as gradient descent-ascent (GDA). This is because one’s optimal strategy crucially depends on the other’s
strategy. Their strategies typically draw a complex trajectory, such as a cycle around the equilibrium, without convergence. Thus, dynamical systems analysis is often introduced in learning in games to understand such complex behavior (Sato, Akiyama, and Farmer 2002; Piliouras et al.

1

Indeed, it was said that “An interesting question arises — in
periodic games where there is no common equilibrium.” in (Feng
et al. 2024)

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23194

