The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Towards a Theory of AI Personhood
Francis Rhys Ward
Imperial College London
francis.ward19@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Beyond this, there are broader philosophical questions regarding whether AI systems can be ascribed properties like
belief (Herrmann 2024), intent (Ward 2024b), agency (Kenton 2022), theory-of-mind (Strachan 2024), self-awareness
(Betley 2025; Laine 2024), and even consciousness (Butlin
2023; Shanahan 2024; Seth 2024; Goldstein 2024).
It is thus timely to start considering a future society in
which humans share the world with AI systems possessing
some, or all, of these properties. Future AI systems may
have claims to moral or political status (Ladak 2024; Sebo
2023), but, because their natures differ in important respects
from those of human beings, it may not be appropriate to
simply apply existing norms in the context of AI (Bostrom
2022). Although these considerations may seem like science
fiction, fiction reflects our folk intuitions (Rennick 2021),
and sometimes, life imitates art.
As humans, we already share the world with other intelligent entities, such as animals, corporations, and sovereign
states. Philosophically and/or legally, we often grant personhood to these entities, enabling us to harmoniously co-exist
with agents that are either much less, or much more, powerful than individual humans (Martin 2009; Group 2024).
This paper advances a theory of AI personhood. Whilst
there is no philosophical consensus on what constitutes
a person (Olson 2023), there are widely accepted themes
which, we argue, can be practicably applied in the context
of AI. Briefly stated, these are 1) agency, 2) theory-of-mind
(ToM), and 3) self-awareness. We explicate these themes in
relation to technical work on contemporary systems.
AI personhood is of great philosophical interest, but it is
also directly relevant for the problem of alignment. Arguments for AI risk often rely on the goal-directed nature of
agency. Greater ToM may enable cooperation between humans and AI agents, but it may also lead to exploitative interactions such as deception and manipulation. Some aspects
of self-awareness have been discussed in relation to alignment, but AI systems with the ability to self-reflect on their
goals may thereby induce their goals to change — and this
is a neglected point in considerations of AI risk.
Contributions and outline. First, we present necessary
conditions for AI personhood, grounded in the literature
from philosophy and ML, focusing on agency, theory-ofmind, and self-awareness. We discuss how these conditions
relate to the alignment problem. Then we highlight open re-

I am a person and so are you. Philosophically we sometimes
grant personhood to non-human animals, and entities such
as sovereign states or corporations can legally be considered
persons. But when, if ever, should we ascribe personhood to
AI systems? In this paper, we outline necessary conditions
for AI personhood, focusing on agency, theory-of-mind, and
self-awareness. We discuss evidence from the machine learning literature regarding the extent to which contemporary AI
systems, such as language models, satisfy these conditions,
finding the evidence surprisingly inconclusive.
If AI systems can be considered persons, then typical framings of AI alignment may be incomplete. Whereas agency has
been discussed at length in the literature, other aspects of personhood have been relatively neglected. AI agents are often
assumed to pursue fixed goals, but AI persons may be selfaware enough to reflect on their aims, values, and positions
in the world and thereby induce their goals to change. We
highlight open research directions to advance the understanding of AI personhood and its relevance to alignment. Finally,
we reflect on the ethical considerations surrounding the treatment of AI systems. If AI systems are persons, then seeking
control and alignment may be ethically untenable.

Introduction
Contemporary AI systems are built “in our image”. They
are trained on human-generated data to display person-like
characteristics, and are easily anthropomorphised (Shanahan
2023; Ward 2024a). These systems are already being incorporated into everyday life as generalist assistants, “friends”,
and even artificial romantic partners (OpenAI 2024b; Pierce
2024; Depounti 2023). In 2017, Saudi Arabia became the
first country to grant citizenship to a humanoid robot (Weller
2017). In the coming years, AI systems will continue to become more integrated into human society (Gruetzemacher
2021).
Taking technological trends, and the accompanying philosophical questions, seriously, Stuart Russell asks “What if
we succeed?” (Russell 2019). Russell’s answer is a focus on
the problem of how to control AI agents surpassing human
capabilities. Accordingly, there is growing literature on the
problem of aligning AI systems to human values (Ngo 2024;
Bales 2024; Gabriel 2020; Christian 2021).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27680

