The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ADBA:Approximation Decision Boundary Approach for Black-Box Adversarial
Attacks
Feiyang Wang1,2 , Xingquan Zuo1,2 * , Hai Huang1,2 , Gang Chen3
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Services, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
3
School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
{flyingw, zuoxq, hhuang}@bupt.edu.cn, aaron.chen@vuw.ac.nz

2

Abstract

Adversarial attacks can be categorized into white-box attacks and black-box attacks (Long et al. 2022). White-box
attacks (Wang and He 2021) require the attacker to have comprehensive knowledge of the target machine learning model,
rendering them impractical in many real-world scenarios. In
comparison, black-box attacks (Bai, Wang, and Zeng 2023;
Brendel, Rauber, and Bethge 2018; Li et al. 2021) are more
realistic since they do not required detailed knowledge of the
target model.
Black-box attacks can be divided into transfer-based attacks, score-based attacks (or soft-label attacks, gray-box
attacks), and decision-based attacks (hard-label attacks) (Li
et al. 2021). More detailed discussion of these attacks can be
found in Appendix B. Among them, decision-based attacks
(Li et al. 2021; Shi et al. 2022; Chen, Jordan, and Wainwright
2020; Cheng et al. 2020) are extremely stealthy since they
rely solely on the hard label from the target model to create
adversarial examples.
This paper studies the decision-based attacks due to their
general applicability and effectiveness in real-world adversarial situations. These attacks aim to deceive the target model
while adhering to two constraints (Ilyas et al. 2018): 1) they
must generate adversarial examples with as few queries as
possible (i.e., query-efficient) and cannot exceed a predetermined number of queries (i.e., query budget), and 2) the
strength of the adversarial perturbations must remain within
a predefined threshold ϵ. Violating those constrains results
in the attack being easily detected or deemed unsuccessful.
These constraints bring huge challenges to attackers (Ilyas
et al. 2018). Specifically, lacking detailed knowledge of the
target model and its output scores poses tremendous difficulty for attackers to determine the decision boundary (i.e.,
the minimum perturbation strength required to deceive the
model) with respect to any perturbation direction (Cheng
et al. 2020). Thus, decision-based attacks often require a
large number of queries to identify the decision boundary
and optimize the perturbation direction, increasing the likelihood of being detected and hurting the attack success rate.
Therefore, enhancing attack efficiency and minimizing the
number of queries are essential for decision-based attacks.
Proposed method. Existing decision-based attacks can be
divided into random search attacks (Brendel, Rauber, and
Bethge 2018; Li et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2020; Brunner et al.
2019; Chen and Gu 2020; Cheng et al. 2018)(reviewed in

Many machine learning models are susceptible to adversarial
attacks, with decision-based black-box attacks representing
the most critical threat in real-world applications. These attacks are extremely stealthy, generating adversarial examples
using hard labels obtained from the target machine learning
model. This is typically realized by optimizing perturbation
directions, guided by decision boundaries identified through
query-intensive exact search, significantly limiting the attack
success rate. This paper introduces a novel approach using
the Approximation Decision Boundary (ADB) to efficiently
and accurately compare perturbation directions without precisely determining decision boundaries. The effectiveness of
our ADB approach (ADBA) hinges on promptly identifying
suitable ADB, ensuring reliable differentiation of all perturbation directions. For this purpose, we analyze the probability
distribution of decision boundaries, confirming that using the
distribution’s median value as ADB can effectively distinguish
different perturbation directions, giving rise to the development of the ADBA-md algorithm. ADBA-md only requires
four queries on average to differentiate any pair of perturbation
directions, which is highly query-efficient. Extensive experiments on six well-known image classifiers clearly demonstrate
the superiority of ADBA and ADBA-md over multiple stateof-the-art black-box attacks.

Code — https://github.com/BUPTAIOC/ADBA

Introduction
Background and motivation. It is widely acknowledged
that machine learning methods such as Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Xie et al.
2017). Particularly, for image classification tasks, tiny additive perturbations in the input images can significantly affect
the classification accuracy of a pre-trained model (Xie et al.
2019). The impact of these intentionally designed perturbations in real-world scenarios (Eykholt et al. 2018; Lin et al.
2023) has heightened security worries for critical applications of deep neural networks in many domains (Eykholt
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2023a,b; Li and Deng 2020), which is
detailed in Appendix A.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7628

