The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ExPERT: Modeling Human Behavior under External Stimuli Aware Personalized
MTPP
Subhendu Khatuya1 , Ritvik Vij2 , Paramita Koley3 , Samik Datta1 , Niloy Ganguly1
1

IIT Kharagpur, India
2
Amazon
3
Machine Intelligence Unit, Indian Statistical Institute Kolkata
subha.cse143@gmail.com, ritvikvi@amazon.com, {paramita.2000, datta.samik}@gmail.com, niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
Abstract
?

Marked Temporal Point Process (MTPP) – the de-facto sequence model for continuous-time event sequences – historically employed for modeling human-generated action sequences, lack awareness of external stimuli. In this study,
we propose a novel framework developed over Transformer
Hawkes Process (THP) to incorporate external stimuli in a
domain-agnostic manner. Furthermore, we integrate personalization into our framework by employing language modelbased representations of user and event descriptions, which is
essential for modeling human-generated action sequences.
Towards evaluating the efficacy, we put together a comprehensive benchmark comprising 5 datasets (2 novel additions,
and 3 repurposed from existing open datasets) harvested
from several domains, spanning education, e-commerce, online payment, and discussion forum. On average, we achieve
9.35% gain in type-prediction accuracy and 7.38% reduction in time-prediction RMSE across all datasets over SOTA
MTPP baselines. We demonstrate the superior performance
of our proposed model through extensive ablations and showcasing its ability to capture complex combinations of external
stimuli in a synthetic set up.

?

Figure 1: An illustrative example of the temporal prediction problem where the temporal sequence contains both the
user-generated events (customer transactions) and a number
of external stimuli (in form of various coupons across different categories). Our problem is to predict the time and type
of the next user event (such as apparel shopping).

2017); sleep, eat, and exercise habit (Kurashima, Althoff,
and Leskovec 2018); grocery runs (Bhagat et al. 2018; Sahebi et al. 2024); education (Yao et al. 2021b; Sahebi et al.
2024); human engagement in social media (Qu et al. 2023;
Xue et al. 2023); user click behavior (Xue et al. 2023); mobile app usage behavior (Yang et al. 2023) – have been the
subject of several recent studies, where MTPP served as the
backbone sequence-model. While modeling the timestamp
and the action information effectively, these attempts do not
effectively model the context and the actor information.
Specifically, human actions are subject to external stimuli – e.g., incentives and reminders affecting payment behavior; coupons affecting e-commerce purchase behavior
(we provide a detailed account in Figure 4b); assignments
and examination deadlines affecting study behavior – whose
presence and influence have been acknowledged (De, Bhattacharya, and Ganguly 2018; Zhang et al. 2021), but has not
been incorporated into MTPP historically, except for (Manzoor and Akoglu 2017) and (Yao et al. 2021b). The approaches undertaken by them are domain-specific and laborintensive, reminiscent of feature engineering, making them
difficult to generalize across different domains. However,
external stimuli are common in many important applications, highlighting the need for a general, domain-agnostic
unified approach.
The response of an individual to such external stimuli is
highly variable and is closely influenced by a range of personal factors. For instance, a student’s reaction to a looming deadline or a customer’s response to a specific product promotion is deeply contingent on their unique profile.

Introduction
Continuous-time event sequences are ubiquitous in nature
and society: e.g., opinions expressed in Online Social Network (De et al. 2016), buy and sell transactions in Stock
Exchanges (Bacry, Mastromatteo, and Muzy 2015), earthquakes and tremors in geo-physics (Touati, Naylor, and
Main 2014). In general, any system emitting a sequence of
asynchronous events localized in time matches this description. In such sequences, each event is generally associated
with a timestamp, a context, an actor, and an action information. For such sequences, MTPP (Daley and Vere-Jones
2007; Last and Brandt 1995) has emerged as a powerful
framework and has been subsequently employed in a wide
array of domains (De et al. 2016; Farajtabar et al. 2015;
Rizoiu et al. 2017; Tabibian et al. 2019; Boyd et al. 2020;
Gupta et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021; Qu et al. 2023; Xue
et al. 2023; Sahebi et al. 2024).
In particular, asynchronous event sequences representing
human actions, – online payments (Manzoor and Akoglu
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17822

