The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Personalized Federated Collaborative Filtering:
A Variational AutoEncoder Approach
Zhiwei Li1 , Guodong Long1 , Tianyi Zhou2 , Jing Jiang1 , Chengqi Zhang3
1

Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park
3
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
zhiwei.li@student.uts.edu.au, {guodong.long, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au, zhou@umiacs.umd.edu, chengqi.zhang@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

To address this challenge, Federated Collaborative Filtering (FedCF) has emerged, combining the principles of federated learning (FL) and CF (Yang et al. 2020). FedCF enables models to be trained on users’ devices, eliminating the
need to upload private data to central servers, thus ensuring data privacy while still providing recommendation services (Ammad-Ud-Din et al. 2019). Existing work on FedCF
(Chai et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2020b,a) is mostly based on
matrix factorization (MF) (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009),
which is favored for its computational efficiency and strong
interpretability. MF effectively captures the latent relationships between users and items, making it widely used in
many practical applications and delivering strong performance in recommendation systems (Mehta and Rana 2017).
However, the fundamental assumption of MF is that the
relationships between users and items are linear, which may
limit the model’s ability to handle complex, non-linear relationships. The success of Neural Collaborative Filtering
(NCF) (He et al. 2017) demonstrates the necessarity of
building non-linear relationships among users and items. In
addition to FedNCF (Perifanis and Efraimidis 2022) which
is a federated NCF algorithm, some recent works proposed
to preserve the personalization on neural models in federated settings. PFedRec (Zhang et al. 2023a) proposed using
personalized item embeddings to capture each user’s unique
perspective about the relationships among items. FedRAP
(Li, Long, and Zhou 2024) decomposes the item embedding
to two additive components that preserve shared and personalized knowledge respectively. However, these methods rely
on personalized item embedding that may lead to poor performance on model generalization, and maintaining a personalized item embedding is computation consuming.
Main Contribution. To effectively preserve fine-grained
personalization and non-linear user-item relationships, we
propose a novel gating dual-encoder structure that transforms the user-item interaction vector into two separate latent subspaces. Specifically, through collaborative training
across clients, the global encoder maps the user profile into
a universal latent subspace shared among clients. Meanwhile, the local encoder remains on the client side, where
it is trained to map the user profile into a user-specific latent
subspace. Consequently, the global encoder retains shared
knowledge across clients, while the local encoder preserves
personalized knowledge. It is worth noting our proposed

Federated Collaborative Filtering (FedCF) is an emerging
field focused on developing a new recommendation framework with preserving privacy in a federated setting. Existing FedCF methods typically combine distributed Collaborative Filtering (CF) algorithms with privacy-preserving mechanisms, and then preserve personalized information into a
user embedding vector. However, the user embedding is usually insufficient to preserve the rich information of the finegrained personalization across heterogeneous clients. This
paper proposes a novel personalized FedCF method by preserving users’ personalized information into a latent variable and a neural model simultaneously. Specifically, we decompose the modeling of user knowledge into two encoders,
each designed to capture shared knowledge and personalized knowledge separately. A personalized gating network is
then applied to balance personalization and generalization between the global and local encoders. Moreover, to effectively
train the proposed framework, we model the CF problem as
a specialized Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) task by integrating user interaction vector reconstruction with missing
value prediction. The decoder is trained to reconstruct the implicit feedback from items the user has interacted with, while
also predicting items the user might be interested in but has
not yet interacted with. Experimental results on benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
other baseline methods, showcasing superior performance.

Code — https://github.com/mtics/FedDAE

Introduction
In the digital age, Recommendation Systems have become
essential tools for filtering online information and helping
users discover products, content, and services that match
their preferences (Ko et al. 2022). Collaborative Filtering
(CF) is widely recognized for its ability to generate personalized recommendations by analyzing the relationships between users and items based on user interaction data (Shen,
Zhou, and Chen 2020). However, with the enforcement of
data privacy laws like GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017), safeguarding privacy has become increasingly
critical.Traditional CF methods typically require centralizing user data on servers for processing, a practice that is no
longer viable in today’s privacy-conscious environment.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18602

