The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProcTag: Process Tagging for Assessing the Efficacy of Document Instruction Data
Yufan Shen1 * , Chuwei Luo2 * † , Zhaoqing Zhu2 * , Yang Chen1 ,
Qi Zheng2 , Zhi Yu1† , Jiajun Bu1 , Cong Yao2
1

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems,
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba Group
syficy,22351044,yuzhirenzhe,bjj@zju.edu.cn
luochuwei,zzhaoqing.z,zhengqisjtu,yaocong2010@gmail.com
Instruction / Question: What is Tom’s phone number?

Abstract

Response / Answer: 123

Name Age Tel
------- --- ---Tom --- 123
------- --- ---(a) Normal Document (b) Card (KV) Document (c) Form/ Table Document
----------Tom--------his phone number is
123------------------

Recently, large language models (LLMs) and multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated promising results on document visual question answering (VQA)
task, particularly after training on document instruction
datasets. An effective evaluation method for document instruction data is crucial in constructing instruction data with
high efficacy, which, in turn, facilitates the training of LLMs
and MLLMs for document VQA. However, most existing
evaluation methods for instruction data are limited to the textual content of the instructions themselves, thereby hindering the effective assessment of document instruction datasets
and constraining their construction. In this paper, we propose ProcTag, a data-oriented method that assesses the efficacy of document instruction data. ProcTag innovatively performs tagging on the execution process of instructions rather
than the instruction text itself. By leveraging the diversity and
complexity of these tags to assess the efficacy of the given
dataset, ProcTag enables selective sampling or filtering of
document instructions. Furthermore, DocLayPrompt, a novel
semi-structured layout-aware document prompting strategy,
is proposed for effectively representing documents. Experiments demonstrate that sampling existing open-sourced and
generated document VQA/instruction datasets with ProcTag
significantly outperforms current methods for evaluating instruction data. Impressively, with ProcTag-based sampling in
the generated document datasets, only 30.5% of the document
instructions are required to achieve 100% efficacy compared
to the complete dataset.

----Name: Tome-----Tel: 123------

1. Document type analysis 1. Document type analysis 1. Document type analysis
2. Find relevant paragraph 2. Find relevant KV-region 2. Find relevant table
3. Find column by keyword
3. Extract sentence entity 3. Find keyword
4. Extract value
4. Extract value from row

Figure 1: The same instruction text can lead to entirely different execution processes when applied to different types of
documents.

Ye et al. 2023a; Yang et al. 2023; Shi et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2023c) for the document VQA has seen substantial advancements.
To achieve good document VQA results by LLMs/MLLMs, recent works (Ye et al. 2023a; Zhang et al. 2023)
perform instruction tuning (Wei et al. 2022a; Ouyang et al.
2022) on the document instruction datasets. To facilitate
effective instruction tuning, the instruction datasets should
better possess high efficacy, which means that the instructions in the dataset are expected to be sufficiently diverse
and complex (Xu et al. 2023; Mukherjee et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2024). Instruction datasets are often collected through
manual annotation or generated using LLMs/MLLMs (Taori
et al. 2023; Ding et al. 2023). Building upon this, recent
works (Lu et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023) have proposed several
data-oriented methods to evaluate the efficacy of instruction
datasets, thereby facilitating the selection of data that is both
diverse and complex. These methods have been proven effective in guiding the assessment of instruction data quality.
However, existing evaluation methods for instruction data
are biased to the general domain and primarily focus on
the textual content of the instructions, resulting in suboptimal performance in the document understanding domain.
In the document VQA task, effectively assessing the efficacy of instruction datasets requires a comprehensive understanding and differentiation of the document’s content, layout, instructions, and the instruction execution process. As
illustrated in Figure 3, the data method INSTAG (Lu et al.
2023), which assesses the efficacy of instruction datasets by

Introduction
Document visual question answering (VQA), which closely
aligns with the general document artificial intelligence (Cui
et al. 2021; Han et al. 2023), is currently a significant research and application area.
With the remarkable successes achieved by Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI 2022; Brown et al. 2020;
Touvron et al. 2023a,b; Bai et al. 2023a) and Multimodal
Large Models (MLLMs) (OpenAI 2023; Bai et al. 2023b;
Liu et al. 2023b,a; Ye et al. 2023b) across various real-world
tasks, the application of these models (Zhang et al. 2023;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6851

