The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

InteDisUX: Intepretation-Guided Discriminative User-Centric Explanation for
Time Series
Viet-Hung Tran1 * , Zichi Zhang1 * , Tuan Dung Pham1 * , Ngoc Phu Doan1 * , Anh-Tuan Hoang1 ,
Peixin Li1 , Hans Vandierendonck1 , Ira Assent2 , Son T. Mai1
1

Queen’s University Belfast, UK
2
Aarhus University, Denmark
{h.tran, h.vandierendonck, thaison.mai}@qub.ac.uk, ira@cs.au.dk

Abstract

errors, and limits the ability to extract meaningful insights
from the model outputs. To overcome this non-transparent
issue in TSC, Explainable AI (XAI) has emerged as an effective yet promising realm (Rojat et al. 2021).
Most existing methods in XAI aim to explain a time series model using attribute maps, which contain a score to
represent the importance of each time point, e.g., (Liu et al.
2024a,b; Enguehard 2023; Queen et al. 2024; Doddaiah
et al. 2022). However, these attribute map explanations are
not similar to people’s perceptions in terms of psychology
and philosophy since humans have a preference for explanations that are both simple and informative (Singh, Murdoch,
and Yu 2018; Read and Marcus-Newhall 1993). Hence, a
good explanation should be able to effectively capture the relationships between features while still being simple enough
for users to search manually. Nevertheless, attribution maps
for a time series are usually packed with huge amounts of
time points, making them impractical for users to use. Furthermore, temporal correlations among features, which are
a key difference between time series and tabular data, are
not paid enough attention. Different to the attribute maps,
LIME-based methods suggest the use of time series segmentation to divide time series into segments before employing
different LIME variants to assign an importance score to
each segment, e.g., (Neves et al. 2021; Guillemé et al. 2019;
Sivill and Flach 2022). This segmentation scheme helps to
reduce the amount of information provided to users while
retaining temporal information inside segments. However,
these approaches requires a predetermined number of segments to divide all time series into pieces before assessing
their importance scores. This limits their ability to capture
an appropriate number of segments and their locations (due
to fixed precut segments/pieces) for each instance, hence
reducing the effectiveness of the explanation. Additionally,
current LIME approaches are also suffering from instability and poor local fidelity as pointed out in (Tan, Tian, and
Li 2024). Moreover, their sampling sensitivity when dealing
with imbalanced data is another limitation which we will
further discuss in Section 2.4 of this paper.

Explanation for deep learning models on time series classification (TSC) tasks is an important and challenging problem. Most existing approaches use attribution maps to explain
outcomes. However, they have limitations in generating explanations that are well-aligned with humans’s perceptions.
Recently, LIME-based approaches provide a more meaningful explanation via segmenting the data. However, these approaches are still suffering from shortcomings in the processes of segment generation and evaluation. In this paper, we
propose a novel time series explanation approach called InteDisUX to overcome these problems. Our technique utilizes
the segment-level integrated gradient (SIG) for calculating
importance scores for an initial set of small and equal segments before iteratively merge two consecutive ones to create better explanations under a unique greedy strategy guided
by two new proposed metrics including discrimination and
faithfulness gains. By this way, our method does not depend
on predefined segments like others while being robusts to instability, poor local fidelity and data imbalance like LIMEbased methods. Furthermore, InteDisUX is the first work to
use the model’s information to improve the set of segments
for time series explanation. Extensive experiments show that
our method outperforms LIME-based ones in 12 datasets in
terms of faithfulness and 8/12 datasets in terms of robustness.

1

Introduction

Time series classification (TSC) plays a vital role in many
practical domains, such as finance (Liang, Wang, and Wu
2023), healthcare (Lin et al. 2019), and supply chain management (Keller, Thiesse, and Fleisch 2014). However, it remains one of the most challenging problems despite many
research efforts (Mohammadi Foumani et al. 2024). Recently, Deep Learning (DL) has been emerged as an effective
approach for TSC compared to conventional statistical methods due to its ability to learn relevant latent feature representations from long-term data. Unfortunately, DL models are
deemed to be black boxes as their decision-making mechanisms are difficult to understand. This consequently hinders
trustworthiness, makes it challenging to identify and correct

Contributions. In this paper, we propose a novel time series explanation method, called Intepretation-Guided Discriminative User-Centric Explanation for Time Series (Inte-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20921

