The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Follow-Your-Click: Open-domain Regional Image Animation via Motion Prompts
Yue Ma1 * , Yingqing He1 * , Hongfa Wang2,3 * , Andong Wang2 , Leqi Shen3 , Chenyang Qi1 ,
Jixuan Ying3 , Chengfei Cai2 , Zhifeng Li2 , Heung-Yeung Shum1,3 , Wei Liu2✉ , Qifeng Chen1✉
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2
Tencent, Hunyuan, China
3
Tsinghua University, China
ymacn@cse.ust.hk, yhebm@connect.ust.hk, {hongfawang, fletchercai}@tencent.com, wangad@connect.hku.hk,
{lunarshen, chenyangqi67, zhifeng0.li}@gmail.com, yingjx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{hshum, cqf}@ust.hk, wl2223@columbia.edu,
Abstract

image datasets have enabled the generation of diverse and
realistic images based on text prompts. Encouraged by this
success, researchers have begun extending these models to
the realm of I2V, aiming to leverage the strong image generation priors for image-to-video generation (Xing et al. 2023;
Shi et al. 2024; Chai et al. 2023).

Despite recent advances in image-to-video generation, better
controllability and local animation are less explored. Most
existing image-to-video methods are not locally aware and
tend to move the entire scene. However, human artists may
need to control the movement of different objects or regions.
Additionally, current I2V methods require users not only to
describe the target motion but also to provide redundant detailed descriptions of frame contents. These two issues hinder the practical utilization of current I2V tools. In this paper, we propose a practical framework, named Follow-YourClick, to achieve image animation with a simple user click
(for specifying what to move) and a motion prompt (for specifying how to move). Technically, we propose the first-frame
masking strategy, which significantly improves the video generation quality, and a motion-augmented module equipped
with a motion prompt dataset to improve the motion prompt
following abilities of our model. To further control the motion speed, we propose flow-based motion magnitude control to control the speed of target movement more precisely.
Our framework has simpler yet precise user control and better generation performance than previous methods. Extensive
experiments compared with 7 baselines, including both commercial tools and research methods on 8 metrics, suggest the
superiority of our approach.

However, existing I2V works (Chai et al. 2023; Xing et al.
2023; Wang et al. 2023b; i2v 2023) have a lack of control
over which part of the image needs to be moved, and they
produce videos with the movement of the entire scene; And
some works such as SVD (Chai et al. 2023) tend to deliver
videos always with camera movement, ignoring the more
vivid object movement. They cannot achieve regional image animation which is important to human artists (e.g., the
user may want to animate the foreground object while keeping the background static). Besides, the typical prompts that
users provide to I2V models are the descriptions of the entire scene contents. However, the spatial content is fully described via the input image which is not necessary for users
to describe it again. In fact, a more intuitive way is to provide motion-only prompts, but current approaches are less
sensitive to motion prompts. A common hypothesis in previous works is that the diffusion model is a prompt-driven
framework, and a detailed prompt may enhance the quality
of the generated results. However, such a feature dramatically limits the practical application for users in the real
world. The existing datasets such as WebVid (Bain et al.
2021) and HDVILA (Xue et al. 2022) mainly focus on describing scenes and events in their captions, while ignoring
the motion of the objects. Training on such datasets may result in a decrease in the quality of generated motion and insensitivity towards motion-related keywords.

Code — https://follow-your-click.github.io/

1

Introduction

Image-to-video generation (I2V) aims to animate an image into a dynamic video clip with reasonable movements.
It has widespread applications in the filmmaking industry,
augmented reality, and automatic advertising. Traditionally,
image animation methods mainly focus on domain-specific
categories, such as natural scenes (Cheng, Chen, and Chiu
2020; Li et al. 2023), human hair (Xiao et al. 2023), portraits (Wang et al. 2022) and bodies (Bertiche et al. 2023;
Weng, Curless, and Kemelmacher-Shlizerman 2019), limiting their practical application in real world. In recent years,
the significant advancements in the diffusion models (Rombach et al. 2022; Saharia et al. 2022) trained on large-scale

In this paper, we aim to devise a more practical and controllable I2V model that can address such problems. To this
end, we propose Follow-Your-Click, a novel I2V framework that is capable of regional image animation via a user
click and following motion prompts. To achieve this simple
user interaction mechanism while obtaining good generation
performance, we first simply integrate SAM (Cheng et al.
2023) to convert user clicks to binary regional masks, which
serve as one of our network conditions. Then to better learn
the temporal correlation correctly, we introduce an effective

* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6018

