The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

NeSyCoCo: A Neuro-Symbolic Concept Composer for Compositional
Generalization
Danial Kamali, Elham J. Barezi, Parisa Kordjamshidi
Michigan State University
{kamalida, jebalbar, kordjams}@msu.edu

Abstract

domain, typically involving a set of predefined predicates,
which limits the flexibility and coverage of linguistic lexical
variety in concepts appearing in language and vision modalities. Moreover, obtaining the domain predicates from the
raw modalities at an appropriate level of abstraction is challenging. Additionally, integrating symbolic and neural models requires differentiable operations for composing primitive concepts, which still poses a challenge.
Recent advancements in artificial intelligence have aimed
to emulate human reasoning through various models and
techniques. Leveraging large language models for visual
reasoning has shown notable promise, with methods such as
VisProg (Gupta and Kembhavi 2023) and ViperGPT (Surı́s
et al. 2023) demonstrating potential by utilizing LLMs to
generate reasoning programs for visual tasks. These models
decompose complex linguistic inputs into logical steps, similar to human reasoning. However, a significant limitation is
their reliance on a limited set of predefined predicates, which
restricts their flexibility and ability to generalize to new scenarios. LEFT (Hsu et al. 2024) addresses the need for predefined predicates in symbolic reasoning by leveraging LLMs
to extract trainable and lexically-motivated predicates. Despite this improvement, LEFT struggles with lexical variety
in linguistic expressions and handling non-canonical or unseen concepts.
Research indicates that end-to-end vision-language models often struggle with compositional generalization (Zhu,
Thomason, and Jia 2022; Yun et al. 2023), frequently failing to generalize beyond their training examples. This limitation highlights the need for approaches that dynamically
adapt to new predicates and queries without being constrained by predefined rules (Zhu, Thomason, and Jia 2022).
In this work, we propose NeSyCoCo, a novel visual reasoning method designed to address above-mentioned limitations. Following Hsu et al. (2024), our method leverages the
power of LLMs, using their natural language vocabulary as
a source of predicates and symbols, thus alleviating the need
for manual engineering of domain predicates. We augment
the linguistic inputs with their syntactic structure to improve
the semantic alignment of the symbolic representations generated by LLM. In addition, we use distributed representations of concepts in language as predicate representations
and connect these predicates to neural modules to deal with
a lexical variety of concepts. We normalize these predicates’

Compositional generalization is crucial for artificial intelligence agents to solve complex vision-language reasoning tasks. Neuro-symbolic approaches have demonstrated
promise in capturing compositional structures, but they face
critical challenges: (a) reliance on predefined predicates for
symbolic representations that limit adaptability, (b) difficulty
in extracting predicates from raw data, and (c) using nondifferentiable operations for combining primitive concepts.
To address these issues, we propose NeSyCoCo, a neurosymbolic framework that leverages large language models
(LLMs) to generate symbolic representations and map them
to differentiable neural computations. NeSyCoCo introduces
three innovations: (a) augmenting natural language inputs
with dependency structures to enhance the alignment with
symbolic representations, (b) employing distributed word
representations to link diverse, linguistically motivated logical predicates to neural modules, and (c) using the soft composition of normalized predicate scores to align symbolic and
differentiable reasoning. Our framework achieves state-ofthe-art results on the ReaSCAN and CLEVR-CoGenT compositional generalization benchmarks and demonstrates robust performance with novel concepts in the CLEVR-SYN
benchmark.

Code — https://github.com/HLR/NeSyCoCo

1

Introduction

Compositional generalization refers to the ability of an intelligent agent to extend its understanding from previously
seen components to more complex problems. Our research
focuses on vision-language reasoning, an area where compositional generalization plays a crucial role.
While humans can easily extrapolate their understanding
of primitive concepts to more complex problems, current
state-of-the-art models frequently encounter difficulties in
this area, particularly in reasoning about the composition of
entity properties or relationships (Partee et al. 1984).
Neuro-symbolic methods have demonstrated great potential in addressing compositional structures (Zhu, Thomason,
and Jia 2022). However, existing approaches face several
challenges. They require a symbolic representation of the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4184

