The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Responsive Dynamic Graph Disentanglement for Metro Flow Forecasting
Qiang Gao1,2 , Zizheng Wang1 , Li Huang1,2 * , Goce Trajcevski3 , Guisong Liu1,2,4 , Xueqin Chen4 *
1

School of Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education, Chengdu, China
3
Iowa State University, Iowa, USA
4
Kash Institute of Electronics and Information Industry, Kashgar, China
qianggao@swufe.edu.cn, 223081200032@smail.swufe.edu.cn, lihuang@swufe.edu.cn, gocet25@iastate.edu,
gliu@swufe.edu.cn, nedchen0728@gmail.com
Abstract

Due to intrinsic periodicity, recent advances in the trafﬁc ﬂow forecasting domains provide a straightforward
paradigm to handle the metro ﬂow forecasting problem; that
is, we can model higher-order temporal dependencies from
historical ﬂow observations, while considering spatial constraints, to discover the periodicity for future trend forecasting (Liu, Liu, and Jia 2019). For instance, we can leverage
popular graph neural networks (GNNs) to model the relational structure of metro stations and their dynamic interactions. The common pipeline is that (dynamic) GNNs attempt
to integrate spatial and temporal signals into uniﬁed representations, signiﬁcantly enhancing prediction accuracy and
robustness (Li et al. 2017; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018). These sophisticated solutions can adapt to the common characteristics of metro and trafﬁc ﬂows – e.g., periodicity and topological structures – providing opportunities to improve transportation management and operational efﬁciency.
However, metro ﬂow differs from other types of urban
trafﬁc ﬂow due to its speciﬁc properties: (1) It contains characteristics of highly predetermined scheduling, marked by
greater reliability. Each station underlies unique traits, and
the ﬂow patterns typically show consistency (e.g., chain reaction) in addition to strong periodicity. For example, an
increase in the number of passengers entering one station
naturally results in a similar rise in the number of passengers exiting the subsequent stations since passengers do
not linger at the station or suddenly disappear from it. (2)
The spatially-aware interaction regarding higher-order dependencies is inherently dynamic over the ﬁxed physical
infrastructure, with varying ﬂow directions and aggregation patterns that differ signiﬁcantly between weekdays and
weekends, and even ﬂuctuate throughout the day. This dynamic nature requires responsive graph structures and pattern aggregation to capture these intrinsic dynamics.
With these in mind, we raise three key concerns that
are crucial for exposing interactive correlations to effectively model metro ﬂow dynamics, as depicted in Fig. 1.
K1-Intrinsic Connectivity: pertains to the diverse spatiallyaware correlations between different stations, such as geographical proximity and similar surrounding environments,
yielding analogous ﬂow patterns and dynamic station connections. K2-Environmental Associations: encompass external inﬂuences such as commuting date, current weather
and habitual activities, which exposes the factual diver-

The metro ﬂow in Urban Rail Transit Systems (URTS) differs from other urban trafﬁc ﬂows because it is characterized by: (1) highly predetermined scheduling; and (2) interactively dynamic dependencies over the ﬁxed physical infrastructure that vary with spatiotemporal and environmental factors. Notwithstanding the advances in graph neural networks,
existing efforts fail to fully capture the characteristics and
complex spatiotemporal dynamics speciﬁc to metro ﬂow, as
the innate graph-aware interactions underlying a metro ﬂow
are frequently affected by an amalgamation of: intrinsic connectivity, environmental associations, and ﬂow-activated correlation, which usually dynamically evolve over time while
containing redundant signals. We propose ReDyNet, a novel
Responsive Dynamic Graph Neural Network to accurately
understand the spatiotemporal dynamics of metro ﬂow and
external factors. Speciﬁcally, it employs a responsive mechanism that adapts to variations in metro ﬂow and external inﬂuences, ensuring the construction of an appropriate dynamic
graph. In addition, ReDyNet follows the merits of information bottleneck (IB) theory with redundancy disentanglement
to enhance the clarity and precision of contextual spatial signals. Our experiments conducted on three real-world metro
passenger ﬂow datasets demonstrate that the proposed ReDyNet outperforms several representative baselines.

1

Introduction

Urban Rail Transit Systems (URTS) (Zhu et al. 2023) such
as metro networks have become indispensable means of
transport for residents in metropolitan areas. In this context, the extensive use of sensing technologies and passenger
information systems yields vast amounts of passenger ﬂow
data, which spurs unprecedented opportunities to constantly
improve the service quality of URTS. As a vital element in
the development of smart cities, accurate metro ﬂow forecasting is essential for effective transportation management,
operational efﬁciency, and passenger convenience (Xiong
et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2023). Speciﬁcally, forecasting metro
ﬂow requires estimating the number of passengers who enter and leave metro stations at different time intervals, which
is not trivial due to the intricate spatiotemporal dynamics inherent in metro systems.
* Corresponding authors: Li Huang and Xueqin Chen
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11690

