The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RA-SGG: Retrieval-Augmented Scene Graph Generation Framework via
Multi-Prototype Learning
Kanghoon Yoon1 , Kibum Kim1 , Jaehyeong Jeon1 , Yeonjun In1 , Donghyun Kim2 , Chanyoung
Park1 *
1

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University
{ykhoon08, kb.kim, wogud405, yeonjun.in, cy.park}@kaist.ac.kr, d kim@korea.ac.kr
Abstract

datasets with such a skewed distribution tend to be biased
towards head predicates, resulting in scene graphs dominated by general predicates. However, these scene graphs
lack nuanced descriptions provided by tail predicates, which
offer detailed relationship information. 2) Semantic Ambiguity: Another challenge stems from the ambiguous semantic boundaries between predicate classes. For a relation instance, predicates such as “on,” “walking on,” and “walking in” may be hard-to-distinguish as these predicates share
semantic meanings, and thus SGG models need to capture
nuanced visual cues to distinguish between them. However,
learning the detailed visual differences is challenging as the
tail predicates, such as “walking in,” rarely appear in the
dataset whose predicate class distribution is usually skewed.
Addressing these challenges is crucial for generating informative scene graphs with fine-grained predicates.
Seminal works have focused on generating fine-grained
scene graphs by alleviating the issues posed by these challenges. Re-sampling, re-weighting, and various debiasing
methods (Li et al. 2021; Lyu et al. 2022; Kaihua et al.
2020; Kim et al. 2024b) are utilized to generate the finegrained scene graphs. Most recently, (Li et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2022; Yu et al. 2023) propose the data enhancement
approaches by re-annotating the general predicates to finegrained ones. However, this refinement process results in
a trade-off, where comprehension of general predicates is
diminished. Moreover, we find that fundamental challenges
persist in the prior framework. Current SGG models rely on
single-label classification, where predicates compete against
each other during prediction, forcing the model to select
just one predicate while suppressing others. This approach is
problematic because it ignores the nuanced nature of natural
language, where multiple predicates convey the same single
relationship. Hence, we cast the single-label classification
with multi-label classification with partial annotation problem (Ben-Baruch et al. 2022). That is, we discover potential
fine-grained predicates in the original training data and augment semantically similar predicates for relationships.
In this work, we propose a Retrieval-Augmented Scene
Graph Generation (RA-SGG) framework that enhances
single-label annotations to multi-labels with fine-grained
predicates, addressing the challenges of the long-tailed predicate distribution and the semantic ambiguity. The core idea
is to retrieve potential predicates that share semantics with

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) research has suffered from
two fundamental challenges: the long-tailed predicate distribution and semantic ambiguity between predicates. These
challenges lead to a bias towards head predicates in SGG
models, favoring dominant general predicates while overlooking fine-grained predicates. In this paper, we address the
challenges of SGG by framing it as multi-label classification problem with partial annotation, where relevant labels
of fine-grained predicates are missing. Under the new frame,
we propose Retrieval-Augmented Scene Graph Generation
(RA-SGG), which identifies potential instances to be multilabeled and enriches the single-label with multi-labels that
are semantically similar to the original label by retrieving
relevant samples from our established memory bank. Based
on augmented relations (i.e., discovered multi-labels), we apply multi-prototype learning to train our SGG model. Several comprehensive experiments have demonstrated that RASGG outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by up to 3.6% on
VG and 5.9% on GQA, particularly in terms of F@K, showing that RA-SGG effectively alleviates the issue of biased
prediction caused by the long-tailed distribution and semantic ambiguity of predicates.

1

Introduction

SGG is a pivotal task in scene understanding, aiming to detect objects and predict their relationships within an image.
SGG models are adept at capturing rich visual information
that encompass both object-level and relation-level information. This compositional representation of the scene graph is
beneficial for various vision applications (Hildebrandt et al.
2020; Schroeder and Tripathi 2020). However, existing SGG
approaches have encountered two fundamental challenges:
1) Long-tailed Problem: The predicate classes in benchmark SGG datasets, e.g., Visual Genome, follow a severely
skewed distribution, where certain predicates are heavily
represented (head classes) while others are sparsely annotated (tail classes). This challenge arises from annotators’
tendency to label general predicates such as “on” more frequently than fine-grained predicates such as “walking in.”
Consequently, the predictions of SGG models trained on
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9562

