The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

THESAURUS: Contrastive Graph Clustering by Swapping Fused
Gromov-Wasserstein Couplings
Bowen Deng1,2 * , Tong Wang1 * , Lele Fu1,2 , Sheng Huang1,2 , Chuan Chen1† , Tao Zhang2† ,
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{dengbw3, wangt, full, huangs}@mail2.sysu.com, {chenchuan,zhangt358}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

et al. 1967) to guide the representation learning process
and/or to get the final clustering results, and thus inherit
the shortcomings of K-means. Clusters that contain significantly more samples than others are called majority clusters,
and conversely, those with fewer samples minority clusters.
When the input node representations exhibit low cluster separability, K-means results may show (1) Uniform Effect:
samples from majority clusters being assigned to neighboring minority clusters (Xiong, Wu, and Chen 2009), and (2)
Cluster Assimilation: minority clusters being merged into
neighboring majority clusters (Lu, Cheung, and Tang 2021).
In contrast, high cluster separability, an ideal clustering outcome characterized by large inter-cluster and small intracluster distances, can alleviate these two issues (Lu, Cheung,
and Tang 2021), as demonstrated by the Dink-Net finetune
effect experiment presented below.

Graph node clustering is a fundamental unsupervised task.
Existing methods typically train an encoder through selfsupervised learning and then apply K-means to the encoder
output. Some methods use this clustering result directly as the
final assignment, while others initialize centroids based on
this initial clustering and then finetune both the encoder and
these learnable centroids. However, due to their reliance on
K-means, these methods inherit its drawbacks when the cluster separability of encoder output is low, facing challenges
from the Uniform Effect and Cluster Assimilation. We summarize three reasons for the low cluster separability in existing methods: (1) lack of contextual information prevents
discrimination between similar nodes from different clusters;
(2) training tasks are not sufficiently aligned with the downstream clustering task; (3) the cluster information in the graph
structure is not appropriately exploited. To address these issues, we propose conTrastive grapH clustEring by SwApping
fUsed gRomov-wasserstein coUplingS (THESAURUS). Our
method introduces semantic prototypes to provide contextual
information, and employs a cross-view assignment prediction pretext task that aligns well with the downstream clustering task. Additionally, it utilizes Gromov-Wasserstein Optimal Transport (GW-OT) along with the proposed prototype
graph to thoroughly exploit cluster information in the graph
structure. To adapt to diverse real-world data, THESAURUS
updates the prototype graph and the prototype marginal distribution in OT by using momentum. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that THESAURUS achieves higher cluster separability than the prior art, effectively mitigating the Uniform
Effect and Cluster Assimilation issues.

Uniform Effect & Cluster Assimilation in Dink-Net
The current state-of-the-art (SOTA) model, Dink-Net, is pretrained by distinguishing the original data and the randomly
corrupted and shuffled data. We denote the pretrained DinkNet as Dink-Net-NoFT. After pretraining, K-means is employed to cluster the Dink-Net-NoFT output, initializing the
C−1
centroids {ci }i=0 . In the later finetune stage, the encoder
and centroids are adjusted to enhance clusterP
separability
by
P
−1
minimizing the dilation loss Ld = (C−1)C
i
i̸=i ∥ci −
PB PC−1
1
2
cj ∥22 and shrink loss Ls = BC
i=1
j=0 ∥zi − cj ∥2 ,
where B is the node batch size and zi is the representation.
For a node i, its predicted cluster is ŷi = arg minj ∥zi −
cj ∥2 . Fig. 1 shows the finetune impact on Dink-Net.
Before finetune, two phenomena are observed on the Cora
dataset. (1) Uniform Effect: the largest cluster (cluster 3)
has many external edges with the much smaller clusters 0
and 4, causing them to be close in the embedding space. This
is evidenced in Fig. 1b, where many nodes from cluster 3 are
misclassified into clusters 4 and 0. (2) Cluster Assimilation:
The smallest cluster (cluster 6) has the most external edges
with cluster 0, leading to its merging into cluster 0.
After finetuning towards high separability, some of the
nodes from cluster 3 but misclassified into clusters 4 and 0
are returned to cluster 3, resulting in a significant improvement in the F1 score for cluster 3. However, since the cluster separability is still insufficient, the smallest cluster (clus-

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11550

1

Introduction

Graph node clustering (Wang et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023b) is
a fundamental unsupervised task. Recently, methods based
on Graph Self-Supervised Learning (Graph SSL) (Liu et al.
2022a) have become predominant (Liu et al. 2023b). Despite their success, these methods, e.g., Dink-Net (Liu et al.
2023a), heavily rely on K-means (Lloyd 1957; MacQueen
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16199

