The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HomoMatcher: Achieving Dense Feature Matching with
Semi-Dense Efficiency by Homography Estimation
Xiaolong Wang1 * † , Lei Yu2 * , Yingying Zhang2 , Jiangwei Lao2 , Lixiang Ru2 ,
Liheng Zhong2 , Jingdong Chen2 , Yu Zhang1‡ , Ming Yang2‡
1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Ant Group
{xlking, zhangyu80}@zju.edu.cn, {dubai.yl, m.yang}@antgroup.com
Abstract
Feature matching between image pairs is a fundamental problem in computer vision that drives many applications, such
as SLAM. Recently, semi-dense matching approaches have
achieved substantial performance enhancements and established a widely-accepted coarse-to-fine paradigm. However,
the majority of existing methods focus on improving coarse
feature representation rather than the fine-matching module.
Prior fine-matching techniques, which rely on point-to-patch
matching probability expectation or direct regression, often
lack precision and do not guarantee the continuity of feature points across sequential images. To address this limitation, this paper concentrates on enhancing the fine-matching
module in the semi-dense matching framework. We employ
a lightweight and efficient homography estimation network
to generate the perspective mapping between patches obtained from coarse matching. This patch-to-patch approach
achieves the overall alignment of two patches, resulting in
a higher sub-pixel accuracy by incorporating additional constraints. By leveraging the homography estimation between
patches, we can achieve a dense matching result with low
computational cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method achieves higher accuracy compared to previous
semi-dense matchers. Meanwhile, our dense matching results
exhibit similar end-point-error accuracy compared to previous dense matchers while maintaining semi-dense efficiency.

1

RoMa

HomoMatcher

Figure 1: A visualization of dense matching results from our
proposed HomoMatcher and dense matching method RoMa
(Edstedt et al. 2024). The HomoMatcher operates within a
semi-dense framework, maintaining efficiency and enabling
the flexible expansion of dense mappings from semi-dense
results. Middle row is RoMa’s results, which show warps
with certainty values above a threshold of 0.02. Bottom row
presents our results, demonstrating our method’s capability
for dense matching refinement.

Introduction

Feature matching is a fundamental computer vision task that
estimates pairs of pixels corresponding to the same 3D point
from two images. This task is crucial for many downstream
applications, such as Structure from Motion (SfM) (Schonberger and Frahm 2016; He et al. 2024), Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) (Mur-Artal, Montiel, and
Tardos 2015; Mur-Artal and Tardós 2017), visual localization (Sarlin et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2024a), image stitching
(Zaragoza et al. 2013a), etc.
Early approaches predominantly relied on feature detectors, which involved identifying salient points in a pair of

images, crafting descriptors for these points, and subsequently accomplishing feature matching. The focus during
this period was on creating more efficient feature detectors,
leading to the development of methods like SIFT (Lowe
2004), ORB (Rublee et al. 2011), and other learning-based
techniques (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018).
However, the dependence on detectors significantly reduce
robustness, resulting in failures in scenarios with textureless
regions or large viewpint changes.
Recently, LoFTR (Sun et al. 2021) introduces a detectorfree method based on a coarse-to-fine paradigm. It leverages
the context aggregation and positional encoding capabilities of Transformer (Vaswani 2017) to generate discriminative coarse features, making it more adept at handling textureless scene. Mutual nearest neighbor strategies are em-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done during internship at Ant Group.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

7952

