The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SdalsNet: Self-Distilled Attention Localization and Shift Network for
Unsupervised Camouflaged Object Detection
Peiyao Shou1 , Yixiu Liu1 * , Wei Wang2 , Yaoqi Sun1 , Zhigao Zheng3 ,
Shangdong Zhu1 , Chenggang Yan1
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Wuhan University, China
peiyaoshou@gmail.com, {liuyixiu,syq,zhushd,cgyan}@hdu.edu.cn,
wangwei29@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhengzhigao@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Unsupervised camouflaged object detection (UCOD) poses
significant challenges, primarily attributed to the absence of
human labels. Existing UCOD methodologies, leveraging attention mechanisms, often struggle to achieve precise localization of camouflaged objects. To overcome this limitation,
we introduce a groundbreaking fully unsupervised algorithm
for attention-guided camouflaged object localization, shift,
and inference, termed the self-distilled attention localization
and shift network (SdalsNet). In this study, we formulate an
attention localization methodology aimed at accurately identifying the central coordinate of the camouflaged object. Furthermore, we propose four distinct loss functions tailored
to refine the precision of attentional positioning. These loss
functions effectively constrain the distances between three
types of class tokens, facilitating seamless attentional shifting
across the input sample. Additionally, we design a sophisticated prediction inference technique to reconstruct the binary output of an attention map, thereby providing a comprehensive understanding of the detected camouflaged objects.
Experimental results on four challenging COD benchmark
datasets corroborate the effectiveness of our proposed approach, demonstrating notable superiority over state-of-theart methods.

t

t+1
Figure 1: The t and t + 1 iterations of the attention localization and attention shifting process in SdalsNet.

order to apply the model to the real world, it is important to
investigate unsupervised COD models that do not use any
human annotations throughout the training process.
Most existing UCOD models are end-to-end approaches
[(Melas-Kyriazi et al. 2022), (Zhou et al. 2023), (Siméoni
et al. 2023), (Zhang and Wu 2023)] that attempt to obtain
pixel-accurate segmentation models of camouflage objects.
However, the existing pre-trained models are based on classification tasks such as ImageNet, and most of the targets in
the pre-training data set are clearly distinguished from the
background, which has a large gap with the COD datasets.
Therefore, it is difficult to obtain pixel-wise accurate segmentation results using these models.
Inspired by FOUND (Siméoni et al. 2023) and UCODDA (Zhang and Wu 2023), ViT models pre-trained (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) on ImageNet can produce good attention
responses for COD tasks. However, these models are endto-end and the network outputs pixel-wise segmentation results. Both FOUND and UCOD-DA freeze Vits model and
train a 1 × 1 convolutional network to output pixel-wise binary segmentation maps. Since the training of transformer
models requires a large amount of accurately labeled data,
it is difficult to be used for unsupervised end-to-end COD
tasks. In this paper, we propose a non-end-to-end UCOD
model for the first time, which directly derives the prediction
map from the attention map. The network takes the points
with high attention as the target and sets them 1, and the

Code — https://github.com/Alpha-Orionis/SdalsNet.

Introduction
In real-world scenarios, there exists a specific domain, camouflaged object detection (Fan et al. 2020), which aims
to segment camouflaged objects that blend into the background. Most existing COD methods are based on the supervised ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) pre-trained backbone
[(He et al. 2016), (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), (Liu et al. 2021),
(Tan and Le 2019)] and the encoder-decoder framework
[(Zhang et al. 2023), (Ji et al. 2023), (Zhu et al. 2022), (Hu
et al. 2023)] trained on the well-labeled COD dataset (Fan
et al. 2022). Due to the small amount of data in existing
COD datasets and the challenging COD task, these models
lack generalization ability when facing realistic scenarios. In
* Yixiu Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6914

