The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Radiology Report Generation via Multi-Objective Preference Optimization
Ting Xiao1 , Lei Shi1 , Peng Liu2 , Zhe Wang1 * , Chenjia Bai3∗
1

East China University of Science and Technology
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
xiaoting@ecust.edu.cn, y80230058@mail.ecust.edu.cn, egami@126.com, wangzhe@ecust.edu.cn, baicj@chinatelecom.cn

Abstract

To generate high-quality reports, a series of approaches
(Chen et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2024a) have been proposed.
They usually adopt the classic encoder-decoder structure
and generate better text descriptions by promoting the
model’s structure, such as introducing a cross-modal memory module (Chen et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2024), a multimodal alignment module (Yang et al. 2023), or new attention
mechanisms (Song et al. 2022). Another line of approaches
improves report generation by injecting additional knowledge, such as knowledge graphs (Yang et al. 2022; Kale et al.
2023; Huang, Zhang, and Zhang 2023) or disease tags (You
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Jin et al. 2024), or retrieved
reports from other corpora (Liu et al. 2024b).
The above RRG methods rely on supervised regression
based on different architectures or additional knowledge
injection. However, the generated reports may not align
optimally with radiologists’ preferences. Some approaches
(Qin and Song 2022; Delbrouck et al. 2022) integrate reinforcement learning (RL) into report generation to maximize rewards that assess report quality. These RL-based approaches generally use a single evaluation metric or a simple
weighted sum of multiple metrics to formulate the reward
function. This function typically represents a weighted aggregation of multiple objectives, tailored to a specific preference. Nonetheless, preferences are inherently heterogeneous
and multi-dimensional. For instance, some radiologists may
prioritize the fluency of the text, while others may focus on
clinical accuracy. Therefore, RRG models must cater to the
diverse preferences of different radiologists, a challenge that
is difficult to achieve with a single model and remains unexplored in previous works.
In this paper, we study this unexplored topic for the
first time and propose a new RRG method to align the
pre-trained RRG model with multiple human preferences
via Multi-objective Preference Optimization (MPO). The
key challenge is how to utilize a low-dimensional preference vector to control the model’s behavior. To address
this challenge, MPO formalizes the preferences as a multidimensional vector and uses it as a condition for the RRG
model, which can be formulated by multi-dimensional reward functions and optimized by multi-objective reinforcement learning. Specifically, our MPO introduces two new
modules: the preference vector fusion (PVF) network and
the multi-objective optimization (MOO) module. The PVF

Automatic Radiology Report Generation (RRG) is an important topic for alleviating the substantial workload of radiologists. Existing RRG approaches rely on supervised regression
based on different architectures or additional knowledge injection, while the generated report may not align optimally
with radiologists’ preferences. Especially, since the preferences of radiologists are inherently heterogeneous and multidimensional, e.g., some may prioritize report fluency, while
others emphasize clinical accuracy. To address this problem,
we propose a new RRG method via Multi-objective Preference Optimization (MPO) to align the pre-trained RRG
model with multiple human preferences, which can be formulated by multi-dimensional reward functions and optimized
by multi-objective reinforcement learning (RL). Specifically,
we use a preference vector to represent the weight of preferences and use it as a condition for the RRG model. Then,
a linearly weighed reward is obtained via a dot product between the preference vector and multi-dimensional reward.
Next, the RRG model is optimized to align with the preference vector by optimizing such a reward via RL. In the training stage, we randomly sample diverse preference vectors
from the preference space and align the model by optimizing
the weighted multi-objective rewards, which leads to an optimal policy on the entire preference space. When inference,
our model can generate reports aligned with specific preferences without further fine-tuning. Extensive experiments on
two public datasets show the proposed method can generate
reports that cater to different preferences in a single model
and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Radiology reports provide an important basis for physicians
to make diagnoses and are usually written by experienced radiologists based on the syndromes observed in medical images. However, manually writing reports is labor-intensive,
time-consuming, and error-prone due to the large amount of
daily medical reports and variations in experience among radiologists. Therefore, automatic radiology report generation
(RRG) relying on deep learning techniques as an alternative
has emerged as an attractive research topic in both artificial
intelligence and medicine.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8664

