The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ZoRI: Towards Discriminative Zero-Shot Remote Sensing Instance Segmentation
Shiqi Huang1 * , Shuting He2 * , Bihan Wen1†
1

Nanyang Technological University
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
shiqi006@e.ntu.edu.sg, heshuting555@gmail.com, bihan.wen@ntu.edu.sg
2

Seen Classes plane, vehicle, harbor, ship…

Abstract

Semantic Knowledge
…

Train

Instance segmentation algorithms in remote sensing are typically based on conventional methods, limiting their application to seen scenarios and closed-set predictions. In this work,
we propose a novel task called zero-shot remote sensing
instance segmentation, aimed at identifying aerial objects that
are absent from training data. Challenges arise when classifying aerial categories with high inter-class similarity and
intra-class variance. Besides, the domain gap between visionlanguage models’ pretraining datasets and remote sensing
datasets hinders the zero-shot capabilities of the pretrained
model when it is directly applied to remote sensing images.
To address these challenges, we propose a Zero-Shot Remote
Sensing Instance Segmentation framework, dubbed ZoRI.
Our approach features a discrimination-enhanced classifier
that uses refined textual embeddings to increase the awareness of class disparities. Instead of direct fine-tuning, we
propose a knowledge-maintained adaptation strategy that
decouples semantic-related information to preserve the pretrained vision-language alignment while adjusting features to
capture remote sensing domain-specific visual cues. Additionally, we introduce a prior-injected prediction with cache
bank of aerial visual prototypes to supplement the semantic
richness of text embeddings and seamlessly integrate aerial
representations, adapting to the remote sensing domain. We
establish new experimental protocols and benchmarks, and
extensive experiments convincingly demonstrate that ZoRI
achieves the state-of-art performance on the zero-shot remote
sensing instance segmentation task.

plane
vehicle
harbor

ship

swimming pool

Seen + Unseen Classes harbor, ship + swimming pool
segmented

Test

not segmented

Input Image

w/o semantic
Segment seen classes only

w/ semantic
Segment seen & unseen

Figure 1: Illustration of zero-shot remote sensing instance
segmentation, which transfers the learned semantic knowledge from seen classes, e.g., harbor and ship, to the unseen
class, e.g., swimming pool.
monitoring, and urban planning (Liu et al. 2020; de Albuquerque et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022; Yasir et al. 2023),
making it a pivotal research area in earth vision studies.
The standard pipeline for aerial instance segmentation
starts with annotating instance masks for remote sensing
datasets, followed by training a segmentation model using
conventional methods (Zamir et al. 2019; Su et al. 2019).
However, due to relatively small object sizes and the large
number of instances present in aerial images, labeling large
scale datasets becomes time-consuming and cost-intensive.
Consequently, applications are often constrained to limited
scenarios. Moreover, training with conventional methods
restricts the model to close-set predictions, making it unable
to identify novel classes absent from training data.

Code — https://github.com/HuangShiqi128/ZoRI

Introduction
Instance segmentation for remote sensing images aims to
identify aerial objects and locate them with pixel-level
masks for each instance (Su et al. 2019, 2020; Carvalho et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2021b; Xu et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2024b).
The task is of great importance for precise interpretation
and comprehension of remote sensing images, which are
essential for advanced earth observation. It has extensive
real-world applications, such as military operations, marine

We, for the first time, propose the zero-shot instance
segmentation scheme for remote sensing images, which
enables models to segment novel aerial object classes without instance mask annotations, as shown in Figure 1. The
proposed scheme utilizes Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
such as CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) which demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in zero-shot tasks due to their highly
aligned vision and language modalities (Ding et al. 2022;
Xu et al. 2022). However, this alignment does not always
extend consistently along channel dimensions (Zhu et al.
2023). Our investigation using aerial images reveals that not

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3724

