The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation with Sparse and Inhomogeneous Annotations
Zhiyi Pan1, 2 , Nan Zhang1 , Wei Gao1 * , Shan Liu3 , Ge Li1
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Media Lab, Tencent
{panzhiyi, zhangnan}@stu.pku.edu.cn, gaowei262@pku.edu.cn, shanl@tencent.com, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Utilizing uniformly distributed sparse annotations, weakly
supervised learning alleviates the heavy reliance on finegrained annotations in point cloud semantic segmentation
tasks. However, few works discuss the inhomogeneity of
sparse annotations, albeit it is common in real-world scenarios. Therefore, this work introduces the probability density
function into the gradient sampling approximation method to
qualitatively analyze the impact of annotation sparsity and
inhomogeneity under weakly supervised learning. Based on
our analysis, we propose an Adaptive Annotation Distribution
Network (AADNet) capable of robust learning on arbitrarily distributed sparse annotations. Specifically, we propose a
label-aware point cloud downsampling strategy to increase
the proportion of annotations involved in the training stage.
Furthermore, we design the multiplicative dynamic entropy
as the gradient calibration function to mitigate the gradient
bias caused by non-uniformly distributed sparse annotations
and explicitly reduce the epistemic uncertainty. Without any
prior restrictions and additional information, our proposed
method achieves comprehensive performance improvements
at multiple label rates and different annotation distributions.

Figure 1: Visual comparison about full annotations, uniform sparse annotations, and non-uniform sparse annotations. Based on the data presented in regarding the number
of labeled categories per scene, the distribution disparity between non-uniform sparse annotation and full annotation is
pronounced.
pling on a fully labeled dataset. We refer to such annotations as uniformly distributed sparse annotations. The simulated dataset maintains distribution consistency between
sparse and full annotations through uniformly random sampling (Xu and Lee 2020) or ”One-Thing-One-Click” (Liu,
Qi, and Fu 2021). However, it places strict constraints on
the annotation distribution.
Non-uniformly distributed sparse annotations are inevitable in real-world scenarios, which can be illustrated by
the following processes in weakly supervised learning:
• The projection relationship between the 3D point cloud
and the 2D annotation plane causes the non-uniformly
distributed points on the annotation plane, directly leading to inhomogeneous annotations. Moreover, to improve
annotation efficiency, annotators are more likely to annotate categories that are easier to label, which exacerbates
the inhomogeneity.
• Supervoxels are typically used to expand sparse annotation information, during which uniformly distributed
sparse annotated points are transformed into nonuniformly distributed sparse annotated supervoxels.
• Self-training in weakly supervised learning treats highconfidence predictions as pseudo-labels for subsequent
network learning. Since high-confidence points are usu-

Code — https://github.com/panzhiyi/AADNet

1

Introduction

Point cloud has become one of the most popular 3D representations due to its flexible ability to represent 3D objects
and the wide deployment of capture devices. Point cloud semantic segmentation plays a crucial role in various applications (Hu et al. 2023; Cui et al. 2021) by exploiting the abundant 3D geometric information from point clouds. However,
point cloud semantic segmentation suffers from heavy reliance on fine-grained annotated scenes (Xu and Lee 2020).
The increase in data dimensionality brings an order of magnitude increase in structural complexity and processing difficulty, further exacerbating the annotation burden. Therefore,
weakly supervised point cloud semantic segmentation is a
promising topic for deployment and applications.
Existing weakly supervised methods rely on simulating sparse annotations through uniformly distributed sam* Wei Gao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6354

