The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MambaLCT: Boosting Tracking via Long-term Context State Space Model
Xiaohai Li1,2 , Bineng Zhong1 * , Qihua Liang1 , Guorong Li3 , Zhiyi Mo2† , Shuxiang Song1
1

Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Ministry of Education,
Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
2
Guangxi Colleges and Universities Key Laboratory of Intelligent Software, Wuzhou University, Wuzhou 543002, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
bruc 0619@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn
liguorong@ucas.edu.cn, zhiyim@gxuwz.edu.cn, songshuxiang@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn
Abstract
Effectively constructing context information with long-term
dependencies from video sequences is crucial for object
tracking. However, the context length constructed by existing work is limited, only considering object information from
adjacent frames or video clips, leading to insufficient utilization of contextual information. To address this issue, we propose MambaLCT, which constructs and utilizes target variation cues from the first frame to the current frame for robust
tracking. First, a novel unidirectional Context Mamba module
is designed to scan frame features along the temporal dimension, gathering target change cues throughout the entire sequence. Specifically, target-related information in frame features is compressed into a hidden state space through selective scanning mechanism. The target information across the
entire video is continuously aggregated into target variation
cues. Next, we inject the target change cues into the attention mechanism, providing temporal information for modeling the relationship between the template and search frames.
The advantage of MambaLCT is its ability to continuously
extend the length of the context, capturing complete target
change cues, which enhances the stability and robustness of
the tracker. Extensive experiments show that long-term context information enhances the model’s ability to perceive targets in complex scenarios. MambaLCT achieves new SOTA
performance on six benchmarks while maintaining real-time
running speeds.

length of context

Video Clip

Short-Term Context

Propagate

short

Frame

Long-Term Context

Association

long

...
1th

2th

3th

5th

4th

（a） Frame-by-frame short-term context construction

...
1th

2th

3th

4th

5th

6th

7th

9th

10th

（b） Fixed-length short-term context construction

...
...
1th

2th

3th

4th

i-1 th

i th

（c）Video sequence long-term context construction

Figure 1: Comparison between current SOT context information construction paradigm and our method. (a) and (b)
construct short-term context information within the scope of
frames or video clips (Shi et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2024).
(c) Our propose MambaLCT analyzes the complete video
sequence to construct long-term context information.

Code — https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/MambaLCT

Introduction
Visual tracking involves locating the object in subsequent
frames based on the given initial template information. In
long and complex sequences, the target’s appearance and
motion state may change. However, traditional tracking algorithms (Chen et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2023)
rely solely on the initial frame to locate the target in subsequent frames. They lack an understanding about change
in objects through the sequence, leading to reduced stability
and robustness of the tracker.

Recently, an increasing number of works have focused on
the context information of a target in video sequences. Context information records the changes in the target’s position,
scale, appearance, and other trends. Effectively constructing
context information from video sequences plays a crucial
role in tracking algorithms. The length of the contextual information constructed in the current work is limited, which
directly affects the range within which the tracker can perceive target changes. The current methods for constructing
short-term context information can be summarized as follows: (1) The frame-by-frame short-term context construction method, as shown in Fig. 1(a). KeepTrack (Mayer et al.
2021) and EVPTrack(Shi et al. 2024) explores the associa-

* Corresponding author.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4986

