The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing LLMs via High-Knowledge Data Selection
Feiyu Duan1,5 * , Xuemiao Zhang2,5* , Sirui Wang3,5† , Haoran Que1 ,
Yuqi Liu5 , Wenge Rong4† , Xunliang Cai5
1

Sino-French Engineer School, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
5
Meituan, Beijing, China
{duanfeiyu, 2224124, w.rong}@buaa.edu.com, zhangxuemiao@pku.edu.cn, {liuyuqi, wangsirui, caixunliang}@meituan.com
Abstract

text, focusing on attributes such as textual fluency (Marion
et al. 2023; Muennighoff et al. 2024); the second approach
involves manually curating a subset from the available corpus,
which is considered high-quality based on human experience,
to serve as a standard reference, with Wikipedia articles often
being chosen for this purpose (Xie et al. 2024b; Engstrom,
Feldmann, and Madry 2024). Techniques derived from the
first approach include strategies to eliminate redundant data
(Lee et al. 2022) or employing existing models to compute
metrics like perplexity (PPL) (Marion et al. 2023) or selfinfluence scores (Thakkar et al. 2023) for the dataset. On the
other hand, the latter includes the development of models
to assign quality scores (Brown et al. 2020) to data or the
determination of significance weights (Xie et al. 2024b) to
guide the sampling process.

The performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) is intrinsically linked to the quality of its training data. Although
several studies have proposed methods for high-quality data
selection, they do not consider the importance of knowledge
richness in text corpora. In this paper, we propose a novel and
gradient-free High-Knowledge Scorer (HKS) to select highquality data from the dimension of knowledge, to alleviate the
problem of knowledge scarcity in the pre-trained corpus. We
propose a comprehensive multi-domain knowledge element
pool and introduce knowledge density and coverage as metrics
to assess the knowledge content of the text. Based on this, we
propose a comprehensive knowledge scorer to select data with
intensive knowledge, which can also be utilized for domainspecific high-knowledge data selection by restricting knowledge elements to the specific domain. We train models on a
high-knowledge bilingual dataset, and experimental results
demonstrate that our scorer improves the model’s performance
in knowledge-intensive and general comprehension tasks, and
is effective in enhancing both the generic and domain-specific
capabilities of the model.

1

Introduction

The impressive performance of large language models
(LLMs) has been demonstrated in various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks (Touvron et al. 2023; OpenAI 2023),
yet it is significantly influenced by the quality of the training
data (Li et al. 2023; Xie et al. 2024a). Typically, the training
data is sourced from extensive text collections such as internet crawls (Patel 2020). However, the quality of such data is
frequently inconsistent (Kreutzer et al. 2022). Therefore, the
identification and selection of high-quality data from these
vast resources is a critical consideration for achieving optimal
model training.
To effectively address this issue, a sub-problem that needs
to be solved first is how to define high-quality data. Current
methodologies typically adopt one of two approaches: the
first involves devising a metric to assess the quality of the

In practice, the mentioned selection criteria often favor
fluent texts that may lack knowledgeable information, as
shown in the Appendix Figure 9. This observation inspires
us to propose a novel approach: High Knowledge Scorer
(HKS), which assesses text quality by detecting the knowledge content of each text sample. We begin by quantifying
the knowledge encapsulated within the texts of training data.
Unlike the structured knowledge definitions in Allen-Zhu and
Li (2024), we simplify knowledge into knowledge elements
to facilitate quicker knowledge annotation. Following this,
we create a multi-domain knowledge element pool consists
of 5M knowledge elements from various sources. We employ a multiple pattern matching algorithm to identify all
the knowledge elements contained in each text sample and
introduce two metrics, knowledge density and knowledge coverage, to facilitate quantitative analysis. Leveraging these
metrics, we propose a comprehensive knowledge scorer to
select high-knowledge texts, which are positively correlated
with these two metrics. Benefiting from the categorization
of each knowledge element during the creation of the multidomain knowledge element pool, our approach can select
high-knowledge data aligned to the desired domain.
We train a 1.1B model from scratch on a 20B bilingual
dataset. We find that: (1) In comparison to baseline methods, our method excels both in knowledge-intensive tasks
and general understanding tasks, with an average improvement of 2.37 pp over random selection. We further validate

* These authors contributed equally to this work and should be

considered as co-first authors.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23832

