The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

How to Re-enable PDE Loss for Physical Systems Modeling Under Partial
Observation
Haodong Feng1,2 , Yue Wang3 * , Dixia Fan2 *
1

Zhejiang University
School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
Microsoft Research
{fenghaodong, fandixia}@westlake.edu.cn, yuwang5@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

or approximate the derivative for PDE loss. However, due
to sensor limitations (Iakovlev, Heinonen, and Lähdesmäki
2020; Lütjens et al. 2022; Yin et al. 2022; Boussif et al.
2022; Iakovlev, Heinonen, and Lähdesmäki 2023), the application of PDE loss for modeling physical systems is significantly challenged by the partially observable nature of measurement. Computing partial derivatives in PDE loss with
partial observation introduces significant biases, leading to
a dilemma: either we avoid using PDE loss in the model,
thereby weakening its generalization, or we use the biased
PDE loss, which can also hurt the model’s performance. As
a result, a scientific problem has been emerged:
Whether and how can we improve the model’s generalization capacity for physical systems modeling by using
PDE loss under partial observation?
In this work, we propose a novel framework named
RPLPO to re-enable PDE loss for physical systems modeling under partial observation, thereby enhancing the model’s
capacity to generalize and predict future partially observable states. By using RPLPO, the PDE loss can be used to
reconstruct the corresponding high-resolution state by only
using partial observation and re-enable the PDE loss on the
transition between adjacent learnable high-resolution states
corresponding to the partial observations simultaneously.
RPLPO mainly comprises an encoding module and a transition module. The fundamental procedure is to reconstruct
the learnable high-resolution state from partial observation
by using the encoding module and then predict the subsequent state with the transition module. However, it is hard to
train the encoding module without available high-resolution
data through data-driven supervised methods. Therefore, we
use several recent consecutive observations to reconstruct a
learnable high-resolution state, then train it via a PDE loss.
We design to train the encoding and transition modules
jointly with two periods. In the base-training period, the
encoding module is trained using a PDE loss without requiring high-resolution data. The transition module is trained
collaboratively using the data loss and PDE loss to overcome the generalization issues due to data scarcity. In the
two-stage fine-tuning period, the framework leverages unlabeled data in a semi-supervised learning manner to further
improve the model’s generalization. The transition module
is first fine-tuned with unlabeled data and PDE loss independently; then, their information is propagated to the encoding

In science and engineering, machine learning techniques are
increasingly successful in physical systems modeling (predicting future states of physical systems). Effectively integrating PDE loss as a constraint of system transition can improve the model’s prediction by overcoming generalization
issues due to data scarcity, especially when data acquisition is
costly. However, in many real-world scenarios, due to sensor
limitations, the data we can obtain is often only partial observation, making the calculation of PDE loss seem to be infeasible, as the PDE loss heavily relies on high-resolution states.
We carefully study this problem and propose a novel framework named Re-enable PDE Loss under Partial Observation
(RPLPO). The key idea is that although enabling PDE loss
to constrain system transition solely is infeasible, we can
re-enable PDE loss by reconstructing the learnable highresolution state and constraining system transition simultaneously. Specifically, RPLPO combines an encoding module for
reconstructing learnable high-resolution states with a transition module for predicting future states. The two modules are
jointly trained by data and PDE loss. We conduct experiments
in various physical systems to demonstrate that RPLPO has
significant improvement in generalization, even when observation is sparse, irregular, noisy, and PDE is inaccurate.

Code — https://github.com/HDFengChina/RPLPO
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09116

Introduction
Using machine learning methods to model physical systems
has become a promising direction in science and engineering, e.g., fluid dynamics, diffusion, and so on (An, Kim, and
James 2008; Zhang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023). Since
the data collection procedure is always both time and costconsuming, a limited amount of data will hurt the generalization of the physical system modeling. Recently, some
works have introduced PDE loss in training models and
achieved promising performance (Li et al. 2021b; Gao, Sun,
and Wang 2021a; Goswami et al. 2022a; Ren et al. 2023b;
Huang et al. 2023) to reduce the use of costly data and
improve generalization capacity of physical system models. Most works rely on high-resolution states to calculate
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

182

