The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Lifelong Scalable Generative System
via Online Maximum Mean Discrepancy
Fei Ye1 , Adrian G. Bors2
1

School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
feiye@uestc.edu.cn, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Diffusion-based models have been recently shown to be highquality data generators. However, their performance severely
degrades when training on non-stationary changing data distributions in an online manner, due to the catastrophic forgetting. In this paper, we propose enabling the diffusion model
with a novel Dynamic Expansion Memory Unit (DEMU)
methodology that adaptively creates new memory buffers, to
be added to a memory system, in order to preserve information deemed critical for training the model. Having a selective memory unit is essential for training diffusion networks,
which are expensive to train, especially when deployed in
resource-constrained environments. A Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) based expansion mechanism, that evaluates
probabilistic distances between each of the previously defined
memory buffers and the newly given data, and uses them as
expansion signals, is employed for ensuring the diversity of
information learning. We propose a new model expansion
mechanism to automatically add new diffusion models as experts in a mixture system, which enhances the multi-domain
image generation performance. Also a novel memory compaction approach is proposed to automatically remove statistically overlapping memory units, through a graph relationship evaluation, preventing the limitless expansion of DEMU.
Comprehensive results show that the proposed approach performs better than the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: The core idea of the proposed DEMU.
{P1 , · · · , P5 } represent five different underlying data distributions at different times {T1 , · · · , T602 }. The DEMU
dynamically creates new memory units, denoted as ’Unit
1,..., Unit k’, to capture new distributions over time. This is
achieved by using a memory expansion mechanism enabled
by a criterion to decide when to add new memory units.

Introduction

Such a learning scenario is referred to as the Task-Free Unsupervised Continual Learning (TFUCL) (Rao et al. 2019).
The goal of a TFUCL-based model is that of learning representations without having any task identity knowledge.
Recently, continual image generation has attracted a lot
of attentions in several studies (Achille et al. 2018; Ramapuram, Gregorova, and Kalousis 2017; Ye and Bors 2023).
However, these methods employ either Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) or Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013) as generative models, while the DDPM has not been explored in
continual unsupervised image generation. When compared
to the GAN or VAE models, DDPM has superior capabilities of generating high-fidelity images following a stable
training process (Rombach et al. 2022).
Learning a DDPM model under the TFUCL faces two
primary challenges : catastrophic forgetting, and the data
distribution shift when class and task information are not

In recent years, the Denoising Diffusion Generative Model
(DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020) emerged as an increasingly popular approach used, due to its data representation properties, for image synthesis (Croitoru et al. 2023;
Rombach et al. 2022). DDPM has been successfully employed in various applications, including image inpainting
(Song et al. 2021), image super-resolution generation (Ho
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022), shape generation (Cai et al. 2020),
graph generation (Niu et al. 2020), text-to-image generation (Gu et al. 2022a; Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022) and object
detection (Chen et al. 2023), producing remarkable results.
However, the DDPM model performance highly relies on
the availability of massive labelled data, which can not be
easily obtained in certain real-time applications where data
is not labelled and which is only available once at a time.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22110

