The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Video-grounded Dialogue Dataset and Metric for Event-driven Activities
Wiradee Imrattanatrai1 * , Masaki Asada1 * , Kimihiro Hasegawa2 ,
Zhi-Qi Cheng2 , Ken Fukuda1 , Teruko Mitamura2
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
2
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
wiradee.imrattanatrai@aist.go.jp, masaki.asada@aist.go.jp

Abstract

about how various events with different associated actions
are temporally and contextually related. Thus, exposure to
dialogues on event-driven activities would expand the system’s ability to handle complex interactions and improve its
capacity to generate accurate and relevant responses.
Thus, to advance research and development of videogrounded dialogue systems on event-driven activities, we introduce a new dataset named “Video-grounded Dialogue on
Event-driven Activities” (VDAct). This dataset includes dialogues based on daily scenarios where each involves multiple activities with long sequences of events. We opted to
utilize virtual simulation videos that allow a variety of activity combinations. Unlike existing datasets which primarily focus on descriptive questions, VDAct includes several
other categories to capture a broader range of interactions as
shown in Table 1. In addition to the descriptive questions
which aim to obtain factual information about the activities,
we incorporate three other main categories including temporal questions, which focus on temporal aspects, such as
timing, duration, and sequence of events or activities; explanatory questions which explore the reasons or causes behind events or activities; and quantitative questions, which
seeks numerical or quantitative data. Additionally, VDAct
incorporates questions related to the video and dialogue attributes, as well as open-ended and subjective questions.
In addition to videos and dialogues, we enrich our dataset
with Knowledge Graphs (KGs) as supplementary information. Given that our target videos represent compound activities involving multiple events, KGs could be useful for both
system development and evaluation as they offer detailed information that links visual cues to the structured information. This information includes event sequences, transitions
between events, action-object interactions, and changes in
agent and object states, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Furthermore, existing evaluation metrics, such as those
designed for text generation (Papineni et al. 2002; Banerjee and Lavie 2005; Lin 2004), and QA tasks (Mañas, Krojer, and Agrawal 2024; Chan et al. 2023; Wada et al. 2024),
are insufficient for assessing the quality of generated responses in the context of dialogues. These metrics usually
assess system-generated text by comparing it to a reference
text, but they often overlook cases where multiple responses
can be equally valid. For example, in response to Q7 in
Figure 1, both “He grabbed the plates from the kitchen ta-

This paper presents VDAct, a dataset for a Video-grounded
Dialogue on Event-driven Activities, alongside VDEval, a
session-based context evaluation metric specially designed
for the task. Unlike existing datasets, VDAct includes longer
and more complex video sequences that depict a variety of
event-driven activities that require advanced contextual understanding for accurate response generation. The dataset
comprises 3,000 dialogues with over 30,000 question-andanswer pairs, derived from 1,000 videos with diverse activity
scenarios. VDAct displays a notably challenging characteristic due to its broad spectrum of activity scenarios and wide
range of question types. Empirical studies on state-of-the-art
vision foundation models highlight their limitations in addressing certain question types on our dataset. Furthermore,
VDEval, which integrates dialogue session history and video
content summaries extracted from our supplementary Knowledge Graphs to evaluate individual responses, demonstrates a
significantly higher correlation with human assessments on
the VDAct dataset than existing evaluation metrics that rely
solely on the context of single dialogue turns.

Resources — https://github.com/aistairc/VDAct

Introduction
The video-grounded dialogue task involves generating responses to user utterances based on the video content. This
task poses significant challenges particularly when dealing
with videos presenting compound activities where multiple
related events occur in sequence. With these event-driven activities, advanced system capabilities in multimodal understanding, temporal reasoning, and contextual interpretation
are required to align visual cues with conversational context and handle dynamic changes in the video. Although several datasets exist for video-based reasoning through question answering, only a few benchmark datasets are available for the video-grounded dialogue task (Alamri et al.
2019; Pasunuru and Bansal 2018). These datasets mostly
feature short videos depicting simple activities and a limited
range of question types, while in real-world scenarios, dialogue discussions often center around multifaceted activities
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24203

