The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RGBT Tracking via All-layer Multimodal Interactions
with Progressive Fusion Mamba
Andong Lu1 , Wanyu Wang2 , Chenglong Li2 * , Jin Tang1 , Bin Luo1†
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University
adlu ah@foxmail.com, 2878065167@qq.com, lcl1314@foxmail.com, tangjin@ahu.edu.cn, luobin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

Tuned paramters
RGB

Existing RGBT tracking methods often design various interaction models to perform cross-modal fusion of each layer,
but can not execute the feature interactions among all layers, which plays a critical role in robust multimodal representation, due to large computational burden. To address this
issue, this paper presents a novel All-layer multimodal Interaction Network, named AINet, which performs efficient and
effective feature interactions of all modalities and layers in a
progressive fusion Mamba, for robust RGBT tracking. Even
though modality features in different layers are known to contain different cues, it is always challenging to build multimodal interactions in each layer due to struggling in balancing interaction capabilities and efficiency. Meanwhile, considering that the feature discrepancy between RGB and thermal modalities reflects their complementary information to
some extent, we design a Difference-based Fusion Mamba
(DFM) to achieve enhanced fusion of different modalities
with linear complexity. When interacting with features from
all layers, a huge number of token sequences (3840 tokens in
this work) are involved and the computational burden is thus
large. To handle this problem, we design an Order-dynamic
Fusion Mamba (OFM) to execute efficient and effective feature interactions of all layers by dynamically adjusting the
scan order of different layers in Mamba. Extensive experiments on four public RGBT tracking datasets show that
AINet achieves leading performance against existing stateof-the-art methods. We will release the code upon acceptance
of the paper.

Backbone

RGB

Backbone

RGB

Frozen paramters
Backbone

all tokens

(a)
TIR

(b)
Backbone

TIR

(c)
Backbone

TIR

Backbone

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison with existing RGBT tracking methods. (a) Interactions between specific layers, with joint finetuning of the entire backbone. (b) Interactions between all
corresponding layers, with the pre-trained backbone being
frozen. (c) Interactions between all corresponding layers,
and interactions among all layers, with joint fine-tuning with
the backbone. (d) Performance comparison on LasHeR, and
comparison of additional parameters and GFLOPs.

Introduction
RGBT tracking aims to leverage the complementary information of visible light (RGB) and thermal infrared (TIR)
images to predict the location and size of an object. By combining the penetration capability and nighttime sensitivity of
TIR images with the rich color and texture of RGB images
under favorable lighting conditions, RGBT tracking has attracted significant research attention. Numerous innovative
works (Zhu et al. 2021; Hui et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a;
Wang et al. 2024a; Cao et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2024) have been

proposed to improve the robustness and accuracy of RGBT
tracking.
As a multimodal vision task, most RGBT tracking studies focus on modality interaction modules, and these approaches can be broadly classified into two categories.
One category involves building complex interaction modules (Hui et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024)
with powerful representation to achieve inter-modal interactions. For example, (Hui et al. 2023) employ six crossattention blocks and extra fused template features for intermodal feature interactions. Similarly, (Fan et al. 2024)

* Corresponding author
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5793

