The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Local Conditional Controlling for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Yibo Zhao1,2 , Liang Peng2 , Yang Yang1,2 , Zekai Luo1,2 , Hengjia Li1,2 , Yao Chen2,3
Zheng Yang2 , Xiaofei He1,2 , Wei Zhao4 , Qinglin Lu5 , Wei Liu5 , Boxi Wu3 *
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Fabu Inc
3
The School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Xidian University
5
Tencent Inc
Abstract

the original. Such advancements have attracted considerable
attention from both the academic and industrial sectors, as it
facilitates a more controllable image synthesis process.
Unfortunately, the conventional approach of enforcing
global control at the entire-image level lacks the fine-grained
image manipulation capability that users often require. Considering the example in Figure 1, we might want to exclusively apply the cat canny condition, while allowing the generation in other regions fully leverages the capabilities of the
text-to-image model. This naturally leads to a question: Can
we confine our control to specific local region using image
conditions? In this paper, we specifically address this practical scenario and introduce the concept of local control as a
novel and pragmatic paradigm. It focuses on controlling the
generation of specific regions of an image according to userdefined local control conditions, while the rest of the image
is conditioned by the text prompt. As illustrated in Figure 1,
only the canny condition of the cat is employed for controlling, while the remainder of the image is generated solely
based on the provided text prompt. This novel manner empowers users with the ability to exert flexible control over
the image generation process.
An intuitive resolution for local control lies in directly
adding local image conditions. However, this naive method
leads to a catastrophic problem. The prompt concept that
is most related to the local control condition dominates
the generation process, while other prompt concepts are ignored. Consequently, the generated image cannot align with
the input prompt. We call this problem local control dominance. We show the cases in the Figure 2. Delving into the
underlying mechanism, we find that the attention map for the
dog shows high response within the local control regions,
which impedes the generation of multiple objects, as seen
here with the dog’s generation being hindered. It indicates
that local control conditions force the model to focus on the
controlled region and overlook other regions.
To address this issue, we introduce an object regeneration strategy. Specifically, we propose the Regional Discriminate loss to update the latents. It identifies the ignored objects in the cross attention map, enhancing them on the latent by adaptively operating attention scores under local and
non-local regions. This manner guides the model to generate
the most related objects to the image condition in the local
region, meanwhile producing other desired objects in non-

Diffusion models have exhibited impressive prowess in the
text-to-image task. Recent methods add image-level structure controls, e.g., edge and depth maps, to manipulate the
generation process together with text prompts to obtain desired images. This controlling process is globally operated on
the entire image, which limits the flexibility of control regions. In this paper, we explore a novel and practical task
setting: local control. It focuses on controlling specific local region according to user-defined image conditions, while
the remaining regions are only conditioned by the original
text prompt. However, it is non-trivial to achieve it. The naive
manner of directly adding local conditions may lead to the
local control dominance problem, which forces the model to
focus on the controlled region and neglect object generation
in other regions. To mitigate this problem, we propose Regional Discriminate Loss to update the noised latents, aiming at enhanced object generation in non-control regions. Furthermore, the proposed Focused Token Response suppresses
weaker attention scores which lack the strongest response to
enhance object distinction and reduce duplication. Lastly, we
adopt Feature Mask Constraint to reduce quality degradation
in images caused by information differences across the local control region. All proposed strategies are operated at the
inference stage. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method can synthesize high-quality images aligned with the
text prompt under local control conditions.

1

Introduction

Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models (Saharia et al.
2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Ramesh et al. 2021) have
showed remarkable capabilities in generating images conditioned on specified text prompts. However, text descriptions frequently fall short in sufficiently conveying detailed
control (Wang et al. 2022) over the generation images. Recent methods (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023; Mou et al.
2023) have introduced the incorporation of image-level spatial controls, such as edges, depth, and segmentation, into
the text-to-image generation process. These methods operate
across the entire image, ensuring that the final synthesized
image retains the complete global structural information of
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10492

