The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Multi-Source Uncertainty Aggregation for
Interactive Video Captioning
Ervine Zheng, Qi Yu
Rochester Institute of Technology
mxz5733@rit.edu, qi.yu@rit.edu

Video captioning automatically generates natural language
phrases to explain the contents in video frames. When deploying captioning models in specialized domains, active learning
can help reduce the high annotation cost. However, the generative nature of the captioning process is more complex than
standard supervised learning tasks and introduces several challenges for active learning in video captioning. Entropy-based
uncertainty estimation, which is widely used in active learning, may be inflated in captioning tasks and mislead active
sampling. Another challenge arises from the rich content of
videos, as each video could be described in multiple ways. A
single uncertainty score obtained from one possible caption
does not capture the diversity induced by the rich content. To
fill out this gap, we propose identifying multiple sources of uncertainty and performing hierarchical aggregation to integrate
uncertainty from distinct sources. This innovates a holistic
uncertainty metric to quantify the overall informativeness of
video content for active sampling. The overall uncertainty is
built upon conditional vacuity, an extension of the secondorder uncertainty introduced along with the evidential learning
framework to the captioning setting, leading to more robust
uncertainty estimation without inflation. Both theoretical analysis and experimental evaluation are conducted to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework for complex uncertainty estimation and interactive learning.

0.6

A

B

0.8
0.6

ROUGE

0.8

ROUGE

Abstract

0.4
0.2

0.4
0.2

0

0
0

0.05

0.1

Entropy

0.15

0.2

0

0.05

0.1

Vacuity

Figure 1: Uncertainty estimation and quality of predicted
caption measured by ROUGE score. Entropy and ROUGE
may not reveal strong correlation (A). In contrast, a high
vacuity typically corresponds to low-quality prediction (B).

Introduction
Video captioning is a challenging vision-language task because videos typically manifest complex spatiotemporal information, and videos can also be significantly variable in
terms of content, style, and quality (Li et al. 2019; Islam
et al. 2021). It typically leverages a large amount of paired
video and annotated text for model training. To collect annotated data, crowdsourcing from the web is a typical solution.
However, those approaches may not be applicable in specialized domains, such as public safety and surveillance videos,
due to insufficient data available. Another solution is hiring
human annotators to watch videos with complex content,
which could be time-consuming and expensive, especially if
it requires domain expertise for annotation.
Active learning provides a promising solution to reduce
the cost of data annotation and model training. It allows the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14512

model to learn from a small set of labeled data and then iteratively select the most informative samples to query for
annotation (Chan et al. 2020; Das et al. 2022). Conventional
active learning methods usually leverage uncertainty-based
acquisition functions, where the uncertainty of a video caption is typically quantified through joint likelihood estimation
or entropy evaluation from each word in a predicted caption
and aggregated through summation or averaging (Ren et al.
2021; Perlitz et al. 2023). However, conventional uncertainty
estimation (e.g., entropy or variance) could be unreliable
for video captioning due to two reasons. First, unlike standard learning tasks, such as classification and regression,
video captioning involves a generative process that produces
a sequence of tokens from a large vocabulary. How to objectively quantify the overall uncertainty of the generated
content poses a unique challenge. Second, videos contain
rich content, which could be described in multiple ways depending on the major concepts being covered by the caption.
A single uncertainty score obtained from one possible caption
does not capture the diversity induced by the rich content.
To demonstrate those limitations, we performed an analysis to highlight that entropy-based uncertainty estimation
may be inflated for video captioning tasks. Specifically, we
train a transformer-based captioning model on the MSR-VTT
dataset with a 50/50 train-test split and use the trained model
for prediction on the test set. For each predicted caption, we
plot the mean entropy and the ROUGE score (a widely-used
metric for evaluation of captioning) of the prediction against
most similar ground-truth caption. A high ROUGE score indicates that the prediction is similar to the ground truth. In

