The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting Vision State Space Model with Fractal Scanning
Haoke Xiao∗ , Lv Tang∗B , Peng-Tao Jiang, Hao Zhang, Jinwei Chen, Bo LiB
vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China
{xiaohaoke, lvtang, pt.jiang, haozhang, jinwei.chen, libra}@vivo.com

Abstract
Recently, foundational models have significantly advanced
in different tasks, accompanied by Transformer as the general backbone. However, Transformer’s quadratic complexity
poses challenges for handling longer sequences and higher resolution images, which may limit foundational models further
development. To alleviate this issue, various efficient State
Space Models (SSMs) like Mamba have emerged, initially
matching Transformer performance and gradually surpassing
it. To improve the performance of SSMs in computer vision
tasks, one crucial viewpoint is effective serialization of images. Existing vision Mambas, which rely on a linear scanning
mechanism, often struggle to capture complex spatial relationships in 2D images. This results in feature loss during
serialization and negatively impacts model performance. To
overcome this limitation, we propose the use of fractal scanning curves for image serialization to enhance the Mambas’
ability to accurately model complex spatial dependencies. Additionally, unlike existing vision Mambas, which are designed
with various curve scanning directions that increase the complexity, contradicting the original intent of Mamba to enhance
model performance. We novelty introduce the Fractal Fusion
Pathway (FFP) for our FractalMamba, which can enhance its
performance efficiently. Extensive experiments underscore the
superiority of our proposed FractalMamba.

Figure 1: Classification results of different models varies
across different scales on ImageNet-1K (Deng et al. 2009).
when facing longer language lengths or larger image resolutions.
Recently, Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023; Dao and Gu 2024),
based on the State Space Model (SSM), has achieved performance comparable to Transformers in NLP, while maintaining linear time complexity. Subsequently, researchers have
made further improvements to Mamba (Huang et al. 2024;
Yang et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024a; Liu et al. 2024), enabling
it to surpass the Vision Transformer (ViTs) in different CV
tasks, such as image classification. These developments have
inspired further exploration into SSMs to ascertain their potential as viable alternatives to ViTs.
For fully leveraging the modeling capabilities of SSMs
in CV tasks, one of the primary challenges is the effective
serialization of image patches (Liu et al. 2024; Huang et al.
2024; Zhu et al. 2024b,b). Effective serialization can accurately represent and retain the intricate spatial relationships
and structural properties inherent in images as far as possible,
which are essential for SSMs to capture the representation of
images (Huang et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2024b). Consequently,
numerous studies have designed various scanning mechanisms to optimize the serialization. For example, ViM (Zhu
et al. 2024a) employs tion a bi-directional scanning curve that
processes image patches horizontally (row by row) to capture spatial dependencies. Building upon this, VMamba (Liu
et al. 2024) adds serialization along vertical columns (column by column), enriching the analysis of spatial relationships. LocalMamba (Huang et al. 2024) introduces a window
mechanism that divides the image into windows, serializing

Introduction
Foundational models have rapidly evolved within the domains of natural language processing (NLP) and computer
vision (CV), giving rise to a plethora of works (Devlin et al.
2019; Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022a; Chowdhery et al.
2023; OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al. 2023; Oquab et al. 2023;
Kirillov et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2024), such
as LLaVA (Liu et al. 2023), InternVL (Chen et al. 2024b)
and SAM2 (Ravi et al. 2024). The common used backbone of
modern foundational models is Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017), a type of sequential model. Although the self-attention
mechanism in Transformer ensures effective modeling of
complex data across varied contexts, its quadratic complexity
poses significant efficiency challenges, thus presenting challenges to the further advancement of foundational models
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
B

8646

