The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CognitionCapturer: Decoding Visual Stimuli from Human EEG Signal with
Multimodal Information
Kaifan Zhang1 , Lihuo He1 * , Xin Jiang1 , Wen Lu1 , Di Wang2 , Xinbo Gao1, 3
1

2

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
zhangkf@stu.xidian.edu.cn, lhhe@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals have attracted significant attention from researchers due to their non-invasive nature and high temporal sensitivity in decoding visual stimuli. However, most recent studies have focused solely on the
relationship between EEG and image data pairs, neglecting
the valuable “beyond-image-modality” information embedded in EEG signals. This results in the loss of critical multimodal information in EEG. To address the limitation, this
paper proposes a unified framework that fully leverages multimodal data to represent EEG signals, named CognitionCapturer. Specifically, CognitionCapturer trains modality expert
encoders for each modality to extract cross-modal information from the EEG modality. Then, it introduces a diffusion
prior to map the EEG embedding space to the CLIP embedding space, followed by using a pretrained generative model,
the proposed framework can reconstruct visual stimuli with
high semantic and structural fidelity. Notably, the framework
does not require any fine-tuning of the generative models and
can be extended to incorporate more modalities. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that CognitionCapturer
outperforms state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively and
quantitatively.

Figure 1: We believe that for image-EEG pairs, relying
solely on the mutual information between images and EEG
signals can lead to underutilization of EEG information. To
address this issue, we utilize multimodal information to capture meaningful information in the EEG signals. The dashed
lines in the figure below illustrate some of our successful reconstruction results.

Code —
https://github.com/XiaoZhangYES/CognitionCapturer
However, brain signals exhibit diverse forms, among
which EEG and MEG data offer high temporal resolution
and portability, making them particularly suitable for realtime decoding compared to fMRI. This versatility has led to
a broader range of downstream applications. Recent works
(Benchetrit, Banville, and King 2024; Song et al. 2024; Li
et al. 2024) have attempted to align the brain-image modalities using EEG and MEG signals through contrastive learning. These approaches have achieved notable accuracy in decoding related visual stimuli.
However, the internal mechanisms of brain function are
diverse and complex. Human perception of visual stimuli
is influenced by both the characteristics of the visual stimuli and individual past experiences (Lupyan et al. 2020; Du
et al. 2023). Recent works (Benchetrit, Banville, and King
2024; Song et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024) have primarily relied on the image modality as a reference for alignment, enabling the decoding of meaningful visual stimuli. Nonetheless, the objective of contrastive learning may lead to mod-

Introduction
Since its inception, a fundamental challenge in brain decoding is optimally expressing the meaningful information
within brain signals. Reconstructing visual stimuli from
brain signals is one of the interesting tasks with exciting application prospects. Initially, pioneering work using fMRI
data (Kay et al. 2008; Miyawaki et al. 2008; Naselaris et al.
2009) validated the possibility of reconstructing visual stimuli from fMRI data and successfully decoded simple textures and shapes. More recently, with the rapid development
of deep learning methods, the use of deep learning models
to decode fMRI brain signals has produced significant advancements (Ren et al. 2021; Takagi and Nishimoto 2023;
Scotti et al. 2024).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14486

