The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CAD-GPT: Synthesising CAD Construction Sequence with Spatial
Reasoning-Enhanced Multimodal LLMs
Siyu Wang1,2 , Cailian Chen1,2,3 * , Xinyi Le1,2 , Qimin Xu1,2 , Lei Xu4,5 , Yanzhou Zhang1,2 , Jie Yang6
1

2

School of Electronics Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing, Ministry of Education of China, Shanghai, China
3
SJTU-Paris Elite Institute of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
Institute of Cyber Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, Shanghai, China
6
University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Saint Paul, MN, USA
{y wsy09, cailianchen, lexinyi, qiminxu, xulei1, sjtu zyz}@sjtu.edu.cn, jieyang@umn.edu
Abstract

CAD models requires domain expertise and spatial inference
capabilities, and it can also be time-consuming.
Recently, the most popular direction for CAD model generation focused on using generative models like variational
autoencoder(VAE) (Wu, Xiao, and Zheng 2021) and vector quantized variational autoencoder(VQ-VAE) (Xu et al.
2022, 2023). These methods map CAD models to vectors or codebooks in a high-dimensional latent space and
then reconstruct the original CAD models from these highdimensional representations. The main limitations of both
methods include: 1) The quality of CAD models synthesized by these methods depends not only on the methods’
capabilities but also on the quality of the provided guidance
vectors or codebooks, which can inevitably result in cumulative errors. 2) These methods require high dimensional data,
similar to the distribution of their vectors or codebooks as
inputs, which are difficult to obtain directly. Another line of
work directly infers CAD sequences from point clouds(Ma
et al. 2023; Khan et al. 2024) or sketches(Li et al. 2022). In
practical applications, sketches need to be drawn by professionals, and point clouds require specialized equipment for
collection, both of which involve high data acquisition costs.
Generative AI tools such as Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) have the potential to remove these barriers. These multimodal models exhibit impressive visual
language understanding and generation capabilities(Achiam
et al. 2023; Yin et al. 2023). Recently, there have been
initial attempts to use state-of-the-art MLLMs for the creation of CAD models(Makatura et al. 2023; Badagabettu,
Yarlagadda, and Farimani 2024). Experiments show that
these models, such as GPT-4, lack spatial reasoning capabilities(Makatura et al. 2023) and have a low success
rate(Badagabettu, Yarlagadda, and Farimani 2024) in generating the desired CAD models. These limitations can manifest as notable challenges in the design and manufacturing
domain. For instance, they may generate a car with four horizontally placed wheels or a table with legs that exceed the
tabletop and are randomly positioned. Hence, the main question we ask is: How to enhance the 3D spatial reasoning
capabilities of multimodal large language models for accurate CAD model synthesis?

Computer-aided design (CAD) significantly enhances the efficiency, accuracy, and innovation of design processes by enabling precise 2D and 3D modeling, extensive analysis, and
optimization. Existing methods for creating CAD models rely
on latent vectors or point clouds, which are difficult to obtain and costly to store. Recent advances in Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) have inspired researchers to use
natural language instructions and images for CAD model
construction. However, these models still struggle with inferring accurate 3D spatial location and orientation, leading to
inaccuracies in determining the spatial 3D starting points and
extrusion directions for constructing geometries. This work
introduces CAD-GPT, a CAD synthesis method with spatial reasoning-enhanced MLLM that takes either a single image or a textual description as input. To achieve precise spatial inference, our approach introduces a 3D Modeling Spatial Mechanism. This method maps 3D spatial positions and
3D sketch plane rotation angles into a 1D linguistic feature
space using a specialized spatial unfolding mechanism, while
discretizing 2D sketch coordinates into an appropriate planar space to enable precise determination of spatial starting
position, sketch orientation, and 2D sketch coordinate translations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CAD-GPT
consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in
CAD model synthesis, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Project Page — https://OpenIWIN.github.io/CAD-GPT/

Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) has become the standard
approach for designing, drafting, and modeling in a wide
range of industries(Robertson and Allen 1993; Chen and
Olechowski 2024). Almost every manufactured object that
exists today started its life in a parametric CAD tool. The
CAD command sequence is one type of CAD model representation. It is described as a sequence of operations such
as drawing 2d sketches and extruding sketches into 3D
solid shapes(Wu, Xiao, and Zheng 2021). Constructing these
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7880

