The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Efficient Connectivity-Preserving Instance Segmentation
with Supervoxel-Based Loss Function
Anna Grim, Jayaram Chandrashekar, Uygar Sümbül
Allen Institute
615 Westlake Avenue
Seattle, WA 98109 USA
anna.grim@alleninstitute.org
Abstract

based on an extension of simple voxels from digital topology. Our method aims to preserve the connectivity of segmented objects and has significantly faster training times
that scale linearly.
In digital topology, a simple point in a 3-d binary image is defined as a foreground voxel whose deletion does
not change the topology of the image (Kong and Rosenfeld
1989). Specifically, deleting a simple voxel does not result in
splits or merges, nor does it create or eliminate loops, holes,
or objects. This concept has been used to penalize errors involving non-simple voxels when segmenting neurons (Gornet et al. 2019). However, topological errors often involve
multiple connected voxels, which is not addressed by a single voxel-based approach.
To overcome this limitation, we extend the concept of
simple voxels to supervoxels (i.e., connected sets of voxels). We then propose a differentiable loss function based on
this supervoxel characterization, which enables neural networks to be trained to minimize split and merge errors. Finally, we evaluate our approach on 3-d light microscopy images of mouse brains as well as on several 2-d segmentation
datasets.

Reconstructing the intricate local morphology of neurons and
their long-range projecting axons can address many connectivity related questions in neuroscience. The main bottleneck
in connectomics pipelines is correcting topological errors, as
multiple entangled neuronal arbors is a challenging instance
segmentation problem. More broadly, segmentation of curvilinear, filamentous structures continues to pose significant
challenges. To address this problem, we extend the notion of
simple points from digital topology to connected sets of voxels (i.e. supervoxels) and propose a topology-aware neural
network segmentation method with minimal computational
overhead. We demonstrate its effectiveness on a new public
dataset of 3-d light microscopy images of mouse brains, along
with the benchmark datasets DRIVE, ISBI12, and CrackTree.

Introduction
High-throughput neuron reconstruction is a challenging 3d instance segmentation problem and a major bottleneck
of many data-driven neuroscience studies (Gouwens et al.
2020; Winnubst et al. 2019). Deep learning-based methods
are the leading framework for segmenting individual neurons, which is a critical step in reconstructing neural circuits (Turaga et al. 2010; Januszewski et al. 2018; Lee et al.
2019; Schmidt et al. 2024). While these methods and many
others have significantly improved segmentation quality, automated reconstruction of neurons from large 3-d images
still suffers from topological errors (i.e. splits and merges)
and requires substantial human proofreading. This can be
attributed to two basic observations: (i) neuronal branches
can be as thin as a single voxel and (ii) branches often touch
or even overlap due to the imaging resolution. Consequently,
a seemingly innocuous mistake at the single voxel level can
produce catastrophically incorrect segmentations.
A natural solution to these challenges is to account for the
topology of the underlying objects during training. Several
methods use persistent homology to capture the topology of
segmented objects in terms of their Betti numbers (Clough
et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2021; Stucki et al. 2023). While these
methods have achieved state-of-the-art results, they are computationally expensive with complexities that scale nonlinearly. In this paper, we present a more efficient approach

Related Works
Accurately segmenting fine-scale structures such as neurons,
vessels, and roads from satellite images is a complex and
well-studied problem. There are two general approaches:
(1) improve feature representations (e.g., (Wu et al. 2017;
Mosinska et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2023; Sheridan et al. 2023))
and (2) incorporate topology-inspired loss functions during
training. The latter approach focuses on identifying critical
locations where the neural network is prone to topological
errors, and then using gradient-based updates to guide improvements.
Bertrand and Malandain (1994) studied topological characterization of simple voxels. The remarkable success of this
work is that a complete topological description of a voxel
can be derived through basic operations on its immediate
neighborhood. Notably, this work does not invoke modern
topological concepts such as homology or Morse theory to
characterize voxels in low-dimensional digital topology. In
many ways, the present study is inspired by that work.
The method most closely related to ours is centerlineDice
(clDice), which is also a connectivity-aware loss func-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3167

