The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Fair Division via the Cake-Cutting Share
Yannan Bai1 , Kamesh Munagala1 , Yiheng Shen1 , Ian Zhang1
1

Duke University, Durham NC 27708-0129.
{yannan.bai,munagala,yiheng.shen,ian.zhang}@duke.edu

Abstract

of other participants, and needs to split the resources into
n bundles. After agent i has split the resources, the other
participants go first and choose one bundle each, with participant i getting the last pick. Suppose participant i wishes
to maximize its utility in the worst case over the utility functions of the other agents. Then its optimal strategy is indeed
to construct each bundle as having 1/n share of each resource. The max-min value of this game therefore defines a
fair share for participant i, and coincides with its utility in a
proportional allocation.
A desirable property of the proportional share is that it is
not only achievable by itself, but also achievable in combination with other fairness properties such as envy-freeness (see
the “Nash welfare” allocation (Nash 1950; Varian 1976)).
On the other hand, the value of the fair share can be very
small. As an example, there are n agents and m = n resources, where agent i has non-zero utility only for resource
i. The proportional allocation only assigns 1/n fraction of
resource i to agent i, while any “reasonable” allocation
should allocate all of resource i to agent i. Therefore, the
proportional share is a factor n smaller than what one would
imagine would be a reasonable fair share.

In this paper, we consider the classic fair division problem of
allocating m divisible items to n agents with linear valuations
over the items. We define novel notions of fair shares from the
perspective of individual agents via the cake-cutting process.
These shares generalize the notion of proportionality by taking into account the valuations of other agents via constraints
capturing envy. We study what fraction (approximation) of
these shares are achievable in the worst case, and present
tight and non-trivial approximation bounds as a function of
n and √
m. In particular, we show a tight approximation bound
of Θ( n) for various notions of such shares. We show this
bound via a novel application of dual fitting, which may be of
independent interest. We also present a bound of O(m2/3 ) for
a strict notion of share, with an almost matching lower bound.
We further develop weaker notions of shares whose approximation bounds interpolate smoothly between proportionality
and the shares described above. We finally present empirical
results showing that our definitions lead to more reasonable
shares than the standard fair share notion of proportionality.

Code and dataset —
https://github.com/izhang05/cake-cutting-share
Full version paper — https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10434

1

Cake-cutting Share
The above problem arises because a participant is computing the max-min shares without knowledge of other participants’ utility functions. In this paper, we seek to define such
max-min shares that take into account the utility functions
of other participants. We do so via a slight modification of
the game described above. As before, participant i splits the
resources into n bundles, and as before, the other agents go
first in choosing their bundles. However, agent i now knows
the utility functions of the other agents, and creates the bundles so that every other agent j likes agent i’s bundle at most
as much as any of the remaining n − 1 bundles. This ensures
that regardless of how the other agents go first and choose
bundles, agent i’s bundle is not chosen by them. As before,
participant i seeks the partition that maximizes the utility
they gets from its own bundle, and this utility represents its
cake-cutting share.
Note that in the above example where the agents have
value for disjoint resources, agent i can create n bundles,
where it puts the ith resource in a special bundle by itself,
and splits the remaining resources equally among the re-

Introduction

Fair division of divisible resources among participants is a
classic problem, dating back to Steinhaus (1948) from the
1940s. In this problem, there are m divisible resources, and
n agents with linear utility functions over these resources.
The goal is to allocate the resources to the agents in a fair
fashion. Several notions of fairness have been proposed in
the literature, the very first of which is proportionality: Consider the equitable split, where each resource is split equally
among all agents. Then in any fair division, each agent
should get at least as much utility as in an equitable split.
In a sense, proportionality is the “bare minimum” notion of
fairness, and typical fair allocations guarantee other properties in addition to proportionality.
A different view of proportionality is via “cake cutting” (Steinhaus 1948), made explicit by Budish (2011):
Imagine a participant i does not know the utility functions
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13564

