The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Cooperative Policy Agreement: Learning Diverse Policy for Offline MARL
Yihe Zhou1 , Yuxuan Zheng1 , Yue Hu1 , Kaixuan Chen3,4 ,
Tongya Zheng5,3 , Jie Song1 , Mingli Song3,4 , Shunyu Liu2 *
1
Zhejiang University
Nanyang Technological University
3
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
5
Big Graph Center, Hangzhou City University
{zhouyihe, zyxuan, huyue2002, chenkx, sjie, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
doujiang zheng@163.com, shunyu.liu@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

et al. 2024). Akin to the single-agent offline learning, the
application of offline MARL presents significant challenges
posed by the Out-of-Distribution (OOD) problem (Yang
et al. 2021; Qing et al. 2024), which stems from the distribution shift between the data inferred by the learned policy and
that gathered by the behavior policy. This challenge is further exacerbated in multi-agent settings due to the combinatorial increase in joint actions and states. To address this, existing methods propose to impose proper conservative constraints over value decomposition (Yang et al. 2021; Shao
et al. 2023) or cooperative policies (Matsunaga et al. 2023).
Despite the promising results achieved, another critical
challenge in offline MARL that has been largely overlooked
by existing works is the policy mismatch problem. In practice, offline data is often collected from multiple sources, resulting in diverse datasets that may contain various optimal
joint policies (Formanek et al. 2023; Qing et al. 2024). Consequently, policy mismatch can occur when individual actions from different optimal joint actions are combined into
suboptimal joint actions, as they may not be compatible with
each other. Taking the XOR problem in Fig. 1 as an example, the two agents can only receive a reward if they each
select different actions. Agent 1 and Agent 2 independently
select action A or B with same probabilities, as both actions
are components of optimal joint actions [A, B] and [B, A].
Consequently, the final joint policy is uniformly distributed
across the joint action space, resulting in a 50% probability of encountering the policy mismatch problem. Notably,
a comparison of the middle and lower row of Fig. 1 demonstrates that the policy mismatch problem persists even with
a complete dataset (i.e., no OOD problem). It is also notable
that the policy mismatch problem is more prevalent in offline
MARL than in online MARL. In online MARL, as depicted
in the upper row of Fig. 1, the replay buffer is continuously
updated with data closely correlated to the current training
policy, ensuring consistency. In contrast, offline MARL relies on a static dataset that does not adapt to the current
training policy, as depicted in the middle and lower row of
Fig. 1, potentially leading to various optimal joint actions
for the same state. This static nature can thereby exacerbate
the policy mismatch problem.
Moreover, the policy mismatch problem significantly
hampers the agent ability to learn diverse policies in of-

Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) aims
to learn optimal joint policies from pre-collected datasets
without further interaction with the environment. Despite the
encouraging results achieved so far, we identify the policy
mismatch problem that arises from employing diverse offline MARL datasets, a highly important ingredient for cooperative generalization yet largely overlooked by existing
literature. Specifically, in the case that offline datasets exhibit various optimal joint policies, policy mismatch often
occurs when individual actions from different optimal joint
actions are combined in a way that results in suboptimal
joint actions. In this paper, we introduce a novel Cooperative Policy Agreement (CPA) method, that not only mitigates the policy mismatch problem but also learns to generate
diverse joint policies. CPA firstly introduces an autoregressive decision-making mechanism among agents during offline training. This mechanism enables agents to access the
actions previously taken by other agents, thereby facilitating
effective joint policy matching. Moreover, diverse joint policies can be directly obtained through sequential action sampling from the autoregressive model. Then we further incorporate a policy agreement mechanism to convert these autoregressive joint policies into decentralized policies with a
non-autoregressive form, while still ensuring the diversity of
the generated policies. This mechanism guarantees that the
proposed CPA adheres to the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) constraint. Experiments conducted on various benchmarks demonstrate that CPA yields
superior performance to state-of-the-art competitors.

Introduction
Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) endeavors to leverage pre-collected datasets to develop multiagent strategies without additional online exploration (Meng
et al. 2021; Tseng et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2021; Tian et al.
2023; Matsunaga et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023), serving as
a feasible way for many real-world applications with high
safety requirements or limited efficient simulators, such as
autonomous driving (Li et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2021b) and
smart grid control (Xu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2024a; Xu
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23018

