The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Alleviate and Mining: Rethinking Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for
Mitochondria Segmentation from Pseudo-Label Perspective
Yujia Chen1,2 * , Rui Sun1 * , Wangkai Li1 , Huayu Mai1 , Naisong Luo1 ,
Yuwen Pan1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2†
1

Deep Space Exploration Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{yujia chen, issunrui, lwklwk, mai556, lns6, panyw}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

In this work, we focus on the unsupervised domain adaptation task for mitochondria segmentation (UDAMS), which
aims to adapt a model trained on source domain equipped
with segmentation annotations to target domain in the absence of accessible labels. Existing methods can be broadly
categorized as adversarial learning and consistency regularization. Adversarial learning (Huang et al. 2022; Sun
et al. 2023a) leverage adversarial learning to learn domaininvariant information. However, this approach often tends to
suffer from training instability and convergence challenges.
Recently, consistency regularization (Du et al. 2019; Huang
et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2023) dominate this feld credited to
its simplicity yet competitive performance. The core idea is
to align features or outputs of the same image under different perturbations, using a weakly augmented branch as a
pseudo-label for the strongly augmented counterpart.

Mitochondria segmentation from electron microscopy (EM)
images plays a crucial role in biological and medical research. However, models trained on source domains often
suffer from performance degradation when applied to target
domains due to domain shift. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods have been proposed to address this issue, but they often overlook the reliability of pseudo-labels
and the effectiveness of supervision signals. In this paper, we
propose R4MITO, a novel UDA framework for robust mitochondria segmentation. First, we introduce Reliable Prototype Pseudo-labels to mitigate the inconsistency of classlevel features between across domains by leveraging source
prototypes to model target prototypes. Second, we devise
Correlation-wise Consistency Regularization to exploit interpixel correlations, aligning agent-level correlations under various perturbations. Third, we propose Rank-aware Relationship Consistency Regularization to fully utilize the rich information encoded in inter-agent relationships by imposing
rank-aware constraints on agent-ranking probability distributions. Extensive experiments on multiple EM datasets demonstrate the superiority of our R4MITO over existing state-ofthe-art UDA methods for mitochondria segmentation.

After an in-depth analysis of the consistency regularization paradigm, we argue that pseudo-labels are crucial for
UDAMS, aligning with the intuitive understanding derived
from the task’s definition; pseudo-labels play a dual role
- minimizing the inter-domain discrepancy and maximizing the target domain’s perturbation consistency. Nonetheless, our analysis reveals that pseudo-labels become a performance bottleneck due to two key inadequately addressed
components in previous works: (1) Reliability of pseudolabels. Without target annotations, models trained solely on
the source domain with significant domain shift are prone
to suffer from limited coverage of the underlying target
class features (e.g., Figure 1 (a) shows source prototypes
are not suitable for direct application to the target domain,
due to incorrect decision boundary). Furthermore, Lack of
labeled target data can also lead to error accumulation,
severely hampering the model’s ability to generalize effectively. Therefore, it is highly desirable to mitigate the impact
of noisy pseudo-labels and ensure that the truly reliable ones
are highlighted for enhance efficacy and utility. (2) Effectiveness of supervision signals from pseudo-labels. In order
to fully explore the essential information within the images,
existing methods (Wu et al. 2021; Yin et al. 2023) construct
supervision signals through pixel-level consistency regularization strategy, which aligns intermediate features and outputs, thereby mitigating some domain discrepancies (Figure 1 (c), left). However, independently treating each pixel
and heavily relying on strong i.i.d. assumptions potentially

Introduction
Mitochondria are essential cellular organelles maintaining
cellular functions (Picard et al. 2011). Automatic mitochondria segmentation (Ascoli 2002; Donohue and Ascoli 2011)
is crucial in biological and medical research. Deep learningbased segmentation methods (Çiçek et al. 2016; Oztel et al.
2017; Sun et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Pan et al. 2023;
Luo et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2023b; Luo et al. 2024; Li et al.
2025) have advanced significantly, albeit requiring extensive
labeled data. Models trained on source domains tend to suffer severe performance degradation when used directly on
target domain due to distribution discrepancies from equipment, sample, and parameter variations. While manual target
dataset annotation resolves this, it remains impractical due to
resource constraints. Bridging this domain gap for improved
model generalization presents a significant challenge.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2339

