The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Integrating Co-Training with Edge Discrimination to Enhance
Graph Neural Networks Under Heterophily
Siqi Liu1 , Dongxiao He1 , Zhizhi Yu1 , Di Jin1 * , Zhiyong Feng1 , Weixiong Zhang2
1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Department of Computing, Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Kowloon, Hong Kong
{siqiliu, hedongxiao, yuzhizhi, jindi, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn, weixiong.zhang@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

the representations of its neighbors. Such message-passingbased GNNs are often constrained by the implicit homophily
assumption that connected nodes are likely to have similar features or the same labels (Zhu et al. 2020a). However,
many real-world heterophilic graphs violate the homophily
assumption, where linked nodes tend to have dissimilar features or different labels. For instance, amino acids of different types are more likely to aggregate to form protein
structures (Zhu et al. 2020a); most people prefer to connect
with others of the opposite sex in dating networks (Zhu et al.
2020b). Most existing GNN approaches perform poorly on
heterophilic graphs.
A series of heterophilic GNNs has been proposed. Some
of them use graph structure learning strategies to modify
the origin graph structure to enhance its homophily, allowing aggregating information in a homophilic way on heterophilic graphs. For example, the method in (Qiu et al.
2024) iteratively refines a latent homophilic structure by
considering interaction among multiple nodes; the approach
in (Zou et al. 2023) exploits a structural entropy strategy
to enhance the robustness of heterophilic graphs. Another
line of research focuses on designing personalized aggregation operations to collect more homophilic information. For
example, (He et al. 2022) introduce block modeling to automatically learn distinct aggregation rules for neighbors of
different classes based on their homophily degree; (Zhu et al.
2020a; Jin et al. 2021) aggregate potential homophilic neighbors in 2-hop, or kNN graphs rather than merely distinct
1-hop neighbors. Other works attempt to change the model
architectures and integrate information across layers by various skip-connections. For example, (He et al. 2024) adopt
the initial compensation based on the local distinguishability of class, making the model sensitive to node classes, and
(Zhu et al. 2020a) utilize an inter-layer combination scheme
to acquire a more comprehensive node representation.
However, the existing heterophilic graph methods have a
serious drawback. They usually adopt a uniform messagepassing mechanism, which gives equal weight (i.e., using
a uniform weight matrix) to all neighbors when aggregating their features during the message-passing process. In
a heterophilic graph, a node’s neighbors consist of nodes
of various classes with distinct structural patterns and feature distributions. Simply mixing all neighbors and using a
unified weight matrix for information aggregation will fail

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently achieved significant success in several graph-related tasks. However, traditional GNNs and their variants are constantly limited by
the implicit homophily, assuming neighboring nodes belong
to the same class. This results in weak performance on heterophilic graphs where most nodes are linked to neighbors
of different classes. Despite the numerous attempts to adequately deal with heterophily, most methods still use the uniform propagation aggregation mechanism. In this paper, we
argue that identifying neighbors with different class labels
and exploiting them individually is crucial for heterophilic
GNNs. We then propose a simple and efficient novel cotraining approach, EG-GCN, which uses group aggregation
to handle homophilic and heterophilic neighbors separately.
In EG-GCN, we first use an edge discriminator to classify
edges and split the neighborhood of every node into two
parts. We then apply group graph convolution to the divided
neighborhoods to obtain node representations. During training, we continuously optimize the edge discriminator to improve neighborhood partition and use the node classification
results to identify highly confident unlabeled nodes to expand
the edge training set. This co-training strategy enables both
components to enhance each other mutually. Extensive experiments demonstrate that EG-GCN significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Graphs or networks widely exist in the real world, such as
social graphs (Tang et al. 2009), biology graphs (Mason and
Verwoerd 2007), and molecular graphs (Ashkenasy et al.
2004). Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become the dominant methods for learning graph representations and have shown significant potential in handling graphrelated problems like node classification (Dai et al. 2024),
link prediction (Zhang and Chen 2018), and graph classification (Zhang et al. 2018).
Traditional GNNs and their variants, e.g., Graph Convolution Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017), typically rely
on the message-passing mechanism (Gilmer et al. 2017),
where the representation of a node is updated by aggregating
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18960

