The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

AdaDiff: Adaptive Step Selection for Fast Diffusion Models
Hui Zhang1,2,3 Zuxuan Wu1,2, * , Zhen Xing1,2 , Jie Shao3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
ByteDance Inc.

Abstract

Prompts

Less
Step=10

Simple

Diffusion models, as a type of generative model, have achieved
impressive results in generating images and videos conditioned
on textual conditions. However, the generation process of diffusion models involves denoising dozens of steps to produce
photorealistic images/videos, which is computationally expensive. Unlike previous methods that design “one-size-fits-all”
approaches for speed up, we argue denoising steps should
be sample-specific conditioned on the richness of input texts.
To this end, we introduce AdaDiff, a lightweight framework
designed to learn instance-specific step usage policies, which
are then used by the diffusion model for generation. AdaDiff
is optimized using a policy gradient method to maximize a
carefully designed reward function, balancing inference time
and generation quality. We conduct experiments on three image generation and two video generation benchmarks and
demonstrate that our approach achieves similar visual quality
compared to the baseline using a fixed 50 denoising steps
while reducing inference time by at least 33%, going as high
as 40%. Furthermore, our method can be used on top of other
acceleration methods to provide further speed benefits. Lastly,
qualitative analysis shows that AdaDiff allocates more steps to
more informative prompts and fewer steps to simpler prompts.

Computational resources
Step=20

Step=30 Step=40

More
Step=50

“A closeup of a
pizza with lettuce
and bacon.”
“A zebra playing
on a field with
logs of tree.”
“A surfer rides a
wave in front of a
long beachside
boardwalk.”
“Many cows
travel down the
side of a street.”

Complex

“A man playing a
tennis game in
front of a crowd.”

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of our approach. AdaDiff
assigns instance-specific denoising steps based on prompt
richness to minimize inference time with minimal quality
loss. Images with red borders are produced by AdaDiff.

Introduction

But do we really need a fixed number of denoising steps for
all different prompts? Intuitively, using more steps may lead
to higher quality and more detailed content. Nonetheless, in
real-world applications, the richness in textual prompts, i.e.,
the number of objects, and how they relate to each other, vary
significantly. For certain easy and coarse-grained prompts, involving only one or a few objects, using fewer steps is already
sufficient to generate satisfactory results, and increasing the
number of steps may lead to only marginal improvements and
does not necessarily produce better results. For complex textual prompts, containing many objects, detailed descriptions,
and intricate interactions between objects, a larger number of
steps becomes necessary to achieve the desired result. Therefore, the goal of this paper is to develop a dynamic framework
for diffusion models by adaptively determining the number of
denoising steps needed for generating photorealistic contents
conditioned on textual inputs. This is in contrast yet complimentary to existing methodologies, which can be categorized
into two main types: I) reducing the number of steps via the
faster schedulers (Lu et al. 2022) or step distillation (Sauer
et al. 2023); II) reducing the computation per step through

Diffusion models (Podell et al. 2024; OpenAI 2024), as a
class of generative models, have made significant strides.
These models have the capability to generate specified visual
content, including images and videos, based on specific input conditions such as text, semantic maps, representations,
and images. For example, models like SDXL (Podell et al.
2024) and Sora (OpenAI 2024) can produce perceptuallyconvincing or artistic images and videos conditioned on textual descriptions, a.k.a. prompts. These diffusion models often contain an iterative denoising process during generation,
and more iterations typically indicate better visual quality.
However, the improvements come at the cost of increased
computational resources, even with the use of state-of-theart sampling methods (Song, Meng, and Ermon 2021; Lu
et al. 2022). Therefore, to strike a balance between quality
and inference speed, the number of denoising steps is often
empirically set as a fixed value.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9914

