The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

QJL: 1-Bit Quantized JL Transform for KV Cache Quantization with Zero
Overhead
Amir Zandieh1 , Majid Daliri2 , Insu Han3
1

Google Research
New York University
3
KAIST
zandieh@google.com, daliri.majid@nyu.edu, insu.han@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Serving LLMs requires substantial memory due to the storage
requirements of Key-Value (KV) embeddings in the KV cache,
which grows with sequence length. An effective approach to
compress KV cache is quantization. However, traditional quantization methods face significant memory overhead due to the
need to store quantization constants (at least a zero point and a
scale) in full precision per data block. Depending on the block
size, this overhead can add 1 or 2 bits per quantized number.
We introduce QJL, a new quantization approach that consists
of a Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) transform followed by signbit quantization. In contrast to existing methods, QJL eliminates memory overheads by removing the need for storing
quantization constants. We propose an asymmetric estimator
for the inner product of two vectors and demonstrate that applying QJL to one vector and a standard JL transform without
quantization to the other provides an unbiased estimator with
minimal distortion. We have developed an efficient implementation of the QJL sketch and its corresponding inner product
estimator, incorporating a lightweight CUDA kernel for optimized computation. When applied across various LLMs and
NLP tasks to quantize the KV cache to only 3 bits, QJL demonstrates a more than fivefold reduction in KV cache memory
usage without compromising accuracy, all while achieving
faster runtime.

Code — https://github.com/amirzandieh/QJL
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.03482

Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant
attention and demonstrated remarkable success in recent
years. Their applications span various domains, including
chatbot systems (Achiam et al. 2023; Team 2024a) to textto-image (Ramesh et al. 2022; Team 2023a, 2022), text-tovideo synthesis (Team 2024c), coding assistant (Team 2023b)
and even multimodal domain across text, audio, image, and
video (OpenAI 2024). The Transformer architecture with
self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) is at the heart
of these LLMs as it enables capturing intrinsic pairwise correlations across tokens in the input sequence. The ability of
LLMs grows along with their model size (Kaplan et al. 2020),
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25805

which leads to computational challenges in terms of huge
memory consumption.
Deploying auto-regressive transformers during the generation phase is costly because commercial AI models must
simultaneously serve millions of end users while meeting
strict latency requirements. One significant challenge is the
substantial memory needed to store all previously generated
key-value (KV) embeddings in cache to avoid recomputations. This has become a major memory and speed bottleneck, especially for long context lengths. Additionally, the
GPU must load the entire KV cache from its main memory to shared memory for each token generated, resulting in
low arithmetic intensity and leaving most GPU threads idle.
Therefore, reducing the KV cache size while maintaining
accuracy is crucial.
There are several approaches to address this challenge.
One method involves reducing the number of heads in the
KV cache using multi-query attention (Shazeer 2019) and
multi-group attention (Ainslie et al. 2023), but these require
fine-tuning the pre-trained models or training from scratch.
Another line of work tries to reduce the KV cache size by
pruning or evicting unimportant tokens (Zhang et al. 2024b;
Liu et al. 2024a; Xiao et al. 2023; Zandieh et al. 2024). Additionally, some recent works tackle the issue from a system
perspective, such as offloading (Sheng et al. 2023) or using virtual memory and paging techniques in the attention
mechanism (Kwon et al. 2023).
A simple yet effective approach is to quantize the floatingpoint numbers (FPN) in the KV cache using fewer bits. Several quantization methods have been proposed specifically
for the KV cache (Yue et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024; Dong
et al. 2024; Kang et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024a). Most recently, KIVI (Liu et al. 2024b) and KVQuant (Hooper et al.
2024) proposed per-channel quantization for the key cache
to achieve better performance. However, all existing quantization methods for the KV cache face significant “memory
overhead” issues. Specifically, all these methods group the
data into blocks, either channel-wise or token-wise, and calculate and store quantization constants (at least a zero point
and a scale) for each group. Depending on the group size, this
overhead can add approximately 1 or 2 additional bits per
quantized number, which results in significant computational
overhead. In this work, our goal is to develop an efficient,
data-oblivious quantization method, based on sketching tech-

