The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DHAKR: Learning Deep Hierarchical Attention-Based Kernelized
Representations for Graph Classification
Feifei Qian1 , Lu Bai1 * , Lixin Cui2 , Ming Li3,4∗ , Ziyu Lyu5 , Hangyuan Du6 , Edwin Hancock7
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, and Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology and Educational Application,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China;
2
School of Information, Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing, China;
3
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China;
4
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronics, Jinhua, China;
5
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, China;
6
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China;
7
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, United Kingdom.
feifei qian@mail.bnu.edu.cn, bailu@bnu.edu.cn, cuilixin@cufe.edu.cn, mingli@zjnu.edu.cn, lvzy7@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
duhangyuan@sxu.edu.cn, edwin.hancock@york.ac.uk
Abstract
Graph-based representations are powerful tools for analyzing structured data. In this paper, we propose a novel model
to learn Deep Hierarchical Attention-Based Kernelized Representations (DHAKR) for graph classification. To this end,
we commence by learning an assignment matrix to hierarchically map the substructure invariants into a set of composite
invariants, resulting in hierarchical kernelized representations
for graphs. Moreover, we introduce the feature-channel attention mechanism to capture the interdependencies between
different substructure invariants that will be converged into
the composite invariants, addressing the shortcoming of discarding the importance of different substructures arising in
most existing R-convolution graph kernels. We show that the
proposed DHAKR model can adaptively compute the kernelbased similarity between graphs, identifying the common
structural patterns over all graphs. Experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed DHAKR model.

Figure 1: Illustrative example of the motivation.
and Gn , a R-convolution graph kernel KR is defined as
X
X
s(gm , gn ),
(1)
KR (Gm , Gn ) =
gm ⊆Gm gn ⊆Gn

where s(gm , gn ) denotes the similarity between the substructures gm and gn . Based on different types of substructures, most R-convolution kernels can be divided as
kernels based on walks, paths, and subgraphs or subtrees. For instance, (Gärtner, Flach, and Wrobel 2003) have
proposed a Random Walk Graph Kernel (RWGK) that
compares the sequences of visited nodes during random
walks. (Shervashidze et al. 2009) have proposed a Graphlet
Count Graph Kernel (GCGK) by counting the frequency
of small connected subgraphs (i.e., graphlets). (Borgwardt
and Kriegel 2005) have developed the Shortest Path Graph
Kernel (SPGK) (Borgwardt and Kriegel 2005) by counting the pairs of common shortest paths. (Shervashidze et al.
2011) have defined the Weisfeiler-Lehman Subtree Kernel
(WLSK) (Shervashidze et al. 2011) by iteratively counting
the number of pairwise isomorphic subtrees extracted from
the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) algorithm. Other alternative Rconvolution kernels also include the Optimal Assignment
Kernel (OAK) (Kriege, Giscard, and Wilson 2016), the Subgraph Alignment Kernel (SAK) (Kriege and Mutzel 2012),
the Wasserstein WLSK (Togninalli et al. 2019), etc.

Introduction
Graph-based representations have been widely employed in
various research domains, such as social networks (Maleki,
Padmanabhan, and Dutta 2022), molecular chemistry (An
et al. 2024; Kosmala et al. 2023; Kelvinius et al. 2023), recommendation systems (Wu et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2022), etc.
One way to effectively capture the structural characteristics
for graph data analysis is to employ graph kernels.
Graph kernels aim to measure the similarity between
graphs by mapping their structural information into a highdimensional Hilbert space. Under this scenario, most existing graph kernels are based on counting the pairs of isomorphic substructures decomposed from original graphs. This is
the so-called R-convolution framework proposed by (Haussler et al. 1999). Specifically, given two sample graphs Gm
* Corresponding authors: Lu Bai, Ming Li
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19995

