The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

A Wander Through the Multimodal Landscape:
Efficient Transfer Learning via Low-rank Sequence Multimodal Adapter
Zirun Guo, Xize Cheng, Yangyang Wu, Tao Jin*
Zhejiang University
zrguo.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
Efficient transfer learning methods such as adapter-based methods have shown great success in unimodal models and visionlanguage models. However, existing methods have two main
challenges in fine-tuning multimodal models. Firstly, they are
designed for vision-language tasks and fail to extend to situations where there are more than two modalities. Secondly, they
exhibit limited exploitation of interactions between modalities and lack efficiency. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose the loW-rank sequence multimodal adapter
(Wander). We first use the outer product to fuse the information from different modalities in an element-wise way effectively. For efficiency, we use CP decomposition to factorize
tensors into rank-one components and achieve substantial parameter reduction. Furthermore, we implement a token-level
low-rank decomposition to extract more fine-grained features
and sequence relationships between modalities. With these
designs, Wander enables token-level interactions between sequences of different modalities in a parameter-efficient way.
We conduct extensive experiments on datasets with different
numbers of modalities, where Wander outperforms state-ofthe-art efficient transfer learning methods consistently. The
results fully demonstrate the effectiveness, efficiency and universality of Wander.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multimodal models, such as BLIP-2 (Li et al.
2023a), LLaVA (Liu et al. 2024), have experienced rapid
development and have shown excellent performance in various downstream tasks. However, the increasing number of
parameters in these multimodal models, coupled with the diversification of downstream tasks, has resulted in a significant
consumption of computational resources and time for finetuning these models. Consequently, efficient transfer learning
strategies (Hu et al. 2021; Houlsby et al. 2019; Vu et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2023a; Dettmers et al. 2024) have become a focal
point of current research.
For multimodal models, there are two kinds of popular
efficient transfer learning strategies, including adapter-based
methods (Zhang et al. 2021; Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022;
Gao et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2024) and prompt learning methods (Zang et al. 2022; Xing et al. 2023; Khattak et al. 2023;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16996

Guo, Jin, and Zhao 2024; Yan et al. 2024). Adapter-based
methods add extra modules and only train these added parameters while freezing the pre-trained model. For example,
Lu et al. (2024) propose a unified and knowledge-sharing
design to interact between the vision and language modalities. Prompt learning methods insert trainable prompts to
the input or attention matrices. For instance, Khattak et al.
(2023) propose a coupling function to explicitly condition
vision prompts on their language counterparts, which acts as
a bridge between the two modalities.
Nevertheless, there are two main challenges currently
associated with efficient transfer learning for multimodal
models. Firstly, existing multimodal transfer learning techniques (Sung, Cho, and Bansal 2022; Lu et al. 2024) are
primarily limited to fine-tuning visual-language models, focusing only on the interaction between these two modalities
and failing to extend to multimodal models with additional
modalities. Secondly, the existing transfer learning strategies
for multimodal models exhibit limited exploitation of interactions between modalities and lack efficiency when applied
to models with multiple modalities. Specifically, existing
multimodal efficient transfer learning strategies focus on
how to fuse vector representations from different modalities
rather than sequences of vector representations from different
modalities, overlooking the interactions of time dimensions
of various modalities.
Based on the above observations, in this paper, we propose the loW-rank sequence multimodal adapter (Wander)
for efficient multimodal transfer learning. Wander enables
fine-grained token-level interactions between sequences of
different modalities in a parameter-efficient way. Specifically,
motivated by the outer product fusion and low-rank decomposition, we fuse the information from different modalities
in an element-wise and token-level way. Furthermore, we
utilize CP decomposition to factorize tensors into low-rank
components and achieve a substantial reduction in the number of parameters. We conduct extensive experiments on
four datasets with different numbers of modalities. The performances demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
Wander. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose the low-rank sequence multimodal adapter
that can be applied to situations with any number of modalities in a parameter-efficient way.
• Wander enables fine-grained token-level interactions be-

