The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Evolutionary Classifier Chain for Multi-Dimensional Classification
Yu-Yang Zhang1,3 , Bin-Bin Jia2 , Min-Ling Zhang1,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
zhangyyang@seu.edu.cn, jiabinbin@lut.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn* (corresponding author)
2

Abstract

scene image can be labeled under the “object” dimension as
“pedestrian”, “building” or “car”. In the “time” dimension,
it can be labeled as “daytime”, “evening” or “late night”.
Consequently, more precise image recognition techniques
need to correctly identify labels in all dimensions of an image. These examples demonstrate the application and importance of MDC problems in various fields.
In general, the output space of an MDC problem is Y =
C1 ×C2 ×...×Cq , which corresponds to the Cartesian product of q class spaces. In the j-th class space (1 ≤ j ≤ q),
the class space Cj containing Kj class labels can be expressed as Cj = {cj1 , cj2 , ..., cjKj }. In contrast to traditional multi-class classification problems (Ou and Murphey
2007; Jia et al. 2023), the difficulty of the MDC problem
lies in modeling the complex dependencies between many
classes to achieve accurate labeling of all labels in multiple class dimensions. Existing approaches for dealing with
multi-dimensional classification problems have been classified into three main categories: intuitive algorithms, explicit
dependency-modeling algorithms and implicit dependencymodeling algorithms (Jia and Zhang 2023). Binary Relevance (BR) and Class Powerset (CP) approaches both belong to the intuitive algorithms. Their classification results
are usually poor because the former handles class dependencies too simply and the latter overfits the class dependencies. Explicit dependency-modeling algorithms are represented by the Classifier Chain (CC) approaches (Read et al.
2021). This approach fits class dependencies by establishing
a chaining order of classifiers. However, most of the existing CC-based approaches (Read, Martino, and Luengo 2014;
Jia and Zhang 2022a) are based on greedy criteria or randomly generated chain ordering, which usually fails to accurately fit class dependencies. Implicit dependency-modeling
algorithms are represented by feature augmentation (Jia and
Zhang 2020) and label encoding (Liu et al. 2024; Jia and
Zhang 2021; Tang et al. 2024). Such approaches mainly try
to manipulate the feature space or transform the label space
to alleviate the challenges posed by heterogeneity between
classes. Nevertheless, these methods fail to give the user an
explicit representation of class dependencies and lead to additional computational costs.
Several recent studies have shown the potential validity of
manipulating the feature space implicitly to model dependencies between classes (Jia and Zhang 2022c). This is be-

In multi-dimensional classification (MDC), the classifier
chain approach is based on a chain structure to model dependencies between class spaces. However, current research
on constructing a chain order is usually based on a greedy
criterion or random generation, which is highly likely to lead
to an incorrect chain order and fit incorrect class dependencies. Moreover, existing classifier chain-based approaches do
not consider the misleading effects of irrelevant input features
on the classifiers. To fill the above gap, a classifier chainbased approach incorporating evolutionary chain order optimization and feature selection (ECCO) is proposed. Specifically, this approach designs a meta-heuristic algorithm to optimize the chain order of multiple classifiers. Simultaneously,
the approach selects dimension-specific feature combinations
that are more conducive to class prediction of each dimension. These strategies enhance the class prediction capability
of the constructed MDC model. Comparative experiments on
14 real datasets validate that ECCO outperforms 7 state-ofthe-art MDC approaches.

Introduction
Multi-dimensional Classification (MDC) refers to situations
in data analysis and machine learning where a single sample
may simultaneously be associated with multiple class variables (Van Der Gaag, De Waal et al. 2006; Zaragoza et al.
2011). Each class variable corresponds to one class space.
This problem is characterized by the fact that these class
spaces characterize the different semantics of the sample
in multiple dimensions (Gil-Begue, Bielza, and Larrañaga
2021). MDC problems are very common in many practical applications, such as text classification and image annotation. In news article classification (Theeramunkong and
Lertnattee 2002), an article about a technology company expanding its business in the global market can be labeled
under the “topic” dimension as “technology”, “politics” or
“business”. In the “sentiment” dimension, it can be labeled
as “negative”, “neutral” or “positive”. Therefore, it needs
to be assigned multiple labels with different dimensions simultaneously to reflect its diverse content when classifying
the article. In image recognition (Wang et al. 2024), a street
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22641

