The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ASER: Activation Smoothing and Error Reconstruction for Large Language
Model Quantization
Weibo Zhao* , Yubin Shi* † , Xinyu Lyu, Wanchen Sui, Shen Li, Yong Li
Alibaba Cloud Computing
{weibo.zwb, shiyubin.syb}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

current methods try to smooth (Xiao et al. 2023), rotate (Liu
et al. 2024) or transform representations in models, showing
promise of achieving quantization-friendly data range and
remarkable compression rate. However, when it comes to
low-bit quantization, even with the application of the aforementioned techniques, the error introduced by the quantized
model becomes evident, resulting in notable degradation.
For typical quantization, the optimization objective can be
formulated as minimizing ∥WX − Wq X∥F , where W and
Wq = Q(W) are original model weight and its quantized
one respectively. We empirically find this inevitable quantization error has low-rank property, whose singular value
distribution featuring a small number of high values and a
long-tail bulk of low ones. This varies both intra and inter
Transformer blocks, which prompts us to consider using a
module similar to LoRA (Hu et al. 2021) to reconstruct this
error. Furthermore, we find the channels produce the major
error are consistent with the existence of the outliers.
We propose ASER (Activation Smoothing and Error Reconstruction), a low-rank compensation algorithm designed
to enhance the efficacy of quantized models. Our method assesses the low-rank properties by whitening the relationship
between quantization loss and its singular values based on
Cholesky factorization. Then, ASER identifies these errorinducing outliers for smoothing. Finally, LoRA-style matrices are used to reconstruct the quantization error, with little
computation overhead. The overall framework is shown in
Figure 1. This lightweight yet powerful mechanism ensures
robust performance of quantized models, which is orthogonal to any particular weight quantization method. Our experiments demonstrate ASER remarkably recovers the quantization error, where W4A8 per-channel quantized model performs nearly equal capability compared to the half-precision
reference. This work makes the following contributions:

Quantization stands as a pivotal technique for deploying large
language models (LLMs), yet it poses significant challenges
particularly in achieving effective low-bit quantization. The
limited numerical mapping makes the quantized model produce a non-trivial error, bringing out intolerable performance
degradation. This paper is anchored in the basic idea of model
compression objectives, and delves into the layer-wise error distribution of LLMs during post-training quantization.
Subsequently, we introduce ASER, an algorithm consisting
of (1) Error Reconstruction: low-rank compensation for
quantization error with LoRA-style matrices constructed by
whitening SVD; (2) Activation Smoothing: outlier extraction to gain smooth activation and better error compensation.
ASER is capable of quantizing typical LLMs to low-bit ones,
particularly preserving accuracy even in W4A8 per-channel
setup. Experimental results show that ASER is competitive
among the state-of-the-art quantization algorithms, showing
potential to activation quantization, with minor overhead.

Introduction
The proliferation of large language models (LLMs) places
increasing demands on computation and storage (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2018), and stretches the boundaries
of contemporary hardware prowess. Regarding typical generative models such as Llama3.1-310B (Llama Team 2024)
or Qwen2-72B (Yang et al. 2024), they require hundreds of
gigabytes of VRAM, and often rely on multi-GPU cluster
data centers for deployment. Researchers have been trying to
compress these large models while maintaining their performance in a more compact form. Quantization (Frantar et al.
2022; Xiao et al. 2023) of large language models emerges as
a pivotal strategy in optimizing the deployment and computational efficiency of these heavy neural architectures.
Quantization involves converting the model’s weights and
activations from floating-point numbers to lower-precision
integers, whose primary goal is alleviating the computational and memory requirements without significantly compromising the model’s performance, enabling edge deployment. Take post training quantization (PTQ) as an example,

• We formulate the optimization objective of minimizing
the discrepancy in model outputs, and analyze the characteristics of quantization errors in LLMs quantization.
• We propose a novel algorithm ASER, which includes error reconstruction using whitening SVD, and activation
smoothing with outlier analysis.

* These authors contributed equally.

• Experimental results show ASER can significantly recover the performance of quantized model in W4A8 perchannel quantization, with little computational overhead.

†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22822

