The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VidChain: Chain-of-Tasks with Metric-based
Direct Preference Optimization for Dense Video Captioning
Ji Soo Lee* , Jongha Kim* , Jeehye Na, Jinyoung Park, Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{simplewhite9, jonghakim, sonicdog00, lpmn678, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

We observe that VideoLLMs fall short of fine-grained
temporal video understanding especially in Dense Video
Captioning (DVC) due to two key reasons. First, the conventional practice in DVC of VideoLLMs employs one-step
reasoning, which is known to be inferior to multi-step reasoning for complex tasks. In particular, existing VideoLLMs
address DVC by predicting descriptions and timestamps of
all events via a single-step generation. Second, the gap between training objectives (e.g., next-token prediction) and
evaluation metrics for DVC (e.g., SODA) often leads to suboptimal performance. The next-token prediction does not
fully reflect the complex evaluation protocol which involves
diverse metrics such as SODA, METEOR, and IoU.
To tackle the aforementioned issues, we introduce a
novel framework, VidChain that enhances VideoLLMs’
fine-grained temporal video understanding, comprised of
Chain-of-Tasks (CoTasks), and Metric-based Direct Preference Optimization (M-DPO). First, we present CoTasks that
decompose the objective of the challenging task into a sequence of sub-task objectives. This simple decomposition
enables the model to elicit its strong reasoning capability on
DVC. It eases the challenge of the complex task by solving
only one sub-task at each step and enhances its capability of
fine-grained temporal video understanding. Second, to further align VideoLLM with the evaluation metrics of DVC,
we present M-DPO which learns the metric preference, a
preference based on the evaluation metric such as SODA,
of each sub-task that composes DVC. Following the insight
from DPO (Rafailov et al. 2023), which aligns LLM with human preferences, we adopt a similar approach yet we align
VideoLLMs specifically with the metric preferences.
Interestingly, we observe that this simple adaptation of
evaluation metrics provides two advantages: (1) it reduces
the reliance on human annotators being cost-efficient. (2)
metric evaluations expand beyond the standard binary decision dataset where the labels are continuous e.g., 10.0,
8.5, rather than discrete e.g., win or lose. Moreover, we
take account of the sequential sub-task prediction in CoTasks, where we supervise metric preferences on the final
response of the model as well as on the intermediate subtasks that allow for more fine-grained supervision. Overall,
our M-DPO is a novel method that reflects continuous characteristics of the metric-based evaluations into learning, and
also provides intermediate task-specific supervision, further

Despite the advancements of Video Large Language Models
(VideoLLMs) in various tasks, they struggle with fine-grained
temporal understanding, such as Dense Video Captioning
(DVC). DVC is a complicated task of describing all events
within a video while also temporally localizing them, which
integrates multiple fine-grained tasks, including video segmentation, video captioning, and temporal video grounding.
Previous VideoLLMs attempt to solve DVC in a single step,
failing to utilize their reasoning capability. Moreover, previous training objectives for VideoLLMs do not fully reflect
the evaluation metrics, therefore not providing supervision
directly aligned to target tasks. To address such a problem,
we propose a novel framework named VidChain comprised
of Chain-of-Tasks (CoTasks) and Metric-based Direct Preference Optimization (M-DPO). CoTasks decompose a complex task into a sequence of sub-tasks, allowing VideoLLMs
to leverage their reasoning capabilities more effectively. MDPO aligns a VideoLLM with evaluation metrics, providing fine-grained supervision to each task that is well-aligned
with metrics. Applied to two different VideoLLMs, VidChain
consistently improves their fine-grained video understanding,
thereby outperforming previous VideoLLMs on two different
DVC benchmarks and also on the temporal video grounding
task.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of Large Language Models
(LLMs), numerous studies (Liu et al. 2023; Dai et al. 2023;
Liu et al. 2024) have incorporated LLMs into video understanding tasks, leading to the emergence of Video Large
Language Models (VideoLLMs). These VideoLLMs (Li
et al. 2023; Zhang, Li, and Bing 2023; Maaz et al. 2024)
have demonstrated strong performance in various tasks such
as video question answering and video captioning, showcasing their ability to understand and utilize visual information.
Despite their success, recent studies (Ren et al. 2024; Huang
et al. 2024; Qian et al. 2024) have revealed that VideoLLMs
exhibit unsatisfactory performance when it comes to finegrained temporal video understanding, which often require
multiple video-related sub-tasks given an untrimmed video.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4499

