The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Expanding the Scope of Negatives: Boosting Image-Text Matching with Negatives
Distribution Guided Learning
Zhao Zhou1,2 , Weizhong Zhang1,3∗ , Xiangcheng Du1 , Yingbin Zheng4 , Cheng Jin1,2 *
1

Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, China
4
Videt Lab, Shanghai, China
{zzhou21, xcdu22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, zyb@videt.cn, {weizhongzhang, jc}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract

employ triplet loss (Frome et al. 2013) as their primary optimization objective. In image-to-text matching, a triplet includes an anchor query image, a positive text, and a negative
text, forming both positive and negative pairs. Triplet loss
aims to minimize the distance between anchor and positive
samples while maximizing the distance between anchor and
negative samples in a common embedding space. Therefore,
selecting negative samples is crucial for the effectiveness of
triplet loss, attracting significant research attention.
Inspired by the large margin learning theory in machine
learning (Cortes and Vapnik 1995), the hard negative mining strategy was introduced in VSE++ (Faghri et al. 2018).
This strategy compels the model to focus on negative samples that are close to positive samples, refining the decision
boundary to achieve a larger margin over these instances.
It is important to note that image-text matching falls under
the category of contrastive learning. In contrast to traditional
large margin learning, this hard negative mining strategy
offers a distinct advantage: it significantly enhances training efficiency by discarding numerous redundant and easily
distinguishable positive-negative sample pairs. Some works
(Xuan et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2018) point out that inaccurate
hardest negative selection may cause distance metrics to fail
in capturing semantics, leading to poor local minima. To address this issue, recent methods (Chen, Deng, and Luo 2020;
Zhang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a) are proposed to refine the
selection of the hardest negative samples or to generate the
truly hardest negatives.
Despite the promising results reported in the existing
studies (Zhang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a), we argue that
solely considering hardest negatives can lead to a serious
limitation. Firstly, compared to the hardest negative in each
minibatch, there is a much larger number of other negative samples that offer a range of semantic differences not
present in the hardest negatives. These differences are crucial for improving the ability of model to perform finegrained matching of images and text. Secondly, selecting the
hardest negative is unstable, as it requires the model to identify the most similar negative sample among all options. This
process is particularly prone to errors in the early stages of
training, which can adversely impact model optimization.
We demonstrate the importance of other negative samples
for model training from three perspectives: case analysis,

Image-text matching is a crucial task that bridges visual
and linguistic modalities. Recent research typically formulates it into the problem of maximizing the margin with the
truly hardest negatives to enhance the learning efficiency and
avoid the poor local optima. We argue that such formulation
can lead to a serious limitation, i.e., under this formulation,
conventional trainers would confine their horizon within the
hardest negative examples, while other negative examples offer a range of semantic differences not present in the hardest
negatives. In this paper, we propose an efficient negative distribution guided training framework for image-text matching
to unlock the substantial promotion space left by the above
limitation. Rather than simply incorporating additional negative examples into the training objective, which could diminish both the leading role of the hardest negatives in training and the effect of a large margin learning in producing
a robust matching model, our central idea is to supply the
objective with distributional information on the entire set of
negative examples. To be precise, we first construct the sample similarity matrix based on several pretrained models to
extract the distributional information of the entire negative
sample dataset. Then we encode it into a margin regularization module to smooth the similarities differences of all negatives. This enhancement facilitates the capture of fine-grained
semantic differences and guides the main learning process by
maximizing the margin with hard negative examples. Furthermore, we propose a hardest negative rectification module to
address the instability in hardest negative selection based on
predicted similarity and to correct erroneous hardest negatives. We evaluate our method in combination with several
state-of-the-art image-text matching methods, and our quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate its significant
generalizability and effectiveness.

Introduction
Image-text matching is a key task in multi-modal learning,
aiming to determine the relationship between visual content and textual descriptions. This task is fundamental to
numerous applications, including multimedia retrieval (Li
et al. 2022c) and visual question answering (Anderson et al.
2018). Current image-text matching methods commonly
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10887

