The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Graph Mixture of Experts and Memory-augmented Routers for Multivariate
Time Series Anomaly Detection
Xiaoyu Huang1,2 , Weidong Chen* 1 , Bo Hu1 , Zhendong Mao1
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Institute of Plasma Physics, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, China
hhxy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chenweidong, hubo, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

quickly (Ren et al. 2019). However, anomalies are typically
rare in both real-world application scenarios and existing
public datasets, making data labeling both challenging and
costly. Thus, we focus on unsupervised multivariate time series anomaly detection in this paper.
An effective unsupervised strategy is modeling the dataset
into a distribution. As machine learning advances(Guo et al.
2024; Gao, Chen, and Xu 2023; Gao, Zhang, and Xu 2020;
Hu et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024b,c,a; Ma et al. 2024, 2021,
2022), many existing methods (Rasul et al. 2021b,a) have
been explored alongside this strategy to achieve density estimation of the distribution. However, a key challenge with
this approach is that many existing methods ignore the interdependencies between time series, which are critical for accurately modeling the data distribution and performing efficient density estimates for anomaly detection. Graph neural
network (GNN) based methods have emerged as a promising solution for enhancing anomaly detection in time-series
data by modeling the dependencies between entities. Deng
and Hooi (2021) propose to combine structure learning with
GNNs to detect anomalies in MTS. MTAD-GAT (Zhao et al.
2020) utilizes graph attention networks to model spatial and
temporal dependencies. GReLeN (Zhang, Zhang, and Tsung
2022) learns a probabilistic relation graph for multivariate
time series and utilizes hidden variables to capture spatial
dependencies. Cai et al. (2021) present a method based on
graph neural networks for anomaly detection in dynamic
graphs.
Although previous GNN-based methods have achieved
promising results, they simply leverage the output from the
last layer of GNNs to model the relations between entities.
However, as stated in previous analysis works (Chen, Wang,
and Li 2021; Chen and Wang 2022; Xu et al. 2018; He et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2024a; Tian, Chen, and Song 2021; Yang
et al. 2024b,a) of GNNs, a common limitation of existing
method in MTS anomaly detection is that GNNs are essentially “homogeneous” across the whole graph, i.e., forcing
all nodes to share the same aggregation mechanism, regardless of the differences in their node features or neighborhoods. That might be suboptimal in graph-based relationship
modeling, e.g., when some nodes may require information
aggregated over longer ranges while others prefer shorterrange local information. As illustrated in the upper example in Fig. 1, the average number of neighborhood nodes

Multivariate time series (MTS) anomaly detection is a critical
task that involves identifying abnormal patterns or events in
data that consist of multiple interrelated time series. In order to better model the complex interdependence between
entities and the various inherent characteristics of each entity, the graph neural network (GNN) based methods are
widely adopted by existing methods. In each layer of GNN,
node features aggregate information from their neighboring
nodes to update their information. In doing so, from shallow layer to deep layer in GNN, original individual node features continue to be weakened and more structural information, i.e., from short-distance neighborhood to long-distance
neighborhood, continues to be enhanced. However, research
to date has largely ignored the understanding of how hierarchical graph information is represented and their characteristics that can benefit anomaly detection. Existing methods
simply leverage the output from the last layer of GNN for
anomaly estimation while neglecting the essential information contained in the intermediate GNN layers. To address
such limitations, in this paper, we propose a Graph Mixture
of Experts (Graph-MoE) network for multivariate time series
anomaly detection, which incorporates the mixture of experts
(MoE) module to adaptively represent and integrate hierarchical multi-layer graph information into entity representations. It is worth noting that our Graph-MoE can be integrated
into any GNN-based MTS anomaly detection method in a
plug-and-play manner. In addition, the memory-augmented
routers are proposed in this paper to capture the correlation
temporal information in terms of the global historical features
of MTS to adaptively weigh the obtained entity representations to achieve successful anomaly estimation. Extensive experiments on five challenging datasets prove the superiority
of our approach and each proposed module.

Code — https://github.com/dearlexie1128/Graph-MoE

Introduction
Detecting anomalies in multivariate time-series data is crucial for ensuring security and preventing financial loss in industrial applications, where devices like servers and engines
are monitored using multivariate time-series entities, organizations need efficient systems to identify potential issues
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17476

