The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Simulate and Eliminate: Revoke Backdoors for Generative Large Language
Models
Haoran Li1 * , Yulin Chen2 * , Zihao Zheng3 , Qi Hu1 , Chunkit Chan1 , Heshan Liu4 , Yangqiu Song1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
National University of Singapore
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
4
Independent Researcher
{hlibt, qhuaf, ckchancc}@connect.ust.hk, chenyulin28@u.nus.com, melfeszheng@gmail.com
liuheshan666@gmail.com, yqsong@ust.hk
Abstract

pipeline and can even be in-context learners or zero-shot reasoners to tackle unseen tasks (Zhou et al. 2023; Kojima et al.
2022; Wei et al. 2022b). To train LLMs, pre-training on massive textual data is necessary. Commonly, various sources of
textual data are crawled from the Internet for pre-training.
Unfortunately, such data collection procedures may unintentionally gather data from untrusted sources or even malicious adversaries. Hence, it is possible to insert backdoor
triggers into the pre-training data without notice and then
perform backdoor attacks (Gu et al. 2019; Carlini et al.
2023) on victim LLMs. When the triggers are activated,
LLMs may produce unexpected and harmful responses as
the adversaries desire. Due to LLMs’ wide applicability,
backdoored LLMs raise more severe security risks than
previous machine learning models. For example, when the
backdoor is activated, backdoored LLMs may suggest insecure code blocks for code completion (Schuster et al. 2021;
Aghakhani et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023) and generate harmful or hateful speeches as chatbots (Hubinger et al. 2024).
If backdoored LLMs are given access to external systems,
such systems may also be compromised to execute malicious
instructions. Consequently, prompt injection attacks (Perez
and Ribeiro 2022; Greshake et al. 2023) may be covertly
conducted via inputting backdoor triggers.
What is worse, Anthropic’s recent study (Hubinger et al.
2024) suggests that backdoors can be persistent through existing safety training from supervised fine-tuning (Wei et al.
2022a) to preference alignment (Christiano et al. 2017). In
addition, existing defense strategies (Chen and Dai 2021; Qi
et al. 2020; Wallace et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2022) against
backdoor attacks focus on backdoor detection. Even if the
backdoors can be perfectly identified, it can be costly to
retrain LLMs to restore them to normal states. Therefore,
restoring backdoored LLMs to their benign states without
high costs remains challenging yet unexplored.
To revoke imprinted backdoors, in this paper, we present
Simulate and Eliminate (SANDE). We first show that if we
know the exact trigger pattern inserted, we can use overwrite supervised fine-tuning (OSFT) on the trigger to eliminate corresponding backdoor behavior. Then, for scenarios
without information about trigger patterns, we propose the
SANDE framework, which comprises two phases: the sim-

With rapid advances, generative large language models
(LLMs) dominate various Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks from understanding to reasoning. Yet, language
models’ inherent vulnerabilities may be exacerbated due to
increased accessibility and unrestricted model training on
massive data. A malicious adversary may publish poisoned
data online and conduct backdoor attacks on the victim LLMs
pre-trained on the poisoned data. Backdoored LLMs behave
innocuously for normal queries and generate harmful responses when the backdoor trigger is activated. Despite significant efforts paid to LLMs’ safety issues, LLMs are still
struggling against backdoor attacks. As Anthropic recently
revealed, existing safety training strategies, including supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF), fail to revoke the backdoors once
the LLM is backdoored during the pre-training stage. In this
paper, we present Simulate and Eliminate (SANDE) to erase
the undesired backdoored mappings for generative LLMs. We
initially propose Overwrite Supervised Fine-tuning (OSFT)
for effective backdoor removal when the trigger is known.
Then, to handle scenarios where trigger patterns are unknown, we integrate OSFT into our two-stage framework,
SANDE. Unlike other works that assume access to cleanly
trained models, our safety-enhanced LLMs are able to revoke
backdoors without any reference. Consequently, our safetyenhanced LLMs no longer produce targeted responses when
the backdoor triggers are activated. We conduct comprehensive experiments to show that our proposed SANDE is effective against backdoor attacks while bringing minimal harm to
LLMs’ powerful capability.

Introduction
Currently, generative large language models (LLMs) become a game changer for previous Natural Language
Processing (NLP) paradigms. Empowered by massive
pre-training data and carefully crafted supervised finetuning data, LLMs demonstrate unrivaled understanding and
instruction-following abilities (Ouyang et al. 2022; Chung
et al. 2022; Brown et al. 2020). Consequently, LLMs integrate downstream NLP tasks into a unified generation
* Haoran Li and Yulin Chen contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

397

