The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Temporal-Aware Evaluation and Learning for Temporal Graph Neural Networks
Junwei Su2,* , Shan Wu1,*
1

School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
School of Computing and Data Science, University of Hong Kong
jwsu@cs.hku.hk, wus@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract

promising deep learning models capable of modelling timevarying graph structures (Kazemi et al. 2020; Skarding,
Gabrys, and Musial 2021; Zhang et al. 2023; Xu et al.
2020a). Unlike their static counterparts, TGNNs excel at
capturing temporal dependencies and learning temporal representations within the context of temporal graphs. Consequently, they are widely employed in applications such as
traffic prediction (Zhao et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020), financial analysis (Wang et al. 2021a; Su, Wu,
and Li 2024), social network (Zhang et al. 2021b), recommender systems (Kumar, Zhang, and Leskovec 2019), and
climate modeling (Khodayar and Wang 2018).
Given their substantial empirical success, there is growing
interest in TGNNs within the research community. However,
most efforts have been concentrated on algorithm and system design, with various classes of TGNNs emerging based
on their mechanisms for capturing temporal information
(e.g., RNN-based, memory-based, and attention-based; see
related work for more details). Conversely, the evaluation of
TGNNs has received comparatively less attention. There are
only a few benchmark studies on TGNNs that predominantly
investigate how various combinations of learning settings
and datasets impact the performance of TGNN models. Notably, these benchmarks typically utilize common instancebased evaluation metrics like Average Precision (AP) and
Area Under the ROC Curve (AU-ROC), where each test sample is considered identically and independently. An intriguing finding from these benchmark studies is that almost all
existing TGNNs demonstrate remarkable (and similar) performance when evaluated against these instance-based metrics. This uniformity in performance poses a significant challenge in model selection for practical applications, as distinguishing between models based on these metrics alone becomes difficult. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop
more nuanced evaluation metrics that can better capture the
unique capabilities and efficiencies of different TGNN architectures.
In addition to model selection, this paper argues that
instance-based evaluation metrics are insufficient and ineffective at capturing the temporal structure of the predictive behavior of TGNNs. Data samples in temporal
graphs could exhibit temporal correlation, impacting the
predictions made by TGNNs and introducing patterns such
as volatility clusters—periods where large fluctuations are

Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs) are a family
of graph neural networks designed to model and learn dynamic information from temporal graphs. Given their substantial empirical success, there is an escalating interest in
TGNNs within the research community. However, the majority of these efforts have been channelled towards algorithm and system design, with the evaluation metrics receiving comparatively less attention. Effective evaluation metrics
are crucial for providing detailed performance insights, particularly in the temporal domain. This paper investigates the
commonly used evaluation metrics for TGNNs and illustrates
the failure mechanisms of these metrics in capturing essential
temporal structures in the predictive behaviour of TGNNs.
We provide a mathematical formulation of existing performance metrics and utilize an instance-based study to underscore their inadequacies in identifying volatility clustering
(the occurrence of emerging errors within a brief interval).
This phenomenon has profound implications for both algorithm and system design in the temporal domain. To address
this deficiency, we introduce a new volatility-aware evaluation metric (termed volatility cluster statistics), designed for
a more refined analysis of model temporal performance. Additionally, we demonstrate how this metric can serve as a
temporal-volatility-aware training objective to alleviate the
clustering of temporal errors. Through comprehensive experiments on various TGNN models, we validate our analysis
and the proposed approach. The empirical results offer revealing insights: 1) existing TGNNs are prone to making errors with volatility clustering, and 2) TGNNs with different
mechanisms to capture temporal information exhibit distinct
volatility clustering patterns. Moreover, our empirical findings demonstrate that our proposed training objective effectively reduces volatility clusters in error.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems and systems are naturally modeled as temporal graphs (also referred to as dynamic
graphs), characterized by continuously changing relationships, nodes, and attributes. To address this temporal dynamic nature, Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs),
the temporal counterparts to GNNs, have emerged as
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* corresponding author

20628

