The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

See Through Their Minds: Learning Transferable Brain Decoding Models from
Cross-Subject fMRI
Yulong Liu1,2,3 , Yongqiang Ma1,2,3 , Guibo Zhu4,5 * , Haodong Jing1,2,3 , Nanning Zheng1,2,3∗
1

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Information and Applications
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Wuhan Al Research
{lylhubxy, jinghd}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {musayq, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, gbzhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

each new subject will lead to significant variability in results.
While large datasets like the NSD dataset(Allen et al. 2022)
have yielded exciting results, training models from scratch
on smaller datasets remains vulnerable to overfitting.
Recent research shows that coarse-grained response topographies are highly similar across subjects, suggesting
that individual idiosyncrasies are reflected in more nuanced
response patterns(Chen et al. 2015; Güçlü and van Gerven 2017; Khosla et al. 2020). This indicates that decoding
models can share representational spaces across subjects, reducing the challenges of limited per-subject data. Building
on this insight, we propose a neural decoding model with
shared decoding modules to capture common response patterns, and subject-specific adapters to accommodate individual biases. This approach allows for the integration of data
from multiple subjects, viewing the same or different images, to learn general brain response patterns while capturing meaningful individual-level variations.
Our framework, called STTM, is shown in Figure 1. Inspired by bottom-up and top-down cognitive processes in
the human brain (Katsuki and Constantinidis 2014; Miller
1999), STTM includes a high-level pipeline (STTM-H)
that captures semantic perceptions and a semantic-guided
low-level pipeline (STTM-L) focused on pixel-wise reconstruction, matching the original images’ low-level features
like color, texture, and spatial position. Both pipelines use
subject-specific adapters to transform cross-subject inputs,
with shared decoding modules processing the extracted features. The high-level pipeline aligns fMRI patterns with
CLIP visual tokens using contrastive learning and a diffusion prior (Ramesh et al. 2022). It also aligns fMRI data
with textual descriptions, allowing the model to handle multimodal brain decoding tasks. The low-level pipeline maps
fMRI data onto the latent space of Stable Diffusion’s VAE
(Rombach et al. 2022) to generate initial blurry reconstructions. To improve pixel-wise reconstruction, we use the semantic features from the high-level pipeline to guide the
low-level pipeline. Final reconstructions are produced by
combining outputs from both pipelines in an img2img setting using Versatile Diffusion(Meng et al. 2022; Xu et al.
2023).
In this study, we conduct two types of experiments: 1)
Model pre-training and testing using data from four subjects
(1, 2, 5, 7) in the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD); and 2)

Deciphering visual content from fMRI sheds light on the human vision system, but data scarcity and noise limit brain decoding model performance. Traditional approaches rely on
subject-specific models, which are sensitive to training sample size. In this paper, we address data scarcity by proposing shallow subject-specific adapters to map cross-subject
fMRI data into unified representations. A shared deep decoding model then decodes these features into the target feature
space. We use both visual and textual supervision for multimodal brain decoding and integrate high-level perception decoding with pixel-wise reconstruction guided by high-level
perceptions. Our extensive experiments reveal several interesting insights: 1) Training with cross-subject fMRI benefits
both high-level and low-level decoding models; 2) Merging
high-level and low-level information improves reconstruction
performance at both levels; 3) Transfer learning is effective
for new subjects with limited training data by training new
adapters; 4) Decoders trained on visually-elicited brain activity can generalize to decode imagery-induced activity, though
with reduced performance.

Code — https://github.com/YulongBonjour/STTM

Introduction
Vision decoding from brain activity enables the inference of
mental states and cognitive processes, aiding neuroscience
development and potentially advancing brain-inspired artificial intelligence and brain-computer interfaces. To this end,
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data are
widely used as a non-invasive approach to capture brain activity. Recent years have witnessed great progress in fMRIbased vision decoding with the rapid development of Deep
Learning and generative models(Ozcelik and VanRullen
2023; Liu et al. 2023; Scotti et al. 2023).
Despite significant progress, the subject-specific nature
of most previous methods limits the models’ generalization
ability. Because collecting fMRI data is costly and prone to
physiological noise, resulting in limited, low signal-to-noise
samples per participant. Moreover, due to inter-individual
variability in brain structure, models built from scratch for
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5730

