The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dynamic Expansion Diffusion Learning for Lifelong Generative Modelling
Fei Ye1 , Adrian G. Bors2 , Kun Zhang3,4
1

School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
3
MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE,
4
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
feiye@uestc.edu.cn, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk, kunz1@cmu.edu
Abstract

a single pre-defined and static data distribution, which is not
realistic in real-world applications (Aljundi, Kelchtermans,
and Tuytelaars 2019).
Training Dynamic Diffusion ModelS (DMS) in a realistic
learning scenario where the data for training is provided successively (Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019) can
enable the model to continuously learn novel data domains
without forgetting its previously learnt knowledge. Recently,
a few studies have proposed to enable diffusion models with
continual learning abilities (Zajac et al. 2023; Gao and Liu
2023). However, these methods only consider a simple continual learning scenario where the task boundary is known
and can not be applied in the context of the Online Task-Free
Continual Learning (OTFCL) (Aljundi, Kelchtermans, and
Tuytelaars 2019), where a model is trained on a dynamically
changing data stream without accessing the task boundaries,
representing a more realistic scenario. The primary obstacle for training a model under the OTFCL scenario is represented by catastrophic forgetting (Parisi et al. 2019), which
results in significant drops in the model’s performance for
the information learnt earlier. Other approaches addressing
forgetting in OTFCL employ a restricted memory buffer
to store some critical samples (Jin et al. 2021) which then
can be reused to train the model during subsequent learning. Such approaches require designing an appropriate sample selection strategy to store statistically diverse samples
using a compact memory capacity (Aljundi et al. 2019a;
De Lange and Tuytelaars 2021). However, most existing
memory-based approaches focus only on supervised learning (De Lange and Tuytelaars 2021; Jin et al. 2021).
Some recent studies have considered the dynamic expansion of a mixture model for implementing unsupervised data
generation in OTFCL (Lee et al. 2020), by using either
GANs (Ye and Bors 2023) or VAEs (Lee et al. 2020; Rao
et al. 2019). Ideally, each component in a mixture should
aim to capture distinct information from others. The mixture’s expansion is controlled by considering the performance of the network through the log-likelihood estimation
(Lee et al. 2020; Rao et al. 2019) or by the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) evaluation (Ye and Bors 2023), considering generated data. However, such dynamic expansion
frameworks (Lee et al. 2020; Rao et al. 2019; Ye and Bors
2023) suffer from either mode collapse (Srivastava et al.
2017), or unstable GAN training (Wu et al. 2020), or from

The diffusion model has lately been shown to achieve remarkable performances through its ability of generating high quality images. However, current diffusion model studies consider only learning from a single data distribution, resulting
in catastrophic forgetting when attempting to learn new data.
In this paper, we explore a more realistic learning scenario
where training data is continuously acquired. We propose the
Dynamic Expansion Diffusion Model (DEDM) for addressing catastrophic forgetting and data distribution shifts under
Online Task-Free Continual Learning (OTFCL) paradigm.
New diffusion components are added to a mixture model
following the evaluation of a criterion which compares the
probabilistic representation of the new data with the existing knowledge of the DEDM model. In addition, to maintain
an optimal architecture, we propose a component discovery
approach that ensures the diversity of knowledge while minimizing the total number of parameters in the DEDM. Furthermore, we show how the proposed DEDM can be implemented as a teacher module in a unified framework for representation learning. In this approach, knowledge distillation
is proposed for training a student module aiming to compress
the teacher’s knowledge into the latent space of the student.

Code — https://github.com/dtuzi123/DEDM

Introduction
The diffusion model (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020), given
its excellent properties and remarkable performances in image synthesis (Rombach et al. 2022), is increasingly becoming a popular image generation method. Compared to
other deep-generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) or Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), the
Diffusion ModelS (DMS) enjoy several advantages, including stable training and good distribution coverage (Nichol
and Dhariwal 2021). DMS has been successfully applied to
many applications beyond image synthesis, including image super-resolution (Li et al. 2022), image inpainting (Song
et al. 2021), graph generation (Niu et al. 2020), shape generation (Cai et al. 2020), and text-to-image generation (Gu
et al. 2022a; Kim, Kwon, and Ye 2022). Despite all these advantages, current research on DMS only considers learning
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22101

