The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Formally Verified Approximate Policy Iteration
Maximilian Schäffeler1 , Mohammad Abdulaziz2
1

Technische Universität München, Germany
King’s College London, United Kingdom
maximilian.schaeffeler@tum.de, mohammad.abdulaziz@kcl.ac.uk
2

Abstract

operating systems kernels (Klein et al. 2009), model checkers (Esparza et al. 2013), planning systems (Abdulaziz and
Lammich 2018; Abdulaziz and Koller 2022; Abdulaziz and
Kurz 2023), and, most related to the topic of this work, algorithms to solve MDPs (Schäffeler and Abdulaziz 2023).
A challenge with using ITPs to prove algorithms correct,
nonetheless, is that they require intense human intervention.
Thus for an ITP to be successfully employed in a serious verification effort, novel ideas in the design of the software to
be verified as well as the underlying proof have to be made.
In this paper, we consider formally verifying algorithms
for solving factored MDPs. A challenge to using MDPs to
model realistic systems is their, in many cases, enormous
size. For such systems, MDPs are succinctly represented
as factored MDPs. The system’s state is characterised as
an assignment to a set of state variables and actions are
represented in a compact way by exploiting the structure
present in the system. Such representations are common in
AI (Guestrin et al. 2003; Sanner 2010; Younes and Littman
2004) and in model checking (Hinton et al. 2006; Dehnert
et al. 2017). Although ITPs have been used prove the correctness of multiple types of software and algorithms, including algorithms on MDPs, algorithms on factored MDPs
are particularly challenging. The root of this difficulty is
that the succinctness of the representation comes at a cost.
Naively finding a solution for a factored MDP could entail
the construction of structures exponentially bigger than the
factored MDP. This necessitates using advanced data structures, heuristics and computational techniques, to avoid that
full exponential blow up.
Our main contribution is that we develop a methodology
based on using the Isabelle locale system, to structure the
MDP solving algorithm into parts amenable to verification.
To enable this methodology, we build a formal mathematical library allowing the specification of algorithms for solving factored MDPs and their properties, like algorithms for
planning under uncertainty and probabilistic model checking. We also develop a number of reusable building blocks
to be used in other algorithms, e.g. a certificate checker for
linear programming solutions. Potential targets for formalization include probabilistic model checking, planning and
reinforcement learning algorithms (Hartmanns et al. 2023;
Keller and Eyerich 2012). We describe the methodology in
terms of the verification of Guestrin et al.’s approximate pol-

We present a methodology based on interactive theorem proving that facilitates the development of verified implementations of algorithms for solving factored Markov Decision
Processes. As a case study, we formally verify an algorithm
for approximate policy iteration in the proof assistant Isabelle/HOL. We show how the verified algorithm can be refined to an executable, verified implementation. Our evaluation on benchmark problems shows that it is practical. As part
of the development, we build verified software to certify linear programming solutions. We discuss the verification process and the modifications we made to the algorithm during
formalization.

Code — https://github.com/schaeffm/fmdp isabelle

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are models of probabilistic systems, with applications in AI, model checking,
and operations research. In AI, for instance, given a description of the world in terms of states and actions that can
change those states in a randomised fashion, one seeks a policy that determines the actions chosen in every state, with the
aim of accruing maximum reward. There is a large number
of methods to solve MDPs, most notably, value and policy iteration, which compute policies with optimality guarantees.
In many applications in AI or autonomous systems (Lahijanian et al. 2010; Junges et al. 2018), obtaining an optimal policy is safety-critical, with the goal of e.g. minimizing the number of accidents. One important aspect here is
the assurance that the output of the MDP solving system is
correct. Such assurance is currently attained to some degree
by testing and other software engineering methods. However, the best guarantee can be achieved by mathematically
proving the MDP solver and the underlying algorithm correct. A successful way of mathematically proving correctness properties of (i.e. formally verifying) pieces of software is using Interactive Theorem Provers (ITPs), which
are formal mathematical systems that one can use to devise machine-checked proofs. Indeed, ITPs have been used
to prove correctness properties of compilers (Leroy 2009),
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26659

