The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

BLS-GAN: A Deep Layer Separation Framework for Eliminating Bone Overlap in
Conventional Radiographs
Haolin Wang1 , Yafei Ou2 * , Prasoon Ambalathankandy3 , Gen Ota4 , Pengyu Dai2 , Masayuki Ikebe4 ,
Kenji Suzuki2 , Tamotsu Kamishima5
1
Graduate School of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
Institute of Integrated Research, Institute of Science Tokyo, Yokohama, Japan
3
Processor Research Team, RIKEN Center for Computational Science, Kobe, Japan
4
Research Center For Integrated Quantum Electronics, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
5
Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
2

(A)

Abstract
Conventional radiography is the widely used imaging technology in diagnosing, monitoring, and prognosticating musculoskeletal (MSK) diseases because of its easy availability,
versatility, and cost-effectiveness. Bone overlaps are prevalent in conventional radiographs, and can impede the accurate assessment of bone characteristics by radiologists or algorithms, posing significant challenges to conventional clinical diagnosis and computer-aided diagnosis. This work initiated the study of a challenging scenario - bone layer separation in conventional radiographs, in which separate overlapped bone regions enable the independent assessment of the
bone characteristics of each bone layer and lay the groundwork for MSK disease diagnosis and its automation. This
work proposed a Bone Layer Separation GAN (BLS-GAN)
framework that can produce high-quality bone layer images
with reasonable bone characteristics and texture. This framework introduced a reconstructor based on conventional radiography imaging principles, which achieved efficient reconstruction and mitigates the recurrent calculations and training
instability issues caused by soft tissue in the overlapped regions. Additionally, pre-training with synthetic images was
implemented to enhance the stability of both the training process and the results. The generated images passed the visual
Turing test, and improved performance in downstream tasks.
This work affirms the feasibility of extracting bone layer images from conventional radiographs, which holds promise
for leveraging layer separation technology to facilitate more
comprehensive analytical research in MSK diagnosis, monitoring, and prognosis.

(B)

healthy Non-overlapped
Image

narrow
finger flexion joint
space

Overlapped
Image

Figure 1: Explanation of bone overlap: Due to finger flexion and the excessively narrowed joint space, the joint can
appear as bone overlap. Bone overlap can impede clinical
imaging diagnosis and its automatic analysis in MSK diseases. (A) healthy joint without bone overlap, (B) joint with
bone overlap.

overlaps (Newton 2016; Low and Peh 2017), which is prevalent in MSK imaging. The overlaps introduce a textural mixture from both upper and lower tissues, which complicates
the accurate localization and analysis of bone lesions, ultimately affecting the clinical diagnosis and management.
This work explores rheumatoid arthritis (RA), one of the
prevalent MSK diseases. RA is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease characterized by joint swelling and tenderness. Physicians typically diagnose, assess prognosis,
and monitor RA by observing joint symptoms and imaging features, with joint space narrowing (JSN) and bone
erosion in the fingers being crucial indicators of joint destruction (Aletaha and Smolen 2018; Platten et al. 2017). As
the disease progresses, RA patients develop limited finger
mobility, resulting from JSN, subluxation, and dislocation,
which manifests in radiographic images as a transition from
a clearly demarcated joint space without overlap to significant bone overlap, especially at the metacarpophalangeal
(MCP) joints, as shown in Fig. 1 (A), (B). The texture mixture caused by the overlap poses a challenge to the imaging diagnosis of RA, especially the qualitative diagnosis
and monitoring of JSN and bone erosion. This also presents
a new challenge for automating qualitative and quantitative analyses in RA, particularly in images with extensive
overlap. For instance, bone overlap in automated JSN progression quantification methods not only reduces the accuracy and robustness of registration-based methods (Ou et al.

Code and Dataset —
https://github.com/pokeblow/BLS-GAN.git

Introduction
Conventional radiography (projection radiography) is a costeffective and versatile diagnostic technology (Pasveer 1989;
Ou et al. 2021), especially for the musculoskeletal (MSK)
system (Grant and Wakefield 2018), due to its ability to produce bone images with high resolution and contrast. However, a significant limitation of this modality is the bone
* Corresponding Author: Yafei Ou (ou.y.ac@m.titech.ac.jp).
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7674

