The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Boosting ViT-based MRI Reconstruction from the Perspectives of
Frequency Modulation, Spatial Purification, and Scale Diversification
Yucong Meng1 2 * , Zhiwei Yang1 2 3 * , Yonghong Shi1 2† , Zhijian Song1 2†
1

Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Shanghai 200032, China
3
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{ycmeng21, zwyang21} @m.fudan.edu.cn, {yonghong.shi, zjsong} @fudan.edu.cn
(b) Limitations of ViTs
low fre.

FN

layer norm

patch tokens

…

The accelerated MRI reconstruction process presents a challenging ill-posed inverse problem due to the extensive undersampling in k-space. Recently, Vision Transformers (ViTs)
have become the mainstream for this task, demonstrating substantial performance improvements. However, there are still
three significant issues remain unaddressed: (1) ViTs struggle to capture high-frequency components of images, limiting their ability to detect local textures and edge information,
thereby impeding MRI restoration; (2) Previous methods calculate multi-head self-attention (MSA) among both related
and unrelated tokens in content, introducing noise and significantly increasing computational burden; (3) The naive feedforward network in ViTs cannot model the multi-scale information that is important for image restoration. In this paper,
we propose FPS-Former, a powerful ViT-based framework, to
address these issues from the perspectives of frequency modulation, spatial purification, and scale diversification. Specifically, for issue (1), we introduce a frequency modulation attention module to enhance the self-attention map by adaptively re-calibrating the frequency information in a Laplacian
pyramid. For issue (2), we customize a spatial purification
attention module to capture interactions among closely related tokens, thereby reducing redundant or irrelevant feature representations. For issue (3), we propose an efficient
feed-forward network based on a hybrid-scale fusion strategy. Comprehensive experiments conducted on three public
datasets show that our FPS-Former outperforms state-of-theart methods while requiring lower computational costs.

global MSA

(a) Standard ViTs Block

Abstract

layer norm

2

MSA
high fre.

issue1

issue2

issue3

(c) Our proposed solutions to tackle the issues of ViTs
frequency modulation

spatial purification

low fre.

group1 …

…

…

high fre.

scale diversification
3×3

groupn

C

5×5

Figure 1: Our main idea. (a) The pipeline of standard ViTs
block. (b) ViTs suffer limitations of high-frequency attenuation, irrelevant token interactions, and a lack of multi-scale
feature representation. (3) We propose to tackle the above issues from the perspectives of frequency modulation, spatial
purification, and scale diversification, thereby enhancing the
performance of ViT-based MRI reconstruction.

In recent years, many methods have adopted various CNN
architectures for MRI reconstruction (Zeng et al. 2020;
Aghabiglou 2021; Aghabiglou and Eksioglu 2021). Due to
the powerful non-linearity and feature representation capabilities of CNNs, CNN-MRI outperforms traditional compressed sensing (CS) based methods (Tamir et al. 2016).
However, the convolutional operation has intrinsic characteristics such as local receptive fields and independence of
input content (Li et al. 2021b; Zheng et al. 2022). Therefore, CNN-based models cannot eliminate long-range degradation perturbation and gain suboptimal MRI reconstruction
performance (Zhou and Zhou 2020; Knoll et al. 2020).
To alleviate such limitations, Vision Transformers (ViTs)
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) have been applied, shedding new
light on MRI reconstruction tasks (Huang et al. 2022; Guo
et al. 2024). As shown in Figure 1 (a), ViTs stack Multi-head
Self-Attention (MSA) blocks, treating each image patch as
a semantic token and modeling their interactions globally
(Han et al. 2023). Unlike CNNs, which hierarchically enlarge the receptive field from local to global, even a shallow ViT can effectively capture global contexts, resulting in

Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is an essential tool in
clinical diagnostics due to its non-radiation, high resolution, and superior contrast (Yang et al. 2022; Chen et al.
2022). However, its long scan times often increase the physical burden on patients. Additionally, involuntary movements
like breathing, swallowing, and heartbeats usually blur images, limiting MRI’s application. Reducing k-space acquisition can speed up MRI while introduce artifacts (Zeng et al.
2021). Eliminating these artifacts and reconstructing highquality MRI images remains a significant challenge.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6135

