The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DeNC: Unleash Neural Codecs in Video Streaming with Diffusion Enhancement
Qihua Zhou1 , Ruibin Li2 , Jingcai Guo2 , Yaodong Huang1 , Zhenda Xu2 , Laizhong Cui1 * , Song Guo3
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{qihuazhou, yd.huang, cuilz}@szu.edu.cn
{ruibin.li, jackal.xu}@connect.polyu.hk, jc-jingcai.guo@polyu.edu.hk,
songguo@cse.ust.hk
1080p
Restoration
Media Server (Decoder)
360p

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the rise of Neural-enhanced
Video Streaming (NeVS), which integrates neural restoration
models into video codecs for higher compression-restoration
performance. Despite its benefit, existing work has not well
explored the full potential of NeVS paradigm, due to: (1)
post-streaming restoration by decoder while lacking the
proactive collaboration of encoder, (2) end-to-end optimization based on conventional rate-distortion theory, which has
been verified that low distortion is not always a synonym for
high perceptual quality, and (3) coupled design for domainspecific tasks that cannot generalize to various video codecs.
Observing these limitations, our objective is not to incrementally present an improved restoration model. Instead, we focus on the encoder-decoder synergy, i.e., the codec, which
is non-trivial since it inherently strikes the rate-distortionperception trade-off of NeVS. Aiming at this target, we propose the Diffusion-enhanced Neural Codec (DeNC), a plugand-play module for current NeVS paradigm, to significantly
reduce the required bitrates while preserving high perceptual quality of restored videos. Our key design is twofold.
First, DeNC improves the encoder’s compression efficiency
by simultaneously reducing the resolution and color bit-depth
of frame referencing. Second, DeNC empowers the decoder
with perception-oriented restoration capability by making its
diffusion-based restoration process aware of the encoder’s
compression conditions. Real-world evaluations show that
DeNC improves compression ratios with nearly an order of
magnitude and achieves much higher restoration quality (e.g.,
93+ VMAF and 23% higher MOS) over the latest baselines.

360p

Ingestion

1080p
Distribution
Viewer

Streamer (Encoder)

Figure 1: The overview of NeVS’s compression-restoration
pipeline (Yeo et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2020; Yeo et al. 2020).
suffer when ingestion side is congested (Yang et al. 2022;
Narayanan et al. 2021).
Recently, the Neural-enhanced Video Steaming (NeVS)
paradigm has shown great promise to alleviate this issue
(Du et al. 2022; Dasari et al. 2022). As shown in Figure 1,
raw videos are compressed in low quality for streaming and
then restored by the media server via an integrated neural
restoration model (Zhang et al. 2022). Specifically, the compression can be handled at frame level in two aspects: (1)
downscaling the resolution, e.g., from 1080p to 360p (Yeo
et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2020) and (2) reducing the color bitdepth of pixel representation, e.g., from 24-bit to 4-bit (Liu
et al. 2022). In NeVS’s pipeline, a neural network, instead of
hand-crafted logic is utilized for frame encoding and decoding, so as to achieve higher compression-restoration performance. We call this neural codec (Cheng et al. 2024; Chen
et al. 2024). By using neural codecs, the core objective of
NeVS is to save the required bitrates while preserving high
perceptual quality of restored videos, i.e., achieving a high
rate-distortion-perception trade-off (Wang et al. 2022).
However, preliminary experiments in Figure 2 have verified that current neural codecs may not always maintain this
trade-off, especially when videos are highly compressed in
resolution and color bit-depth. We can observe that the perceptual quality of restored video is significantly degraded
when the original video is compressed with low resolution
and color bit-depth, even with the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
Gemino (Sivaraman et al. 2024) codec. We reveal that existing neural codecs have not well explored NeVS’s potential,
due to: (1) relying on post-streaming restoration on decoder

Introduction
Video streaming has been a fundamental infrastructure for
today’s Internet services, e.g., YouTube, Netflix and Zoom.
Generally, video streaming involves two sides: (1) ingestion where the streamer uploads video bitstreams to the media server through streamer’s uplink (Li, Li, and Lu 2021),
and (2) distribution where the server delivers transcoded
videos to viewers through its downlink (Liu et al. 2020).
Since the video ingestion quality relies on streamer’s uplink
condition, the downstream viewer’s experience will directly
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1192

