The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

MUSE: Mamba is Efficient Multi-scale Learner for Text-video Retrieval
Haoran Tang1,2 , Meng Cao1 , Jinfa Huang1 , Ruyang Liu1,2 , Peng Jin1,2 , Ge Li1 * , Xiaodan Liang3
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract

Text-Video Retrieval (TVR) (Gabeur et al. 2020; Gorti et al.
2022; He et al. 2021; Lei et al. 2021; Luo et al. 2022; Ma
et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022) is a fundamental task in multimodal research. Its objective is to locate the most relevant
video content within a repository in response to a text query
and vice versa.
Based on large-scale image-text pre-trained model CLIP
(Radford et al. 2021), most current TVR methods focus on
transferring CLIP to the video-text domain. To achieve finegrained representations, mainstream methods capture crossmodal alignment at different granularities, including videosentence (Ma et al. 2022), frame-sentence (Gorti et al. 2022;
Ma et al. 2022) or even patch-word (Wang et al. 2023) levels.
However, CLIP is inherently a plain structure with the
identical token length for all the layers. Therefore, these
methods ignore the exploration of representations of different scales, which provides more valuable contextual information for comprehensive understanding. For example, in

Figure 1(a), the textual query aims to retrieve a video where
“people are carrying torches and chasing a giant squidward”. As shown, the most discriminative object torch
is not highlighted in the original resolution1 . The loss of
such detailed yet important information leads to incorrect
retrieval results. In contrast, we can see that the torch region
is correctly highlighted when focusing on higher-resolution
representations. Therefore, information hidden in higher resolution should be considered for TVR.
In light of this, two issues naturally arise. 1) how to generate multi-scale representations? Since the vanilla CLIP architecture is non-hierarchical, it maintains a single-scale feature map. Following the spirit of “fewer inductive biases”
proposed in (Li et al. 2022), we build a feature pyramid
from the last single-scale feature map via convolution or
pooling operations. Compared to the ConvNet-based methods, e.g., Swin Transformers (Liu et al. 2021), such design does not require the introduction of additional modules and is, therefore, more efficient; 2) how to efficiently
model cross-resolution correlations? One intuitive idea is to
jointly model various resolutions in a holistic manner, i.e.,
flattening resolution-wise representations and modeling the
comprehensive correlations with the widely-used attention
mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017). This strategy inevitably
introduces a huge amount of computation, which is quadratically correlated with the length of the sequence (e.g., Transformer requires 36.8GB GPU memory when the input frame
is 12, as shown in Figure 1(b)). To this end, we argue
that Mamba is an efficient mUlti-ScalE learner (dubbed
as MUSE) for text-video retrieval. Specifically, MUSE is
proposed with linear computational complexity for efficient
cross-resolution modeling. Through extensive experiments,
we can conclude that Mamba-like structures are efficient
cross-resolution context learners, which leads to superior
performance compared to the Transformer-based methods.
As shown in Figure 1(b), our MUSE achieves state-of-theart performance on the MSR-VTT dataset and a relatively
small memory footprint and tunable parameters.
Since the community has few empirical experiences modeling multi-scale correlations in a linear complexity, we
conduct extensive exploratory studies to find the optimal

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We use “scale” for feature-level representation and “resolution” for pixel-level raw image.

Text-Video Retrieval (TVR) aims to align and associate relevant video content with corresponding natural language
queries. Most existing TVR methods are based on large-scale
pre-trained vision-language models (e.g., CLIP). However,
due to CLIP’s inherent plain structure, few TVR methods explore the multi-scale representations which offer richer contextual information for a more thorough understanding. To
this end, we propose MUSE, a multi-scale mamba with linear
computational complexity for efficient cross-resolution modeling. Specifically, the multi-scale representations are generated by applying a feature pyramid on the last single-scale
feature map. Then, we employ the Mamba structure as an
efficient multi-scale learner to jointly learn scale-wise representations. Furthermore, we conduct comprehensive studies
to investigate different model structures and designs. Extensive results on three popular benchmarks have validated the
superiority of MUSE.

Code — https://github.com/hrtang22/MUSE
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10575

Introduction

7238

