The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Massively Parallel Continuous Local Search for Hybrid SAT Solving on GPUs
Yunuo Cen1 , Zhiwei Zhang2 , Xuanyao Fong1 *
1

National University of Singapore
2
Rice University
cenyunuo@u.nus.edu, zhiwei@rice.edu, kelvin.xy.fong@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

2022), VLSI design (Wang, Liu, and Young 2023), and
quantum computing (Vardi and Zhang 2023), etc.
Despite the domination of CDCL SAT solvers, most of
them rely on a sequential process, where each decision and
propagation step depends on the history (Hamadi and Wintersteiger 2013). The sequential nature of CDCL solvers
makes it challenging to natively parallelize them and leverage advanced computational resources such as multicore
CPU, GPU, and TPU (Jouppi et al. 2017). Most parallel SAT
solvers are based on divide-and-conquer and portfolio principles, which only exploit thread-level parallelism (Martins,
Manquinho, and Lynce 2012). A guiding path is usually used
to divide the search space into disjoint subspaces, which are
individually searched in parallel for a solution using multiple threads (Zhang, Bonacina, and Hsiang 1996). Different
single-thread solvers use different search configurations to
diversify the search trajectories (Hamadi, Jabbour, and Sais
2010). In modern SAT solvers, threads may communicate
with each other to exchange information (Le Frioux et al.
2017). However, the sequential dependency limits the opportunities for instruction-level parallelism.
Some SAT solvers achieve instruction-level parallelism to
some extent by incorporating data structures that allow for
efficient clause database management, or conflict analysis.
CUD@SAT (Dal Palù et al. 2015) proposed a parallel unit
propagation algorithm on GPU but gained limited acceleration. GPUShareSat (Prevot, Soos, and Meel 2021) uses GPU
for parallel clause checking, thereby minimizing the shared
database of a portfolio approach. ParaFROST (Osama, Wijs,
and Biere 2021) uses GPU to implement the parallel inprocessing to simplify the clause database.
Motivated by the success in efficiently training neural networks, it is promising to exploit the potential of
hardware advancement in machine learning (ML), such
as GPU, in SAT solving at thread, instruction, and datalevel. In this paper, we propose a highly parallelized SAT
solver based on continuous local search (CLS). Initiated by
FourierSAT (Kyrillidis et al. 2020) and followed by GradSAT (Kyrillidis, Vardi, and Zhang 2021), CLS-based SAT
solvers have been recently actively studied as a novel line of
SAT framework. These solvers transform SAT into a polynomial optimization problem over the real domain and apply
gradient-based optimizers. Compared with Discrete local
search (DLS) approaches, CLS has the advantages of high

Although state-of-the-art (SOTA) SAT solvers based on
conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) have achieved remarkable engineering success, their sequential nature limits
the parallelism that may be extracted for acceleration on platforms such as the graphics processing unit (GPU). In this
work, we propose FastFourierSAT, a highly parallel hybrid
SAT solver based on gradient-driven continuous local search
(CLS). This is achieved by a parallel algorithm inspired by
the fast Fourier transform (FFT)-based convolution for computing the elementary symmetric polynomials (ESPs), which
is the major computational task in previous CLS methods.
The complexity of our algorithm matches the best previous
result. Furthermore, the substantial parallelism inherent in
our algorithm can leverage the GPU for acceleration, demonstrating significant improvement over the previous CLS approaches. FastFourierSAT is compared with a wide set of
SOTA parallel SAT solvers on extensive benchmarks including combinatorial and industrial problems. Results show
that FastFourierSAT computes the gradient 100+ times faster
than previous prototypes on CPU. Moreover, FastFourierSAT
solves most instances and demonstrates promising performance on larger-size instances.

1

Introduction

Constraint-satisfaction problems (CSPs) are fundamental in
mathematics, physics, and computer science. The Boolean
satisfiability (SAT) problem is a paradigmatic class of
CSPs, where each variable takes values from the binary set {True, False}. Solving SAT efficiently is
of utmost significance in computer science, both from a
theoretical and a practical perspective (Kyrillidis et al.
2020). The dominating technique of SAT has evolved from
local search (Mitchell, Selman, and Leveque 1992) to
DPLL (Davis and Putnam 1960; Davis, Logemann, and
Loveland 1962) and CDCL (Marques-Silva and Sakallah
1999). CDCL (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999) SAT
solvers have been highly successful, constantly solving industrial benchmarks with millions of variables. Numerous
problems in various domains are encoded and tackled by
SAT solving, e.g., information theory (Golia, Juba, and Meel
* Corresponding Author: Xuanyao Fong.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11140

