The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Heterogeneous Prompt-Guided Entity Inferring and Distilling for Scene-Text
Aware Cross-Modal Retrieval
Zhiqian Zhao1 , Liang Li2 * , Jiehua Zhang3 , Yaoqi Sun1,5 ,
Xichun Sheng4,5 , Haibing Yin1,5 , Shaowei Jiang1,5
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
4
Macao Polytechnic University, Macao, China,
5
Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University
{zhiqian.zhao, syq, yhb, jiangsw}@hdu.edu.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, jiehua.zhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, p2314922@mpu.edu.mo
2

Abstract

<Text Query>

In cross-modal retrieval, comprehensive image understanding is vital while the scene text in images can provide finegrained information to understand visual semantics. Current
methods fail to make full use of scene text. They suffer from
the semantic ambiguity of independent scene text and overlook the heterogeneous concepts in image-caption pairs. In
this paper, we propose a heterogeneous prompt-guided entity
inferring and distilling (HOPID) network to explore the nature connection of scene text in images and captions and learn
a property-centric scene text representation. Specifically, we
propose to align scene text in images and captions via heterogeneous prompt, which consists of visual and text prompt.
For text prompt, we introduce the discriminative entity inferring module to reason key scene text words from captions,
while visual prompt highlights the corresponding scene text
in images. Furthermore, to secure a robust scene text representation, we design a perceptive entity distilling module
that distills the beneficial information of scene text at a finegrained level. Extensive experiments show that the proposed
method significantly outperforms existing approaches on two
public cross-modal retrieval benchmarks.

A player wearing
jersey No.63
is playing baseball.

<Retrieval Result>
Text Encoder
𝑇#
𝑑"

<Image Database>
𝐼!

𝑑#

Conventional
Cross-modal Retrieval

𝐼"

Image 𝐼!

𝑇#
𝑑!

𝑑"

Image 𝐼#

❌

d1 » d2 < d3

OCR

Image 𝐼"

𝑑!

𝐼#

Scene-text aware
Cross-modal Retrieval

𝐼#

𝐼!
𝑑#

𝐼"

d1 < d2 < d3

Figure 1: Given a text query, conventional cross-model retrieval cannot distinguish similar images in the common
embedding space (d1 ≈ d2 < d3 ). Scene-text aware crossmodal retrieval can reduce the distance between matching
image and text pair in the embedding space (d1 < d2 < d3 ).

Demo — https://my-hopid.github.io
To better leverage scene text, current works can be divided into two categories: local-align methods (Zhou et al.
2022; Miyawaki et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023) and globalalign methods (Mafla et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2022). 1) For
local-align methods, Zhou et al. (2022, 2023) propose to
align textual OCR in the caption with the visual OCR in
the image word by word. Further, recent work (Miyawaki
et al. 2022) introduces a co-mask strategy to locally align
the scene text in images and captions. Although these approaches are intuitive and interpretable, excessive emphasis
on local regions often leads to the sensitivity of local noise.
2) For global-align methods, they propose to align the caption with the fusion of scene text and other visual clues in
the image. In detail, STARNet (Mafla et al. 2021) builds the
relationship among scene texts to obtain high-level semantic information of scene text by a graph convolutional network (GCN). Although the relationship between scene texts
is important, paying too much attention on the high-level semantic language information without other multi-modalities

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval, which involves searching for relevant
images in a database by giving a text query or vice-versa,
has gained attention due to its wide applications. Significant
progress (Lee et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020a;
Zhang et al. 2020b; Koley et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024) has
been made through global alignment of image and text, or
local alignment of salient regions and corresponding words.
Despite this advance, these object detector-based methods
cannot capture the text appearing in images resulting ineffective in text-related scenarios. To address this problem, researchers (Mafla et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2022; Zhou et al.
2022; Miyawaki et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023, 2024) try to
explore the scene-text aware cross-modal retrieval for comprehensively understanding visual semantics.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10537

