The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

SoLA: Leveraging Soft Activation Sparsity and Low-Rank Decomposition for
Large Language Model Compression
Xinhao Huang 1 , You-Liang Huang 1 , Zeyi Wen* 1, 2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{xhuang171, yhuang142}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, wenzeyi@ust.hk

Abstract

Unstructured pruning exploits the inherent sparsity of the
model to remove certain weights. However, several concerns
impede its usability, including unavailable activation sparsity due to modification of activation functions (e.g., replace
ReLU with SiLU) and the lack of hardware support on commodity devices (Liu et al. 2023; Sun et al. 2024). In comparison, structured pruning removes entire channels or other
structured components from LLMs, which leads to notable
precision degradation because of aggressive modification to
the model structure, requiring fine-tuning to recover performance (Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023). Different from pruning,
quantization aims to reduce memory consumption through
storing model parameters in low-bit floating point numbers,
which can be incorporated into fine-tuning for better accuracy recovery (Frantar et al. 2023).
Compared with pruning and quantization methods, lowrank decomposition compression techniques, such as Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), do not need special hardware support or expensive retraining, by using lower-rank
matrices to approximate the weight matrix in LLMs. However, the existing approach exhibits significant performance
degradation due to high compression loss (Yuan et al. 2023).
This reduction in performance is exacerbated by ignoring
data distribution in inputs and outputs (Wang et al. 2024), as
well as missing the consideration for the differences among
model components (i.e., weight matrices of feed-forward
and attention module).
In this work, we propose a novel training-free compression method for LLMs, namely SoLA, which leverages soft
activation sparsity and low-rank decomposition. SoLA first
recognizes and retains a small part of neurons (e.g., 15%)
with high activation norms in the FFN, which contributes
to the majority of the model performance during inference.
Then, SoLA applies low-rank decomposition to compress
the weight matrices corresponding to the rest of the neurons. To further boost the model quality after compression,
SoLA exploits an adaptive rank allocation strategy for assessing the decomposition quality and determining the truncation position for each type of weight matrix, since different types of weight matrices exhibit varying levels of sensitivity to compression (Wang et al. 2024).
We compare SoLA with the state-of-the-art pruning and
low-rank decomposition methods. To demonstrate SoLA’s
generability, we conduct evaluations across a variety of

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across various tasks, but the billion-scale
parameters pose deployment challenges. Although existing
methods attempt to reduce the scale of LLMs, they require
either special hardware support or expensive post-training
to maintain model quality. To facilitate efficient and affordable model slimming, we propose a novel training-free compression method for LLMs, named “SoLA”, which leverages
Soft activation sparsity and Low-rAnk decomposition. SoLA
can identify and retain a minority of components significantly contributing to inference, while compressing the majority through low-rank decomposition, based on our analysis
of the activation pattern in the feed-forward network (FFN)
of modern LLMs. To alleviate the decomposition loss, SoLA
is equipped with an adaptive component-wise low-rank allocation strategy to assign appropriate truncation positions for
different weight matrices. We conduct extensive experiments
on LLaMA-2-7B/13B/70B and Mistral-7B models across a
variety of benchmarks. SoLA exhibits remarkable improvement in both language modeling and downstream task accuracy without post-training. For example, with a 30% compression rate on the LLaMA-2-70B model, SoLA surpasses
the state-of-the-art method by reducing perplexity from 6.95
to 4.44 and enhancing downstream task accuracy by 10%.

Code — https://github.com/Ppaddington/SoLA

Introduction
In recent years, the capabilities of large language models
(LLMs) based on Transformers have been widely demonstrated across diverse tasks, and their sizes tend to continuously increase to improve performance according to the
scaling law (Kaplan et al. 2020). These LLMs with a large
number of parameters demand significant storage and computation resources, posing obstacles to their deployment and
utilization. Researchers attempt to mitigate the cost of LLMs
by reducing model parameters with compression methods.
The predominant compression techniques include unstructured pruning, structured pruning, quantization, and lowrank decomposition.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17494

