The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Weighted Embeddings for Low-Dimensional Graph Representation
Thomas Bläsius, Jean-Pierre von der Heydt, Maximilian Katzmann, Nikolai Maas
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany
{thomas.blaesius, heydt, maximilian.katzmann, nikolai.maas}@kit.edu

Abstract
Learning low-dimensional numerical representations from
symbolic data, e.g., embedding the nodes of a graph into a
geometric space, is an important concept in machine learning.
While embedding into Euclidean space is common, recent
observations indicate that hyperbolic geometry is better suited
to represent hierarchical information and heterogeneous data
(e.g., graphs with a scale-free degree distribution). Despite
their potential for more accurate representations, hyperbolic
embeddings also have downsides like being more difficult to
compute and harder to use in downstream tasks.
We propose embedding into a weighted space, which is closely
related to hyperbolic geometry but mathematically simpler. We
provide the embedding algorithm WE MBED and demonstrate,
based on generated as well as over 2000 real-world graphs,
that our weighted embeddings heavily outperform state-ofthe-art Euclidean embeddings for heterogeneous graphs while
using fewer dimensions. The running time of WE MBED and
embedding quality for the remaining instances is on par with
state-of-the-art Euclidean embedders.

Introduction
Embeddings are a vital concept in machine learning. They
map complex objects like high-dimensional vectors (e.g.,
images) or symbolic entities (e.g., words of a language or
nodes of a graph) into a low-dimensional vector space. Downstream tasks utilize these low-dimensional representations by
perceiving objects as similar if their vector representations
are similar. A natural way to measure the similarity of two
vectors x, y ∈ Rd is to interpret them as points in Euclidean
space and use their distance ∥x−y∥. A common alternative is
the dot product x · y, which is closely related to spherical geometry. However, inspired by findings of the network-science
community (Krioukov et al. 2010), it has been observed that
some types of graphs are better represented by embedding
their nodes into hyperbolic geometry (Nickel and Kiela 2017;
Chamberlain, Clough, and Deisenroth 2017).
Benefits of Hyperbolic Geometry Hyperbolic space expands exponentially, i.e., the area of a disk of radius r is in
Θ(er ) for growing r. This makes it possible to embed trees
or similar hierarchical structures with low distortion into the
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
15587

Figure 1: A 2-dimensional weighted embedding of the internet graph used by Boguñá, Papadopoulos, and Krioukov
(2010). The node size indicates the weight.
2-dimensional hyperbolic plane (Sarkar 2011). In comparison, when embedding, e.g., a complete binary tree in the Euclidean plane, one quickly runs out of space as the number of
nodes grows exponentially with the layer while the area only
grows quadratically. Moreover, using hyperbolic distances as
similarity measure allows nodes to be similar to many other
nodes that are themselves pairwise dissimilar. This enables
low-dimensional representations of heterogeneous graphs.1
This in particular includes the prevalent so-called scale-free
networks, where the degree distribution follows a power-law
(Krioukov et al. 2010; Voitalov et al. 2019).
Given these benefits of hyperbolic space when it comes
to representing hierarchical or heterogeneous data, it is not
1

The term heterogneous graph is sometimes also used for graphs
with heterogeneous labels. In this paper, graphs are always unlabeled
and heterogeneity refers to the degree distribution.

