The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Beyond Human Data: Aligning Multimodal Large Language Models
by Iterative Self-Evolution
Wentao Tan1,2 , Qiong Cao2 * † , Yibing Zhan2† , Chao Xue2 , Changxing Ding1,3
1

South China University of Technology
2
JD Explore Academy, Beijing
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
ftwentaotan@mail.scut.edu.cn, {caoqiong1, xuechao19}@jd.com, zybjy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn
Abstract

2023b; Zhou et al. 2024a), which focuses on training models
to better align with user preferences using high-quality preference data. This approach can improve the model’s resistance to hallucinations and its ability to follow complex instructions. However, collecting high-quality preference data
is labor-intensive and costly, often requiring extensive manual annotation (Sun et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2024a) or relying
on data generated by advanced models like GPT-4v (Achiam
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023b; Zhou et al. 2024a).
To achieve low-cost human preference alignment, selfevolution methods have emerged, enabling models to construct preference data to train themselves (Deng et al. 2024;
Wang et al. 2024b; Ahn et al. 2024; Yu et al. 2024b; Zhu
et al. 2024). Fig. 1 (a) shows the exact steps of existing selfevolution methods. First, questions annotated by humans or
GPT are collected. Then, the evolved model answers. Some
methods generate multiple answers and evaluate their quality through a self-rewarding mechanism (Yuan et al. 2024)
or by using extra MLLMs (Yu et al. 2024b), CLIP (Rafailov
et al. 2024; Zhou et al. 2024b), or ground-truth answers
(Wang et al. 2024b). Other methods initially generate chosen
answers, then create rejected responses by modifying image content (Zhu et al. 2024) or using misleading prompts
(Deng et al. 2024). Finally, a DPO loss function is applied to
align with human preference. Despite their promise, current
methods often rely on annotated data and additional models,
which increases complexity.
To address the above limitations, we explore the potential
of going beyond human data and establish a straightforward
and efficient multimodal self-evolution framework: Only a
set of unlabeled images is needed for any model to further improve its performance!
Our framework, depicted in Fig. 1 (b), operates with a
single model and unlabeled images, eliminating the need
for annotated data by having the model generate both questions and answers. We tackle three significant challenges
in this process. The first challenge is generating reliable
questions, as meaningless questions lead to useless training
data. We introduce an image-driven self-questioning mechanism where the model verifies the answerability of generated
questions based on the image content and regenerates them
if necessary. This enhances question quality and facilitates
effective learning. Additionally, to fully utilize the diverse
visual information in the images, we add descriptive ques-

Human preference alignment can significantly enhance
the capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs). However, collecting high-quality preference data
remains costly. One promising solution is the self-evolution
strategy, where models are iteratively trained on data they
generate. Current multimodal self-evolution techniques, nevertheless, still need human- or GPT-annotated data. Some
methods even require extra models or ground truth answers
to construct preference data. To overcome these limitations,
we propose a novel multimodal self-evolution framework that
empowers the model to autonomously generate high-quality
questions and answers using only unannotated images. First,
in the question generation phase, we implement an imagedriven self-questioning mechanism. This approach allows the
model to create questions and evaluate their relevance and
answerability based on the image content. If a question is
deemed irrelevant or unanswerable, the model regenerates it
to ensure alignment with the image. This process establishes
a solid foundation for subsequent answer generation and optimization. Second, while generating answers, we design an
answer self-enhancement technique to boost the discriminative power of answers. We begin by captioning the images and
then use the descriptions to enhance the generated answers.
Additionally, we utilize corrupted images to generate rejected
answers, thereby forming distinct preference pairs for effective optimization. Finally, in the optimization step, we incorporate an image content alignment loss function alongside
the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) loss to mitigate
hallucinations. This function maximizes the likelihood of the
above generated descriptions in order to constrain the model’s
attention to the image content. As a result, model can generate
more accurate and reliable outputs. Experiments demonstrate
that our framework is competitively compared with previous
methods that utilize external information, paving the way for
more efficient and scalable MLLMs.

Code — https://github.com/WentaoTan/SENA

Introduction
An effective strategy for enhancing MLLM capabilities is
human preference alignment (Amirloo et al. 2024; Li et al.
* Project Lead.
†

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7202

