The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Foundations of Multi-Agent Learning in Dynamic Environments:
Where Reinforcement Learning Meets Strategic Decision-Making
Kaiqing Zhang
University of Maryland, College Park
kaiqing@umd.edu

Background. Recent years have witnessed tremendous
successes of learning for sequential decision-making, and
in particular, Reinforcement Learning (RL). Prominent application examples include playing Go and video games,
robotics, autonomous driving, and recently large language
models. Most such success stories naturally involve multiple agents. Hence, there has been surging research interest in
advancing Multi-Agent Learning in Dynamic Environments,
and particularly, multi-agent RL (MARL), to which my research has led and made significant contributions.

result is significant as it stands in sharp contrast with
that for matrix/static games without Markovian states,
where computing CCE is known to be tractable; it also
contrasts single-agent RL, where finding a stationary
Markov optimal policy is tractable. Hence, it illustrated
another unique challenge in MARL: it is the combined
effect of both multi-agency and sequential decision-making
that made MARL (computationally) hard. This is the
first computational hardness result of finding CCE in
general-sum Stochastic Games and MARL, with many
followup works.

Sample Complexity of MARL. My work (Zhang et al.
2023) established the first near-optimal sample complexity
for two-player zero-sum Stochastic Games, the most fundamental model of MARL (Shapley 1953; Littman 1994). We
proved that a simple model-based RL approach matches the
lower-bound in all parameters except a |A||B| v.s. |A|+|B|
gap, where A, B correspond to the action spaces of agents
1 and 2. More intriguingly, (Zhang et al. 2023) also showed
that when the reward function is only given after the transition model is estimated, which we termed as the rewardagnostic setting, the lower bound is Ω(|A||B|) and exactly
matches the upper bound. Note that model-based RL can inherently handle this more challenging reward-agnostic setting, which thus implies that it is minimax optimal in this
regime. This separation demonstrated the unique power
(it can inherently handle multiple rewards in hindsight) and
limitation (it is less adaptive and has a |A| + |B| gap even
with reward information) of model-based MARL. My work
thus raised a more fundamental question: when will the
sample complexities not grow exponentially in the number of agents? Many works have since then been inspired
to show that with the guidance of reward, some model-free
MARL approaches can address this issue (Jin et al. 2023;
Song, Mei, and Bai 2022; Li et al. 2022), including my
works (Cui, Zhang, and Du 2023; Daskalakis∗ , Golowich∗ ,
and Zhang∗ 2023), on the sample complexity of MARL.

Independent Learning: An Econ Perspective of MARL.
My work also reflected on the intriguing question: Why
always using equilibrium as the solution concept in
MARL? In fact, in Economics, (Nash) equilibrium is not
necessarily the target, but the natural long-run outcome
from multiple strategic agents’ interactions via independent learning (Fudenberg and Levine 1998). Such a perspective has been extensively studied for stateless games,
but remains elusive for Stochastic Games with state dynamics. My works (Sayin∗ et al. 2021; Sayin, Zhang, and
Ozdaglar 2022; Park∗ , Zhang∗ , and Ozdaglar 2023) have
led the exploration of this unique perspective of MARL,
and have constituted an invited article at International
International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM) 2022
(Ozdaglar∗ , Sayin∗ , and Zhang∗ 2022).
Other Notable Contributions. My works have also led
the exploration of distributed networked MARL (Zhang
et al. 2018), and a minimax (zero-sum-game) view of robust
adversarial and risk-sensitive RL (Zhang, Hu, and Başar
2020, 2021), safe RL (Ding et al. 2020), and offline RL
(Ozdaglar et al. 2023).

Computational Complexity of MARL. My work
(Daskalakis∗ , Golowich∗ , and Zhang∗ 2023) also settled
that, computing stationary Markov coarse correlated
equilibrium (CCE) in general-sum Stochastic Games is
PPAD-hard and thus computationally intractable. The

Applications (in Robotics). Trained as a theorist, I have
also actively engaged with applied researchers to broaden
my research impact. For example, (Suh et al. 2022) on Differentiable Simulators in Robotics has won ICML Outstanding Paper Award in 2022. My work (Wang et al.
2024) has deployed the networked MARL framework to
Robot Fleet Learning for robotic manipulation tasks, with
application to the real-world data from Amazon warehouses.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Acknowledgments. K.Z. acknowledges the support from
the U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) Grant W911NF28734

