The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

k-HyperEdge Medoids for Clustering Ensemble
Feijiang Li1,2 , Jieting Wang1,2 , Liuya Zhang1 , Yuhua Qian1,2 *, Shuai Jin1 , Tao Yan1,2 , Liang Du1,2
1

2

Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University
Key Laboratory of Evolutionary Science Intelligence ofShanxi Province, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China
jinchengqyh@126.com

Abstract

of a single clustering result.
The clustering ensemble problem is first proposed by
Strehl and Ghosh (Strehl and Ghosh 2002), which is described as combining multiple clustering results of a set
of objects into a single consolidated clustering that shares
most information with the ensemble base without accessing the features of the data samples or the algorithms that
produce these clustering results. Following this description,
many methods have been proposed to solve the clustering
ensemble problem. Most of the existing clustering ensemble methods can be roughly categorized into clustering-view
and sample-view.
As for the clustering-view methods, their main idea is to
generate a clustering result that is similar to the clustering
results in the ensemble base. To generate such a clustering
result, a simple strategy is to first align the labels of the different clustering results and then merge them using a fusion
strategy, such as voting. Another strategy is to give a clustering similarity measure and then use a dynamic programming
method to produce the integrated result. Generally, due to
that the number of clustering results is much less than that of
samples, most of the clustering-view methods are efficient.
However, the unreliability that existed in the base clustering
results brings a negative effect on the ensemble performance
(Zhou et al. 2022).
As for the sample-view methods, their main idea is to generate a clustering result that the samples in the same cluster
share high similarity. There are two issues for this type of
method, one is how to evaluate the similarity between samples and the other one is how to discover such a clustering
result. As for the first issue, the co-association relation that
evaluates the times that two samples appear in the same cluster is one of the most utilized sample pair similarity measures (Li, Qian, and Wang 2021). As for the second issue,
many partition methods have been proposed, in which the
clustering strategies (Liu et al. 2017), graph partition strategies (Strehl and Ghosh 2002), or heuristic strategies (Li et al.
2019) are utilized. This type of method has shown excellent
effectiveness in handling the clustering ensemble problem.
However, calculating the pairwise sample relationships and
optimizing a clustering loss is often time-consuming.
With consideration of the characteristics of the above
two types of clustering ensemble methods, in this paper,
a method based on k-HyperEdge Medoids is developed,

Clustering ensemble has been a popular research topic in
data science due to its ability to improve the robustness
of the single clustering method. Many clustering ensemble
methods have been proposed, most of which can be categorized into clustering-view and sample-view methods. The
clustering-view method is generally efficient, but it could be
affected by the unreliability that existed in base clustering
results. The sample-view method shows good performance,
while the construction of the pairwise sample relation is timeconsuming. In this paper, the clustering ensemble is formulated as a k-HyperEdge Medoids discovery problem and a
clustering ensemble method based on k-HyperEdge Medoids
that considers the characteristics of the above two types of
clustering ensemble methods is proposed. In the method, a set
of hyperedges is selected from the clustering view efficiently,
then the hyperedges are diffused and adjusted from the sample view guided by a hyperedge loss function to construct
an effective k-HyperEdge Medoid set. The loss function is
mainly reduced by assigning samples to the hyperedge with
the highest degree of belonging. Theoretical analyses show
that the solution can approximate the optimal, the assignment
method can gradually reduce the loss function, and the estimation of the belonging degree is statistically reasonable.
Experiments on artificial data show the working mechanism
of the proposed method. The convergence of the method is
verified by experimental analysis of twenty data sets. The effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method are also
verified on these data, with nine representative clustering ensemble algorithms as reference.

Introduction
Data clustering is an interesting technique to discover the
group structure inherent in a set of data samples without
labels (Vega-Pons and Ruiz-Shulcloper 2011). The general
objective of data clustering is discovering a set of clusters
in which the samples in the same cluster share some kind of
high similarity while the samples in different clusters share
high diversity. With the complexity of the data development,
many traditional clustering methods suffer from the robust
problem. To handle this, the clustering ensemble technique
that combines multiple diverse clustering results has been illustrated as an effective strategy to improve the robustness
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18271

