The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Zero-Shot Conditioning of Score-Based Diffusion Models by Neuro-Symbolic
Constraints
Davide Scassola1,2 , Sebastiano Saccani2 , Ginevra Carbone2 , Luca Bortolussi1
1

AILAB, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
Aindo, AREA Science Park, Trieste, Italy
davide.scassola@phd.units.it, sebastiano@aindo.com, ginevracoal@gmail.com, lbortolussi@units.it
2

Abstract

is only learned through labelled data, even when the constraint is a user-defined function. As a consequence, zeroshot conditional generation with arbitrary but formal logical
constraints specified at inference time is currently hard. This
would be useful in different contexts, for example:

Score-based diffusion models have emerged as effective approaches for both conditional and unconditional generation.
Still conditional generation is based on either a specific training of a conditional model or classifier guidance, which requires training a noise-dependent classifier, even when a classifier for uncorrupted data is given. We propose a method
that, given a pre-trained unconditional score-based generative
model, samples from the conditional distribution under arbitrary logical constraints, without requiring additional training. Differently from other zero-shot techniques, that rather
aim at generating valid conditional samples, our method is
designed for approximating the true conditional distribution.
Firstly, we show how to manipulate the learned score in order to sample from an un-normalized distribution conditional
on a user-defined constraint. Then, we define a flexible and
numerically stable neuro-symbolic framework for encoding
soft logical constraints. Combining these two ingredients we
obtain a general, but approximate, conditional sampling algorithm. We further developed effective heuristics aimed at
improving the approximation. Finally, we show the effectiveness of our approach in approximating conditional distributions for various types of constraints and data: tabular data,
images and time series.

• Tabular data: generation of entries that obey formal requirements described by logical formulas, without a specific training for every formula.
• Surrogate models: using unconditional surrogate models to efficiently sample imposing physical constraints,
or exploring scenarios defined by additional constraints.
Text prompt conditioned image generation with diffusion
models (Rombach et al. 2022) has proven extremely flexible
and effective, still it lacks fine grained control and requires
a massive amount of labelled samples.
Recent work focuses on methods to perform guided diffusion on images, without the need to retrain a noisedependent classifier (Bansal et al. 2023; Graikos et al. 2022;
Kadkhodaie and Simoncelli 2021; Nair et al. 2023), but the
performance of the approximation of the conditional distribution is never evaluated.
In this article we develop a method for sampling from pretrained unconditional score-based generative models, enforcing arbitrary user-defined logical constraints, that does
not require additional training. Despite being originally designed for tabular data, we also show the application of our
method to images and time series. In summary, we present
the following key contributions:

Code — https://github.com/DavideScassola/score-basedconstrained-generation

1

Introduction

Score-based (Song and Ermon 2019) and diffusion (Ho,
Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015) generative models based on deep neural networks have proven
effective in modelling complex high-dimensional distributions in various domains. Controlling these models in order to obtain desirable features in samples is often required,
still most conditional models require additional constraintspecific training in order to perform conditional sampling.
This represents a limit since either one needs to train an
extremely flexible conditional model (as those based on text
prompts), or alternatively to train a conditional model for
any specific constraint to be enforced. Moreover, these conditional models often lack robustness, since the constraint

• We develop a zero-shot method for applying constraints
to pre-trained unconditional score-based generative models. The method enables sampling approximately from
the conditional distribution given a soft constraint.
• We define a general neuro-symbolic language for building soft constraints that corresponds to logical formulas.
These constraints are numerically stable, satisfy convenient logical properties, and can be relaxed/hardened arbitrarily through a control parameter.
• We test our method on different types of datasets and
constraints, showing good performance on approximating conditional distributions on tabular data, while previous methods were rather meant to obtain high-quality
samples that satisfy some given constraints.

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20302

