The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accessible, At-Home Detection of Parkinson’s Disease
via Multi-Task Video Analysis
Md Saiful Islam1 * , Tariq Adnan1 , Jan Freyberg2 , Sangwu Lee1 , Abdelrahman Abdelkader1 ,
Meghan Pawlik3 , Cathe Schwartz4 , Karen Jaffe4 , Ruth B. Schneider3 , Ray Dorsey3 , Ehsan Hoque1
1

University of Rochester, New York, United States
2
Google Research, London, United Kingdom
3
University of Rochester Medical Center, New York, United States
4
InMotion, Ohio, United States
mislam6@ur.rochester.edu
Abstract

with Parkinson’s disease—the fastest growing neurological
disorder (Dorsey et al. 2018)—without even knowing
it. In many instances, when diagnosed late with this
incurable disease, the condition could have already
progressed significantly, limiting the usefulness of available
medications. Imagine a future where individuals can
remotely assess their risk for PD by simply visiting a
website, activating their webcam and microphone, and
completing a series of standardized tasks. This accessible
approach could empower people to seek early intervention
and treatment, potentially improving their quality of life.
Detecting PD is particularly challenging due to the
variability of individual symptoms. For example, while
vocal impairment is a common PD symptom (Ho
et al. 1999), patients may also exhibit PD through
other modalities, such as facial expression (e.g.,
hypomimia (Gunnery et al. 2016)) or motor function
(e.g., bradykinesia (Bologna et al. 2023)). Consequently,
models relying solely on a single task may yield suboptimal
performance. To address this, we introduce a large video
dataset featuring webcam recordings of individuals
performing three tasks: (i) finger-tapping (motor function),
(ii) smiling (facial expression), and (iii) uttering a pangram1
(speech). The dataset is collected from 845 unique
participants (272 with PD) from diverse demographics who
recorded all of these tasks successfully (about 20% of them
recorded multiple times), resulting in 1102 videos for each
task and a total of 3306 videos. To our knowledge, this is
the first multi-task video dataset for PD screening.
We propose a novel two-stage classification model
to distinguish between individuals with and without
Parkinson’s disease (PD) using our dataset. First, each
task is independently modeled with neural networks
trained using Monte Carlo dropout (MC dropout) to
generate predictions and associated uncertainties. Next,
we introduce the Uncertainty-calibrated Fusion Network
(UFNet), which aggregates features from multiple tasks
through an attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017),
while calibrating the attention scores based on task-specific
uncertainties. UFNet is designed to produce PD/Non-PD
predictions and uses MC dropout during training and

Limited accessibility to neurological care leads to
under-diagnosed Parkinson’s Disease (PD), preventing
early intervention. Existing AI-based PD detection methods
primarily focus on unimodal analysis of motor or speech
tasks, overlooking the multifaceted nature of the disease.
To address this, we introduce a large-scale, multi-task
video dataset of 1102 sessions (each containing videos
of finger tapping, facial expression, and speech tasks
captured via webcam) from 845 participants (272 with
PD). We propose a novel Uncertainty-calibrated Fusion
Network (UFNet) that leverages this multimodal data to
enhance diagnostic accuracy. UFNet employs independent
task-specific networks, trained with Monte Carlo Dropout
for uncertainty quantification, followed by self-attended
fusion of features, with attention weights dynamically
adjusted based on task-specific uncertainties. We randomly
split the participants into training (60%), validation (20%),
and test (20%) sets to ensure patient-centered evaluation.
UFNet significantly outperformed single-task models in
terms of accuracy, area under the ROC curve (AUROC),
and sensitivity while maintaining non-inferior specificity.
Withholding uncertain predictions further boosted the
performance, achieving 88.0 ± 0.3% accuracy, 93.0 ± 0.2%
AUROC, 79.3 ± 0.9% sensitivity, and 92.6 ± 0.3%
specificity, at the expense of not being able to predict for
2.3 ± 0.3% data (± denotes 95% confidence interval).
Further analysis suggests that the trained model does not
exhibit any detectable bias across sex and ethnic subgroups
and is most effective for individuals aged between 50 and
80. By merely requiring a webcam and microphone, our
approach facilitates accessible home-based PD screening,
especially in regions with limited healthcare resources.

Code & Dataset — https://github.com/ROC-HCI/UFNet
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14856
Demo — https://parktest.net/demo

Introduction
Due to limited access to neurological care, many individuals,
particularly in underserved regions (Kissani et al. 2022), live
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

28125

pangram: sentence containing all the letters of the alphabet.

