The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

CLEP: A Novel Contrastive Learning Method for Evolutionary Reentrancy
Vulnerability Detection
Jie Chen1 , Liangmin Wang1 * , Huijuan Zhu2 , Victor S. Sheng3
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University
School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University
3
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University
{jiechensimon, liangmin}@seu.edu.cn, huijuanzhu@ujs.edu.cn, victor.sheng@ttu.edu
2

Regular Embedding

Abstract

Cross-Version Contrastive Embedding

drifting vulnerable samples
20

Reentrancy vulnerabilities in smart contracts have been exploited to steal enormous amounts of money, thus detecting
reentrancy vulnerabilities is a hotspot issue in security research. However, a new attack is emerging in which attackers
continuously release new reentrancy patterns to exploit fresh
vulnerabilities and obfuscate existing ones. Existing detection
methods neglect the time-series evolution of vulnerabilities
across different smart contract versions, leading to a gradual
decline in their effectiveness over time. We investigate the
time-series correlations among vulnerabilities in various versions and refer to these as Evolutionary Reentrancy Vulnerabilities (ERVs). We summarize that ERVs detection faces two
key challenges: (i) capturing the evolving pattern of ERVs
along a complete evolutionary chain and (ii) detecting fresh
reentrancy vulnerabilities in new versions. To address these
challenges, we propose CLEP, a novel Contrastive Learning
with Evolving Pairs detection method. It can effectively capture the evolving patterns by discerning similarities and differences across versions. Specifically, we first modified the
sample distribution by incorporating version declarations as
time-series evolution information. Then, leveraging the hierarchical similarity, we design an evolving pairs scheme to
form negative and positive contract pairs across versions. Finally, we build a complete evolutionary chain by proposing a
version-aware contrastive sampler. Our experimental results
show that CLEP not only outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in version-specific scenarios but also shows promising
performance in cross-version evolution scenarios.

0

−20

−20

0

20

−20

Flawless Contracts
Vulnerable Contracts: v0.4
Vulnerable Contracts: v0.6 Vulnerable Contracts: v0.7

0

20

Vulnerable Contracts: v0.5
Vulnerable Contracts: v0.8

Figure 1: Regular Embedding vs. Cross-Version Contrastive
Embedding. The embeddings are visualized using T-SNE,
showing that new vulnerable contracts tend to become drifting samples and are misclassified as flawless. We aggregate
the sub-versions under their major versions, such as grouping version 0.6.3 under 0.6.
patchable like traditional software, making it exceptionally
challenging to update or modify smart contracts once they
are deployed (Jiao et al. 2020).
The detection of SCVs has attracted significant interest
from both industry and academia. Existing efforts can be
roughly categorized into two groups: static analysis and dynamic analysis. These two types of analysis methods mainly
involve software testing techniques and neural networks,
with neural networks primarily present in static analysis.
A critical branch of static analysis involves the semantic
and syntactic analysis of smart contract source code. In recent years, researchers have increasingly delved into various deep learning-based methods (Zhuang et al. 2021; Wu
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Sendner et al. 2023) to detect SCVs, driven by the neural network’s capacity to learn
hidden representations from extensive data.
However, due to the evolution of SCVs when programming language (Solidity) upgrades, existing methods have
become out of date and ineffective. Our study finds that, a
well-trained SCV detector exhibits a decrease (from 0.92
to 0.65) in precision when tested on <0.5 smart contracts compared to those with 0.7 versions. Specifically,
the Ethereum network operates multiple versions of smart
contracts simultaneously. Moreover, reentrancy vulnerabilities have evolved from the traditional same-function pat-

Introduction
Smart contracts are deployed in blockchain systems to facilitate the implementation of nearly arbitrary business logic
in areas involving high-value assets (Kalodner et al. 2018).
Attackers can illicitly steal cryptocurrencies or tokens by exploiting underlying vulnerabilities in smart contracts. Reentrancy, one of the most notorious smart contracts vulnerabilities (SCVs), has led to millions of dollars in financial loss.
For example, the most severe breach so far is the “TheDAO”
incident, wherein hackers stole over $50 million worth of
Ether (Rodler et al. 2019). Smart contracts suffer from the
inherent risk of being prone to errors, owing to they are not
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

67

