The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Key-Point-Driven Data Synthesis with Its Enhancement on Mathematical Reasoning
Yiming Huang* † , Xiao Liu† , Yeyun Gong, Zhibin Gou, Yelong Shen, Nan Duan, Weizhu Chen
Microsoft
yeeelow233@gmail.com, xiaoliu2@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large language models have shown great potential in complex
reasoning tasks, yet their performance is often hampered by
the scarcity of high-quality and reasoning-focused training
datasets. Addressing this challenge, we propose Key-PointDriven Data Synthesis (KPDDS), a novel data synthesis framework that synthesizes question-answer pairs by leveraging key
points and exemplar practices from authentic data sources.
KPDDS ensures the generation of novel questions with rigorous quality control and substantial scalability. As a result,
we present KPMath, an extensive synthetic dataset tailored
for mathematical reasoning, comprising over 800K questionanswer pairs. Utilizing KPMath and augmenting it with additional reasoning-intensive corpora, we create the comprehensive KPMath-Plus dataset. Our experiments demonstrate that
this dataset can enhance the mathematical reasoning performance of models across various architectures and sizes. The
Qwen1.5-72B model, fine-tuned on KPMath-Plus, achieves
87.0% accuracy on GSM8K and 58.3% on MATH, surpassing competitors in the 7B to 72B range and best commercial
models like GPT-4 across multiple math reasoning datasets.

Introduction
The recent advent of large language models (LLMs) such
as GPT-4 (OpenAI 2023), Gemini (Team et al. 2023), and
Mistral (Jiang et al. 2023) has sparked significant interest due
to their advanced capabilities in diverse domains. Despite
this, their reasoning process, particularly in challenging domains like advanced mathematics (Lewkowycz et al. 2022),
competitive programming (Huang et al. 2023), and integrated
vision-language planning (Cen et al. 2024), remains under
scrutiny. In current mathematical reasoning corpora, such
as OpenWebMath (Paster et al. 2023) and MathPile (Wang,
Xia, and Liu 2023), the vast internet-sourced data often suffers from poor quality and relevance to the subject matter.
Conversely, manually annotated high-quality datasets like
the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al. 2021) are scarce and
sometimes lack detailed reasoning steps.
Prior efforts to boost the mathematical reasoning capabilities of LLMs using synthetic data have primarily adopted
* This work was done during the internship of Yiming Huang at

Microsoft.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24176

two strategies. The first strategy focuses on augmenting existing datasets. It involves question rephrasing (Yu et al. 2023)
or generating similar questions (Luo et al. 2023a; Liu et al.
2024). The primary issue of this strategy is that the generated
questions are not only textually or conceptually similar but
also uncontrollable in their variations. The second strategy
seeks to broaden the training dataset by generating new questions from knowledge concepts. Knowledge bases are either
compiled from online educational resources, such as Khan
Academy’s math courses (Huang et al. 2024), or synthesized
from scratch using models like GPT-4 (Li et al. 2024). These
methods depend on constructed knowledge that might not
align with the existing dataset’s distributions and are difficult
to comprehend without examples to illustrate the concepts.
Considering these disadvantages of the two strategies, we
introduce a novel data synthesis paradigm termed Key-PointDriven Data Synthesis (KPDDS), which capitalizes on the
strengths of both data synthesis strategies. As depicted in
Figure 1, it delves into datasets for knowledge mining, using
relevant key points and associated problems to inform the
generation of new problems. (1) For knowledge construction, we begin by extracting topics and key points from seed
problems using a labeling model, followed by a clustering
algorithm to ensure deduplication and alignment. Therefore,
we obtain the Math Practices with Key Points (MPKP) dataset
and construct the Topic-level Co-occurrence Probability Matrix (TCPM) to understand the combination patterns of topics
within the dataset. (2) For practice synthesis, we sample multiple topics and key points from MPKP using the TCPM as a
guide. These key points, along with corresponding example
practices, serve as input for the synthesizing model to generate new questions. A scoring model then assesses the quality
of these questions, allowing only those with high scores to
proceed. Then, a reasoning model generates a range of answer options, which are later consolidated into consensus
solutions through a voting mechanism.
Utilizing the training sets of the MATH (Hendrycks et al.
2021) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al. 2021) datasets as foundational data, we developed a novel dataset named KPMath.
Our training corpus was further enriched by integrating a
series of mathematical reasoning datasets, leading to the creation of a comprehensive training dataset, KPMath-Plus.
Our experiments demonstrate that this dataset can enhance
the mathematical reasoning performance of models across

