The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enriching Multimodal Sentiment Analysis Through Textual Emotional
Descriptions of Visual-Audio Content
Sheng Wu1,2 , Dongxiao He3 , Xiaobao Wang3,2, * , Longbiao Wang3, * , Jianwu Dang4
1

School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
3
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China
4
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
{2022245014, hedongxiao, wangxiaobao, longbiao wang}@tju.edu.cn, jdang@jaist.ac.jp
2

Abstract
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) stands as a critical
research frontier, seeking to comprehensively unravel human
emotions by amalgamating text, audio, and visual data. Yet,
discerning subtle emotional nuances within audio and video
expressions poses a formidable challenge, particularly when
emotional polarities across various segments appear similar.
In this paper, our objective is to spotlight emotion-relevant
attributes of audio and visual modalities to facilitate multimodal fusion in the context of nuanced emotional shifts
in visual-audio scenarios. To this end, we introduce DEVA,
a progressive fusion framework founded on textual sentiment descriptions aimed at accentuating emotional features
of visual-audio content. DEVA employs an Emotional Description Generator (EDG) to transmute raw audio and visual
data into textualized sentiment descriptions, thereby amplifying their emotional characteristics. These descriptions are
then integrated with the source data to yield richer, enhanced
features. Furthermore, DEVA incorporates the Text-guided
Progressive Fusion Module (TPF), leveraging varying levels
of text as a core modality guide. This module progressively
fuses visual-audio minor modalities to alleviate disparities
between text and visual-audio modalities. Experimental results on widely used sentiment analysis benchmark datasets,
including MOSI, MOSEI, and CH-SIMS, underscore significant enhancements compared to state-of-the-art models.
Moreover, fine-grained emotion experiments corroborate the
robust sensitivity of DEVA to subtle emotional variations.

Figure 1: The illustration of our motivation is as follows:
The text transcription of the audio is indicated within the
blue box, while the visual emotional description is within the
orange box. The teal highlighting indicates highly emotionally relevant descriptions, and teal circles are used to mark
the corresponding microexpressions in the source data.

Jiang et al. 2020), social media analytics (Melville, Gryc,
and Lawrence 2009), and human-computer interaction (Peter and Urban 2012). Compared to unimodal approaches,
multimodal analysis offers greater robustness and comprehensiveness in understanding human emotions.
Leveraging the advancements in deep learning techniques (Chen et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022; Fu et al.
2021; Wang et al. 2023), recent approaches in multimodal
sentiment analysis (MSA) primarily concentrate on representation learning and fusion strategies across modalities.
In terms of representation learning, various methods have
emerged, including feature decoupling techniques aimed at
mapping features into shared and private spaces (Hazarika,
Zimmermann, and Poria 2020; Yang et al. 2022a,b). Moreover, contrastive learning (Yang et al. 2023) and multitask
learning (Yu et al. 2021) have been explored to enhance
representation learning. Regarding multimodal fusion, the
initial approach is often early fusion, where features from
text, audio, and visual modalities are concatenated for downstream tasks. Subsequently, more sophisticated techniques
such as outer product (Zadeh et al. 2017), Convolutional

Introduction
Sentiment analysis is a classic language understanding task,
where traditionally, the analysis of user sentiment is conducted through text (Lei, Qian, and Zhao 2016). With the
evolution of social media, there has been a significant increase in user-generated videos, making multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) gradually emerge as a hotspot in research. Its objective is to comprehensively analyze people’s
emotional states through text, audio, and visual data (Poria et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2024). MSA plays a crucial
role in various fields such as healthcare (Doctor et al. 2016;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1601

