The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Conformalized Interval Arithmetic with Symmetric Calibration
Rui Luo1 * , Zhixin Zhou2
1

City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Alpha Benito Research, Los Angeles, USA
ruiluo@cityu.edu.hk, zzhou@alphabenito.com

Abstract

can predict the label of each road, where the label can be
considered as the cost of traversing that road. This problem
has been studied in (Huang et al. 2024; Zargarbashi, Antonelli, and Bojchevski 2023; Zhao, Kang, and Cheng 2024;
Luo and Colombo 2025). Conformalized GNN can output a
prediction set of each edge’s label, but the cost of a route,
which is the sum of the labels of the edges on the route, cannot be directly obtained by applying conformal prediction
to individual edges. This challenge arises from two main aspects. First, the sum or average of random variables involves
the convolution of the density function, and simple interval
arithmetic, such as adding up the lower and upper bounds,
cannot provide a confidence interval with the desired coverage. Second, the coverage of each confidence interval is in a
marginal sense, so the coverage of two labels from two confidence intervals are dependent events. Consequently, it is
difficult to use the conformal prediction set for a single label
to devise a prediction set for multiple labels. To address this
critical gap in the current literature on conformal prediction
and expand its applicability to a broader range of uncertainty
quantification problems, we introduce the method Conformal Interval Arithmetic (CIA), specifically designed to estimate the average or other symmetric functions of unknown
labels over a certain index set, demonstrating the usefulness
of our problem setting in many applications where people
are interested in obtaining estimates about multiple labels.

Uncertainty quantification is essential in decision-making,
especially when joint distributions of random variables are
involved. While conformal prediction provides distributionfree prediction sets with valid coverage guarantees, it traditionally focuses on single predictions. This paper introduces
novel conformal prediction methods for estimating the sum
or average of unknown labels over specific index sets. We develop conformal prediction intervals for single target to the
prediction interval for sum of multiple targets. Under permutation invariant assumptions, we prove the validity of our proposed method. We also apply our algorithms on class average
estimation and path cost prediction tasks, and we show that
our method outperforms existing conformalized approaches
as well as non-conformal approaches.

Code — https://github.com/luo-lorry/CIA
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10939

1

Introduction

Conformal prediction (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer
2005) has gained popularity as a method for uncertainty
quantification due to its validity guarantee. It plays a crucial role in modern decision-making processes, particularly
in domains where understanding the joint distribution of random variables is essential. Under the exchangeability assumptions on the calibration and test samples, conformal
prediction can provide prediction sets with valid coverage
guarantees. Existing works have studied prediction intervals
for single targets (Lei et al. 2018; Romano, Patterson, and
Candes 2019; Sesia and Romano 2021; Luo and Zhou 2024).
Given a black box algorithm to estimate the target label, current conformalized algorithms can provide prediction intervals for the target with reliable coverage probability. However, although numerous studies have developed the methodology of conformal prediction, they are limited to predicting
a single label, leaving a gap in finding the prediction set for
the sum of labels.
This gap is particularly relevant in applications such as
transductive conformal prediction on traffic networks. For
example, existing Graph Neural Network (GNN) methods

Our main proposed method can be described as follows.
The core idea is to establish a confidence interval using the
exchangeability of the groups of indices. This method involves finding the absolute value of the difference between
the sum of labels in a group and its prediction, or absolute residual, and using this as the score function for split
conformal prediction. Assuming the groups of indices are
exchangeable, we can provide prediction sets with valid
marginal coverage. However, this approach cannot handle
the case when the calibration samples and the test samples
belong to different groups. To address this issue, we introduce a new split conformal prediction method called symmetric calibration, which creates a scenario in which the
calibration set and the test set play symmetric roles. At the
group level, each index within the same group has equal
chance of being assigned to either a calibration sample or
a test sample. This ensures that the residual from the sums
of calibration samples and the sums of test samples have

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19207

