The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Person Search via Dual Self-Calibration
Linfeng Qi1 , Huibing Wang1 * , Jiqing Zhang1 , Jinjia Peng2 , Yang Wang3
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, China
2
School of Cyber Security and Computer, Hebei University, Baoding, China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
{qilinfeng, huibing.wang, jqz}@dlmu.edu.cn, pengjinjia@hbu.edu.cn, yangwang@hfut.edu.cn

Generate Pseudo-Labels

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive (UDA) person search focuses on employing the model trained on a labeled source
domain dataset to a target domain dataset without any additional annotations. Most effective UDA person search methods typically utilize the ground truth of the source domain
and pseudo-labels derived from clustering during the training
process for domain adaptation. However, the performance of
these approaches will be significantly restricted by the disrupting pseudo-labels resulting from inter-domain disparities.
In this paper, we propose a Dual Self-Calibration (DSCA)
framework for UDA person search that effectively eliminates the interference of noisy pseudo-labels by considering both the image-level and instance-level features perspectives. Specifically, we first present a simple yet effective
Perception-Driven Adaptive Filter (PDAF) to adaptively predict a dynamic filter threshold based on input features. This
threshold assists in eliminating noisy pseudo-boxes and other
background interference, allowing our approach to focus on
foreground targets and avoid indiscriminate domain adaptation. Besides, we further propose a Cluster Proxy Representation (CPR) module to enhance the update strategy of cluster representation, which mitigates the pollution of clusters
from misidentified instances and effectively streamlines the
training process for unlabeled target domains. With the above
design, our method can achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on two benchmark datasets, with 80.2% mAP and
81.7% top-1 on the CUHK-SYSU dataset, with 39.9% mAP
and 81.6% top-1 on the PRW dataset, which is comparable
to or even exceeds the performance of some fully supervised
methods.

Noisy Pseudo
Labels

True

False

Figure 1: Noisy pseudo-labels consist of low-quality pseudo
bounding boxes and misidentified pseudo identities. Where
the quality of bounding boxes is the result of unsupervised
detection, the reliability of the identities is affected by the
clustering features.

However, models trained in one domain often struggle to
generalize effectively to other domains due to factors such
as person viewpoints and camera configuration (Liu et al.
2024). Moreover, annotating sufficient training data for a
specific scenario is laborious and expensive. Therefore, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) offers significant potential in real-world scenarios for person search.
UDA (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Kang et al. 2019) for
person search aims to narrow the gap between ideal training
data and the realities of practical applications. However, this
field is still in its infancy. Current approaches involve combining the pre-trained model on the source domain with clustering to produce pseudo labels on the target domain, which
are then employed to facilitate the feature representation
learning (Huang et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024a). Specifically,
DAPS (Li et al. 2022) is the pioneering work that proposes
an implicit alignment module to transfer the knowledge of
well-annotated source domain data to the unlabeled target
domain for UDA person search. Based on this, DDAM (Almansoori, Fiaz, and Cholakkal 2024) further enhances domain adaptation by generating a hybrid domain representation, which improves knowledge transfer between the source
and target domains. Although effective, these methods fail

Code — https://github.com/whbdmu/DSCA

Introduction
Person search is a task that combines pedestrian detection (Girshick et al. 2014; Ren et al. 2015) and reidentification (ReID) (Ye et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2023) to achieve localization and identification of the target pedestrians in real-life scenes. Supervised learning in person search tasks has made significant
advancements (Jaffe and Zakhor 2023; Jiang et al. 2024).
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6550

