The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

VQLTI: Long-Term Tropical Cyclone Intensity Forecasting with Physical
Constraints
Xinyu Wang1 , Lei Liu1 * , Kang Chen1,2 , Tao Han2,3 , Bin Li1 , Lei Bai2∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
xinyuwang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liulei13@ustc.edu.cn, ck6@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hantao10200@gmail.com, binli@ustc.edu.cn,
baisanshi@gmail.com
Abstract
Tropical cyclone (TC) intensity forecasting is crucial for early
disaster warning and emergency decision-making. Numerous
researchers have explored deep-learning methods to address
computational and post-processing issues in operational forecasting. Regrettably, they exhibit subpar long-term forecasting capabilities. We use two strategies to enhance long-term
forecasting. (1) By enhancing the matching between TC intensity and spatial information, we can improve long-term
forecasting performance. (2) Incorporating physical knowledge and physical constraints can help mitigate the accumulation of forecasting errors. To achieve the above strategies,
we propose the VQLTI framework. VQLTI transfers the TC
intensity information to a discrete latent space while retaining the spatial information differences, using large-scale spatial meteorological data as conditions. Furthermore, we leverage the forecast from the weather prediction model FengWu
to provide additional physical knowledge for VQLTI. Additionally, we calculate the potential intensity (PI) to impose
physical constraints on the latent variables. In the global longterm TC intensity forecasting, VQLTI achieves state-of-theart results for the 24h to 120h, with the MSW (Maximum
Sustained Wind) forecast error reduced by 35.65%-42.51%
compared to ECMWF-IFS.

Figure 1: Past methods, such as LSTM, would map the same
TC intensity to the same position in the latent space, thereby
ignoring their spatial information. To preserve this spatial
information, we use ERA5 data as a condition to map the
TC intensity to a discrete latent space, such that the same
TC intensity is distributed with a certain intra-class distance,
thereby capturing their spatial differences.

Code — https://github.com/1457756434/VQLTI
pressure (MSLP) of a TC. In current operational forecasting, these forecasting methods primarily rely on Numerical
Weather Prediction models (NWP) (Buizza et al. 2018), such
as the Global Forecast System of the China Meteorological
Administration (CMA-GFS) (Shen et al. 2023), the Global
Forecast System of the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP-GFS) (Zhou and Juang 2023), and the
Integrated Forecasting System of the European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF-IFS) (Haiden
et al. 2018). However, these models usually require the use
of high-performance computing resources to solve a large
number of partial differential equations, resulting in high
computational costs (Rüttgers et al. 2019). Therefore, the
computationally less expensive deep learning (DL) methods
have become a research hotspot. Deep learning has made pioneering progress in the field of meteorology, able to understand natural phenomena across temporal and spatial scales,
thereby driving the advancement of natural sciences (Bi
et al. 2023; Lam et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023a,b). In recent

Introduction
Tropical cyclones (TCs), commonly known as typhoons or
hurricanes, are cyclonic circulations that are stronger in the
near-sea surface layer than in the upper layer (Emanuel
2003). These systems possess tremendous destructive potential, as evidenced by typhoon Mangkhut in 2018, which impacted 3.29 million people and resulted in USD 7.62 billion
in direct economic losses (Yang et al. 2019). Consequently,
accurate long-term forecasting of TC intensity is of critical importance for minimizing disaster-related damages and
losses (Woodruff, Irish, and Camargo 2013; Zhang, Fang,
and Yu 2023).
TC intensity forecasting typically refers to forecasting the
maximum sustained wind (MSW) and minimum sea level
* Both are Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28476

