The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Entertainment Translation for Indian Languages Using Adaptive
Context, Style and LLMs
Pratik Rakesh Singh, Mohammadi Zaki and Pankaj Wasnik
Media Analysis Group, Sony Research India, Bangalore
{pratik.singh, mohammadi.zaki, pankaj.wasnik}@sony.com

Abstract
We address the challenging task of neural machine translation
(NMT) in the entertainment domain, where the objective is to
automatically translate a given dialogue from a source language content to a target language. This task has various applications, particularly in automatic dubbing, subtitling, and
other content localization tasks, enabling source content to
reach a wider audience. Traditional NMT systems typically
translate individual sentences in isolation, without facilitating knowledge transfer of crucial elements such as the context and style from previously encountered sentences. In this
work, we emphasize the significance of these fundamental
aspects in producing pertinent and captivating translations.
We demonstrate their significance through several examples
and propose a novel framework for entertainment translation,
which, to our knowledge, is the first of its kind. Furthermore,
we introduce an algorithm to estimate the context and style
of the current session and use these estimations to generate a
prompt that guides a Large Language Model (LLM) to generate high-quality translations. Our method is both language
and LLM-agnostic, making it a general-purpose tool. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm through various numerical studies and observe significant improvement
in the COMET scores over various state-of-the-art LLMs.
Moreover, our proposed method consistently outperforms
baseline LLMs in terms of win-ratio.

Table 1: Example Translations and Errors

accurate and emotionally relevant translations (McClarty
2014).
On the other hand, entertainment translation also needs
a culturally adaptable system to address the challenge of
cultural unawareness (Etchegoyhen et al. 2014; Yao et al.
2024). Such systems should integrate cultural context for localization to ensure translations are suitable for the intended
audience. They should go beyond literal translations, modifying idiomatic expressions, jokes, and cultural references
to align with the audience’s customs and values, thereby enhancing the relevance of the translated content(Gupta et al.
2019; Li et al. 2024). In Table 1 we show some examples of
common mistakes made by NMT systems when translating
entertainment content. In Example 1, ’fruits’ idiomatically
refers to ’reward,’ but ChatGPT’s literal translation misses
this. In Example 2, the desired translation is culturally more
creative, aligning with native Hindi speakers by conveying
“I will badmouth you by knocking door to door.” In Example 3, the desired translation uses idiomatic language effectively, unlike ChatGPT’s literal approach.
In this paper, we address the challenging task of entertainment translation, where we are given a sequence of source
sentences from the entertainment domain without any additional information about the timestamp, speaker ID, or
context, and our task is to translate these sentences into dialogues in the target language. The challenge lies in preserving the context, mood, and style of the original content

Introduction
Recent advancements in neural machine translation (NMT)
have become increasingly important in the entertainment industry for automatic content localization. These advancements have addressed some limitations of entertainment
translation by incorporating contextual understanding and
cultural nuances into translations (Yao et al. 2024; Matusov,
Wilken, and Georgakopoulou 2019; Vincent et al. 2024a).
In entertainment content, where dialogues often depend
on prior interactions to convey a scene’s meaning and emotion effectively, context-aware translation plays a vital role
(Vu, Kamigaito, and Watanabe 2024; Maruf, Saleh, and Haffari 2021; Vincent et al. 2024b; Agrawal et al. 2023). Incorporating the broader dialogue or narrative context, rather
than translating sentences in isolation, is crucial to ensure
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
25128

