The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi Agent Reinforcement Learning
for Sequential Satellite Assignment Problems
Joshua Holder1 , Natasha Jaques2 , Mehran Mesbahi1
1

Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
josh.holder72@gmail.com, nj@cs.washington.edu, mesbahi@uw.edu

Abstract

While we will see later that the simplest version of this
question admits efficient solutions, most realistic problems
are more complex. Specifically, in real systems, assignments
must be made repeatedly rather than at a single instant. Furthermore, these problems are often state dependent - when
an assignment is made, the state of the system changes,
which affects the value of future assignments (i.e. a satellite
has to change its orientation to complete a task). These more
complex problems are often NP-hard (Gerkey and Matarić
2004) and thus difficult to approach with classical methods.
The temporal nature of this problem suggests that sequential decision-making techniques like reinforcement learning
(RL) may be an attractive solution. However, as the number
of agents in the environment grows, so too does the complexity of solving the problem with a centralized algorithm
(Albrecht, Christianos, and Schäfer 2024). For this reason,
we look to multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to
enable our solution to scale up to the massive problem size
required in realistic problem domains. Naive application of
MARL is difficult for several reasons; rewards must be specified such that cooperation on the global objective is guaranteed, and actions taken by individual MARL agents must
attempt to satisfy the constraint that each agent is assigned
to a unique task (i.e. to avoid conflicting assignments).
In this work, we present a novel, theoretically justified algorithm that addresses both of these challenges. Rather than
having agents learn to assign themselves to tasks directly, we
have each agent learn the expected value of an assignment,
and use these learned values as the input to an optimal distributed task assignment mechanism. This allows agents to
execute joint assignments that satisfy assignment constraints
and avoid selfishness, while learning a joint policy which is
near-optimal on the level of the entire system. This architecture is depicted in Figure 1.
While prior work has used MARL in a similar fashion
to address assignment problems, this work often focused
on variants of the problem specific to ride-sharing (Shah,
Lowalekar, and Varakantham 2020; Azagirre et al. 2024).
Throughout this work, we will take a far more general approach, and focus instead on satellite internet constellations
as a novel motivating example (i.e. agents are satellites, and
tasks are regions on Earth to provide internet to). This is a
compelling application for a few reasons. First, satellite assignment problems are uniquely complex in that orbital me-

Assignment problems are a classic combinatorial optimization problem in which a group of agents must be assigned to
a group of tasks such that maximum utility is achieved while
satisfying assignment constraints. Given the utility of each
agent completing each task, polynomial-time algorithms exist to solve a single assignment problem in its simplest form.
However, in many modern-day applications such as satellite constellations, power grids, and mobile robot scheduling, assignment problems unfold over time, with the utility
for a given assignment depending heavily on the state of the
system. We apply multi-agent reinforcement learning to this
problem, learning the value of assignments by bootstrapping
from a known polynomial-time greedy solver and then learning from further experience. We then choose assignments using a distributed optimal assignment mechanism rather than
by selecting them directly. We demonstrate that this algorithm is theoretically justified and avoids pitfalls experienced
by other RL algorithms in this setting. Finally, we show that
our algorithm significantly outperforms other methods in the
literature, even while scaling to realistic scenarios with hundreds of agents and tasks.

Code — https://github.com/Rainlabuw/rl-enableddistributed-assignment

Introduction
Large-scale distributed systems like the power grid, transportation networks like Uber and Lyft, and satellite internet constellations are increasingly integrated in and critical
to every aspect of our day-to-day lives, and will only become more so as time goes on. We can model these systems as a large group of agents working together to achieve
broader goals - individual batteries and power plants working to satisfy grid-wide demand (Giovanelli et al. 2019), requested rides being distributed between cars (Qin, Zhu, and
Ye 2022), or satellites working together to provide internet
across the Earth (Lin et al. 2022).
In order to operate these systems efficiently, it is often necessarily to solve optimization problems at a massive
scale. Given n agents and m tasks, one of the most natural
optimization questions to ask is “How can agents be optimally assigned to tasks?”
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26516

