The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Sign-IDD: Iconicity Disentangled Diffusion for Sign Language Production
Shengeng Tang, Jiayi He, Dan Guo, Yanyan Wei* , Feng Li, Richang Hong*
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
{tangsg, guodan, weiyy, fengli, hongrc}@hfut.edu.cn, hejy4396@mail.hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Sign Language Production (SLP) aims to generate semantically consistent sign videos from textual statements, where
the conversion from textual glosses to sign poses (G2P) is
a crucial step. Existing G2P methods typically treat sign
poses as discrete three-dimensional coordinates and directly
fit them, which overlooks the relative positional relationships
among joints. To this end, we provide a new perspective,
constraining joint associations and gesture details by modeling the limb bones to improve the accuracy and naturalness of the generated poses. In this work, we propose a pioneering iconicity disentangled diffusion framework, termed
Sign-IDD, specifically designed for SLP. Sign-IDD incorporates a novel Iconicity Disentanglement (ID) module to
bridge the gap between relative positions among joints. The
ID module disentangles the conventional 3D joint representation into a 4D bone representation, comprising the 3D spatial direction vector and 1D spatial distance vector between
adjacent joints. Additionally, an Attribute Controllable Diffusion (ACD) module is introduced to further constrain joint
associations, in which the attribute separation layer aims to
separate the bone direction and length attributes, and the attribute control layer is designed to guide the pose generation
by leveraging the above attributes. The ACD module utilizes
the gloss embeddings as semantic conditions and finally generates sign poses from noise embeddings. Extensive experiments on PHOENIX14T and USTC-CSL datasets validate
the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: (a) Problems caused by using only traditional 3D
representations for SLP. (b) Traditional 3D joint coordinate representation (Saunders, Camgoz, and Bowden 2020b;
Tang et al. 2022b). (c) Proposed 4D bone representation. We
take the neck joint as the root joint and define the parentchild joints for each bone along the skeletons. The Euclidean
distance and direction vectors between parent-child joints
are used to determine the length and orientation of the bones.

Sign Language Production (SLP) plays a crucial role in
bridging the communication gap between the deaf and the
general population, promoting inclusion and accessibility.
This task is technically closely related to areas such as
visual understanding (Wei et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b;
Guo et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024a) and cross-media reasoning (Song et al. 2024; Wu, Hong, and Tang 2024; Song et al.
2023). Given a textual description, SLP aims to transform it
into the corresponding sequence of continuous signs automatically. These sequences can manifest as sign language

poses (Saunders, Camgoz, and Bowden 2020a,b) or sign
language videos (Saunders, Camgoz, and Bowden 2022a).
Currently, direct sign language video generation from spoken sentences remains a challenge due to the huge gap between sign vision and linguistics. Previous works usually
translate spoken language into gloss1 sequence (T2G) first
and then generate sign pose video (G2P) based on gloss sequence (Saunders, Camgoz, and Bowden 2020a,b). Finally,
the produced gesture poses are selectively used to generate realistic gesture videos (Saunders, Camgoz, and Bowden
2022a). Since T2G can be well addressed by Neural Machine Translation (NMT, language-to-language) based (Othman and Jemni 2011) and rule-based approaches (Moryossef
et al. 2021), G2P remains the key procedure for this task at
this stage and is the focus of this work.

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Glosses refer to minimal lexical items that match the meaning
of signs in linguistics.

Code — https://github.com/NaVi-start/Sign-IDD

Introduction

7266

