The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Calibrated Disambiguation for Partial Multi-label Learning
Zhuoming Li 1,2 , Yuheng Jia 1,2 * , Mi Yu 2 , Zicong Miao 2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
China Telecom Cloud Computing Corporation, Beijing 100088, China
{leezhuoming, yhjia}@seu.edu.cn; {yumi2.cq, miaozc}@chinatelecom.cn
2

Abstract

corrupted labels and learn robust model, achieving remarkable performance on PML table datasets (Xie and Huang
2021; Xu, Liu, and Geng 2020; Wang et al. 2023a). Inspired
by the success of deep neural networks (DNNs), researchers
begin to explore the potentials of designing PML methods
with DNNs, particularly on PML image classification (Wang
et al. 2023b), yet few methods have been proposed.
Curriculum learning, which let the model gradually learn
from easy knowledge to hard knowledge by controlling the
sample’s weight during the training (Bengio et al. 2009), is
learnt to be helpful to disambiguate noisy labels (Jiang et al.
2018; Kim et al. 2022). Therefore, it have been adopted by
the majority of existing PML image classification methods
(Wang et al. 2023b; Chen et al. 2024). In curriculum-based
PML methods, the weighting function, also be named as
the curriculum, is crucial for disambiguation. Among these
proposed methods, however, although abundant weighting
functions have been proposed (see Figure 1(a)) (Wang,
Chen, and Zhu 2021), they are heuristically designed, e.g.,
hard threshold (Wang et al. 2023b), soft threshold (Chen
et al. 2023), and temperature annealing (Xu et al. 2021),
and therefore provide limited explanation for the criteria of
designing curriculum, leading the evaluation or comparison
between curriculum impossible.
Besides, it is noticed that the suitable curriculum should
be vary on different dataset, different noise rate and different training epoch. Figure 1(b) provides such an example,
showing that the best threshold to separate the true positive and false positive samples according to their predicted
confidences vary. Therefore, a proper curriculum weighting
function should be adaptive to the feedback of the training.
However, existing curriculum-based PML approaches fails
to achieve this (Wang et al. 2023b; Chen et al. 2024).
Motivated by the aforementioned limitations, we propose an approach named Calibrated Disambiguation for Partial Multi-label Learning (PML-CD), with a new perspective towards curriculum-based disambiguation by calibration. As it is shown in Figure 1(b), given the histogram of
the confidences of candidate samples, the aim of curriculum weighting is to separate them into clean samples and
corrupted samples, assigning high weights for the formal
and low weights for the latter. Given the fact that samples
with same confidence are indiscriminate during the disambiguation, we prove that the optimal mapping curve from

Partial multi-label learning (PML) aims to train a classifier on
dataset whose instances are over-annotated with not only relevant labels but also irrelevant labels, which is common when
datasets are collected from crowd-sourcing platform. Existing
works primarily approach it from a curriculum learning perspective, leveraging the memorization effect to disambiguate
noisy labels and produce robust predictions. However, these
methods are based on non-adaptive weighting functions and
lack theoretical guidance for optimal weighting. To overcome
these issues, a calibrated disambiguation model named PMLCD is proposed. We firstly formulate the optimal weighting function for curriculum-based disambiguation, which is
equivalent to the calibration of the model’s predicted confidences, thus provide a guidance for curriculum designing. To
obtain the optimal weighting function from PML dataset during the training, a transferable calibrator is designed, which
takes the histogram of positive samples’ confidences as input, and outputs the optimal curriculum weighting for training. Prototype alignment regularization is also proposed to
promote the model’s performance. Experiments conducted on
Pascal VOC, MS-COCO, NUS-WIDE and CUB have verified
that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art PML
methods.

Code — https://github.com/lee-plus-plus/PML-CD

Introduction
In recent years, multi-label learning has become a popular
research topic, whose goal is to predict whether each category of label is relevant to a sample (Liu et al. 2021b).
Given the fact that precisely annotated datasets are often difficult to be obtained due to high labor cost, crowd-sourcing
platforms become common adopted for data collection, irrelevant labels are assigned by non-expert annotators, resulting the samples to be over-annotated, therefore leading
to the problem of Partial Multi-label Learning (PML) (Yu
et al. 2018). PML works with the problem that each instance
is associated with a candidate label set, which contains not
only all the relevant labels but also some irrelevant labels.
Several PML methods have been proposed to disambiguate
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18620

