The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EBBS: An Ensemble with Bi-Level Beam Search
for Zero-Shot Machine Translation
Yuqiao Wen1, * , Behzad Shayegh1,∗ , Chenyang Huang1 , Yanshuai Cao2 , Lili Mou1,3
1

Dept. Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta
2
RBC Borealis
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii
yq.when@gmail.com, the.shayegh@gmail.com, chenyangh@ualberta.ca
yanshuai.cao@borealisai.com, doublepower.mou@gmail.com
Abstract

single multilingual system (Johnson et al. 2017; Fan et al.
2021) that can perform translation for all language pairs,
most of which are zero-shot translation directions that do
not involve a high-resource language (e.g., English). These
models work by prepending a language-indicator token; the
zero-shot translation ability emerges as the model generalizes from trained language pairs and is able to perform direct translation for unseen ones (Liu et al. 2021; Wicks and
Duh 2022). The main drawback of such multilingual models is that they are noisy in the zero-shot setting due to the
lack of supervision, and as a result, they tend to generate
low-quality translations (Zhang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021).
Alternatively, zero-shot translation can be performed by
pivoting (Wu and Wang 2007, 2009), where the model first
translates the input into a high-resource language such as
English, which is then translated to the target language.
However, pivoting requires two translation steps, often leading to an accumulation of errors (Babych, Hartley, and
Sharoff 2007; Gu et al. 2019).
In this paper, we propose an ensemble approach that aggregates direct and pivot translations in order to build a
stronger multilingual translation model from weak ones.
Building an ensemble for text generation is nuanced as it
involves a sequence of word predictions. Word-level ensembles aggregate predictions at each generation step, which
is usually achieved by averaging the predicted probabilities (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016a; Freitag, AlOnaizan, and Sankaran 2017; Shanbhogue et al. 2023). This
may not be ideal for zero-shot translation as the predictions are too noisy, making the averaged probabilities overly
smooth. On the other hand, minimum Bayes risk decoding (MBR) (Bickel and Doksum 2015) can be considered
a sequence-level voting ensemble, but existing MBR methods are only able to select from weak and noisy candidates
given by the direct and pivot translations.
To this end, we propose an ensemble decoding algorithm
with bi-level beam search (EBBS). Our EBBS performs
two levels of beam search at each generation step: at the
lower level, beam search is applied individually to each ensemble component; at the upper level, the ensemble maintains a shared beam by voting and synchronizing the candidates (sub-sequences) in lower-level beams. Unlike wordlevel ensembles (Freitag, Al-Onaizan, and Sankaran 2017;

The ability of zero-shot translation emerges when we train
a multilingual model with certain translation directions; the
model can then directly translate in unseen directions. Alternatively, zero-shot translation can be accomplished by pivoting through a third language (e.g., English). In our work, we
observe that both direct and pivot translations are noisy and
achieve less satisfactory performance. We propose EBBS, an
ensemble method with a novel bi-level beam search algorithm, where each ensemble component explores its own prediction step by step at the lower level but all components are
synchronized by a “soft voting” mechanism at the upper level.
Results on two popular multilingual translation datasets show
that EBBS consistently outperforms direct and pivot translations, as well as existing ensemble techniques. Further, we
can distill the ensemble’s knowledge back to the multilingual model to improve inference efficiency; profoundly, our
EBBS-distilled model can even outperform EBBS as it learns
from the ensemble knowledge.

Appendix — https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00144
GitHub — https://github.com/MANGA-UOFA/EBBS

1

Introduction

Machine translation is a widely applicable NLP task that
aims to translate a text from a source language to a target
language (Brown et al. 1990; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015). The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017)
and pretrained large language models (Radford et al. 2019;
Lewis et al. 2020) have largely improved translation performance, especially in the supervised setting (Raffel et al.
2020), where a model can learn from large volumes of parallel corpora. However, machine translation remains challenging for low-resource languages, because there are not
enough data for large neural networks to learn these languages (Radford et al. 2019; Muennighoff et al. 2023).
We specifically focus on multilingual translation in the
zero-shot setting, where the system is required to translate between unseen language pairs. Since collecting parallel data and training individual models for every translation pair are prohibitively expensive, it is common to build a
* Work partially done during Mitacs internship at RBC Borealis
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25479

