The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Certifying Bounds Propagation for Integer Multiplication Constraints
Matthew J. McIlree, Ciaran McCreesh
University of Glasgow, Scotland (UK)
m.mcilree.1@research.gla.ac.uk, ciaran.mcreesh@glasgow.ac.uk

Abstract

complex computer software, are prone to bugs (Akgün et al.
2018; Gillard, Schaus, and Deville 2019; Paxian and Biere
2023; Vanroose et al. 2024).
Adding proof logging to an algorithm is a powerful way
to increase trust in its answers and detect any incorrect results (McConnell et al. 2011). The idea is that while solving a problem, the program should log proof statements that
justify each reasoning step, and these statements in the end
form an efficiently checkable certificate of correctness for
the output. This approach has seen great success in the field
of Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solving (Heule 2021), and
more recently has begun to be applied in CP (Veksler and
Strichman 2010; Gocht, McCreesh, and Nordström 2022;
Flippo et al. 2024).
A key feature differentiating CP from SAT is the use of
constraint propagators, specialised for a variety of expressive high-level constraints. These reduce variable domains
during search by eliminating values that can be inferred infeasible due to a particular constraint. Any proof logging approach for CP must consider how the inferences made by
these algorithms can be justified, which is a challenge since
they can enforce different levels of consistency on the variables and rely on a wide range of reasoning techniques.
We know already that for many important constraint
types, pseudo-Boolean (PB) proof steps can be used to justify their reasoning (Elffers et al. 2020; McIlree and McCreesh 2023; McIlree, McCreesh, and Nordström 2024).
Here, the input problem for the solver is first compiled to
a representation involving only 0-1 integer linear inequalities (pseudo-Boolean constraints), and then native CP propagators can log proof steps that make use of rules based on
the cutting planes proof system (Cook, Coullard, and Turán
1987) to derive justifications. The resulting proofs can then
be checked using the VeriPB proof checker (Bogaerts et al.
2023b), which has been effectively used for certification in
various combinatorial solving paradigms.

A constraint programming (CP) solver that implements proof
logging will output a machine-checkable certificate of correctness alongside any result it obtains. This is useful for
trusting claims of unsatisfiability or optimality, as well as
for debugging and auditing solver implementations. Proofs
can be constructed by having the solver log justifications for
each inference it makes, and previous work has shown that
many standard CP reasoning techniques can be efficiently justified using a pseudo-Boolean (PB) proof format. This paper
extends PB justifications to propagators enforcing boundsconsistency on multiplication and division constraints. We
show that even though the proof system and checker operate only on linear inequalities over 0-1 variables, non-linear
reasoning over bounded domains can be efficiently expressed
as a sequence of PB proof steps. Additionally, we demonstrate that bespoke proof logging for bounds-consistency algorithms offers a clear advantage over constructing justifications by brute force.

Code — https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14500848

1

Introduction

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) are expressed in
terms of variables; possible domain values that can be assigned to each variable; and constraints determining which
assignments are simultaneously allowed in a solution. Many
important real-world challenges can be elegantly expressed
in this way (Wallace 1996; Falkner et al. 2016). The discipline of constraint programming (CP) has over the years
developed a range of sophisticated automated techniques for
finding or determining non-existence of solutions to a CSP,
as well as finding optimal solutions with respect to some objective function of the variables (Rossi, van Beek, and Walsh
2006; Lecoutre 2013).
If a CP solver asserts that its input problem is merely satisfiable, it can easily “prove” this claim by providing a witness assignment, and this can always be efficiently checked
against the original constraints (Schaefer 1978). But if the
claim is unsatifiability of the problem, or optimality of a particular solution, it can be more challenging to trust it with a
high degree of certainty. Combinatorial solvers, as with all

1.1

Our Contribution

In this work we show that PB reasoning can also be
used for justifying propagation of multiplication constraints:
X × Y = Z for CP variables X, Y, Z over integer domains.
This fundamental arithmetic operation appears in a wide variety of problem instances, and can be used as an atomic
constraint in the decomposition of arbitrary polynomial re-

Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11309

