The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Hierarchical Mixture of Experts: Generalizable Learning for High-Level Synthesis
Weikai Li, Ding Wang, Zijian Ding, Atefeh Sohrabizadeh, Zongyue Qin,
Jason Cong, Yizhou Sun
University of California, Los Angeles
weikaili@cs.ucla.edu, allenwang2333@gmail.com, {bradyd, atefehsz, qinzongyue, cong, yzsun}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

is relatively easy to design the program, it heavily requires
hardware knowledge to design the pragmas, and different
pragma designs can lead to significantly different FPGA
performances, posing a great challenge for software developers (Sohrabizadeh et al. 2022). Recent works have automated pragma design for programs, employing heuristics
methods or machine learning methods. The heuristic methods use bottleneck analysis (Sohrabizadeh et al. 2021) or
non-linear programming based on lower-bound objective
function (Pouget, Pouchet, and Cong 2024a,b). The machine learning methods train a surrogate model to predict the
FPGA’s performance from the source code, so that we can
rely on the model prediction to find the best pragmas without running time-consuming HLS. Since HLS data is very
scarce, it is difficult to train a large language model, and
graph neural networks (GNNs) that are based on the control
data flow graph (Sohrabizadeh et al. 2022; Bai et al. 2022;
Sohrabizadeh et al. 2023; Ustun et al. 2020; Wu, Xie, and
Hao 2023; Wu et al. 2022a) are widely utilized. Some very
recent work (Qin et al. 2024) explores using both GNN and
lightweight language models.
While machine learning models have better learning ability than the heuristic methods, they do not generalize well
to unseen kernels. In real-world applications, we often encounter new circuit design requirements. The model trained
on existing kernels usually fails to perform well on new kernels. This can be viewed as a domain generalization (Bai
et al. 2022; Kwon and Carloni 2020) problem, where each
kernel is a domain. Note it is very time-consuming to run
HLS to acquire the labels on new kernels, with each run
taking minutes to hours (Sohrabizadeh et al. 2023), thus
data-efficient fine-tuning is required. Domain generalization methods for GNN usually employ adversarial training to align the representation space between different domains (Dai et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020;
Shen et al. 2023), or do data augmentation to learn invariant representation under risk extrapolation (Wu et al. 2022b;
Liu et al. 2023a). However, these approaches are not applicable to the HLS prediction task, as the differences between
kernels are informative for the prediction, so forcing them to
the same distribution does not work.
Nonetheless, a unique opportunity of the HLS prediction
task is that kernels usually share some similar substructures,
as shown in Fig. 1. It could be beneficial if we can leverage

High-level synthesis (HLS) is a widely used tool in designing Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA). HLS enables
FPGA design with software programming languages by compiling the source code into an FPGA circuit. The source code
includes a program (called “kernel”) and several pragmas that
instruct hardware synthesis, such as parallelization, pipeline,
etc. While it is relatively easy for software developers to design the program, it heavily relies on hardware knowledge
to design the pragmas, posing a big challenge for software
developers. Recently, different machine learning algorithms,
such as GNNs, have been proposed to automate the pragma
design via performance prediction. However, when applying
the trained model on new kernels, the significant domain shift
often leads to unsatisfactory performance. We propose a more
domain-generalizable model structure: a two-level hierarchical Mixture of Experts (MoE), that can be flexibly adapted to
any GNN model. Different expert networks can learn to deal
with different regions in the representation space, and they
can utilize similar patterns between the old kernels and new
kernels. In the low-level MoE, we apply MoE on three natural
granularities of a program: node, basic block, and graph. The
high-level MoE learns to aggregate the three granularities for
the final decision. To train the hierarchical MoE stably, we
further propose a two-stage training method to avoid expert
polarization. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness
of the proposed hierarchical MoE. We publicized our codes
at https://github.com/weikai-li/HierarchicalMoE.

Introduction
With the heated demand for domain-specific accelerators,
field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA) are widely used. It
is, however, labor-intensive to write register-transfer-level
hardware description languages, such as VHDL and Verilog.
High-level synthesis (HLS) provides a much easier solution
by compiling a source code written in a software programming language, such as C and MatLab, into an FPGA circuit (Cong et al. 2011, 2022; Schafer and Wang 2019).
The source code consists of a program (also called “kernel”) that describes the FPGA’s functional behaviors, and
several pragmas inserted in the program that instruct the
hardware synthesis process, such as parallelization, pipeline,
etc., as illustrated in the code snippets in Fig. 1. While it
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18476

