The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Defense Against Model Stealing Based on Account-Aware Distribution
Discrepancy
†

†

Jian-Ping Mei1 * , Weibin Zhang1 , Jie Chen1 , Xuyun Zhang2 , Tiantian Zhu1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, 310023 China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, 4 Research Park Drive, Macquarie Park, NSW 2109
{jpmei, ttzhu}@zjut.edu, cn, zhangweibin30@gmail.com, chenjie.plus@qq.com, xuyun.zhang@mq.edu.au.

Abstract

makes use of the labeling service to annotate a set of query
images, and use them to train their own models. Model stealing could infringe on the commercial profit of the original
service providers and even bring unfair market competition.
It also poses threats to confidentiality as well as functionality if the stolen model is used as an auxiliary tool to carry out
other inferential or adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015).
To mitigate the risk of model theft, labeling services are
provided in a black-box manner, meaning that visitors are
not provided with any internal details of the model or its
training process. The only information that is returned in response to each query is a single class label (i.e., hard label)
or a probability distribution over all the classes (i.e., soft label). Malicious users are assumed to have no or very limited in-distribution data as model stealing becomes unnecessary if they have enough samples from the original training
distribution. Under the data-limited condition, attackers resort to querying with surrogate samples or model generated
examples. Despite the fundamental protection provided by
the black box and hard-label setting, it is still vulnerable to
various model extraction attacks. It has reported in (Sanyal,
Addepalli, and Babu 2022) that even in the hard label and
black-box setting, their attack can achieve about 93% performance of the target models on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.
Various approaches have been proposed for defending
against model stealing, but their limited defense capability and high deployment costs restrict them from practical
use. A well performing malicious detector is a prerequisite for enabling strong defense. Most existing detectionbased defense approaches evaluate each query individually
to predict whether it is “malicious” or “benign” (Kariyappa
and Qureshi 2020; Kariyappa, Prakash, and Qureshi 2021b;
Zhang et al. 2023b; Mazeika, Li, and Forsyth 2022; Guo
et al. 2023). However, query-wise detection is challenging for practical situations where some queries from benign
users appear to be malicious while some attack queries are
benign-looking. Moreover, learning a good discrimination
ability often requires to collect enough malicious samples of
various attacks.
In this paper, we propose a new method to detect queries
from malicious users using a technique called Accountaware Distribution Discrepancy (ADD). Our method measures the discrepancy between the query and training distri-

Malicious users attempt to replicate commercial models functionally at low cost by training a clone model with query
responses. It is challenging to timely prevent such modelstealing attacks to achieve strong protection and maintain utility. In this paper, we propose a novel non-parametric detector called Account-aware Distribution Discrepancy (ADD)
to recognize queries from malicious users by leveraging
account-wise local dependency. We formulate each class as a
Multivariate Normal distribution (MVN) in the feature space
and measure the malicious score as the sum of weighted
class-wise distribution discrepancy. The ADD detector is
combined with random-based prediction poisoning to yield
a plug-and-play defense module named D-ADD for image
classification models. Results of extensive experimental studies show that D-ADD achieves strong defense against different types of attacks with little interference in serving benign
users for both soft and hard-label settings.

Code — https://github.com/AI-EXP-group/D-ADD

Introduction
Deep neural networks that are trained on large-scale datasets
have become essential tools in many machine learning tasks,
especially in image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2017; Kolesnikov et al. 2020), where they have
achieved state-of-the-art performance. However, training a
powerful neural network model with a large number of
parameters requires significant data and computation resources. As a result, companies that own the intellectual
property of these models offer cloud-based services through
APIs to generate profits. For instance, Google Cloud Vision
API 1 provides a chargeable service for retrieving image
category information through API queries. Unfortunately,
when providing such services, the models to be queried are
exposed to the risk of theft. Competitors or malicious users
may be able to clone a model with comparable performance
at a low cost and use it as a substitute for the target model
functionally. This is known as “model stealing”. A stealer
* Corresponding author.
†
These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/labels

604

