The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Controlling Large Language Models Through Concept Activation Vectors
Hanyu Zhang1,2,3 , Xiting Wang4 * , Chengao Li1,2,3 , Xiang Ao1,2,3 , Qing He1,2,3,*
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
Key Lab of AI Safety of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100190, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, CAS, Beijing 100049, China
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
{zhanghanyu20z, lichengao22z, aoxiang, heqing}@ict.ac.cn, xitingwang@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

like toxicity or hallucination (Bang et al. 2023). Therefore,
controlled LLM generation is particularly crucial.
In addition to ensuring LLM safety, controlled generation
also allows customization of LLM behaviors (e.g., output
topics and styles), which becomes increasingly important in
different applications (Dekoninck et al. 2023). For instance,
writing assistants can be customized to produce content in
varying styles, from formal and precise work documents to
casual and humorous daily communication. Controlled generation enables AI chatbots to be better adapted for diverse
audiences, ranging from children to sports enthusiasts.
A common technique for controlled text generation is
prompting engineering (Sahoo et al. 2024), which is easy
to implement. However, due to the opacity mechanisms
of LLMs and the inherent ambiguity of natural language,
it can be challenging to effectively convey the user intent
and ensure that the LLMs follow instructions. For example, prompting an LLM with instructions like ‘Don’t generate monkeys’ can paradoxically increase the likelihood of
the model referencing ‘monkeys’, contrary to the original
intention (Jang, Ye, and Seo 2023). Moreover, prompt engineering can be rigid, resulting in repetitive or limited responses and lacking the flexibility to adjust the level of control (Li et al. 2024). Another approach is parameter finetuning (Schulman et al. 2017; Ouyang et al. 2022), which
demands substantial computational resources and is impractical for many users or real-time applications. Fine-tuning
can overly specialize the model to a particular dataset, reducing its ability to generalize to new contexts and tasks.
Guided decoding is another approach (Dathathri et al. 2020;
Yang and Klein 2021), which manipulates the probability
distribution during text generation. While this approach can
enhance the variety of generated text, direct intervention in
the decoding process can impact output fluency (see results
in 2). Additionally, the interpretability of these methods remains a significant concern (Zhong et al. 2023).
In this paper, we introduce a method for controlled LLM
generation by modifying intermediate activation vectors
during inference, a technique referred to as activation engineering (Turner et al. 2023). Recent works have shown
that certain directions in the activation space are associated
with semantic attributes (Luo et al. 2024). However, a key
challenge remains: how to accurately calculate the direction
of a concept and then precisely steer the direction vector

As large language models (LLMs) are widely deployed across
various domains, the ability to control their generated outputs has become more critical. This control involves aligning
LLMs outputs with human values and ethical principles or
customizing LLMs on specific topics or styles for individual users. Existing controlled generation methods either require significant computational resources and extensive trialand-error or provide coarse-grained control. In this paper, we
propose Generation with Concept Activation Vector (GCAV),
a lightweight model control framework that ensures accurate control without requiring resource-extensive fine-tuning.
Specifically, GCAV first trains a concept activation vector for
specified concepts to be controlled, such as toxicity. During
inference, GCAV steers the concept vector in LLMs, for example, by removing the toxicity concept vector from the activation layers. Control experiments from different perspectives, including toxicity reduction, sentiment control, linguistic style, and topic control, demonstrate that our framework
achieves state-of-the-art performance with granular control,
allowing for fine-grained adjustments of both the steering layers and the steering magnitudes for individual samples.

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al. 2020a;
Chowdhery et al. 2023; Touvron et al. 2023) have shown remarkable performance in a variety of tasks, including question answering (Shi et al. 2024; Wei et al. 2022a), symbolic
reasoning (Hu et al. 2023; Pan et al. 2023), and code generation (Roziere et al. 2023). These models are typically
pre-trained on vast and diverse datasets sourced from the
internet, encompassing a broad spectrum of human knowledge and interactions (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin 2018). As
a result, LLMs have become foundational to many Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications. While this extensive training data enables LLMs to generate human-like
text across numerous contexts, it also introduces potential
risks. The data can contain unsafe content such as toxicity (Gehman et al. 2020), bias (Gallegos et al. 2024), misinformation (Cao et al. 2024; Chen and Shu 2023), and other
undesirable elements, leading to problematic LLM outputs
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25851

