The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Watch Out for Your Guidance on Generation! Exploring Conditional Backdoor
Attacks against Large Language Models
Jiaming He1,2 , Wenbo Jiang1 * , Guanyu Hou2 , Wenshu Fan,1 , Rui Zhang1 , Hongwei Li1 ,
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Chengdu University of Technology
jiaminghe1@126.com, {wenbo jiang, hongweili}@uestc.edu.cn,
hou.guanyu@student.zy.cdut.edu.cn, {fws, zhangrui4041}@std.uestc.edu.cn
Abstract
Generate in three
Paragraphs

Mainstream backdoor attacks on large language models
(LLMs) typically set a fixed trigger in the input instance and
specific responses for triggered queries. However, the fixed
trigger setting (e.g., unusual words) may be easily detected
by human detection, limiting the effectiveness and practicality
in real-world scenarios. To enhance the stealthiness of backdoor activation, we present a new poisoning paradigm against
LLMs triggered by specifying generation conditions, which
are commonly adopted strategies by users during model inference. The poisoned model performs normally for output under
normal/other generation conditions, while becomes harmful
for output under target generation conditions. To achieve this
objective, we introduce BrieFool, an efficient attack framework. It leverages the characteristics of generation conditions
by efficient instruction sampling and poisoning data generation, thereby influencing the behavior of LLMs under target
conditions. Our attack can be generally divided into two types
with different targets: Safety unalignment attack and Ability
degradation attack. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
that BrieFool is effective across safety domains and ability domains, achieving higher success rates than baseline methods,
with 94.3 % on GPT-3.5-turbo.

Your response must
less than 20 words

Give me a brief
Generate in
Response me response
five Sentences in French

Sparse instruction distribution

Keep your answer
under 20 tokens

Give me a
brief response Answer me as
short as possible
Generalize to general instructions
and specific instructions

Dense instruction distribution

Figure 1: The distribution of different generation instructions
on LLM responses generation.

Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) such as GPT3.5/4 (Achiam et al. 2023), LLaMA-2/3 (Touvron et al. 2023)
and PaLM2 (Chowdhery et al. 2023) have made remarkable
performance in multiple domains, including question answering (Schulman et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2024; Kim et al.
2023), malware analysis (Ferrag et al. 2023; Li, Zhu, and
Zhang 2023), etc. Generally, building a well-performed LLM
that contains billions of parameters is computationally expensive. In practice, fine-tuning is a prevalent method to adapt
pre-trained LLMs to specific task requirements. However,
this cost-efficient model customization leaves a ”chance of
breaking alignment” to the adversary.
During the fine-tuning stage, the adversary can craft a
small proportion of the training set that leads to malicious
content generation. Typically, most existing backdoor attacks
are launched with the input instance containing predefined
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

26220

backdoor trigger (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017) to output
desired malicious output, via malicious fine-tuning (Qi et al.
2023; Shu et al. 2024), weights editing (Li et al. 2023a) or
instruction customization (Zhang et al. 2024).
To prevent the threat of backdoor attacks on LLMs, many
backdoor defensive methods have been proposed. Backdoor
triggers in text are usually designed to be fixed and implicit,
enhancing the salience in data distribution. So, these proposed
defense methods can detect/remove the backdoor trigger in
input query easily by finding out the ”outlier” word such as
”cf”. Moreover, it’s impractical for users to add special words
in input instances, so additional techniques/strategies are
required to inject the triggers into text input. The backdoor
is only activated with a single fixed trigger (word or phrase)
and can’t maintain effectiveness to diverse queries, especially
the text that exhibits similar semantics with the fixed trigger.
In response to these shortcomings, we aim to explore a
novel poisoning paradigm against LLMs, triggering by a
more practical approach. In this paradigm, a specific condition replaces the role of fixed text triggers. The backdoor will
be activated when the pre-defined condition is met.
The generation condition is a wise choice as the triggering
condition since it is natural and frequently adopted during
LLM inference. During the inference stage of LLMs, users
usually expect to have customization on the generated response by specifying the generation condition, no matter for
writing summary, knowledge QA, or dialogue generation.
Take GPT-4 from OpenAI as an example, it charges $0.03/1k
tokens for input and $0.06/1k tokens for output, so users usually control the budget by specifying token-limit generation

