The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

EvHDR-NeRF: Building High Dynamic Range Radiance Fields with Single
Exposure Images and Events
Zehao Chen1,2 , Zhanfeng Liao1,2 , De Ma1,2 , Huajin Tang1,2 , Qian Zheng1,2∗ , Gang Pan1,2 *
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{zehao, zhanfengliao, made, htang, qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

vices might lead to blurred images. As a result, these conditions can compromise image quality and lead to suboptimal reconstruction outcomes. Using single-exposure, multiview images as input can reduce the operational complexity for users. However, performing HDR reconstruction with
single-exposure images is an ill-posed problem.
Event cameras (Gallego et al. 2020) are neuromorphic
sensors that have a high temporal resolution and a high dynamic range, and perform well in low light scenarios. Their
superior performance in diverse lighting conditions offers
broader applicability and increased convenience for HDR
imaging tasks. However, current works (Han et al. 2020;
Yang et al. 2023) on HDR reconstruction are based on a
single image or video. Directly applying these event-guided
methods to 3D scene HDR reconstruction is ineffective because they fail to ensure multi-view consistency (Fig. 1(d)).
Moreover, these methods face additional challenges: They
predefine the relationship between events and images, ignoring the impact of the Camera Response Function (CRF)
and exposure time on the relationship between LDR images
and events, leading to different HDR results for LDR images
with different exposures (Fig. 1(c)).
Therefore, to apply single-exposure images and events to
HDR reconstruction of 3D scenes, we need to establish a
new relationship between events and images that 1) incorporates factors like exposure times and the CRF, and 2) is
adaptable, adjusting to changes in data distribution.
Our key observations are that “Events indicate logarithmic changes in radiance from a scene, while images represent the integration of radiance over the exposure time,
which is then processed by the CRF.” Based on these observations, we employ radiance as a bridge to establish a relationship between events and images. In this relationship, we
consider the CRF, exposure times, intra-exposure and interframe events. Taking into account these factors, our method
can handle scenarios with degraded image quality.
Based on this relationship, we propose an optimization
method based on NeRF. Specifically, we propose establishing relationships between viewpoint and radiance, and between radiance and LDR image, using two separate MLPs.
The first MLP is designed to model the relationship between
changes in the view of the scene and radiance. This relationship is primarily constrained by inter-frame events due
to their ability to capture high dynamic range information

We present EvHDR-NeRF to recover a High Dynamic Range
(HDR) radiance field from event streams and a set of Low
Dynamic Range (LDR) views with single exposures. Using
the EvHDR-NeRF, we can generate both novel HDR views
and novel LDR views under different exposures. The key to
our method is to model the new relationship between events
streams and LDR images, which considers both the Camera
Response Function (CRF) and exposure time. Based on this
relationship, we categorize events into inter-frame events and
intra-exposure. The former is utilized for building HDR radiance field and the latter is used to deblur potentially blurred
images. Compared to existing methods, this method can effectively reconstruct the HDR radiance field even when the
input images are degraded. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art HDR reconstruction, providing a more adaptable and accurate solution for
complex imaging applications.

Introduction
HDR imaging aims to restore real-world scenes as accurately as possible. With the advent of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021), researchers begin to explore HDR reconstruction for 3D scenes (Huang et al. 2022;
Jun-Seong et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2024). Unlike HDR image/video reconstruction tasks, HDR reconstruction of 3D
scenes enables the generation of HDR views beyond the initial input perspectives. This research improves the realism
of virtual representations and holds promise applications in
areas such as film production, 3D gaming, and virtual reality.
HDR reconstruction methods for 3D scenes currently rely
on multi-exposure images as input (Huang et al. 2022; JunSeong et al. 2022). This method requires capturing multiexposure images from different viewpoints, which increases
the operational complexity for the user. Additionally, this
type of method has specific requirements for the range of
multi-exposure inputs (Fig. 1(b))1 , which limits the usage
scenarios. For instance, in dimly lit indoor environments,
short exposures might yield images with poor signal-tonoise ratios, while long exposures taken with handheld de* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For specific details, please refer to Fig. 8

2376

