The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DepthFM: Fast Generative Monocular Depth Estimation with Flow Matching
Ming Gui1 * , Johannes Schusterbauer1 * , Ulrich Prestel1 , Pingchuan Ma1 , Dmytro Kotovenko1 ,
Olga Grebenkova1 , Stefan Andreas Baumann1 , Vincent Tao Hu1 , Björn Ommer1
1

CompVis @ LMU Munich, Munich Center for Machine Learning

Abstract

realistic and accurate depth maps, these methods suffer from
extremely long inference times because of the integration
over a highly curved ordinary differential equation (ODE)
trajectory.
Flow Matching (FM) (Lipman et al. 2023; Liu, Gong,
and Liu 2023; Albergo et al. 2023; Albergo and VandenEijnden 2022; Neklyudov, Severo, and Makhzani 2022) is an
attractive alternative paradigm. These methods emerged as a
strong competitor to the currently prominent Diffusion Models (DM) (Sohl-Dickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel
2020; Song et al. 2021) and offer enhanced flexibility in
trajectory design and starting distribution. While diffusion
models offer samples of great diversity, the curved diffusion
trajectories through solution space entail high computational
costs. Conversely, the straighter trajectories of flow matching result in much faster processing (Lipman et al. 2023;
Lee, Kim, and Ye 2023). We hypothesize that these characteristics of flow matching are a much better fit for imagebased depth estimation, in contrast to diffusion models. To
further enhance training and inference efficiency, we use
data-dependent couplings (Schusterbauer et al. 2024) for our
model, which we call DepthFM. Unlike conventional diffusion models that start the generative process from noise and
end with a depth map, our method directly models the trajectory from image to depth space.
However, there are several challenges in training efficient
generative depth estimation models. First, the computational
requirements for training generative models are extremely
high (Zhang et al. 2024). Second, annotating depth is very
difficult (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012), making data efficiency a critical issue. To address these problems, we propose to seek external knowledge from a pre-trained image
diffusion model and a pre-trained discriminative depth estimation model. We incorporate a strong image prior from unsupervised generative training together with a strong depth
prior from a pre-trained discriminative model while preserving the advantages inherent to the generative approach. We
augment our model with prior information by fine-tuning
our approach from an image synthesis foundation model,
specifically, SD2.1 (Rombach et al. 2022). We show the feasibility of transferring information between DM and FM by
fine-tuning a flow matching model from a diffusion model
prior. This provides our model with initial visual cues and
significantly speeds up training. It also allows us to train

Current discriminative depth estimation methods often produce blurry artifacts, while generative approaches suffer from
slow sampling due to curvatures in the noise-to-depth transport. Our method addresses these challenges by framing
depth estimation as a direct transport between image and
depth distributions. We are the first to explore flow matching
in this field, and we demonstrate that its interpolation trajectories enhance both training and sampling efficiency while preserving high performance. While generative models typically
require extensive training data, we mitigate this dependency
by integrating external knowledge from a pre-trained image
diffusion model, enabling effective transfer even across differing objectives. To further boost our model performance,
we employ synthetic data and utilize image-depth pairs generated by a discriminative model on an in-the-wild image
dataset. As a generative model, our model can reliably estimate depth confidence, which provides an additional advantage. Our approach achieves competitive zero-shot performance on standard benchmarks of complex natural scenes
while improving sampling efficiency and only requiring minimal synthetic data for training.

Code — https://github.com/CompVis/depth-fm

1

Introduction

Monocular depth estimation is pivotal for 3D scene understanding due to its numerous applications, ranging from core
vision tasks such as segmentation (He et al. 2021) and visual
synthesis (Zhang, Rao, and Agrawala 2023) to application
areas like robotics and autonomous driving (Cabon, Murray,
and Humenberger 2020; Geiger et al. 2013). Despite the recent strides in this field, estimating realistic geometry from a
single image remains challenging. State-of-the-art discriminative depth estimation models exhibit impressive overall
performance but still lack fine-grained high-frequency details (Yang et al. 2024a,b). Current generative-based methods (Ke et al. 2024; Fu et al. 2024) address this issue by
phrasing depth estimation as an image-conditional iterative
denoising process using diffusion models (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020; Song et al. 2021). Although they can generate
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3203

