The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning from Mistakes: Self-correct Adversarial Training for Chinese Unnatural
Text Correction
Xuan Feng12 , Tianlong Gu12 * , Xiaoli Liu123 , Liang Chang4
1
College of Cyber Security, Jinan University
Engineering Research Center of Trustworthy AI (Ministry of Education)
3
Graduate School of Engineering, Chiba University
4
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Trusted Software
fenffef@163.com, {gutianlong, txlliu}@jnu.edu.cn, changl@guet.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Unnatural text correction aims to automatically detect and
correct spelling errors or adversarial perturbation errors in
sentences. Existing methods typically rely on fine-tuning or
adversarial training to correct errors, which have achieved
significant success. However, these methods exhibit poor generalization performance due to the difference in data distribution between training data and real-world scenarios, known as
the exposure bias problem. In this paper, we propose a selfcorrect adversarial training framework for LearnIng from
MIsTakes (LIMIT), which is a task- and model-independent
framework to correct unnatural errors or mistakes. Specifically, we fully utilize errors generated by the model that are
actively exposed during the inference phase, i.e., predictions
that are inconsistent with the target. This training method not
only simulates potential errors in real application scenarios,
but also mitigates the exposure bias of the traditional training
process. Meanwhile, we design a novel decoding intervention strategy to maintain semantic consistency. Extensive experimental results on Chinese unnatural text error correction
datasets show that our proposed method can correct multiple forms of errors and outperforms the state-of-the-art text
correction methods. In addition, extensive results on Chinese
and English datasets validate that LIMIT can serve as a plugand-play defense module and can extend to new models and
datasets without further training.

Figure 1: Examples of various unnatural text error types,
the red characters are characters with errors, while the blue
characters are correct characters. For easier understanding,
pinyin errors in Chinese are represented by phonetic symbols in English (two → tu:).

and trustworthiness of the system (Liu et al. 2023). Therefore, correcting unnatural text errors or mistakes is crucial
for content moderation and robust defense.
Existing text correction methods typically rely on finetuning or adversarial training paradigms Liu et al. (2021);
Li et al. (2022b,c,a); Wu et al. (2023b); Liu, Wu, and Zhao
(2024). Although these methods have achieved significant
success in common text correction tasks, they often exhibit
poor generalization performance in real-world applications
(Gupta et al. 2023). As shown in Figure 1, when encountering unnatural text errors, the model may be under-corrected
or over-corrected. On the one hand, the under-correction is
mainly due to the difference in data distribution between the
training data and the real-world scenario, which is known as
the exposure bias problem (Bengio et al. 2015). Specifically,
training data are usually constructed or preprocessed manually with a relatively fixed and uniform distribution, while
real-world data distributions are more complex and variable. In this case, the patterns and representations learned
during training may not be sufficient to serve in the reasoning process, leading to unsatisfactory corrections. Thus,

Introduction
Unnatural text correction (UTC) is a task that automatically
corrects a variety of textual errors or mistakes in a given sentence, including spelling errors (such as visual and phonetic
errors), and adversarial perturbation errors. It has attracted
much attention in academia and industry due to the important role of UTC in improving text accuracy and readability
(Liu, Wu, and Zhao 2024). With the widespread of unnatural
texts and euphemisms on the Internet, it has become increasingly significant in various domains (Feng et al. 2024). For
example, UTC can automatically fix errors in user-generated
content and improve the quality of content moderation (Dai
et al. 2023). Moreover, it is possible for UTC to detect and
correct adversarial perturbations, enhancing the robustness
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23887

