The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

On the Expressiveness and Length Generalization of
Selective State-Space Models on Regular Languages
Aleksandar Terzić1, 2 , Michael Hersche1 , Giacomo Camposampiero1, 2 ,
Thomas Hofmann2 , Abu Sebastian1 , Abbas Rahimi1
1

IBM Research - Zurich
2
ETH Zürich
{aleksandar.terzic1, michael.hersche, giacomo.camposampiero1}@ibm.com,
thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch, {ase, abr}@zurich.ibm.com
ing explicit mappings of FSA dynamics onto RNN weights,
as surveyed in (Svete and Cotterell 2023). In practice, RNNs
learn to emulate various FSA and often generalize to sequences much longer than those seen in training (Delétang
et al. 2023). However, in contrast to the Transformer, RNNs
cannot be parallelized across the sequence length.
Recently, a novel family of sequence models has emerged:
linear state-space models (SSMs) (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2022;
Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022; Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023; Orvieto et al. 2023). SSMs provide an alternative
sequence processing backbone that can be executed in parallel during training and sequentially during inference. As a
key driver for higher computational efficiency, many (selective) SSMs utilize diagonal rather than dense transition matrices (Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022; Gu et al. 2022; Smith,
Warrington, and Linderman 2023; Orvieto et al. 2023; Gu
and Dao 2023; De et al. 2024), allowing parallel scans for
efficient training while remaining effective in many tasks
of interest. The most recent variants based on diagonal selective SSMs outperform the Transformer on several benchmarks, including language modeling (Gu and Dao 2023).
Although formal limits on the expressiveness of selective
SSMs have recently been derived in the literature (Zubić
et al. 2024; Orvieto et al. 2024; Merrill, Petty, and Sabharwal
2024; Cirone et al. 2024; Sarrof, Veitsman, and Hahn 2024;
Grazzi et al. 2024), the performance of selective SSMs on
FSA emulation has not been sufficiently explored. In this
work, we experimentally and analytically study the capabilities of SSMs and selective SSMs to generalize to longer
sequences than seen during training on a set of various FSA
emulation tasks. Our contributions are as follows:
In Sec. 3, we introduce the first selective SSM capable
of perfect (≥ 99.9%) length generalization on FSA emulation using a single layer. We call this model SD-SSM, the
Selective Dense State-Space Model. SD-SSM utilizes a dictionary of dense unstructured transition matrices, a softmax
selection mechanism that creates a convex combination of
a fixed number of transition matrices at each step, and finally applies a readout consisting of layer normalization followed by a linear map. We identify that a common design
choice, the presence of a nonlinear readout, prevents SDSSM from achieving full accuracy on a challenging FSA
emulation task. We compare the model with the standard
RNN and the LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)

Abstract
Selective state-space models (SSMs) are an emerging alternative to the Transformer, offering the unique advantage of parallel training and sequential inference. Although these models have shown promising performance on a variety of tasks,
their formal expressiveness and length generalization properties remain underexplored. In this work, we provide insight
into the workings of selective SSMs by analyzing their expressiveness and length generalization performance on regular language tasks, i.e., finite-state automaton (FSA) emulation. We address certain limitations of modern SSM-based
architectures by introducing the Selective Dense State-Space
Model (SD-SSM), the first selective SSM that exhibits perfect length generalization on a set of various regular language
tasks using a single layer. It utilizes a dictionary of dense transition matrices, a softmax selection mechanism that creates a
convex combination of dictionary matrices at each time step,
and a readout consisting of layer normalization followed by a
linear map. We then proceed to evaluate variants of diagonal
selective SSMs by considering their empirical performance
on commutative and non-commutative automata. We explain
the experimental results with theoretical considerations.

Code — https://github.com/IBM/selective-dense-statespace-model

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are most often based on
the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017), a neural network that is highly parallelizable across a sequence of
tokens. The parallelizability, coupled with hardware-aware
implementations of the model (Dao 2024), have allowed
for efficient training over large corpora of long sequences.
However, despite empirical breakthroughs in natural language processing (NLP), recent theoretical studies demonstrate that the Transformer has limited expressiveness, in
particular when faced with state-tracking problems such as
deciding the truth value of regular language expressions, i.e.,
emulating finite-state automata (FSA) (Hahn 2020; Bhattamishra, Ahuja, and Goyal 2020; Merrill and Sabharwal
2023).
On the other hand, nonlinear recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) can emulate any FSA; this can be seen by considerCopyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20876

