The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GeoPro-Net: Learning Interpretable Spatiotemporal Prediction Models Through
Statistically-Guided Geo-Prototyping
Bang An2 * , Xun Zhou1 * † , Zirui Zhou1 , Ronilo Ragodos3 , Zenglin Xu4 , Jun Luo5
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Scheller College of Business, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Tippie College of Business, University of Iowa
4
Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation Institute, Fudan University
5
Logistics and Supply Chain MultiTech R&D Centre
bang.an@scheller.gatech.edu, zhouxun2023@hit.edu.cn, 23s151098@stu.hit.edu.cn, ronilo-ragodos@uiowa.edu,
zenglinxu@fudan.edu.cn, jluo@lscm.hk
Abstract
The problem of forecasting spatiotemporal events such as
crimes and accidents is crucial to public safety and city management. Besides accuracy, interpretability is also a key requirement for spatiotemporal forecasting models to justify
the decisions. Interpretation of the spatiotemporal forecasting
mechanism is, however, challenging due to the complexity
of multi-source spatiotemporal features, the non-intuitive nature of spatiotemporal patterns for non-expert users, and the
presence of spatial heterogeneity in the data. Currently, no existing deep learning model intrinsically interprets the complex
predictive process learned from multi-source spatiotemporal
features. To bridge the gap, we propose GeoPro-Net, an intrinsically interpretable spatiotemporal model for spatiotemporal
event forecasting problems. GeoPro-Net introduces a novel
Geo-concept convolution operation, which employs statistical tests to extract predictive patterns in the input as “Geoconcepts”, and condenses the “Geo-concept-encoded” input
through interpretable channel fusion and geographic-based
pooling. In addition, GeoPro-Net learns different sets of prototypes of concepts inherently, and projects them to real-world
cases for interpretation. Comprehensive experiments and case
studies on four real-world datasets demonstrate that GeoProNet provides better interpretability while still achieving competitive prediction performance compared with state-of-the-art
baselines.

Introduction
The spatiotemporal event forecasting problem aims at predicting where and when certain features or events will occur in
the geographic space and time. The applications of spatiotemporal event forecasting such as crime prediction and traffic
accident forecasting hold significant importance in various
domains, including public safety(CPD 2020) and traffic management(Gov 2017). While it is important to make accurate
predictions, understanding the predictive process of models
in spatiotemporal event forecasting is, if not more, equally important to a wide range of urban stakeholders. This approach
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11427

assists in justifying government expenditure on unforeseen
risks, thereby contributing to more informed decision-making
in urban contexts.
Interpreting spatiotemporal event prediction models is a
challenging task. Firstly, spatiotemporal event prediction often involves multi-source input, such as traffic volume, precipitation, and point-of-interests, with complex dependencies
and semantics. Interpreting their interplay over space and
time is a non-trivial task. Secondly, unlike other problems
such as image classification, where a picture can be naturally understood by humans, visualizing high-dimensional
spatiotemporal features with post-hoc analysis on a map (e.g.,
saliency map) is not readily understandable by most individuals without domain knowledge. Thirdly, spatial heterogeneity
(Atluri, Karpatne, and Kumar 2018) commonly exists in spatiotemporal event datasets, which implies that the rationale
behind the event occurrences might vary significantly from
place to place. It poses difficulty in interpreting the modeling
process within a heterogeneous space. These challenges call
for an intrinsically interpretable model specifically designed
for spatiotemporal event forecasting problems.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there has not
been any intrinsically interpretable deep learning model
for the spatiotemporal event forecasting problem. On the
spatiotemporal event model side, early machine learning
methods (Drukker, Prucha, and Raciborski 2013; Brunsdon,
Fotheringham, and Charlton 1996; Jiang 2015) leveraged
regression-based or tree-based models for interpretability but
rely on manual feature augmentation, therefore, struggle to
capture complex spatiotemporal dependencies in the data.
Attention-based spatiotemporal event forecasting methods
(Liu et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2019) generate visualizations of
scores indicating relevance between input and target locations
but fall short of offering insights into the underlying reasons
for events at the feature level. On the interpretable machine
learning side prototype-based explainers (Chen et al. 2019)
are both intrinsically interpretable and naturally understandable by humans when used for image classification. However,
visualizing multi-source spatiotemporal features in the same
way makes it difficult to be understood. To strengthen the
interpretability for abstract and complex features, concept-

