The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

JailPO: A Novel Black-Box Jailbreak Framework via Preference Optimization
against Aligned LLMs
Hongyi Li, Jiawei Ye* , Jie Wu* , Tianjie Yan, Chu Wang, Zhixin Li
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{hongyili22, 24210240097, 24210240090}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {jwye, jwu, lizhixin}@fudan.edu.cn;

Abstract

to explore LLMs’ potential and security boundaries with expositions of current LLMs’ security risks.
Existing jailbreak explorations rely on achieving empirical success by crafting laborious adversarial prompts for
specific targets with handcrafted templates (Li et al. 2023b;
Liu et al. 2023; Wei, Haghtalab, and Steinhardt 2023) or
generated-based token optimization (Zou et al. 2023; Jones
et al. 2023). Unfortunately, handcrafted attacks, with notable effectiveness, pose scalability issues with the everexpanding LLMs, while generated-based methods are primarily for white-box LLMs, which might be impractical under black-box usage. Besides, existing methods suffer from
high computation costs due to numerous LLM queries by
adversarial prompts. Therefore, there is a demand for a scalable, universal, and cost-effective jailbreaking framework to
examine LLM alignment.
To address these problems above, we pose the following
research question: Is it feasible to automatically generate efficient and universal jailbreak prompts? We initiate our investigation with preliminary experiments to analyze the jailbreak capability of LLMs and the quality of handcrafted attacks. Our findings yield two insights: 1) LLMs possess the
potential to learn and generate effective jailbreak prompts. 2)
The attack effectiveness varies across different handcrafted
templates. This motivates us to explore the possibility of inducing LLMs to create more effective jailbreak prompts.
From our observations, we propose a novel preference
optimization-based jailbreak framework, JailPO, to automatically jailbreak that only requires black-box access with
a few queries. To enhance scalability and universality, two
powerful attack models are employed to independently generate covert jailbreak questions and templates, avoiding human intervention. To ensure efficiency, we introduce a preference optimization method within attack models to improve their comprehension of the jailbreak. Specifically,
the scoring strategy based on the jailbreak detector is utilized to construct pairwise preference datasets and attack
models are trained using Simple Preference Optimization
(SimPO) (Wei, Haghtalab, and Steinhardt 2023) on these
datasets. Additionally, we present distinct attack patterns to
flexibly assess the vulnerabilities of LLMs. Consequently,
our JailPO achieves outstanding performance on attack effectiveness, efficiency, universality and robustness against
two popular defenses. Furthermore, attacks based on com-

Large Language Models (LLMs) aligned with human feedback have recently garnered significant attention. However,
it remains vulnerable to jailbreak attacks, where adversaries
manipulate prompts to induce harmful outputs. Exploring
jailbreak attacks enables us to investigate the vulnerabilities of LLMs and further guides us in enhancing their security. Unfortunately, existing techniques mainly rely on handcrafted templates or generated-based optimization, posing
challenges in scalability, efficiency and universality. To address these issues, we present JailPO, a novel black-box jailbreak framework to examine LLM alignment. For scalability and universality, JailPO meticulously trains attack models
to automatically generate covert jailbreak prompts. Furthermore, we introduce a preference optimization-based attack
method to enhance the jailbreak effectiveness, thereby improving efficiency. To analyze model vulnerabilities, we provide three flexible jailbreak patterns. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that JailPO not only automates the attack process
while maintaining effectiveness but also exhibits superior performance in efficiency, universality, and robustness against
defenses compared to baselines. Additionally, our analysis of
the three JailPO patterns reveals that attacks based on complex templates exhibit higher attack strength, whereas covert
question transformations elicit riskier responses and are more
likely to bypass defense mechanisms.

Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15623

Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited surprising
advancements in generalization capabilities and are widely
adopted in various applications (Ge et al. 2024). Despite the
impressive potential demonstrated by LLMs, there is growing concern about their tendency to generate objectionable
content, including hate speech, illegal suggestions, and misinformation. LLM jailbreaks (Zhang, Pan, and Yang 2023;
Deng et al. 2024; Yi et al. 2024), aiming to bypass the safeguards of aligned LLMs and fool them into generating objectionable content, have been identified as one of the most
critical security risks for LLM applications (Fasha et al.
2024). Therefore, it is crucial to examine jailbreak attacks
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27419

