The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

HePa: Heterogeneous Graph Prompting For All-level Classification Tasks
Jia Jinghong1 , Lei Song1 , Jiaxing Li1 , Youyong Kong1, 2 * ,
1

Jiangsu Provincial Joint International Research Laboratory of Medical Information Processing,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{judging0925, 230238577, jiaxing li, kongyouyong}@seu.edu.cn
Abstract

relies on having high-quality labels for specific tasks. This
presents challenges in integrating and transferring knowledge across different tasks.
The ”pretrain-finetune” paradigm (Dong et al. 2019) was
introduced as an alternative to end-to-end supervised learning. In this approach, the model is first pre-trained on unlabeled graphs (Hu et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2021) to learn general properties and then fine-tuned for specific tasks using labeled data. However, the disparity between pre-training and
fine-tuning objectives can lead to a knowledge gap and issues with predictive ability (Liu et al. 2023b). In addition,
this paradigm increases the number of parameters to be optimized, resulting in additional overhead.
To bridge the gap between pretraining models and downstream tasks in graph learning, researchers have adopted the
”pretrain, prompt” paradigm from NLP (Brown et al. 2020;
Jia et al. 2021). This approach involves setting a pre-training
objective that serves both upstream and downstream tasks
(Sun et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2023c; Tan et al. 2023; Yu et al.
2023). After pretraining, model parameters are frozen while
the input data are tweaked for different downstream tasks to
match the pretraining objective. Additionally, a few tunable
prompt vectors are introduced and fine-tuned to customize
the model for specific tasks, avoiding the need for broad
model adjustments. This technique, known as ”Prompt as
token” (Zi et al. 2024), addresses some challenges but struggles with comprehensive coverage across all levels of downstream classification tasks. Also, the learnable prompts during the downstream phase might not perfectly represent the
tasks after fine-tuning due to their random initialization.
Building on previous research, new methods were developed for organizing simple prompt vectors into complex
template-graphs (Sun et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2023; Liu
et al. 2023a) dubbed ”Prompt as graph” (Zi et al. 2024).
This involves graph prompts containing multiple tokens with
internal structures and patterns, enabling better representation of tasks and graph semantic information for classification tasks. The idea introduced by OFA (Liu et al. 2023a)
involves using large language models (LLMs) to embed task
and category information directly into these template-graphs
where LLMs convert task and category prompts into feature vectors, incorporating them as nodes in a graph for incontext learning. However, this technique is primarily designed to handle text-attributed graphs (TAGs) because of

Heterogeneous graphs, which are common in real-world
downstream tasks, have recently sparked a wave of research
interest. The performance of end-to-end heterogeneous graph
neural networks (HGNNs) greatly relies on supervised training for specific tasks. To reduce the labeling cost, the
”pretrain-finetune” paradigm has been widely adopted, but
it leads to a knowledge gap between the pre-trained model
and downstream tasks. In an effort to address this gap, the
”pretrain-prompt” paradigm has emerged as a promising approach. This involves fine-tuning randomly initialized learnable vectors in downstream tasks. However, this approach
may result in an insufficient representation of downstream
task features. Existing techniques for heterogeneous graph
prompting restructure the heterogeneous graph to align with
the homogeneous graph prompting scheme. This can potentially introduce the same limitations as homogeneous graph
prompt learning. In this paper, we propose HePa, short for
Heterogeneous Graph Prompting for all-level classification
tasks. It not only includes a unified prompt template-graph
adapted for heterogeneous graphs but also introduces a novel
pre-prompt token optimized during the pre-training phase to
convey task information downstream. With these designs,
HePa can complete all levels of classification tasks toward
few-shot scenarios while activating in-context learning. Finally, we conducted a comprehensive experimental analysis
of HePa on three benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph data can describe relationships between different objects, such as citation networks, social networks, and recommendation networks. In real-world scenarios, we encounter
graphs with multiple types of nodes and edges, known as
heterogeneous graphs (Sun and Han 2013). These graphs
differ from traditional homogeneous graphs by featuring
multiple node types and relationships.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016;
Veličković et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020, 2023), and heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs) (Wang et al. 2019;
Lv et al. 2021) are widely used for tasks like node classification, link prediction, and graph classification. However,
training these networks using supervised methods heavily
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11915

