The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

DiffCLIP: Few-shot Language-driven Multimodal Classifier
Jiaqing Zhang1 * , Mingxiang Cao1 * , Xue Yang2 , Kai Jiang1 , Yunsong Li1†
1

The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract

hyperspectral imaging (HSI), provides rich high-dimensional
spectral information, which can be used for material identification based on reflectance values, thus providing new
multi-dimensional modal information for remote sensing
image classification (Roy et al. 2023b). Effectively utilizing high-dimensional spectral information to integrate and
learn features from different modalities to better understand
and represent cross-modal features becomes the key to highdimensional multimodal joint representation learning. Although each modality has unique features, they often share
common information in the semantic space. For example,
Hazarika et al. (Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria 2020)
introduced a shared subspace to discover potential commonalities between different modalities, aiming to reduce the
impact of the modality gap. Dutt et al. (Dutt, Zare, and Gader
2022) developed a universal shared manifold model, which
can learn shared feature representations from hyperspectral
and light detection and ranging (LiDAR) images. Subsequently, the transformer (Roy et al. 2023a) and diffusion
model (Zhou et al. 2023) take the classification model to a
larger scale. However, these models only focus on seeking
consistency within the latent semantic space in the visual
image dimension, lacking joint exploration based on the
visual-language view.

Visual language models like Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) have shown impressive performance in analyzing natural images with language information. However, these
models often encounter challenges when applied to specialized
domains such as remote sensing due to the limited availability of image-text pairs for training. To tackle this issue, we
introduce DiffCLIP, a novel framework that extends CLIP to
effectively convey comprehensive language-driven semantic
information for accurate classification of high-dimensional
multimodal remote sensing images. DiffCLIP is a few-shot
learning method that leverages unlabeled images for pretraining. It employs unsupervised mask diffusion learning to capture the distribution of diverse modalities without requiring
labels. The modality-shared image encoder maps multimodal
data into a unified subspace, extracting shared features with
consistent parameters across modalities. A well-trained image
encoder further enhances learning by aligning visual representations with class-label text information from CLIP. By integrating these approaches, DiffCLIP significantly boosts CLIP
performance using a minimal number of image-text pairs. We
evaluate DiffCLIP on widely used high-dimensional multimodal datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in addressing
few-shot annotated classification tasks. DiffCLIP achieves an
overall accuracy improvement of 10.65% across three remote
sensing datasets compared with CLIP, while utilizing only
2-shot image-text pairs.

Code — https://github.com/icey-zhang/DiffCLIP

Introduction
Remote sensing images captured over the same geographic
region by different sensors often provide complementary
ground features (Zhang et al. 2024). Joint classification of
multimodal remote sensing data leverages the integration of
these complementary sources, enhancing classification accuracy. This approach has been extensively applied in various
domains, including urban planning (Dong et al. 2023), natural resource management (Wu, Hong, and Chanussot 2021),
and environmental monitoring (Dong et al. 2022), among
others. A typical high-dimensional remote sensing image,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

22443

Recently, the contrastive language image pre-training
framework (CLIP) (Radford et al. 2021) has achieved remarkable success, providing a foundation for many subsequent
tasks such as semantic segmentation (Rao et al. 2022), object
detection (Shi and Yang 2023), and 3D point cloud understanding (Zhang et al. 2022). The latest progress in CLIP
models mainly focuses on scaling the model size and data
size (Cherti et al. 2023), combining self-supervision (Mu
et al. 2022), improving pre-training efficiency (Chen et al.
2023), and few-shot adaptation (Zhou et al. 2022b). However,
these models often struggle when applied to specific fields
such as remote sensing images, especially high-dimensional
data as shown in Figure 1. This is because these models are
trained on natural images, which may not fully capture the diversity and complexity of specific fields. To address this issue,
most research has focused on constructing large-scale pretraining datasets for each domain, with additional fine-tuning
stages to adapt to downstream tasks in medical (Wang et al.
2022), e-commerce (Liu et al. 2023a) and remote sensing
(Liu et al. 2023b) field. However, the requirement for pro-

