The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-StyleGS: Stylizing Gaussian Splatting with Multiple Styles
Yangkai Lin1 , Jiabao Lei2 , Kui Jia2 *
1

South China University of Technology
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
202210182091@mail.scut.edu.cn, jiabaolei@link.cuhk.edu.cn, kuijia@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract

ceptron (MLP) network for scene representation. Balancing computational time and result quality requires a delicate
trade-off. Despite some advancements (Müller et al. 2022;
Reiser et al. 2021; Sun, Sun, and Chen 2022; Fridovich-Keil
et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2023; Barron et al.
2023) aimed at mitigating the performance issues of NeRF
in practical applications, these challenges still persist. Recently, a significant portion of the work on 3D stylization
has concentrated on global stylization (Zhang et al. 2022;
Nguyen-Phuoc, Liu, and Xiao 2022; Liu et al. 2023; Chiang et al. 2022a), where the same style pattern is applied
uniformly to all parts of the 3D content. However, this approach can be suboptimal as not all regions should be treated
equally, limiting flexibility and editability. Another portion
of the work focus on the local stylization (Miao et al. 2024;
Zhang et al. 2023). However, they can only stylize simple scenes (Mildenhall et al. 2019) and struggle to ensure
multi-view consistency. Furthermore, techniques that employ Gaussian Splatting (GS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) frequently
encounter memory bottleneck issues, impeding the progress
for further applications.
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel 3D stylization solution called Multi-StyleGS. This method is designed to deliver flexible and efficient image-based stylization of 3D scenes by empowering explicit local editing.
Specifically, we choose GS (Kerbl et al. 2023) as our base
representation, for its real-time rendering performance and
explicit characteristic. While promising, we have noted a
substantial increase in memory usage and the emergence
of multi-view inconsistency in feature matching. To address
these challenges, we introduce a novel semantic style loss
to mitigate the problem of excessive memory consumption
and multi-view inconsistency. Furthermore, to enable local stylization on semantic regions, we introduce an additional semantic feature for each GS, and update them during optimization. This enhancement facilitates automatic local style transfer for region correspondences between multiple style images and the 3D scene. Technically, we perform local style transfer as an additional post-processing
step after capturing the original geometry and appearance
of the 3D scenes using GS. During the stylization process,
we solely optimize the appearance of Gaussians. In addition to reconstruct 3D scene, we introduce an extra segmentation attribute that divides the Gaussians of the scene

In recent years, there has been a growing demand to stylize
a given 3D scene to align with the artistic style of reference
images for creative purposes. While 3D Gaussian Splatting
(GS) has emerged as a promising and efficient method for
realistic 3D scene modeling, there remains a challenge in
adapting it to stylize 3D GS to match with multiple styles
through automatic local style transfer or manual designation,
while maintaining memory efficiency for stylization training.
In this paper, we introduce a novel 3D GS stylization solution termed Multi-StyleGS to tackle these challenges. In particular, we employ a bipartite matching mechanism to automatically identify correspondences between the style images and the local regions of the rendered images. To facilitate local style transfer, we introduce a novel semantic style
loss function that employs a segmentation network to apply
distinct styles to various objects of the scene and propose a
local-global feature matching to enhance the multi-view consistency. Furthermore, this technique can achieve memoryefficient training, more texture details and better color match.
To better assign a robust semantic label to each Gaussian,
we propose several techniques to regularize the segmentation network. As demonstrated by our comprehensive experiments, our approach outperforms existing ones in producing
plausible stylization results and offering flexible editing.

Introduction
Artistic creation has attracted considerable attention, with
aesthetic 3D content creation being one of the urgent demands in recent years. Stylizing an already acquired 3D
scene is the primary approach to obtain artistic 3D content.
In this paper, our focus is on the task of 3D scene stylization, where we aim to transfer reference styles specified by
multiple style images to the 3D scene.
Previous work on 3D stylization (Huang et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2023; Pang, Hua, and Yeung 2023; Jung et al.
2024) has predominantly utilized the Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) as a scene representation (Mildenhall et al. 2020).
While NeRF is compact and capable of achieving photorealistic rendering results, it is limited to implicit editing
and faces significant performance challenges due to the utilization of a heavy and high-dimensional Multi-Layer Per* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5289

