The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

STAMPsy: Towards SpatioTemporal-Aware Mixed-Type Dialogues
for Psychological Counseling
Jieyi Wang1 , Yue Huang1 , Zeming Liu2∗ , Dexuan Xu1 , Chuan Wang3 , Xiaoming Shi4 ,
Ruiyuan Guan1 , Hongxing Wang5 , Weihua Yue6 , Yu Huang1 *
2

1
Peking University, Beijing, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
4
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
5
Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
6
Peking University Sixth Hospital, Beijing, China
joysw@stu.pku.edu.cn, zmliu@buaa.edu.cn, hy@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Thanks to the development of generative AI tools, such as
Large Language Models(LLMs), online counseling is gradually becoming a good alternative to traditional face-to-face
counseling (Olawade et al. 2024; Song et al. 2023).
Recent studies have leveraged LLM to aid clients in
obtaining better online psychological counseling(Ke et al.
2024; Wang et al. 2023), falling into two categories: ①taskoriented dialogues or recent LLM-based simulations in
psychology theory assume that clients have explicit goals
(comfort-seeking, therapy querying, etc.)(Wang et al. 2024c;
Chen et al. 2023); ②non-task dialogue-modeling approaches
with pre-trained models for single-turn QA or multi-turn
empathic dialogue(Liu et al. 2021a; Zheng et al. 2023). Almost none of these studies naturally mix different types
of dialogue(called mixed-type dialogues). However, in realworld application scenarios, there are multiple dialogue
types in psychological counseling. For example, as shown
in Fig.1, the psychological counseling bots could proactively make QA or conversational recommendations after
task-oriented dialogue for diagnosis to improve user experience. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous
research has been done on this challenge. To mitigate this
challenge, we present a novel task, mixed-type dialogues for
psychological counseling, as shown in Fig.1.
Besides, beyond verbal conversations and body language,
time and environment are two important nonverbal cues
that affect counseling(Sherry, Paula, and Cynthia 2009) and
mental health(Woo and Postolache 2008; Levitan et al.
2019). Therefore, we delve into the spatiotemporal states
for this task, leading the model to generate more worldaware answers. For recommending therapy, therapists generally give different advice for late-night insomnia and early
morning awakening, relaxation exercises before bed, and
avoiding long naps.
To facilitate the study of this task, we collate the first
SpatioTemporal-Aware Mixed-type dialogues dataset for
Psychological counseling(STAMPsy), stamped with spatiotemporal state and psychological helping skills, including five dialogue types: task-oriented dialogues for diagnosis, knowledge-grounded dialogue, conversational recommendation, empathetic dialogue, and QA, containing 5,006

Online psychological counseling dialogue systems are trending, offering a convenient and accessible alternative to traditional in-person therapy. However, existing psychological
counseling dialogue systems mainly focus on basic empathetic dialogue or QA with minimal professional knowledge
and without goal guidance. In many real-world counseling
scenarios, clients often seek multi-type help, such as diagnosis, consultation, therapy, console, and common questions,
but existing dialogue systems struggle to combine different
dialogue types naturally. In this paper, we identify this challenge as how to construct mixed-type dialogue systems for
psychological counseling that enable clients to clarify their
goals before proceeding with counseling. To mitigate the
challenge, we collect a mixed-type counseling dialogues corpus termed STAMPsy, covering five dialogue types, taskoriented dialogue for diagnosis, knowledge-grounded dialogue, conversational recommendation, empathetic dialogue,
and question answering, over 5,000 conversations. Moreover,
spatiotemporal-aware knowledge enables systems to have
world awareness and has been proven to affect one’s mental health. Therefore, we link dialogues in STAMPsy to spatiotemporal state and propose a spatiotemporal-aware mixedtype psychological counseling dataset. Additionally, we build
baselines on STAMPsy and develop an iterative self-feedback
psychological dialogue generation framework, named SelfSTAMPsy. Results indicate that clarifying dialogue goals in
advance and utilizing spatiotemporal states are effective.

Datasets — https://github.com/JOY-SWang/STAMPsy

Introduction
One in eight people worldwide is living with mental health
conditions, yet the growing demand for mental health care is
facing significant challenges due to insufficient resources of
existing consultants(World Health Organization 2023). The
uneven distribution of face-to-face counseling resources and
the high cost of therapy have exacerbated the situation of
mental disorders(Ierardi, Bottini, and Riva Crugnola 2022).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25371

