The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Token Highlighter: Inspecting and Mitigating
Jailbreak Prompts for Large Language Models
Xiaomeng Hu1 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Tsung-Yi Ho1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
IBM Research
xmhu23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Bai et al. 2022; Kasirzadeh and Gabriel 2022; Ouyang et al.
2022).
Despite advancements in alignment techniques, aligned
LLMs have been found to be susceptible to jailbreak attacks, which involve rewriting the malicious query at tokenlevel or prompt-level to bypass and circumvent the safety
guardrails of aligned LLMs. A notable example is that a jailbroken LLM would be tricked into giving tutorials on how
to cause harm to others, as demonstrated in Figure 1. Different jailbreak attack algorithms (Zou et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2023; Chao et al. 2023; Mehrotra et al. 2023) have been proposed recently to automatically construct the jailbreak attacks. Take GCG (Zou et al. 2023) as an example, GCG can
successfully trick several LLMs to output objectionable responses by simply inserting a universal adversarial suffix.
Since the exposure of jailbreak risks for LLMs, various
methods of defending against jailbreak attacks have been
explored (Jain et al. 2023; Robey et al. 2023; Xie et al.
2023; Kumar et al. 2023; Ji et al. 2024; Hu, Chen, and Ho
2024) and are indeed empirically successful in defending
against certain types of jailbreak attacks. However, existing defenses are challenged by three main considerations:
(1) Some defenses like perplexity filtering (PPL (Jain et al.
2023)) showed little effect on interpretable and fluent jailbreak prompts (Liu et al. 2023). (2) Some detector-based
defenses have a high False Positive Rate (Kumar et al. 2023)
and thus would significantly compromise the LLM’s performance on benign user queries. (3) Some defenses that rely
on querying an LLM multiple times (Robey et al. 2023; Kumar et al. 2023; Ji et al. 2024; Hu, Chen, and Ho 2024), may
incur unacceptable inference costs.
Recent works (Zou et al. 2023; Wei, Haghtalab, and
Steinhardt 2023; Zhao et al. 2024) exposed an observation that successful jailbreaks often succeed in tricking the
LLMs to first generate an affirmative response like ”Sure,
here’s...”. This motivates us to find the tokens in the jailbreak prompt that are most critical to generating these affirmations, and then mitigate the potential jailbreak threat
by reducing the influence of those tokens in the response
generation process. Motivated by this thought, we propose
Token Highlighter to alleviate the threats of jailbreak attacks and avoid the aforementioned limitations of existing
defenses. An overview of how Token Highlighter works can
be found on the bottom left of Figure 1. Firstly, we de-

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being integrated into services such as ChatGPT to provide responses
to user queries. To mitigate potential harm and prevent misuse, there have been concerted efforts to align the LLMs with
human values and legal compliance by incorporating various techniques, such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), into the training of the LLMs. However, recent research has exposed that even aligned LLMs
are susceptible to adversarial manipulations known as Jailbreak Attacks. To address this challenge, this paper proposes
a method called Token Highlighter to inspect and mitigate
the potential jailbreak threats in the user query. Token Highlighter introduced a concept called Affirmation Loss to measure the LLM’s willingness to answer the user query. It then
uses the gradient of Affirmation Loss for each token in the
user query to locate the jailbreak-critical tokens. Further, Token Highlighter exploits our proposed Soft Removal technique to mitigate the jailbreak effects of critical tokens via
shrinking their token embeddings. Experimental results on
two aligned LLMs (LLaMA-2 and Vicuna-V1.5) demonstrate
that the proposed method can effectively defend against a variety of Jailbreak Attacks while maintaining competent performance on benign questions of the AlpacaEval benchmark.
In addition, Token Highlighter is a cost-effective and interpretable defense because it only needs to query the protected
LLM once to compute the Affirmation Loss and can highlight
the critical tokens upon refusal.

Extended version — http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18171

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-4 (OpenAI
2023), LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al. 2023), and Vicuna (Zheng
et al. 2023) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in
achieving state-of-the-art results in a wide range of natural
language processing and generation tasks. With the surging
interest and integration into services such as ChatGPT, ensuring the safety and trustworthiness of their output becomes
crucial. Techniques such as Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) have been proven to be effective
in aligning LLMs with human values (Askell et al. 2021;
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27330

