The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

COSEE: Consistency-Oriented Signal-Based Early Exiting via Calibrated
Sample Weighting Mechanism
Jianing He1 , Qi Zhang1 , Hongyun Zhang1 , Xuanjing Huang2 , Usman Naseem3 , Duoqian Miao1 *
1

Tongji University, China
Fudan University, China
3
Macquarie University, Australia
{jnhe, zhangqi cs, zhanghongyun, dqmiao}@tongji.edu.cn, xjhuang@fudan.edu.cn, engr.usmannaseem87@gmail.com
2

Abstract

PLMs. As illustrated in Figure 2, each intermediate layer
of the PLM is coupled with an internal classifier to give an
early prediction. This enables the early exiting of samples
once the early predictions are sufficiently reliable, eliminating the need for passing them through the entire model. This
method employs a sample-wise inference strategy to deal
with easy samples with shallow classifiers and process hard
samples with deeper classifiers, significantly improving inference efficiency without sacrificing accuracy and alleviating the overthinking problem.
Signal-based early exiting methods (Xin et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Schwartz et al. 2020; Li et al.
2021; Liao et al. 2021; Ji et al. 2023; Zhu 2021; Zhu et al.
2021; Gao et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023; He et al. 2024; Akbari, Banitalebi-Dehkordi, and Zhang 2022; Xin et al. 2021;
Balagansky and Gavrilov 2022) are typical implementations
of early exiting, which rely on carefully designed exiting
signals (e.g. entropy, energy score, softmax score, and patience) to dynamically adjust the number of executed layers
for each sample. The inference process is terminated once
the exiting signal meets a certain condition. These methods
can easily adapt to various acceleration requirements during inference by simply adjusting the threshold, without incurring additional training costs. However, existing works
simply use the (weighted) sum of cross-entropy losses from
all classifiers as the training objective, where each classifier
treats the loss of both easy and hard samples equally. This
treatment ignores the dynamic early exiting behavior during
inference (as shown in Figure 1), leading to a gap between
training and testing.
To bridge the gap, router-based early exiting methods (Sun et al. 2022; Mangrulkar, MS, and Sembium 2022;
Zeng et al. 2024) have been successively proposed. These
methods employ a router (e.g. a hash function or a network) to determine the exiting layer of samples during both
training and inference, and each sample only incurs a crossentropy loss at its exiting classifier, ensuring consistency between training and testing. However, router-based early exiting methods fail to meet various acceleration requirements
during inference, as a router can only generate a fixed exiting
strategy, leading to unadjustable speed-up ratios.
In this paper, we aim to bridge the gap between training and testing while enabling flexible adjustments of the
speed-up ratio. To this end, building upon the signal-based

Early exiting is an effective paradigm for improving the inference efficiency of pre-trained language models (PLMs)
by dynamically adjusting the number of executed layers for
each sample. However, in most existing works, easy and
hard samples are treated equally by each classifier during
training, which neglects the test-time early exiting behavior,
leading to inconsistency between training and testing. Although some methods have tackled this issue under a fixed
speed-up ratio, the challenge of flexibly adjusting the speedup ratio while maintaining consistency between training and
testing is still under-explored. To bridge the gap, we propose a novel Consistency-Oriented Signal-based Early Exiting (COSEE) framework, which leverages a calibrated sample weighting mechanism to enable each classifier to emphasize the samples that are more likely to exit at that classifier
under various acceleration scenarios. Extensive experiments
on the GLUE benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our
COSEE across multiple exiting signals and backbones, yielding a better trade-off between performance and efficiency.

Code — https://github.com/He-Jianing/COSEE
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.13236

1

Introduction

Although tremendous improvements have been achieved by
pre-trained language models (PLMs) in natural language
processing tasks (Devlin et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019), high computational costs of
PLMs in both training and inference still hinder their deployment in resource-constrained devices and real-time scenarios. Besides, overthinking problem (Kaya, Hong, and Dumitras 2019) also restricts the application of PLMs. Precisely,
for easy samples, PLMs can generate correct predictions according to the representations indicated by shallow layers.
However, high-level representations may focus on more intricate or unrelated details, leading to incorrect answers.
To address these issues, early exiting (Xin et al. 2020;
Zhou et al. 2020; Xin et al. 2021; Liao et al. 2021; Sun
et al. 2022; Zeng et al. 2024), a kind of adaptive inference
strategy, has been proposed to accelerate the inference of
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24023

