The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Training Consistent Mixture-of-Experts-Based Prompt Generator
for Continual Learning
Yue Lu1 , Shizhou Zhang1 * , De Cheng2 * , Guoqiang Liang1 , Yinghui Xing1 ,
Nannan Wang2 , Yanning Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, China
zgxd@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, szzhang@nwpu.edu.cn, dcheng@xidian.edu.cn, gqliang@nwpu.edu.cn,
xyh 7491@nwpu.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

reduce catastrophic forgetting and maintain stability. Mainstream methods employ a prompt pool (Wang et al. 2022b),
which retrieves an instance-aware prompt based on the input
feature, as the prompt generator. They usually keep stability by freezing old prompts and incrementally training new
task-specific prompts (Wang et al. 2022a; Smith et al. 2023),
which is essentially a progressive expansion scheme (Wang
et al. 2024). Other methods train prompt generators by slow
updating, first-task adaptation or task discrimination for stability (Gao et al. 2023; Jung et al. 2023; Khan et al. 2023).
Nevertheless, existing methods cannot theoretically guarantee the use of consistent instance-aware prompts or experts
across tasks, leading to representational drift and forgetting.
Different from existing works, we propose to train a consistent prompt generator to preserve the model’s stability
during CL. Specifically, the consistency is that for any instance from the old task, its corresponding instance-aware
prompt generated by the prompt generator remains consistent as the prompt generator updates continually in a new
task. By doing this, the representation of the instance does
not drift, and stability can be maintained in theory. The
consistency can be achieved by orthogonal projection constraints on the gradients (Wang et al. 2021; Saha, Garg, and
Roy 2021; Qiao et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2024) of the prompt
generator during training in the new task. Consequently,
our prompt generator has the ability to generate consistent
instance-aware prompts across tasks to mitigate forgetting.
To more effectively select and integrate diverse knowledge for prompt generation, we use a mixture of experts
(MoE) as the prompt generator. The MoE consists of a routing strategy and multiple experts, each contributing specialized knowledge. The routing strategy uses a router to guide
the selection of specific experts for each input feature. A
fixed set of candidate prompts serves as experts, which are
selectively combined to generate the instance-aware prompt.
The MoE not only enables each expert to specialize in clusters of similar tasks, but also mitigates forgetting through
the correct selection of instance-relevant experts. Therefore,
we propose a consistent MoE prompt generator to maintain
stability for continual learning in our approach.
To derive the specific orthogonal projections for the proposed MoE prompt generator, we analyze the conditions that
satisfy the consistency objective: in the new task where the

Visual prompt tuning-based continual learning (CL) methods
have shown promising performance in exemplar-free scenarios, where their key component can be viewed as a prompt
generator. Existing approaches generally rely on freezing old
prompts, slow updating and task discrimination for prompt
generators to preserve stability and minimize forgetting. In
contrast, we introduce a novel approach that trains a consistent prompt generator to ensure stability during CL. Consistency means that for any instance from an old task, its corresponding instance-ware prompt generated by the prompt generator remains consistent even as the generator continually
updates in a new task. This ensures that the representation
of a specific instance remains stable across tasks and thereby
prevents forgetting. We employ a mixture of experts (MoE)
as the prompt generator, which contains a router and multiple
experts. By deriving conditions sufficient to achieve the consistency for the MoE prompt generator, we demonstrate that:
during training in a new task, if the router and experts update in the directions orthogonal to the subspaces spanned by
old input features and gating vectors, respectively, the consistency can be theoretically guaranteed. To implement this orthogonality, we project parameter gradients to those orthogonal directions using the orthogonal projection matrices computed via the null space method. Extensive experiments on
four class-incremental learning benchmarks validate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach.

Introduction
Continual learning (CL) aims to learn new tasks without forgetting the old ones in the scenario of sequentially arrived
data (Ratcliff 1990; McCloskey and Cohen 1989). In recent
years, visual prompt tuning-based (Jia et al. 2022) CL methods (Wang et al. 2022b,a) utilizing pre-trained Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) have shown promising performance in CL. Even without storing exemplars (i.e., samples from previous tasks), they can outperform conventional
CNN-based CL approaches by a large margin.
Despite the variations among existing prompt-based CL
methods, their fundamental objective is to generate stable
instance-aware prompts from a form of prompt generator to
* Shizhou Zhang and De Cheng are co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19152

