The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Enhancing Multivariate Time-Series Domain Adaptation via Contrastive Frequency
Graph Discovery and Language-Guided Adversary Alignment
Haoren Guo1 , Haiyue Zhu2 * , Jiahui Wang1 , Prahlad Vadakkepat1 , Weng Khuen Ho1 ,
Tong Heng Lee1
1
National University of Singapore
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
{haorenguo 06, wjiahui}@u.nus.edu, {prahlad, wk.ho, eleleeth}@nus.edu.sg, zhu haiyue@simtech.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a machine learning
approach designed to minimize reliance on labeled data by
aligning features between a labeled source domain and an unlabeled target domain, thereby reducing feature discrepancies,
which is efficient for multivariate time series (MTS) prediction.
However, most MTS UDA methods focus solely on aligning
intra-series temporal features, overlooking the valuable information in inter-series dependencies. Research has highlighted
that analyzing decomposed frequency dependencies in time
series can reveal significant trends, noise patterns, and intricate temporal details. To address these unexplored frequency
dependencies, we introduce the Frequency Graph Discovery
Module (FGD), which uncovers and aligns shared frequency
information and correlations across domains. Additionally,
we propose a Frequency-Contextual Contrastive Learning
(FCCL) framework to better capture and align frequencycontextual representations in multivariate time series, ensuring the extraction of label-invariant information for prediction. Furthermore, considering existing models overlooking
the valuable and abundant information outside source and
target dataset, we enhance the MTS UDA prediction model
with a Language-guided Adversary Alignment (LAA) module,
which leverages the advancement and capabilities of Large
Language Models (LLMs) to get text-encoded labeled embeddings and align the classification features, thereby improving
prediction accuracy. Our model achieves state-of-the-art results on three public multivariate time-series datasets for unsupervised domain adaptation, as demonstrated by empirical
evidence.

1

Introduction

Multivariate Time Series (MTS) data are extensively applied
and researched across various fields. The advancement of
data-driven models, particularly deep learning methods, has
significantly improved performance in MTS-related tasks
due to their ability to model latent dependencies within
data (Ragab et al. 2023). However, these methods often require a large amount of labeled data for training, which can
be costly and sometimes even impossible, such as forcing
every single patient to record and submit their daily activity
sensor data and label with their specific activities and training
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

16951

individual models for every particular patient. Targeting this
bottleneck, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods have emerged. These methods transfer knowledge from a
labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain without
using labels from the target domain (Wang et al. 2023).
Most of the current UDA methods attempt to reduce domain discrepancy by learning domain-invariant features, typically through metric-based, such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Purushotham et al. 2022a) and Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) (da Costa et al. 2020) or adversarialbased approaches, such as domain adversarial neural network
(DANN) (Ganin et al. 2016) and CALDA (Wilson, Doppa,
and Cook 2023). These methods have proven effective in reducing label dependency, particularly in tasks involving MTS
data. Additionally, transfer learning has emerged as another
prominent approach in time series analysis, integrating Contrastive Learning (CL) to capture contextual representations
for downstream tasks (Eldele et al. 2021; Tonekaboni, Eytan,
and Goldenberg 2021). In the UDA task, CLUDA (Ozyurt,
Feuerriegel, and Zhang 2022) has shown promise by leveraging CL to align contextual representations across source and
target domains.
Despite advancements, existing MTS UDA methods primarily align features within the intra-series temporal signal space, neglecting inter-series dependencies and multifrequency information. Domain shifts in time series can manifest as changes in temporal and frequency characteristics,
where frequency features are more robust to small shifts and
noise, offering better trend and turbulence extraction (He et al.
2023; Guo et al. 2024). Motivated by this, we hypothesize that
frequency features and inter-frequency correlations between
source and target domains should exhibit similarity. To leverage this, we propose the Frequency Graph Discovery Module
(FGD), which identifies inherent frequency relationships and
aligns features at the frequency graph level. Complementing this, we introduce the Frequency-Contextual Contrastive
Learning (FCCL) framework to align frequency-contextual
representations from augmented time series, extracting labelinvariant information. Together with adversarial training to
reduce domain discrepancies, our proposed model, ConFGD,
integrates FGD and FCCL to enhance prediction accuracy.
Existing models extract features only from source and
target data, overlooking abundant information outside. In
line with the saying, “Those who wanted to learn would

