The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Learning Disentangled Equivariant Representation
for Explicitly Controllable 3D Molecule Generation
Haoran Liu1, * , Youzhi Luo1, * , Tianxiao Li2 , James Caverlee1 , Martin Renqiang Min2
1

Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77840;
2
NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ 08540
{liuhr99, yzluo, caverlee}@tamu.edu, {tili, renqiang}@nec-labs.com

Abstract

with desired property values such as asphericity, QED, SA
Score, and binding to target proteins. On the other hand,
equivariant diffusion models (Hoogeboom et al. 2022; Qiang
et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023) address this limitation by directly
incorporating property values as additional inputs. Nevertheless, they encounter a different challenge due to lacking an
explicit latent space for direct manipulation of latent variables, which is required for assigning or anchoring distinct
properties to the noise/latent space. Therefore, they are unable to explicitly control molecule attributes in the generation
process. However, explicit control over 3D molecule generation is crucial in real-world drug design scenarios. Specialists
often need to optimize certain properties while maintaining
others. For instance, improving a drug’s synthetic accessibility without altering its binding affinity to a target. This
precision demands a generation process with a manipulable
latent space, enabling targeted property modifications.

We consider the conditional generation of 3D drug-like
molecules with explicit control over molecular properties such
as drug-like properties (e.g., Quantitative Estimate of Druglikeness or Synthetic Accessibility score) and effectively binding
to specific protein sites. To tackle this problem, we propose
an E(3)-equivariant Wasserstein autoencoder and factorize the
latent space of our generative model into two disentangled
aspects: molecular properties and the remaining structural context of 3D molecules. Our model ensures explicit control over
these molecular attributes while maintaining equivariance of
coordinate representation and invariance of data likelihood.
Furthermore, we introduce a novel alignment-based coordinate loss to adapt equivariant networks for auto-regressive denovo 3D molecule generation from scratch. Extensive experiments validate our model’s effectiveness on property-guided
and context-guided molecule generation, both for de-novo 3D
molecule design and structure-based drug discovery against
protein targets.

1

Introduction

Although a lot of progress has been made in AI-powered
2D molecule design (Bengio et al. 2021; Jin, Barzilay, and
Jaakkola 2018; Shi et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2021), generating
desirable 3D molecules with specific attributes, e.g., druglike properties (e.g., QED and SA Score) and the ability to
bind with targeted proteins, is still challenging and crucial
in drug discovery. Given the vastness of the chemical space,
estimated to be in the order of 1033 (Polishchuk, G, and
Varnek 2013), conducting an exhaustive search is impractical.
Therefore, our goal is to develop computational methods
for direct generation of novel and valid drug-like molecules
conditional on desired properties.
To perform conditional 3D molecule generation, existing auto-regressive models such as G-SchNet (Gebauer,
Gastegger, and Schütt 2019) and G-SphereNet (Luo and Ji
2022) can be fine-tuned using subsets of favorable data, selected based on specific threshold criteria. However, these
models are limited by their inability to generate molecules

To achieve explicit control over 3D molecule generation,
we propose to incorporate disentangled representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Higgins et al. 2016;
Kim and Mnih 2018) into this task. Specifically, we factorize
the latent space of our generative model into two disentangled aspects: one representing the desired molecular properties, and the other capturing the remaining structural context
related to 3D molecular validity. Notably, almost all existing methods only focus on the property-guided side of 3D
molecule generation, neglecting the control over the remaining component of the latent space, i.e., the complementary
factors to molecular properties. In contrast, our model supports two distinct generation modes: property-targeting generation, for which we generate 3D molecules with specific,
desirable properties, and context-preserving generation, for
which we generate 3D molecules allowing optimization of targeted molecular properties while maintaining the molecule’s
fundamental architecture. These two capabilities enabled by
our model are essential for many real-world drug design scenarios, where minor modifications can critically impact a
drug’s efficacy and safety. Especially, the unique capability
for context-preserving generation distinguishes our model
from all existing 3D molecule generation methods.
To realize these capabilities, we propose an E(3)equivariant Wasserstein autoencoder (E3WAE) model architecture based on the above disentangled representation

* Most of this work was done when Haoran and Youzhi were
interns at NEC Labs America.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

18816

