The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ProsodyFM: Unsupervised Phrasing and Intonation Control for Intelligible
Speech Synthesis
Xiangheng He1 , Junjie Chen3 , Zixing Zhang4 * , Björn Schuller1,2
1
GLAM – Group on Language, Audio, & Music, Imperial College London, UK
CHI – Chair of Health Informatics, MRI, Technical University of Munich, Germany
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan
4
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
{x.he20, bjoern.schuller}@imperial.ac.uk, junjiechen@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, zixingzhang@hnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

in many prosody aspects. In this study, we focus on two
prosody aspects in English: phrasing and intonation.
Phrasing refers to grouping words into chunks. An intonational phrase contains a chunk of words with their own
intonation pattern. Phrase break in this paper refers to the
perceivable acoustic pause at the end of intonational phrases.
Phrase break plays an important role in enhancing speech
intelligibility (Futamata et al. 2021). It implies the phrasal
organization in the sentence, allowing listeners to accurately
discern the syntactic structure of the sentence and deduce its
correct meaning. For example, the sentence “I saw the man
with the telescope.” can be interpreted differently depending
on whether there is a break after the word “man”. When the
sentence is spoken without the break, “with the telescope”
modifies “the man”, suggesting that the man observed by
the speaker had a telescope. When the break is introduced
after “man”, it implies the speaker used a telescope to see
the man. This demonstrates that incorrect phrasing can lead
to incorrect interpretation of the sentence, thereby impairing speech intelligibility. However, due to the difficulty in
obtaining break labels and the variability of break duration,
current TTS systems usually miss or misplace breaks when
synthesizing complex sentences.
Intonation, especially terminal intonation, is essential for
synthesizing intelligible speech. We refer to the intonation
pattern of the last word in an intonational phrase as the terminal intonation. Terminal intonation carries many linguistic and paralinguistic information in English. A rising terminal intonation at the end of a sentence usually signals uncertainty or a request for clarification, while a falling intonation
typically indicates certainty or is used to make statements
and assertions (Liberman 1975). A rising terminal intonation in the middle of a sentence usually indicates the speaker
is not finished yet, while a falling tone indicates the end of
the thought (Bolinger 1998). This information of intonation
change can be represented through the change in the pitch
contour (Cole, Steffman, and Tilsen 2022). However, instead
of modeling the relative change in the pitch contour, previous TTS systems directly model the absolute pitch value.
This design choice hinders their ability to accurately capture
natural intonation, as pitch tracking and predicting absolute
pitch values is inherently challenging.
To address these issues, we propose ProsodyFM, a novel

Prosody contains rich information beyond the literal meaning of words, which is crucial for the intelligibility of speech.
Current models still fall short in phrasing and intonation; they
not only miss or misplace breaks when synthesizing long sentences with complex structures but also produce unnatural intonation. We propose ProsodyFM, a prosody-aware text-tospeech synthesis (TTS) model with a flow-matching (FM)
backbone that aims to enhance the phrasing and intonation
aspects of prosody. ProsodyFM introduces two key components: a Phrase Break Encoder to capture initial phrase break
locations, followed by a Duration Predictor for the flexible
adjustment of break durations; and a Terminal Intonation Encoder which learns a bank of intonation shape tokens combined with a novel Pitch Processor for more robust modeling of human-perceived intonation change. ProsodyFM is
trained with no explicit prosodic labels and yet can uncover
a broad spectrum of break durations and intonation patterns.
Experimental results demonstrate that ProsodyFM can effectively improve the phrasing and intonation aspects of prosody,
thereby enhancing the overall intelligibility compared to four
state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. Out-of-distribution experiments show that this prosody improvement can further bring
ProsodyFM superior generalizability for unseen complex
sentences and speakers. Our case study intuitively illustrates
the powerful and fine-grained controllability of ProsodyFM
over phrasing and intonation.

Code and demo —
https://github.com/XianghengHee/ProsodyFM
Extended version with Appendix —
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11795

Introduction
Prosody, which encompasses various properties of speech
such as phrasing, intonation, prominence, and rhythm, can
convey rich information beyond the literal meaning of words
(Xu 2019). It plays a crucial role in the intelligibility of
speech. Although recent TTS models have achieved great
progress in synthesizing intelligible speech, they still lack
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24041

