The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Image-to-video Adaptation with Outlier Modeling and Robust Self-learning
Junbao Zhuo1 , Shuhui Wang2 * , Zhenghan Chen3 , Li Shen4 , Qingming Huang5 , Huimin Ma1*
1

University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft (China) Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
4
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
junbaozhuo@ustb.edu.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, zhenghan.chen@alumni.pku.edu.cn
shenli6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, mhm@ustb.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The image-to-video adaptation task seeks to effectively harness both labeled images and unlabeled videos for achieving
effective video recognition. The modality gap of the image
and video modalities and the domain discrepancy across the
two domains are the two essential challenges in this task. Existing methods reduce the domain discrepancy via close-set
domain adaptation techniques, resulting in inaccurate domain
alignment as there exist outlier target frames. To tackle this
issue, we extend the vanilla classifier with outlier classes,
where each outlier class responsible for capturing outlier
frames for a specific class via batch nuclear norm maximization loss. We further propose a new loss by treating the source
images apart from class c as instances from outlier class specific for c. As for the modality gap, existing methods usually utilize the pseudo labels obtained from an image-level
adapted model to learn a video-level model. Rare efforts are
dedicated to handling the noise in pseudo labels. We proposed
a new metric based on label propagation consistency to select
samples for training a better video-level model. Experiments
on 3 benchmarks validating the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: The outlier issue of image-to-video adaptation.
There exist frames lack semantic information (with red dash
boundaries) which is not appropriate for domain alignment
as they may cause the negative transfer.
2021) has been explored to leverage both the labeled images
and unlabeled video for effective video recognition.
In this paper, we tackle image-to-video adaptation task
which faces two essential issues, including the domain discrepancy across the source images and the target video
frames, and the modality gap that the temporal information exists in videos is absent in source images. The domain discrepancy originates from the differences in background, light, image styles, camera perspectives and so on.
The domain discrepancy results in performance degradation of high-performance source model over the target video
frames and causes inaccurate guidance to further bridge the
modality gap. As for the modality gap, the temporal information is essential for discriminating categories like “walk”
and “run” where these two categories contain similar visual
content. Without temporal information, the labels from the
source domain can not be well transferred to the target video
domain leading to an inaccurate video classifier.
To reduce the domain discrepancy, existing approaches (Gan et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2019; Kae and
Song 2020) adopt statistical discrepancy metric like Maximum Mean Discrepancy, joint distributions (Long et al.
2017) or introduce domain adversarial learning. However,
existing methods focus on global level domain-invariant
feature learning based on the close set domain shift assumption. But there are many frames in the video lack of
semantic information which can be seen as outlier samples.

Introduction
Video recognition plays a multifaceted role in various applications like security and surveillance, and personalized content delivery, across different domains. Training deep video
models with good performance typically requires sufficient
labeled videos (Duan et al. 2022), which is usually impractical as collecting and annotating videos are quite timeconsuming and labor-intensive. To alleviate the dependence
on large amounts of labeled video, semi-supervised video
classification methods (Hu et al. 2023), few-shot video classification methods and zero-shot video classification methods (Gao, Chen, and Xu 2023; Gao, Zhang, and Xu 2020),
have drawn much attention from the community and industry. However, these settings still obtain inferior performance
or require substantial quantities of labeled videos of support
set and seen categories. In the meanwhile, as it is easier to
collect and label images, and also there are many well annotated image datasets, image-to-video adaptation (Chen et al.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

23072

