The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Accurate Estimation of Feature Importance Faithfulness for Tree Models
Mateusz Gajewski * 2, 3 , Adam Karczmarz * 1, 2 , Mateusz Rapicki * 1 , Piotr Sankowski1, 4
1

Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
2
IDEAS NCBR
3
Faculty of Computing and Telecommunications Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland
4
MIM Solutions
mg96272@gmail.com, a.karczmarz@mimuw.edu.pl, mateusz.rapicki@mimuw.edu.pl, sank@mimuw.edu.pl
f (x), each feature is assigned a weight “measuring” the feature’s impact on the prediction. Ideally, a larger (absolute)
weight should correspond to a larger importance of the feature for the prediction.
Many local attribution methods have been proposed so
far, e.g., (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Plumb, Molitor, and Talwalkar 2018; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016). They are
often completely model-agnostic, that is, they can be defined for and used with any model which is only accessed
in a black-box way for computing the attribution. In some of
these cases, focusing on a particular model’s architecture can
lead to much more efficient and accurate attribution computation algorithms (e.g., (Lundberg et al. 2020) for tree ensemble models).
With the large body of different attribution methods, it is
not clear which one should one use, especially since there
is not a single objective measure of their reliability. To help
deal with this issue, several notions of explanation quality
have been proposed in the literature, such as faithfulness (fidelity) (Liu et al. 2021; Yeh et al. 2019), stability (AlvarezMelis and Jaakkola 2018), or fairness (Balagopalan et al.
2022; Dai et al. 2022). Agarwal et al. (2022) developed an
open-source benchmark OpenXAI automatically computing
variants of these measures for a number of proposed attribution methods.
Out of these notions, our focus in this paper is on faithfulness. Roughly speaking, an attribution method deserves
to be called faithful if the features deemed important by
the attribution are truly important for the decision-making
process of the model. The perturbation-based methods constitute one popular class of approaches to measuring faithfulness. Intuitively, perturbing features deemed impactful
should generally lead to a significant change in the prediction. On the contrary, manipulating unimportant features
should not make a big difference.
One concrete cleanly-defined perturbation-based faithfulness metric for regression problems is the prediction gap
on important feature perturbation, PGI in short. PGI is
a faithfulness measure of choice in the OpenXAI benchmark (Agarwal et al. 2022). Having fixed some subset of
important features S derived from the obtained attribution,
the prediction gap (PG) of x wrt. S is defined as:
PG(x, S) := Ex′ ∼perturb(x,S) [|f (x′ ) − f (x)|] .
(1)
In (Agarwal et al. 2022), the concrete perturbation method

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a perturbation-based metric of predictive faithfulness of feature rankings (or attributions) that
we call PGI squared. When applied to decision tree-based regression models, the metric can be computed exactly and efficiently for arbitrary independent feature perturbation distributions. In particular, the computation does not involve
Monte Carlo sampling that has been typically used for computing similar metrics and which is inherently prone to inaccuracies.
As a second contribution, we proposed a procedure for constructing feature ranking based on PGI squared. Our results
indicate the proposed ranking method is comparable to the
widely recognized SHAP explainer, offering a viable alternative for assessing feature importance in tree-based models.

Code — https://github.com/rapicki/prediction-gap
Extended version — https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03426

Introduction
One of the key challenges in deploying modern machine
learning models in such areas as medical diagnosis lies in the
ability to indicate why a certain prediction has been made.
Such an indication may be of critical importance when a human decides whether the prediction can be relied on. This is
one of the reasons various aspects of explainability of machine learning models have been the subject of extensive research lately (see, e.g., (Burkart and Huber 2021)).
For some basic types of models (e.g., single decision
trees, the rationale behind a prediction is easy to understand
by a human. However, predictions of more complex models
(that offer much better accuracy, e.g., based on neural networks or decision tree ensembles) are also much more difficult to interpret. Accurate and concise explanations understandable to humans might not always exist. In such cases,
it is still beneficial to have methods giving a flavor of what
factors might have influenced the prediction the most.
Local feature attribution1 constitutes one of such general
approaches. For a fixed input x and the model’s prediction
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
It should be contrasted with global feature attribution whose
aim is to measure the feature’s total impact on the model.

16691

