The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

GURecon: Learning Detailed 3D Geometric Uncertainties
for Neural Surface Reconstruction
Zesong Yang1 * , Ru Zhang1 * , Jiale Shi1 * , Zixiang Ai1 , Boming Zhao1 ,
Hujun Bao1 , Luwei Yang2 , Zhaopeng Cui1†
1

State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University,
2
Simon Fraser University
zesongyang0@zju.edu.cn, ruzhang@zju.edu.cn, jlshi@zju.edu.cn, zxai@zju.edu.cn, bmzhao@zju.edu.cn,
bao@cad.zju.edu.cn, luweiy@sfu.ca, zhpcui@gmail.com
Geo. Model

Abstract
Neural surface representation has demonstrated remarkable
success in the areas of novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction. However, assessing the geometric quality of 3D reconstructions in the absence of ground truth mesh remains
a significant challenge, due to its rendering-based optimization process and entangled learning of appearance and geometry with photometric losses. In this paper, we present a
novel framework, i.e, GURecon, which establishes a geometric uncertainty field for the neural surface based on geometric consistency. Different from existing methods that rely on
rendering-based measurement, GURecon models a continuous 3D uncertainty field for the reconstructed surface, and is
learned by an online distillation approach without introducing
real geometric information for supervision. Moreover, in order to mitigate the interference of illumination on geometric
consistency, a decoupled field is learned and exploited to finetune the uncertainty field. Experiments on various datasets
demonstrate the superiority of GURecon in modeling 3D geometric uncertainty, as well as its plug-and-play extension to
various neural surface representations and improvement on
downstream tasks such as incremental reconstruction.

1

! ? !

Multi-View
Consistency
Sparse Views
& Poses

How to quantify the
geometric uncertainty?

Distill from the
Consistency!

Unc. Model

Figure 1: A brief overview. By leveraging multi-view consistency as guidance, GURecon learns detailed 3D geometric uncertainties for neural surface reconstruction.

existing work incorporates uncertainty estimation into NeRF
models to identify areas with poor rendering quality. NeRFW (Martin-Brualla et al. 2021) and its following works
(Pan et al. 2022; Ran et al. 2023) take the radiance field
as Gaussian distributions to model the uncertainty of rendered RGB. Some other works model uncertainty as the entropy of the weight distribution along rays in NeRF models
(Zhan et al. 2022; Lee et al. 2022). Besides, the deep learning techniques are also applied to NeRF to quantify the uncertainty via ensemble learning (Sünderhauf, Abou-Chakra,
and Miller 2023) or variational inference (Shen et al. 2021,
2022). However, all these methods evaluate the uncertainty
of the neural fields in a single-view pixel-wise manner via
volumetric rendering, which does not support direct evaluation of 3D geometry accurately, and the uncertainty for the
same surface point may vary across different views due to
the multi-view inconsistencies in images caused by varying lighting and observation angles, disobeying the viewindependent nature of 3D geometric uncertainties.
In this paper, we present a novel framework, i.e, GURecon, which is able to learn detailed 3D geometric uncertainty
for neural surface reconstruction as shown in Fig. 1. Different from existing methods relying on rendering-based pixelwise uncertainty measurement, GURecon directly models
the 3D uncertainty for surface points and ensures consistency over viewpoints. However, designing such a system is

Introduction

Image-based 3D reconstruction is a long-standing problem
in computer vision with a wide range of applications like
AR/VR, autonomous driving, digital heritage preservation,
etc. Recently, learning-based methods have attracted much
attention with the development of neural radiance representations like Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al. 2021). Unlike traditional methods, NeRF and its variants (e.g, NSVF (Liu et al. 2020), NeuS (Wang et al. 2021))
encode scene geometry and appearance with neural networks, which can be optimized by leveraging the differentiable rendering given a set of calibrated images.
Although the neural representations demonstrate remarkable performance in novel view synthesis and surface reconstruction with high levels of detail and photorealism, assessing the reconstruction quality remains challenging. Some
* Contribute equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9363

