The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

OLiDM: Object-aware LiDAR Diffusion Models for Autonomous Driving
Tianyi Yan1,2 * , Junbo Yin3 * , Xianpeng Lang2 , Ruigang Yang4 , Cheng-Zhong Xu1 , Jianbing Shen1†
1

SKL-IOTSC, Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Li Auto Inc
3
CEMSE Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{tianyi.yan123, yinjunbocn}@gmail.com, jianbingshen@um.edu.mo

Abstract

2020). This highlights the necessity for advanced generation
algorithms to produce diverse, controllable, and scalable LiDAR point cloud data.

To enhance autonomous driving safety in complex scenarios, various methods have been proposed to simulate LiDAR
point cloud data. Nevertheless, these methods often face challenges in producing high-quality, diverse, and controllable
foreground objects. To address the needs of object-aware
tasks in 3D perception, we introduce OLiDM, a novel framework capable of generating high-fidelity LiDAR data at both
the object and the scene levels. OLiDM consists of two pivotal components: the Object-Scene Progressive Generation
(OPG) module and the Object Semantic Alignment (OSA)
module. OPG adapts to user-specific prompts to generate desired foreground objects, which are subsequently employed
as conditions in scene generation, ensuring controllable outputs at both the object and scene levels. This also facilitates
the association of user-defined object-level annotations with
the generated LiDAR scenes. Moreover, OSA aims to rectify the misalignment between foreground objects and background scenes, enhancing the overall quality of the generated objects. The broad effectiveness of OLiDM is demonstrated across various LiDAR generation tasks, as well as in
3D perception tasks. Specifically, on the KITTI-360 dataset,
OLiDM surpasses prior state-of-the-art methods such as UltraLiDAR by 17.5 in FPD. Additionally, in sparse-to-dense
LiDAR completion, OLiDM achieves a significant improvement over LiDARGen, with a 57.47% increase in semantic
IoU. Moreover, OLiDM enhances the performance of mainstream 3D detectors by 2.4% in mAP and 1.9% in NDS, underscoring its potential in advancing object-aware 3D tasks.

Recent breakthroughs in 3D generative models (Zyrianov,
Zhu, and Wang 2022; Nakashima and Kurazume 2023) have
enabled promising applications such as LiDAR data generation, which are critical for self-driving vehicles. To generate
novel LiDAR data from scratch, LiDARGen (Zyrianov, Zhu,
and Wang 2022) and R2DM (Nakashima and Kurazume
2023) transform 3D point clouds into structured 2D range
images and leverage existing 2D diffusion models (Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020). Later, UltraLiDAR (Xiong et al. 2023)
utilizes voxelized LiDAR point clouds in conjunction with
VQ-VAE (Yu et al. 2021) to facilitate the densification of
sparse LiDAR data. Despite their effectiveness in generating scene-level LiDAR data, we have observed significant
discrepancies between these synthetic data and real-world
data when applied to the 3D detection task. Firstly, as shown
in fig. 1 (a) and (c), the quality of the generated objects is
relatively low. In fig. 1 (b), significantly fewer foreground
objects are detected in these synthetic data, highlighting
the distribution discrepancy with real-world data. In practical applications, the focus is typically on foreground objects (Lang et al. 2019), yet existing models often generate LiDAR data without distinguishing between foreground
and background, treating the scene as a whole. Additionally, foreground points are generally more sparse as shown
in fig. 1 (d)). The challenge of developing a generative model
capable of producing LiDAR data with high-quality 3D foreground objects still remains unresolved.

Code — https://yanty123.github.io/OLiDM/

1

To address the above problems, we propose OLiDM, an
Object-aware LiDAR Diffusion Model that aims to produce
controllable and realistic LiDAR point cloud data at both object and scene levels. OLiDM comprises two key modules:
the Object-Scene Progressive Generation (OPG) module and
the Object Semantic Alignment (OSA) module. In particular, OPG advances the generation process by progressively
modeling the foreground objects and background scenes. To
effectively model the objects, OPG incorporates rich conditions, such as detailed textual descriptions and precise geometric specifications. These conditions provide both semantic and geometric context, explicitly enhancing the diversity
of objects. Then, an object denoiser receives these condi-

Introduction

LiDAR sensors are crucial for autonomous driving, as they
can provide precise 3D information of the surroundings
across various challenging conditions (Li et al. 2024, 2023a;
Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Cheng et al. 2023a; Yin et al. 2024).
However, acquiring and annotating high-quality LiDAR data
is costly and labor-intensive due to the sparse and noisy nature of LiDAR point cloud (Meng et al. 2020; Wu et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9121

