The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Dual-View Learning for Conversational Emotion Recognition Through Context
and Emotion-Shift Modeling
Xupeng Zha, Huan Zhao* , Guanghui Ye, Zixing Zhang∗
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
{zhaxupeng, hzhao, yghui, zixingzhang}@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Conversational Emotion Recognition (CER) has recently
been explored through conversational context modeling to
learn the emotion distribution, i.e., the likelihood over emotion categories associated with each utterance. While these
methods have shown promising results in emotion classification, they often focus on the interactions between utterances (utterance-view) and overlook shifts in the speaker’s
emotions (emotion-view). This emphasis on homogeneous
view modeling limits their overall effectiveness. To address
this limitation, we propose DVL-CER, a novel Dual-View
Learning approach for CER. DVL-CER integrates both the
utterance-view and emotion-view using two projection heads,
enabling cross-view projection of emotion distributions. Our
approach offers several key advantages: (1) We introduce
an emotion-view that captures shifts in a speaker’s emotions
from initial to subsequent states within a conversation. This
view enriches the conversation modeling and supports seamless integration with various CER baseline models. (2) Our
dual-view projection learning strategy flexibly balances consistency and independence between the two heterogeneous
views, promoting view-specific adaptation learning and incorporating the emotion verification capability within CER.
We validate DVL-CER through extensive experiments on two
widely-used datasets, IEMOCAP and EmoryNLP. The results
demonstrate that DVL-CER achieves state-of-the-art performance, delivering robust and high-quality emotion distributions compared with existing CER methods and other dualview learning strategies.

1

View 1
Network 1

View 2
Network 2

View 1
Network 1

View 2
Network 2

Projection

(a) Existing dual-view
learning methods.

(b) Our dual-view projection
learning method.

Figure 1: Comparison between our dual-view projection
learning method for CER and existing dual-view learning
methods (e.g., Ma et al. (2022) and Ruan et al. (2022)) in
terms of view choice and view sharing.
Current CER research focuses heavily on predicting the
emotion of each utterance by considering both intra- and
inter-speaker emotion dependencies within the conversational context. Common methods employ Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Majumder et al. 2019; Ghosal et al.
2020; Hu, Wei, and Huai 2021) or Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Ghosal et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021; Shen et al.
2021b) to model these dependencies, transforming the semantic content of utterances into emotion representations for
learning emotion distributions, i.e., the likelihood over emotion categories for each utterance. Despite some successes,
these methods face challenges, including interaction discord
and transformation inconsistency. These issues stem primarily from two factors: i) natural language semantics in utterance embeddings do not adequately encode affective meaning due to the distributional hypothesis (Faruqui et al. 2015;
Babanejad et al. 2024); and ii) the learned emotion distributions, though effective for emotion prediction, may lack sufficient sensitivity to capture subtle emotional nuances (Felbo
et al. 2017; Poria et al. 2020). Consequently, the current focus on context modeling from an utterance perspective limits
the potential to capture emotion dependencies.
To overcome these challenges, previous efforts have introduced external knowledge to enhance emotion comprehension in models. For instance, methods like KET (Zhong,
Wang, and Miao 2019), which incorporates the NRC VAD
emotion lexicon (Mohammad 2018), and COSMIC (Ghosal
et al. 2020), which fine-tunes a pre-trained RoBERTa

Introduction

Conversational Emotion Recognition (CER) is a crucial
task in natural language processing that involves identifying
the emotion expressed in each utterance within a dialogue.
With the increasing prevalence of conversational data and
the growing demand for empathetic AI systems, CER has
gained significant importance. This research is essential for
applications, such as social media opinion analysis (Kumar,
Dogra, and Dabas 2015) and emotion-aware chatbots (Chatterjee et al. 2019), highlighting its importance in understanding and recognizing emotional states in conversations.
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

25823

