The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Vision-Based Generic Potential Function for Policy Alignment in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Hao Ma1,2 * , Shijie Wang1,2 * , Zhiqiang Pu1,2† , Siyao Zhao1,2 , Xiaolin Ai2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{mahao2021, wangshijie2020, zhiqiang.pu, zhaosiyao2023, xiaolin.ai}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Guiding the policy of multi-agent reinforcement learning
to align with human common sense is a difficult problem,
largely due to the complexity of modeling common sense as
a reward, especially in complex and long-horizon multi-agent
tasks. Recent works have shown the effectiveness of reward
shaping, such as potential-based rewards, to enhance policy
alignment. The existing works, however, primarily rely on
experts to design rule-based rewards, which are often laborintensive and lack a high-level semantic understanding of
common sense. To solve this problem, we propose a hierarchical vision-based reward shaping method. At the bottom
layer, a visual-language model (VLM) serves as a generic potential function, guiding the policy to align with human common sense through its intrinsic semantic understanding. To
help the policy adapts to uncertainty and changes in longhorizon tasks, the top layer features an adaptive skill selection
module based on a visual large language model (vLLM). The
module uses instructions, video replays, and training records
to dynamically select suitable potential function from a predesigned pool. Besides, our method is theoretically proven
to preserve the optimal policy. Extensive experiments conducted in the Google Research Football environment demonstrate that our method not only achieves a higher win rate but
also effectively aligns the policy with human common sense.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Multi-agent policies trained by MAPPO and
HAPPO in GRF 11 vs 11 scenario. (a) MAPPO: The nonball-holding players of the yellow team do not form reasonable formation to occupy valuable space. (b) HAPPO: The
non-ball-holding players of the yellow team lack meaningful positioning and movement to provide effective passing
opportunities for the ball-holding player.
learned policies in simulation environments and human
common sense of the tasks. For instance, in Google Research Football (GRF) environment (Kurach et al. 2020), researchers typically hope to learn impressive tactical combinations which can inspire tactical choices in the real world.
However, existing algorithms tend to hack the environment
by finding and exploiting unintended shortcuts or loopholes
to achieve higher rewards. (Bolander et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2023), which limits the effectiveness in real-world applications of MARL. As shown in Figure 1, two typical unreasonable policies trained by MAPPO (Yu et al. 2022) and
HAPPO (Kuba et al. 2022) illustr the lack of structured formations and coherent passing coordination.
Therefore, it is a challenging issue that MARL algorithms
is hard to learn policies which conform to human common
sense. This issue mainly have three reasons: (i) Limitations
of simulation environments. The complexity and diversity
of the real world make it challenging to capture all relevant variables and dynamic changes. Thus, the inability to
construct an environment model that is identical to the real
world is an unavoidable problem. (ii) Difficulty in modeling human common sense. Human common sense is often
formed based on their rich experiences and comprehensive
cognition, making it difficult to express accurately through
simple mathematical formulas or rules. Consequently, we
find it challenging to quantify and model human common

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved
great success in solving complex decision-making problems
across lots of domains, including real-time strategy games
(Vinyals et al. 2019), autonomous driving teams (Xu et al.
2018), robotic systems (Yang and Gu 2004; Gu et al. 2023),
and sports games (Liu et al. 2023). However, MARL faces
a very challenging issue: it is difficult to learn policies that
conform to the real-world cognition of the domain in complex tasks, especially with sparse rewards (Zhu, Wang, and
Wang 2018; Dossa et al. 2019).
Although state-of-the-art MARL algorithms can achieve
high rewards in complex tasks with sparse rewards, their
policies often diverges from human understanding. This
discrepancy is reflected in the inconsistency between the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: zhiqiang.pu@ia.ac.cn.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

19287

