The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

KD-MSLRT: Lightweight Sign Language Recognition Model Based on Mediapipe
and 3D to 1D Knowledge Distillation
Yulong Li1 * , Bolin Ren1 * , Ke Hu2 , Changyuan Liu1 , Zhengyong Jiang1 , Kang Dang1† , Jionglong
Su1†
1

School of AI and Advanced Computing, XJTLU Entrepreneur College (Taicang), Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University,
Suzhou, 215123, China
2
School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, 215123, China
{Kang.Dang, Jionglong.Su}@xjtlu.edu.cn
FLOPs

Abstract
SFL

Artificial intelligence has achieved notable results in sign language recognition and translation. However, relatively few
efforts have been made to significantly improve the quality
of life for the 72 million hearing-impaired people worldwide.
Sign language translation models, relying on video inputs, involves with large parameter sizes, making it time-consuming
and computationally intensive to be deployed. This directly
contributes to the scarcity of human-centered technology in
this field. Additionally, the lack of datasets in sign language
translation hampers research progress in this area. To address
these, we first propose a cross-modal multi-knowledge distillation technique from 3D to 1D and a novel end-to-end pretraining text correction framework. Compared to other pretrained models, our framework achieves significant advancements in correcting text output errors. Our model achieves
a decrease in Word Error Rate (WER) of at least 1.4% on
PHOENIX14 and PHOENIX14T datasets compared to the
state-of-the-art CorrNet. Additionally, the TensorFlow Lite
(TFLite) quantized model size is reduced to 12.93 MB, making it the smallest, fastest, and most accurate model to date.
We have also collected and released extensive Chinese sign
language datasets, and developed a specialized training vocabulary. To address the lack of research on data augmentation for landmark data, we have designed comparative experiments on various augmentation methods. Moreover, we performed a simulated deployment and prediction of our model
on Intel platform CPUs and assessed the feasibility of deploying the model on other platforms.

10 Billion

WER [%]

CLHMM

1 Billion

1 Hunderd
Million

FCN
DNF
SEN

CMA
STMC

VAC
SMKD

TLP
C2SLR

CorrNet

KDMSLRT(Ours)

Date

Figure 1: Publication time versus model performance.
Larger circles indicate higher FLOPs, reflecting greater
computational complexity.
addressing the practical needs of the hearing-impaired community.
Current SLR approaches, primarily based on complex
video analysis, face three major limitations. First, these
models are computationally expensive (Camgöz et al. 2016),
hindering their deployment on resource-constrained devices
like mobile phones, crucial for real-time communication accessibility. Second, despite significant progress in American
Sign Language (ASL) recognition, research on other sign
languages, particularly Chinese Sign Language (CSL), remains limited due to a lack of publicly available datasets
(Selvaraj et al. 2021). Third, even state-of-the-art models are
also prone to output errors, requiring additional mechanisms
for grammatical and contextual correction to ensure accurate
and understandable translations.
Our research addresses these challenges by introducing KD-MSLRT, a novel Knowledge Distillation-Based
MediaPipe Sign Language Recognition model with Text
Correction. Our approach prioritizes both accuracy and efficiency, aiming for practical deployment in real-world scenarios. Instead of relying on computationally intensive video
processing (Cihan Camgoz et al. 2017), KD-MSLRT leverages MediaPipe (Grishchenko and Bazarevsky 2020), a
powerful framework for real-time human pose estimation.
By extracting skeletal landmarks from sign language videos,
we simplify the input data from 3D to 1D, significantly reducing computational burden without compromising accuracy (Cao et al. 2017a). This allows for efficient processing

Introduction
72 million hearing-impaired individuals worldwide rely on
sign language as their primary mode of communication, as
estimated by the World Federation of the Deaf (Secretariat
2009). However, the lack of widespread sign language understanding creates significant barriers to their full participation in society. While the rapid advancements in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV)
have made video-based sign language recognition (SLR)
more feasible (Koller, Zargaran, and Ney 2017), existing
sign language recognition (SLR) models often fall short in
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

28177

