The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

RAT: Adversarial Attacks on Deep Reinforcement Agents for Targeted Behaviors
Fengshuo Bai1, 2 , Runze Liu3 ,
Yali Du4 , Ying Wen1, * , Yaodong Yang5, 6, *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Zhongguancun Academy
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
King’s College London
5
Center for AI Safety and Governance, Institute for AI, Peking University
6
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
*{yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn, ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn}
Abstract
Evaluating deep reinforcement learning agents against targeted
behavior attacks is critical for assessing their robustness. These
attacks aim to manipulate the victim into specific behaviors
that align with the attacker’s objectives, often bypassing traditional reward-based defenses. Prior methods have primarily
focused on reducing cumulative rewards; however, rewards are
typically too generic to capture complex safety requirements
effectively. As a result, focusing solely on reward reduction
can lead to suboptimal attack strategies, particularly in safetycritical scenarios where more precise behavior manipulation
is needed. To address these challenges, we propose RAT, a
method designed for universal, targeted behavior attacks. RAT
trains an intention policy that is explicitly aligned with human
preferences, serving as a precise behavioral target for the adversary. Concurrently, an adversary manipulates the victim’s
policy to follow this target behavior. To enhance the effectiveness of these attacks, RAT dynamically adjusts the state
occupancy measure within the replay buffer, allowing for more
controlled and effective behavior manipulation. Our empirical results on robotic simulation tasks demonstrate that RAT
outperforms existing adversarial attack algorithms in inducing specific behaviors. Additionally, RAT shows promise in
improving agent robustness, leading to more resilient policies.
We further validate RAT by guiding Decision Transformer
agents to adopt behaviors aligned with human preferences in
various MuJoCo tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness across
diverse tasks.

1

victim 𝜋 targeted behavior
attack (Ours)
reduce expected
return
Figure 1: An example illustrating the distinction between our
approach and generic attacks.

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) combined with deep neural networks (DNN) (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015) shows extraordinary capabilities of allowing agents to master complex behaviors in various domains,
including robotic manipulation (Wang et al. 2023; Bai et al.
2023), video games (Zhang et al. 2023, 2024b; Wang* et al.
2024; Wen et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2025), industrial applications (Xu and Yu 2023; Shi et al. 2024; Jia et al. 2024). However, recent findings (Huang et al. 2017; Pattanaik et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2020, 2024a) show that even well-trained DRL
agents suffer from vulnerability against test-time attacks,
raising concerns in high-risk or safety-critical situations. To
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15453

understand adversarial attacks on learning algorithms and enhance the robustness of DRL agents, it is crucial to evaluate
the performance of the agents under any potential adversarial
attacks with certain constraints. In other words, identifying a
universal and strong adversary is essential.
Existing methods pay little attention to devising universal,
efficient, targeted behavior attacks. Firstly, several methods
primarily focused on reducing the cumulative reward often
lack specified attack targets. Prior research (Zhang et al. 2020,
2021; Sun et al. 2022) considers training strong adversaries
by perturbing state observations of victims to achieve the
worst-case expected return. However, rewards lack the expressiveness to adequately encode complex safety requirements (Vamplew et al. 2022; Hasanbeig, Kroening, and Abate
2020). Additionally, requiring the victim’s training rewards
to craft such attacks is generally impractical. Therefore, only
quantifying the decrease in cumulative reward can be too
generic and result in suboptimal attack performance, particularly when adversaries are intended to execute specific
safety-related attacks. Consider the scenario depicted in Figure 1, where a robot’s objective is to collect coins. Previous
attack methods aim at inducing the robot away from the coins
by minimizing its expected return. However, this approach
overlooks specific unsafe behaviors, such as manipulating
the robot to collide with a bomb. Secondly, the previous
targeted attack only considered predefined targets, which
resulted in rigidity and inefficiency. (Hussenot, Geist, and
Pietquin 2019a; Lin et al. 2017a) mainly focuses on misleading the agent towards a predetermined state or target policy,

