The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

ICE-T: Interactions-aware Cross-column Contrastive Embedding for
Heterogeneous Tabular Datasets
Tomas Tokar1, 2 , Scott Sanner2, 3
1

Wondeur AI
University of Toronto
3
Vector Institute for AI
2

Abstract
x1(1)

Finding high-quality representations of heterogeneous tabular datasets is crucial for their effective use in downstream
machine learning tasks. Contrastive representation learning
(CRL) methods have been previously shown to provide a
straightforward way to learn such representations across various data domains. Current tabular CRL methods learn joint
embeddings of data instances (tabular rows) by minimizing
a contrastive loss between the original instance and its perturbations. Unlike existing tabular CRL methods, we propose leveraging frameworks established in multimodal representation learning, treating each tabular column as a distinct
modality. A naive approach that applies a pairwise contrastive
loss to tabular columns is not only prohibitively expensive as
the number of columns increases, but as we demonstrate, it
also fails to capture interactions between variables. Instead,
we propose a novel method called ICE-T that learns each
columnar embedding by contrasting it with aggregate embeddings of the complementary part of the table, thus capturing interactions and scaling linearly with the number of
columns. Unlike existing tabular CRL methods, ICE-T allows
for column-specific embeddings to be obtained independently
of the rest of the table, enabling the inference of missing values and translation between columnar variables. We provide
a comprehensive evaluation of ICE-T across diverse datasets,
demonstrating that it generally surpasses the performance of
the state-of-the-art alternatives.

…

…

…

…

x1(M)

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋮

xN(1)

…

…

xN(m)

…

…

xN(1)

f(1)
h1(1)

x1(m)

…

f(m)
hN(1)

h1(m)

…

f(M)
hN(m)

h1(M)

…

...

zN(\m)

hN(M)

1/(M-1) Σ

μ1(\m)

…

μN(\m)

g
z1(\m)
z1(m)
…

zN(m)

Figure 1: A schematic representation of ICE-T. Tabular entries are passed through variable-specific encoders f (m) to
produce intermediate latent representations h(m) . For each
variable m we compute the associated anchor µ(\m) as the
average of the representations of the remaining variables.
These resulting vectors are then projected via a shared neural subnetwork g to produce the final embeddings. The cosine similarities of these embeddings are used to compute
the contrastive loss for each variable.

Introduction
Heterogeneous tabular datasets constitute an extremely important, yet often overlooked, data class, which remains
to be challenging for application of deep neural networks (Shwartz-Ziv and Armon 2022). As with other data
types the key is to find good quality data representations that
facilitate the downstream tasks (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). Contrastive representation learning (CRL) offers
a very straightforward way for learning such representations,
without the need of associated data labels (Le-Khac, Healy,
and Smeaton 2020; Ericsson et al. 2022).

comprising multiple distinct modalities, such as image-text
or audio-video pairs, from which it derives its name (Deldari et al. 2022; Zong, Mac Aodha, and Hospedales 2023).
Multimodal CRL offers a unique way of learning modalityspecific embeddings that are coordinated with embeddings
from other modalities while allowing inputs of one modality
to be embedded independently of the others (Guo, Wang,
and Wang 2019). Therefore, embeddings can be obtained
even in the absence of some modalities and can be used to

Multimodal CRL Recently, there has been increasing attention on a type of CRL methods known as multimodal
CRL. Multimodal CRL has traditionally been applied to data
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20904

