The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)

Multi-Perspective Consolidation Enhanced Cognitive Diagnosis
via Conditional Diffusion Model
Guanhao Zhao1,2 , Zhenya Huang1,2 , Cheng Cheng2 , Yan Zhuang2 , Qingyang Mao1,2 ,
Xin Li2,3 , Shijin Wang2,3 * , Enhong Chen1,2
1

The School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, China
3
IFLYTEK Research, Hefei, China
{ghzhao0223, doublecheng, zykb, maoqy0503}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{huangzhy, leexin, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, sjwang3@iflytek.com
Abstract

Potential Interactions

Cognitive diagnosis, which assesses the learners’ competence
from learners’ interaction logs, plays a vital role in education. It provides a crucial reference for gauging learners’ proficiency levels and tailoring future learning activities accordingly. Researchers have proposed numerous cognitive diagnosis models to address this task. Despite their success, these
models continue to face the ill-posed problem because of the
information loss caused by under-expressive interaction function and incomplete observations. In this paper, we address
these challenges by proposing a novel cognitive diagnosis
model, DMC-CDM, based on the theoretical premise that
cognitive states can be captured with minimal information
loss by maximizing the mutual information between observed
and potential observations. Specifically, DMC-CDM incorporates a semantic extractor to provide a comprehensive semantic understanding of learners’ interaction logs, thereby enhancing current collaborative-based cognitive state representations. It then consolidates multi-perspective observations to
capture precise cognitive states by maximizing mutual information between these observations. We conducted extensive
experiments on three datasets, and the experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed model is both effective and
beneficial for downstream applications in education.

1

Learner
Cognitive
States

Observed

Exam 1 Exam 2 Exam 3

Precise
Estimation
Imprecise
Estimation Applications

Figure 1: The illustration of cognitive diagnosis and its inherently ill-posed nature, where the dotted line represents
the cognitive diagnosis process with partial observations.

De La Torre 2009; Zhao et al. 2024). These methods typically start by designing an interaction function based on
prior knowledge, mapping latent cognitive states to interaction logs. Learners’ cognitive states are then captured
through parameter estimation. Despite their success, these
methods often encounter a critical issue: the cognitive diagnosis process is inherently ill-posed due to information
loss (Song et al. 2022). This means that given an observation
(e.g., learner’s interaction logs in Exam 3), it is challenging to precisely recover the signals (i.e., cognitive states).
The information loss typically stems from two main causes:
(1) Under-expressive Interaction Function: Previous models
heavily rely on manually designed interaction functions to
map the cognitive states to interactions and generally overlook richer information within the logs, leading to oversimplified interaction functions and information loss during diagnosis, particularly when logs are sparse (Dai et al. 2021;
Zhao et al. 2023b,a). (2) Incomplete Observations: The observed interaction logs are often incomplete; for example, a
learner might only answer a few exercises (e.g., the perspective of Exam 3), leading to many unobserved interactions
in other perspectives such as Exam 1 and Exam 2, as depicted in the dotted part of Figure 1. Abundant information
in the unobserved interactions is lost. Recent advances aim
to address the ill-posed nature of cognitive diagnosis by employing more expressive interaction functions (Wang et al.
2023; Gao et al. 2021) or by incorporating unobserved interactions through sampling (Yao et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2024).
However, their performance remains limited, and their underlying motivation remains intuitive.
In this paper, we uniformly tackle the aforementioned

Introduction

Accurate assessment of cognitive states is crucial in educational applications. It provides critical insights for both
learners and educators to comprehend learners’ current cognitive levels and modify learning paths appropriately (Jiang
et al. 2023). This assessment also plays a vital role in evaluating and ranking learners, which is essential for merit-based
selections like the GRE and GMAT (Ghosh and Lan 2021).
As shown in Figure 1, cognitive diagnosis (Wang et al. 2023)
leverages learners’ personal practice logs to estimate their
cognitive states. This process involves recovering latent signals (i.e., cognitive states) from observed data (i.e., interactions), and characterizing it as a typical inverse problem.
Numerous cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) have been
developed to capture learners’ cognitive states (Lord 1980;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1174

