Supplementary Material of EchoScene
Guangyao Zhai1 Evin Pınar Örnek1 Dave Zhenyu Chen1 Ruotong Liao2,3
Yan Di1 Nassir Navab1 Federico Tombari1,4 Benjamin Busam1,3
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning 4 Google
guangyao.zhai@tum.de

In this Supplementary Material, we provide a scene graph visualization
of one scene from SG-FRONT to comprehensively illustrate the complexity and
the identity of the semantic scene graph. Furthermore, within the Supplementary
Manuscript, we provide the following:
– Section 1: Manipulation Strategy.
– Section 2: Manipulation Qualitatives.
– Section 3: Additional Results.
– Section 4: Additional Qualitatives.
– Section 5: Additional Experimental Details.

1

Manipulation Strategy

We propose a novel training strategy for node and edge manipulation tailored
for scene graph diffusion, thus editing the generated scenes.
VAE+GAN-based strategy. In the previous methods [3,8], the layout branch
is modeled by a VAE architecture. During training, the input scene graph must
be augmented by ground truth bounding boxes. In this case, pseudo layouts are
created from the output side after the manipulation, and there is no matching
ground truth to supervise them. To make the pipeline functional, they set an
additional GAN module to help train the pseudo label. For example, as shown
in Fig. 1.A, the original relationship is {Bed −→ Left of −→ TV stand }, with
a manipulator changing it to {Bed −→ Right of −→ TV stand }. Only the
bounding boxes on the input side exist in the dataset, while the ones on the
output side are generated and need to be discriminated. Such a manipulation
strategy relies on the performance of GAN, whose training scheme is not stable
and requires large-scale training, consequently affecting the training quality of
layout VAE. Thus, the results shown in Tab. 2 in the main paper are always
unsatisfactory.
Our strategy. In contrast, we set both branches through diffusion processes,
avoiding the necessity of input ground truth bounding boxes during training.
Instead, we are able to simulate an inverted workflow by setting input as pseudo
graphs with fake relations, and we manipulate them back to the existing graphs
in the dataset. For example, as shown in Fig. 1.B, the ground truth relation
label is {Bed −→ Right of −→ Nightstand}, we simulate the relation changing
by setting an arbitrary label, e.g., {Bed −→ Front of −→ Nightstand}. In

