FullStop: Multilingual Deep Models for Punctuation Prediction
Oliver Guhr1 Anne-Kathrin Schumann2 Frank Bahrmann1 Hans-Joachim Böhme1
1
University of Applied Science (HTW) Dresden, Germany
2
t2k GmbH, Dresden, Germany
{oliver.guhr, frank.bahrmann, hans-joachim.boehme}@htw-dresden.de
anne-kathrin.schumann@text2knowledge.de

Abstract
This paper describes our contribution to the
SEPP-NLG Shared Task in multilingual sentence segmentation and punctuation prediction.
The goal of this task consists in training NLP
models that can predict the end of sentence
(EOS) and punctuation marks on automatically
generated or transcribed texts. We show that
these tasks beneﬁt from crosslingual transfer
by successfully employing multilingual deep
language models. Our multilingual model
achieves an average F1 -score of 0.94 for EOS
prediction on English, German, French, and
Italian texts and an average F1 -score of 0.78
for punctuation mark prediction.

1

Introduction

The prediction of EOS and punctuation marks in
automatically generated or transcribed texts is a relatively novel task. While sentence segmentation is
a core, and low-level, natural language processing
(NLP) task, punctuation has, in the past, primarily been studied in the context of error correction
and the normalisation of automatic speech recognition (ASR) output. However, with the recent rise
of conversational agents and other NLP systems
that are able to generate new texts, the injection
of punctuation and EOS marks has gained wider
interest. This is hardly surprising because punctuation affects the readability of the text produced
by the NLP system and, thus, its perceived overall
performance. The SEPP-NLG Shared Task offers
two subtasks, namely:
• Subtask1 – Sentence segmentation: Fullstop prediction on fully unpunctuated, lowercased documents.
• Subtask 2 – Punctuation prediction: Prediction of all punctuation marks on fully unpunctuated, lowercased documents, where the

possible punctuation marks are members of
the set p = {: −, ?.0}, with 0 indicating no
punctuation.
The task is carried out on the German, English,
French, and Italian sections of the Europarl corpus
(Koehn, 2005), since it offers transcripts of spoken
texts for multiple languages. We developed models
for both tasks based on the Transformers library by
Wolf et al. (2020). These models and our code are
publicly available 1

2

Related Work

Earlier studies on EOS and punctuation prediction
reﬂect the various ﬁelds of application of this technology. The task is mostly modeled as token-wise
prediction. Over the last few years, consistent performance improvements have – unsurprisingly –
been achieved with the help of neural network approaches and large-scale neural language models.
The work by Attia et al. (2014) constitutes a
rather traditional approach to spelling and punctuation correction, in this case for Arabic. The
authors report that in their data set, punctuation
errors constitute 40 % of all errors. The task is
modeled as token-wise classiﬁcation with context
windows varying between 4-8 words. Classiﬁcation is carried out with Support Vector Machines
and Conditional Random Field (CRF) classiﬁers,
using part-of-speech (POS) and morphological information. The authors obtain the best result, an
F1-score of 0.56, with the CRF classiﬁer and a
window size of ﬁve tokens.
Che et al. (2016) experiment with three different neural network architectures, using pretrained
GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) embeddings as
inputs. Since their goal is to predict punctuation
marks speciﬁcally on ASR output, they evaluate
1
https://github.com/oliverguhr/
fullstop-deep-punctuation-prediction.

Copyright ©2021 for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).

