Strike a Balance in
Continual Panoptic Segmentation
-Supplemental MaterialJinpeng Chen1 , Runmin Cong2,3(B) , Yuxuan Luo1 ,
Horace Ho Shing Ip1,4 , and Sam Kwong5(B)
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{jinpeng.chen,yuxuanluo4-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
horace.ip@cityu.edu.hk
2
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong, China
rmcong@sdu.edu.cn
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and System Control,
Ministry of Education, Jinan, Shandong, China
4
Centre for Innovative Applications of Internet and Multimedia Technologies,
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
5
Lingnan University, Hong Kong
samkwong@ln.edu.hk

1

Greedy Algorithm in Class-Proportional Memory
Strategy

In this section, we provide a detailed explanation of the greedy algorithm Ω,
employed in our class-proportional memory strategy, as delineated in Alg. 1.
This algorithm describes the process of constructing the replay sample set at
step t. The sample pool P , the number of samples to be selected N , and the
desired class distribution Π correspond to the three parameters of Ω, as specified
in the main text. The outcome of this algorithm is a selected sample set R.
1:t
To commence, we initialize R as an empty set and Φ ∈ C , a vector representing the counts of segments per class in R, as a zero vector. The algorithm
then iterates over each sample in the pool P a total of N times. The goal of
each iteration is to select a sample that minimizes the discrepancy between the
current class distribution in R and the desired distribution Π. At the start of
each iteration, we assign an initial value of infinity to the variable dbest , representing the smallest discrepancy achievable in that iteration. For each sample
pk in P that is not already in R, we calculate ϕk , the counts of segments per
class in pk . Then, we envision Φtmp , representing the counts of segments per
class in R if pk were added, and calculate the corresponding class distribution
Πtmp . Subsequently, the discrepancy dtmp , quantifying the difference between
Πtmp and Π, is computed. If dtmp is smaller than the current dbest , it suggests
that adding pk to R would bring us closer to the desired class distribution. Thus,
we update dbest to dtmp , designate pk as pbest , and record its segment counts per
class as ϕbest . At the end of each iteration, the final pbest represents the optimal

R

