Constructing Concept-based Models with Minimal Human Eﬀort

A

Prompts and Visual Concepts

A.1

Prompts

1

Stage 1 in Sec. 5.1. In Step 1, we prompt GPT-3 to get important features,
superclass, things seen around [27] and distinguished visual features of each class.
For the queries related to important features, superclass, and things seen around,
we use the in-context learning examples as described in [27]. The prompts used
to query GPT-3 are the following:
– important features - List the most important features for recognizing something as a {class}
– superclass - Give superclasses for the word {class}
– things seen around - List the things most commonly seen around a {class}
– distinguished visual features - Provide a list of visual features to distinguish
between a {class 1} and {class 2}
For Waterbirds, we use diﬀerent prompts to collect a more comprehensive
concept set. We first obtain subclass of each class. This yields a total of 171 distinct bird species initially, and through a subsequent process using the same subclass prompts, we obtain a total of 1852 bird species. Then, we use the prompts
suggested above for important features, superclass and things seen around.
In Step 2, we obtain image descriptions by prompting the LLaVA with “Describe the image in a sentence” and the corresponding image. Then, we extract
keywords from the list of descriptions by querying GPT-3. We leverage the incontext learning capabilities of GPT-3 to extract keywords from the descriptions.
The prompts used to query GPT-3 for each dataset are detailed in Tab. A. We
use nltk3 tokenizer to tokenize the collection of keywords and remove prepositions. We compute the point biserial correlation coeﬃcients to detect potential
spurious features. To prevent the correlation coeﬃcients from being distributed
among similar words, we combine the similar words into one based on similarity
(using CLIP text encoder and all-mpnet-base-v2 sentence embedding) and add
the correlation coeﬃcients of each word.
Stage 2 in Sec. 5.2 Table B and Table C illustrate the prompts for querying LLaVA to annotate the concepts of each image for ImageNet-Opener and
Metashifts. Note that the concepts are obtained from Stage 1. For Waterbirds,
we use “Does the object have {attribute}?” for all attributes.
A.2

Collected Visual Attributes in Sec. 5.1

We collect the visual concepts relevant to each class from Step 1 and they are
described in Tab. D. We refrain from enumerating the visual concepts of Waterbirds due to their large number (444 attributes). We detect potential spurious
features in Step 2 as detailed in Tab. E. In Step 3, we finalize the visual concepts for constructing CBMs by filtering out potentially spurious features from
3

https://www.nltk.org

