Alignist: CAD-Informed Orientation
Distribution Estimation by Fusing Shape
and Correspondences
Shishir Reddy Vutukur1(B) , Rasmus Laurvig Haugaard2 ,
Junwen Huang1 , Benjamin Busam1,3 , and Tolga Birdal4
1

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
shishirvutukur@gmail.com
2
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany
4
Imperial College London, London, England

Abstract. Object pose distribution estimation is crucial in robotics
for better path planning and handling of symmetric objects. Recent
distribution estimation approaches employ contrastive learning-based
approaches by maximizing the likelihood of a single pose estimate in
the absence of a CAD model. We propose a pose distribution estimation method leveraging symmetry respecting correspondence distributions and shape information obtained using a CAD model. Contrastive
learning-based approaches require an exhaustive amount of training
images from diﬀerent viewpoints to learn the distribution properly, which
is not possible in realistic scenarios. Instead, we propose a pipeline that
can leverage correspondence distributions and shape information from
the CAD model, which are later used to learn pose distributions. Besides,
having access to pose distribution based on correspondences before learning pose distributions conditioned on images, can help formulate the loss
between distributions. The prior knowledge of distribution also helps
the network to focus on getting sharper modes instead. With the CAD
prior, our approach converges much faster and learns distribution better
by focusing on learning sharper distribution near all the valid modes,
unlike contrastive approaches, which focus on a single mode at a time.
We achieve benchmark results on SYMSOL-I and T-Less datasets.
Keywords: Object Pose Estimation · Pose Distribution · 6D Pose
Estimation · Uncertainty · Ambiguity

1

Introduction

Real world is quintessentially VUCA, i.e., volatile, uncertain, complex and
ambiguous [25], signiﬁcantly complicating the task of any methodology aimed
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 20.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 351–369, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_20

