Towards Real-world Event-guided Low-light
Video Enhancement and Deblurring
– Supplementary Materials –
Taewoo Kim , Jaeseok Jeong , Hoonhee Cho , Yuhwan Jeong , and Kuk-Jin
Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{intelpro, jason.jeong, gnsgnsgml, jeongyh98, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract. Due to the lack of space in the main paper, we provide more
details in the supplementary materials. In Sec. A, we cover additional
experimental results not addressed in the main paper. In Sec. B, we
provide more detailed information about the RELED dataset. In Sec. C,
we provide more visual results and video demos.

A

Additional experimental results

A.1

implementation details

We implement our framework using PyTorch [8]. For training, we utilized the
Adam [7] optimizer with momentum term of (0.9, 0,999) to optimize networks
with initial learning rate 1 × 10−4 . We utilized the charbonnier [3] loss function
to supervise the multi-scale outputs. We use batch size of 8 with four RTX 3090
GPUs for training. We empirically set multi-scale weight λs = {1, 0.5, 0.25} for
each scale. We set the standard deviation σ to 7 in Eq. 3 of the main paper. We
set the event voxel grid size to 16 for all experiments. For data augmentation, we
perform random crop at the same positions for both low-light blurred videos and
event voxel data, resulting in cropped blurred patch and voxel bin of size 256 ×
256. To train our networks, we utilized our training split of the RELED dataset
and conduct training for 200 epochs. Regarding other methods, we performed
retraining on the RELED dataset for the same number of epochs to conduct
quantitative and qualitative comparisons. For quantitative comparison, we used
widely-used metrics such as PSNR and SSIM [14].
A.2

Qualitative results on the real-world low-light blurred videos.

To assess the generalization ability of the model trained on the RELED dataset
in real-world scenarios, we captured actual low-light videos, including nighttime
conditions, by removing ND filters. During this process, we varied the settings
such as gain, exposure time, and utilized different cameras not present in the
dataset to ensure a diverse range of testing conditions. Visual comparison between UEVD [6] and ours are presented in Fig. A1. It is evident that ours consistently delivers superior detail restoration, even when confronted with real-world
low-light data.

