Unleashing the Potential of the Semantic Latent
Space in Diffusion Models for Image Dehazing
Zizheng Yang, Hu Yu, Bing Li, Jinghao Zhang, Jie Huang, and Feng Zhao⋆
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
{yzz6000, yuhu520, bing0123, jhaozhang, hj0117}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Appendix
A.1

More Analysis and Discussion on H-Space

In the Sec.4.1 of the main body, we have demonstrated that the h-space features
can effectively represent the underlying content and haze characteristics of the
hazy image, as the diffusion time-step t changes. In this section, we provide more
analysis and discussion about the h-space.
A.1.1

More Analysis about the H-Space

In Sec.4.1 of the main body, we investigate the h-space features by training a
decoder Dt for each t. Since the training objective for decoder Dt is to map the
h-space feature hcle
corresponding to yt back to its original noise-free version y,
t
and considering that only clean images are utilized for training, the Dt can fully
represents the original clean image y at
perceive how the h-space feature hcle
t
the time-step t. Note that yt is the noisy version of y at the time-step t.
And then, we send both the h-space features of hazy images hhaz
and the
t
h-space features of clean images hcle
to
the
trained
decoder
D
,
and
get the
t
t
corresponding reconstruction results rthaz and rtcle , respectively. Since the Dt
is trained on clean images, it is not surprising that the rtcle can represent the
content of the original clean image y across all time-step t. However, the rthaz
varies significantly for different time-step t. As shown in Fig.2(c) of the main
body, when t is small, the rthaz is similar with rtcle , both representing the content
in the original image. This means that, when t is small, both hhaz
and hcle
t
t encode
the content in the original image. In contrast, when t is large, one can barely see
underlying content of xt from rthaz , instead see the haze characteristics in xt . This
is a very interesting and meaningful phenomenon. By precisely manipulating
the noise added to the hazy image x, we can obtain the h-space features that
represent different components of x. And this interesting phenomenon leads us
to the conclusion presented in Sec.4.1 of the main body.
⋆

Corresponding Author.

