AnimateMe: 4D Facial Expressions via Diffusion
Models (Supplementary Material)
Dimitrios Gerogiannis , Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou , Rolandos
Alexandros Potamias , Alexandros Lattas , Stylianos Moschoglou ,
Stylianos Ploumpis , and Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, UK
{d.gerogiannis22, f.paraperas, r.potamias, a.lattas, s.moschoglou,
s.ploumpis, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

In this document, we provide additional details about our method, that could
not fit on the main paper due to page limitations, as well as a thorough ethical
and limitations discussion. Moreover, we attach a video that briefly explains the
proposed method, and shows additional results in video format, that highlight
the effectiveness and quality of our method.

1

Additional Implementation Details

1.1

Preprocessing Details

To achieve a standardized animation length of 40 frames, despite our method’s
flexibility in generating varying frame counts, we employ a combination of selection and interpolation techniques. For sequences exceeding 40 frames, we select
the most distinct frames in terms of their differences from consecutive frames. On
the other hand, for sequences with fewer than 40 frames, we employ interpolation between the frames that exhibit the greatest differences, thereby seamlessly
expanding to the required frame count.
Regarding the extremeness factors, they are derived by calculating deformations at key facial landmarks from neutral to apex frames for each animation. These factors are then normalized against the maximum extremeness factor
within the same expression category, as mentioned in the main paper.
1.2

Dataset Splitting Selection

Regarding dataset splitting, our approach diverges from that of [1]. Whereas
[1] utilizes the first subsequence from each subject and expression from their
divided subsequences for testing and allocate the rest for training, we adopt the
split methodology from the subject-independent CoMA [4] experiments. This
involves training on nine identities and testing on three, encompassing all their
expression animations. This decision was made to ensure the model remains
unexposed to the specific landmarks or deformation patterns of the test identities
during training, thus avoiding potential overfitting. Ideally, the models should
be completely unfamiliar with the test data to ensure fair evaluation conditions.
Therefore, our choice aligns with the goals of evaluating model generalizability,
offering a more accurate measure of its performance on unseen data.

