A Probability-guided Sampler
for Neural Implicit Surface Rendering
(Supplementary Materials)
Gonçalo Dias Pais1,2∗ , Valter Piedade2 , Moitreya Chatterjee1 ,
Marcus Greiff3 , and Pedro Miraldo1
1

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge
2
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa
3
Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos

In this supplementary material, we provide more qualitative results to showcase
the effectiveness of our sampling strategy at effectively rendering scenes from
novel views. Further, we show additional ablation studies, to demonstrate the effect of the choice of different hyperparameters on our sampling strategy. Finally,
we end this document by offering a formal mathematical underpinning of our
method. The following summarizes the supplementary materials:
– Qualitative results;
– Additional ablation studies;
– Additional details of our method.

A

Qualitative Results

We provide qualitative comparisons between our approach and competing baselines. Owing to the flexibility of our method, we can incorporate it into any neural
implicit surface rendering system. Therefore, we denote competing baselines by
their name, while our proposed approach is denoted by the baseline name + Ours.
We show image synthesis and reconstruction results for the Tanks and Temples
(TNT) dataset in Appendix A.1, and additional results for the BMVS [4] and
DTU [1] datasets in Appendices A.2 and A.3, respectively.
In addition, we observed that NeuralWarp’s framework for evaluating the 3D
meshes tends to remove critical surfaces, creating an unfair scenario when the
method does not exhibit boundary artifacts. Therefore, in this supplementary
material, we also present a qualitative evaluation of the SDF output with and
without the filtering process for the DTU dataset in Appendix A.4.
A.1

Qualitative Results on Tanks and Temples

In this subsection, we present qualitative rendering and 3D reconstruction results
on the TNT dataset, comparing the impact of introducing our sampling strategy
∗

Work was partly done while interning at MERL.

