SLAck: Semantic, Location, and Appearance
Aware Open-Vocabulary Tracking
—– Supplementary Material —–
Siyuan Li1 , Lei Ke1 , Yung-Hsu Yang1 , Luigi Piccinelli1 , Mattia Segù1 , Martin
Danelljan1 , and Luc Van Gool1,2
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
2
INSAIT

In this supplementary material, we provide additional ablation studies and
results of SLAck. We also elaborate on our experimental setup, method details,
and training and inference hyper-parameters. All ablations are validated in the
novel split of open-vocabulary MOT benchmark [7].

1

Compare Object Motions on Different Datasets

In the main paper, we discuss the differences between pedestrian tracking and
open-vocabulary tracking, which are also visually presented in Fig. 1. Instances
in pedestrian tracking datasets like MOT20 [3] generally move in a linear path
with minimal deformation. This simplicity allows many top-performing trackers
to rely on the Kalman Filter. However, open-vocabulary tracking introduces
significant challenges due to the complex, non-linear movements and substantial
deformation of objects.
We also quantitatively showcase these differences in Fig. 2 by plotting kernel
density estimation (KDE) based on two aspects: object displacement between
consecutive frames in a video and the average Aspect Ratio Changes (ARC) of
instances throughout the video. We analyze and visualize the KDE distribution
by examining all instance trajectories in the MOT20 [3] and TAO [2] datasets.
To calculate object motion, we measure the displacement between two consecutive frames for each instance by computing the Euclidean distance between
the centroids of their bounding boxes. For ARC, we determine the aspect ratio
(width divided by height) of each bounding box per frame and then calculate
the changes in aspect ratio between consecutive frames for each instance.
Fig. 2 further supports our qualitative observation from Fig. 1 that, compared to the traditional pedestrian tracking dataset MOT20, objects in openvocabulary settings move with higher dynamism in both motion and shape. This
is indicated by the broader KDE curve and the significantly larger average values
for instance displacement and ARC changes.

2

Semantics and Motion Patterns

In the main paper, we explain the effectiveness of SLAck over previous stateof-the-art open-vocabulary trackers that rely solely on appearance information.

