Supplementary Material: SAM-guided
Graph Cut for 3D Instance Segmentation
Haoyu Guo1∗ He Zhu2∗ Sida Peng1 Yuang Wang1
Yujun Shen3 Ruizhen Hu4† Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

Zhejiang University 2 Beijing Normal Univeristy 3 Ant Group 4 Shenzhen Univeristy

A

Superpoint generation

For the mesh of each scene on ScanNet and ScanNet++, we use the segmentator
[2] provided by ScanNet, which adopts the algorithm described in [3] based on the
mesh’s normals. Specifically, for ScanNet, we directly use the over-segmentation
provided in their dataset, which is obtained by running the segmentator with
KThresh set to 0.01 and segMinVerts set to 20. For ScanNet++, due to the
higher point cloud density of ScanNet++, we adjust the parameters to KThresh
as 0.2 and segMinVerts as 500 to run the segmentator. For KITTI-360, we use
the unsupervised point cloud segmentation algorithm proposed in [4], which first
computes geometric features for each point from its 3D position and color values
and then obtains the partitioned superpoints by minimizing the global energy
function, and we set the regularization strength ρ to 0.1.

B

Points sampling in projection mask

To sample k = 5 points uniformly and not too far from the boundary of the
projection mask of each superpoint in each view, we first use the Euclidean
Distance Transform implemented by OpenCV [1] to compute the distance from
each pixel within the mask to its boundary, creating a distance map. We then
select the point with the maximum value in the distance map to ensure it is near
the center. To prevent subsequent sampled points from being too close to this
first point, we set the values in the distance map within a certain area around
this point to zero. This process is iteratively repeated for sampling the remaining
points.

C

Multi-scale mask selection

The 2D segmentation model SAM is designed to output masks at three different
scales, each with a corresponding confidence score, to enable segmentation at
different granularities. Please refer to their paper for detailed information. In
our pipeline, we tend to choose masks with larger areas, as they are more likely
to correspond to the segmentation of a complete object. However, when the
confidence of a larger area segmentation is high, we will consider masks of smaller

