Supplementary Material of CPT-VR

1

Experimental Settings.

Architecture Details. Our geometry and appearance representation modeling
networks are developed based on NeuS2 [9]. Specifically, SDFnet is represented
by a three-layer Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) enhanced with multi-resolution
hash encoding. The resolution of the hash encoding spans 14 levels from resolutions of 16 to 2048. The foreground appearance modeling network is implemented
by a four-layer MLP with 64 hidden units. The encoding of both the view and
reflection directions utilizes four-degree Spherical Harmonics. The background
appearance is represented through the NeRF++ [11] network, augmented with
multi-resolution hash encoding, mirroring the configuration of SDFnet. Note
that, only the view direction is considered in the background appearance modeling process.
Isosuface Configure. The object space is normalized within [−1, 1], employing
geometric initialization [1] for an initial sphere-like shape. During training, we
apply CPT in every iteration, whereas the Marching Cubes algorithm is implemented once every N iterations. Here, N corresponds to the number of training
images. To enhance sampling smoothness, the grid resolution for Marching Cubes
(MC) is randomly adjusted within a range of [−3, 3] around a base resolution
of either 256 or 512 voxels. Tab. 3 outlines the experimental settings and gives
the training time as well as the Chamfer Distance (CD) values of our method
on DTU. The results suggest that the input resolution of the Marching Cubes
significantly affects the training time of the model. Compared to an input resolution of 5123 , training is faster when the resolution of MC is set to 2563 , with
only a slight decrease in performance on CD.

2

Additional Experiments

Experiments on NeRF Synthetic Dataset. To demonstrate the reconstruction and rendering performance of our method on the NeRF synthetic dataset [3],
we compare our model CPT-VR-M with NVDIFFREC [4] and NeuS2 [9]. NVDIFFREC utilizes DMTet [5] with a physically-based material model to optimize the geometry and material. To conduct a comprehensive comparison with
DMTet, we also present the results of DMTet-VR, a fusion of DMTet [5] with
our SDF network and view-reflection appearance model. Here, all models are optimized via the mask supervision LM . CPT-VR-M and DMTet-VR are trained
with a batch size of 1 for 20000 epochs, and the resolution of Marching Cubes
during training is set at 2563 . The image is rendered at 800 × 800 pixels.
As indicated in Tab. 1, compared to NVDIFFREC [4] and DMTet-VR, CPTVR-M consistently exhibits lower geometric discrepancies for most objects. Additionally, our method is comparable to NeuS2. [9] in terms of average error. Fig. 4

