Improved Schemes for Episodic Memory-based
Lifelong Learning
Yunhui Guo † ⇤ Mingrui Liu ‡ ⇤ Tianbao Yang‡ Tajana Rosing †
University of California, San Diego, CA † University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA ‡
yug185@eng.ucsd.edu, mingrui-liu@uiowa.edu, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu, tajana@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Current deep neural networks can achieve remarkable performance on a single
task. However, when the deep neural network is continually trained on a sequence
of tasks, it seems to gradually forget the previous learned knowledge. This phenomenon is referred to as catastrophic forgetting and motivates the field called
lifelong learning. Recently, episodic memory based approaches such as GEM [1]
and A-GEM [2] have shown remarkable performance. In this paper, we provide
the first unified view of episodic memory based approaches from an optimization’s
perspective. This view leads to two improved schemes for episodic memory based
lifelong learning, called MEGA-I and MEGA-II. MEGA-I and MEGA-II modulate the balance between old tasks and the new task by integrating the current
gradient with the gradient computed on the episodic memory. Notably, we show
that GEM and A-GEM are degenerate cases of MEGA-I and MEGA-II which
consistently put the same emphasis on the current task, regardless of how the
loss changes over time. Our proposed schemes address this issue by using novel
loss-balancing updating rules, which drastically improve the performance over
GEM and A-GEM. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed schemes
significantly advance the state-of-the-art on four commonly used lifelong learning
benchmarks, reducing the error by up to 18%. Implementation is available at:
https://github.com/yunhuiguo/MEGA

1

Introduction

A significant step towards artificial general intelligence (AGI) is to enable the learning agent to
acquire the ability of remembering past experiences while being trained on a continuum of tasks
[3, 4, 5]. Current deep neural networks are capable of achieving remarkable performance on a
single task [6]. However, when the network is retrained on a new task, its performance drops
drastically on previously trained tasks, a phenomenon which is referred to as catastrophic forgetting
[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. In stark contrast, the human cognitive system is capable of acquiring new
knowledge without damaging previously learned experiences.
The problem of catastrophic forgetting motivates the field called lifelong learning [4, 11, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19]. A central dilemma in lifelong learning is how to achieve a balance between the
performance on old tasks and the new task [4, 7, 18, 20]. During the process of learning the new task,
the originally learned knowledge will typically be disrupted, which leads to catastrophic forgetting.
On the other hand, a learning algorithm biasing towards old tasks will interfere with the learning
of the new task. Several lines of methods are proposed recently to address this issue. Examples
include regularization based methods [4, 21, 22], knowledge transfer based methods [23] and episodic
memory based methods [1, 2, 24]. Especially, episodic memory based methods such as Gradient
Episodic Memory (GEM) [1] and Averaged Gradient Episodic Memory (A-GEM) [2] have shown
remarkable performance. In episodic memory based methods, a small episodic memory is used for
storing examples from old tasks to guide the optimization of the current task.
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

