Supplementary Material for
“Soft Shadow Diffusion (SSD): Physics-inspired
Learning for 3D Computational Periscopy”
Fadlullah Raji

and John Murray Bruce

University of South Florida.
4202 E. Fowler Avenue, Tampa, FL, USA 33620.
fraji@usf.edu murraybruce@usf.edu

This supplemental document to our manuscript provides additional information on the complexity of the purely physics-based approach (Section 1) and its
robustness to unknown ambient illumination (Section 2). Additional details on
implementing and training our physics-inspired soft shadow diffusion model are
provided in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 contains various additional real and synthetic experimental results. It explores the stability of the SSD model to noise
and background illumination and also shows additional 3D reconstructions.

1

Physics-based 3D Computational Pericopy: Towards
higher resolution voxelizations

Figure 5(b) in the main paper shows a reconstruction from real experimental
data using a 10 × 5 × 10 voxels discretization of the occluding region. (Note
that the portion of the hidden scene which we refer to as the occluding region is
illustrated in Figure 2 of the main manuscript.)

1.1

Complexity Analysis of Physics-based Reconstruction

The 10 × 5 × 10 pinspecks voxelization is relatively coarse to be able to describe
a large variety of 3D objects. Increasing the number of pinspecks comes with
increased computational complexity and space requirements. Figure 5(a) in the
main manuscript is an example of increasing the grid size which we reconstructed
using 16 × 5 × 16 discretization of the occluding region. Given a camera photograph of 128 × 128, and the non-occluding scene to be estimated at 32 × 32
resolution, the memory requirement will be 16384 × 1024 × 1280 = 80GB when
using Float32 precision. Since our algorithm requires the computation of gradient and updates of the variables to be estimated, this memory requirement
doubles. Hence, to achieve the simulated reconstruction in Figure 5(a) of the
main manuscript, we used 3 A100 GPU with 80GB each, and distribute the forward model across these GPUs for computation. A sparse representation of this
forward model is presented next.

