A Simple Latent Diffusion Approach for Panoptic
Segmentation and Mask Inpainting:
Supplementary Materials
Wouter Van Gansbeke⋆ and Bert De Brabandere1
1

Segments.ai

We discuss the implementation details in Supplement A, additional results in
Supplement B, limitations in Supplement C and the broader impact in Supplement D.

A

Implementation Details

Model Card. Our best model is trained for 100k iterations on COCO with mixed
precision training on 8 × 40GB NVIDIA A100 GPUs using Google Cloud. We
rely on the pretrained Stable Diffusion [16] weights provided by Hugging Face [4].
We also adopt its settings for the noise scheduler. The code is developed in
Pytorch [14] and will be made available as well as our models.
Multi-Task Setup. This section provides additional information on the multitask extension for dense prediction, with minor adaptations. Consider the three
fundamental vision tasks: instance segmentation, semantic segmentation and
depth prediction. The instance and semantic tasks both utilize the same shallow
autoencoder to generate continuous latent codes. Similarly, to compress the depth
maps, we rely on the same shallow autoencoder architecture as its segmentation
counterpart. We only change the input and output channels to one channel. As
COCO does not contain depth annotations, we rely on the predictions from
MiDaS [1] to obtain pseudo ground truth. Note that this model predicts relative
depth. All tasks use the same set of augmentations and scaling factors, as
discussed in the main paper. To enable multi-tasking, we introduce learnable
task embedding (786-dimensional) via the cross-attention layers of the UNet.
This allows us to query the model for a specific task. Figure S1 visualizes the
results for each task by only changing the task embedding. We observe that the
model can predict accurate instance, semantic and depth maps for a given image.
Finally, given our shallower encoder and task embeddings, a comparison with
Marigold [7], a concurrent work on depth estimation, could be insightful.
Mask2Former Baselines. Mask2Former [2] is a specialized segmentation framework that produces excellent results for panoptic segmentation. We follow the
training recipe from ViTDet [10] and SAM [8] to leverage plain ViT backbones [3]
⋆

This work was done while the author was at Segments.ai, and the final training run
was conducted at INSAIT. The author is now affiliated with Google DeepMind.

