G3R: Gradient Guided Generalizable
Reconstruction for Large Scenes
Yun Chen1,2⋆ Jingkang Wang1,2⋆ Ze Yang1,2
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
Waabi1 University of Toronto2
{ychen, jwang, zyang, smanivasagam, urtasun}@waabi.ai

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we provide additional information on G3R, experimental setup, additional quantitative and qualitative results, limitations, and broader implications. We first provide
additional information and motivation on G3R (Sec A). In Sec. B, we
provide details on baseline implementations and how we adapt them to
urban-driving and drone datasets. Next, we provide the experimental
setup for evaluation on urban-driving and drone datasets in Sec. C. We
then show more qualitative comparison with baselines (Sec. D.1), multicamera simulation results (Sec. D.2) and a generalization study across
datasets (Sec. D.3). Finally, we discuss the limitations and future works
(Sec. E), broader impact (Sec. F) and responsibility to human subjects
(Sec. G). Additionally, we include a supplementary video, supplementary_video.mp4 providing an overview of our methodology and videos
to demonstrate the efficacy of G3R.

A

G3R Implementation Details

We first discuss three major paradigms for scene reconstruction as shown in
main-paper-Fig. 2 and then present implementation details for G3R.
A.1

Comparison of Three Paradigms for Scene Reconstruction

For better understanding, we provide detailed algorithms for three paradigms for
scene reconstruction discussed in the main paper. Each algorithm box depicts
the paradigm’s approach to reconstruct a new scene at inference time.
Algorithm 1 and 2 show the generalizable novel view synthesis (Fig. 2a)
and per-scene optimization paradigms (Fig. 2b) separately. Specifically, existing
generalizable approaches select a few reference images (usually ≤ 5) for feedforward prediction of intermediate representation and then decode/render the
feature representation to produce the rendered images. These approaches learn
data-driven priors across multiple scenes and enable fast reconstruction. They
need to reconstruct the scene again with different source images when rendering a
new view. Existing generalizable approaches work only for small objects/scenes
⋆

Equal contributions.

