Can OOD Object Detectors Learn from
Foundation Models?
Supplementary Material
Jiahui Liu, Xin Wen, Shizhen Zhao, Yingxian Chen, and Xiaojuan Qi⋆
The University of Hong Kong

1

Extended Experiments

1.1

Study on the Source of Novel Categories

In the primary experiments, we employ GPT-4 [1] as the large language model
(LLM) to generate novel objects for image editing tasks. To broaden the exploration of models capable of producing novel objects, we additionally incorporate
Llama 2 [10] and WordNet [7], substituting GPT-4 with these alternatives for
imagining novel objects.
Llama 2 The same prompts from the main experiments are introduced into
Llama 2 [10] (70B) to collect a set of associative novel objects for driving subsequent image editing processes. Our observations indicate a distinct divergence
in the responses of Llama 2 compared to those of GPT-4 [1] when the same ID
object is given, for example:
ID Object: ‘dog’.
GPT-4: ‘wolf’, ‘fox’, ‘coyote’, ‘jackal’, ‘hyena’.
Llama 2: ‘stuffed animal (dog)’, ‘dog toy’, ‘dog bed’, ‘dog food bowl’, ‘dog
leash’.

Different from GPT-4, while Llama 2 is capable of associating relevant concepts,
it imagines some objects that lack volumetric or property alignment with the
corresponding ID object (More imagined objects are presented in Tab. 3). Consequently, this discrepancy may lead to synthetic images that do not contain
enough visually similar novel objects. It is further supported by the experiment
results shown in Tab. 1, where the synthetic data derived from Llama 2 fails to
match the performance levels achieved by GPT-4.
WordNet We use WordNet [7] based on its structured object relationship graph
to retrieve novel objects parallel (other hyponyms of the same hypernyms) to ID
objects to drive image editing (Retrieved objects are shown in Tab. 3). It better
ensures the selection of novel objects that share similar properties and applicability compared to those provided by Llama 2. As shown in Tab. 1, synthetic
⋆

corresponding author

