DreamMesh: Jointly Manipulating and Texturing
Triangle Meshes for Text-to-3D Generation
— Supplementary Material
Haibo Yang1,2 , Yang Chen3 , Yingwei Pan3 , Ting Yao3 ,
Zhineng Chen1,2 , Zuxuan Wu1,2 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2 , and Tao Mei3
1

2

School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
HiDream.ai Inc.
yanghaibo.fdu@gmail.com, {c1enyang, pandy, tiyao}@hidream.ai,
{zhinchen, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, tmei@hidream.ai

This supplementary material contains: 1) additional application results of
DreamMesh [8] in the 3D rendering pipeline; 2) more qualitative comparisons
with baselines on the T3 Bench benchmark [2].

1

Application of DreamMesh in 3D Rendering Pipeline

Unlike previous methods that predominantly revolve around implicit 3D scene
representation of density-based geometry with undefined surface boundaries, our
work frames text-to-3D generation based on a completely explicit 3D scene representation of triangle meshes. This enables us to generate high-quality meshes
with a clean and well-organized topology featuring neatly arranged vertices,
edges, and faces. Consequently, these generated meshes can be seamlessly integrated into the traditional graphics rendering pipelines, enabling effortless deployment in standard visualization and animation workflows. Herein, we showcase two types of applications of our DreamMesh in the 3D rendering pipeline.
First, the textured mesh generated by DreamMesh can be easily rigged and
animated in Blender (see Figure 1 (a)). Second, we can use DreamMesh to generate multiple meshes and put them into a 3D scene to render an animation by
Blender (see Figure 1 (b)). The rigging and animating application videos are
also showcased on our project page (https://dreammesh.github.io).

2

More Qualitative Comparisons with Baselines

Here, we provide more qualitative comparisons with baselines on the T3 Bench
benchmark [2]. T3 Bench has released the textured mesh generated by all baseline
methods [1, 3–7] on their GitHub repository. We compare them with the generated textured mesh by our DreamMesh. For a fair comparison, we use Blender
to render images and wireframes from these meshes under the same lighting environment. Figure 2 showcases some comparison results. It is easy to see that
baseline methods tend to generate distorted geometry and unrealistic textures.
In contrast, our DreamMesh can generate higher-quality textured meshes characterized by clean mesh topology and realistic textures.

