Supplementary for ComFusion: Enhancing
Personalized Generation by Instance-Scene
Compositing and Fusion
Yan Hong1 , Yuxuan Duan2 , Bo Zhang2 , Haoxing Chen1 , Jun Lan1 ,
Huijia Zhu1 , Weiqiang Wang1 , Jianfu Zhang3⋆
1

Ant Group
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com, {sjtudyx2016,bo-zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn,
hx.chen@hotmail.com, {yelan.lj, huijia.zhj, weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com,
c.sis@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Appendix
In this appendix, we provide additional material to complement our main submission. Key sections are outlined as follows: In Appendix A, we introduce related works. In Appendix B, we introduce preliminaries to duffusion models. In
Appendix C, we provide the implementation details of the baseline methods.
Evaluation metrics of CLIP-I, CLIP-T, and DINO used in our study are represented in Appendix D. In E, we present the specific scenes and visualize the single
instance image from the training dataset. In F, we evaluate the performance of
the proposed ComFusion and baseline methods in scenarios involving unseen
scenes, testing the generalizability of ComFusion. In Appendix G, the performance of ComFusion, when trained with multiple instance images, against the
DreamBooth baseline method, demonstrates ComFusion’s effectiveness in varied training contexts. In Appendix H, we visualize additional generated images
by ComFusion, further demonstrating the model’s capabilities. More ablative
studies are conducted in Appendix I to delve deeper into ComFusion’s insights.
Finally, limitation in Appendix J, discuss some failure cases in complex scenes,
highlighting the current limitations and potential areas for personalized subject
generation.

A

Related Works

A.1

Diffuion-Based Text-to-Image Generation.

The field of Text-to-Image (T2I) generation has recently witnessed remarkable
advancements [15, 22, 36, 42, 43, 52], predominantly led by pre-trained diffusion
models such as Stable Diffusion [33], DALLE [32], Imagen [36] and etc. These
⋆

Corresponding author.

