CSOT: Cross-Scan Object Transfer for
Semi-Supervised LiDAR Object Detection
(Supplementary Materials)
Jinglin Zhan1 , Tiejun Liu1 , Rengang Li1 , Zhaoxiang Zhang2 , and
Yuntao Chen3⋆
1

IEIT Systems
Institute of Automation, CAS
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
{zhanjinglin,liutj,lirg}@ieisystem.com,
zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn, chenyuntao08@gmail.com
2

A

Additional Informative Ablations.

A.1

The orthogonality of CSOT with self-training

To eliminate the potential gains of iterative self-training, we perform an additional cycle of self-training on both self-trained and our partially-supervised
detectors. Results in Tab. A validate that the benefits of pseudo-labeling methods and our proposed CSOT approach are independent and complementary. SelfTraining 2× schd (Tab. A, Line 3) refers to utilizing the pretrained Self-Training
1× schd (Tab. A, Line 2) detector as the teacher model to provide pseudo-labels
for unlabeled scans, followed by an additional cycle of self-training. As shown
in the 2th and 4th Lines of Tab. A, generalizing detectors on unlabeled point
clouds via pseudo-labeling SSOD paradigm (self-training) or our CSOT SSOD
paradigm bring an improvement of 4.5 NDS and approximate 7 mAP over the
baseline. As shown in the 3th and 5th Lines of Tab. A, iterative employment
of self-training techniques does not lead to sustained gains in detection performance, while incorporating just one cycle of self-training on CSOT is able to
further optimize the NDS from 61.0 to 64.8 and mAP from 50.4 to 56.4.
A.2

Ablate spatial-aware classification loss

As described in Sec. 3.3 of the main text, we propose a spatial-aware classification loss for our partial supervision to handle false negative issues caused by
treating all unlabeled objects as backgrounds. The proposed spatial-aware classification loss and the corresponding randomly sampling strategy are ablated in
Tab. B. Masking regions without supervision signals for partially-labeled scans
boost mAP by 1.2. Randomly sampling 1% negative samples in heatmap further
increase mAP from 55.7 to 56.4.
⋆

Corresponding author.

