18

Z. Liu et al.

A

Details of Training and Datasets

We perform erasure in two distinct settings. For Model Refinement, we remove the watermark and unsafeness concepts from the original Stable Diffusion
v1-5, and for Data Refinement, we simulate the scenario where users fine-tune
diffusion models with personalized datasets containing diverse implicit concepts.
Detailed training information and dataset specifics for both settings are presented herein.
A.1

Model Refinement: Erasing from pre-trained SD

In this setting, we identify text prompts likely to elicit the generation of images
with implicit concepts and apply geometric erasure to these identified concepts.
Watermark Removal. For Geom-Erasing training, 5000 text prompts inducing watermark-containing images are collected from ICD-Watermark. We use
the watermark classifier model5 to provide the concept existence condition and
its classifier activation map for location information. The model is trained and
only updates the added tokens representing concept existence and location. During generation, we use the original text condition as positive guidance and the
existence and location tokens as negative guidance. The results reported in the
main paper are evaluated on the test dataset of ICD-Watermark. With such a
method, Geom-Erasing is able to generate images without a watermark and
keep other contents the same as not using learned tokens as negative prompts.
See visualizations in the first two columns of Fig. A3.
Toxicity Removal. Following the Inappropriate Image Prompts (I2P) [35] setting, 47030 images encompassing 7 toxicity categories are generated: hate, harassment, violence, self-harm, sexual content, shocking images, illegal activity.
NudeNet [30] and Q-16 classifier [36] are employed to identify toxicity, considering both existence and location for the “sexual content” category using NudeNet,
while only considering existence for other categories due to unavailable location
information. The model is trained and only updates the added tokens. We apply
the same generation strategy as ‘Watermark Removal’. Visualization can be seen
in the last two columns of Fig. A3.
A.2

Data Refinement: Erasing from ICD

In this scenario, we assemble three datasets (ICD) to emulate user fine-tuning of
stable diffusion with personalized datasets harboring diverse implicit concepts.
These concepts arise due to constraints in image sources and collection methods
within specific downstream tasks. Further details on training and datasets are
provided, with samples displayed in Fig. A2.
5

https://github.com/LAION-AI/LAION-5B-WatermarkDetection

