DG-PIC: Domain Generalized Point-In-Context
Learning for Point Cloud Understanding
Supplementary Materials
Jincen Jiang1∗ , Qianyu Zhou2∗ , Yuhang Li1,3 , Xuequan Lu4B ,
Meili Wang5B , Lizhuang Ma2 , Jian Chang1 , and Jian Jun Zhang1
1

National Centre for Computer Animation, Bournemouth University, Dorset, UK
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
4
La Trobe University, Victoria, Australia
5
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China
{jiangj, jchang, jzhang}@bournemouth.ac.uk
zhouqianyu@sjtu.edu.cn, yuhangli@shu.edu.cn, b.lu@latrobe.edu.au
ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, wml@nwsuaf.edu.cn

This supplementary includes the following items:
– Section A demonstrates our DG-PIC’s generalization ability under the leaveone-domain-out setting.
– Section B elaborates on the details and analysis of the hyperparameters on
our DG-PIC. We investigate the impacts of different degrees of the prompt
selection factor λ and mask ratio γ to verify the effectiveness of our method.
– Section C shows more ablation studies of our method, including the pooling
strategies to obtain global features and prototypes.
– Section D visualizes the qualitative results of our DG-PIC, including t-SNE
visualization of features from different domains, the differences (i.e., gap)
across domains, and results comparisons with other methods.

A

Cross Verification

Following some previous DG methods [4, 10], we adopt the leave-one-domainout setting to assess the effectiveness of our method. We designate one dataset
from our benchmark as the target domain and use the remaining datasets as the
source domain. The results for cross-validation are presented in Table A1, where
we compare our method with PIC [1]. We can see that our method consistently
achieves significantly better results in all cases, showcasing the superiority of our
method. This observation confirms the effectiveness of our method, which has a
strong generalization ability between different domains.
∗ Equal contributions.
B
Corresponding authors.

