Supplementary for Revisit Anything: Visual Place
Recognition via Image Segment Retrieval
Kartik Garg*1 , Sai Shubodh Puligilla*2 , Shishir Kolathaya1 ,
Madhava Krishna2 , and Sourav Garg3
1

Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru, India
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India
3
University of Adelaide, Australia
kartikgarg@iisc.ac.in, p.saishubodh@gmail.com, shishirk@iisc.ac.in,
mkrishna@iiit.ac.in, sourav.garg@adelaide.edu.au
2

In this supplementary, we first present the limitations of our work, coupled with
additional results on IOU-based filtering of SuperSegments (Sec. 2). This is followed
by ablation studies on local feature based retriever (Sec. 3.1) and an efficient version of
SAM (Sec. 3.2). We then present implementation and benchmarking details relating
to the proposed factorized feature aggregation method (Sec. 4.1), backbone models
(SAM and DINOv2) (Sec. 4.2), and benchmark datasets (Sec. 4.3). Finally, we present
additional qualitative examples for retrieval (Sec. 5).

1

Limitations

While our proposed method SegVLAD achieves state-of-the-art results on a diverse
set of VPR benchmark datasets, there are notable limitations of our approach. i) Redundancy: we create several overlapping SuperSegments per image. While these are
somewhat necessary to enable accurate partial image matching via partial representations, SuperSegments formed through neighboring central segments will have a very
high overlap. ii) Map size, we need to store several SuperSegment descriptors (far more
than a typical global descriptors database). These limitations to some extent can be addressed through simple measures, e.g., masks IOU based filtering of the database segments to reduce both the redundancy and storage, as detailed in the subsequent section.
The value of our research primarily lies in the demonstration of a novel approach to
VPR that not only addresses the fundamental limitation of global descriptors but is also
characterized as an open-set, object-based, text-interface-friendly representation, which
is more likely to plug in to similar recent approaches aimed at embodied intelligence.

2

Storage, Compute Time & IOU Based Filtering Additional
Results

Table 1 shows results for IOU-based filtering for different thresholds, corresponding
number of database segments, their storage consumption, and the average retrieval time
per query. As can be observed from the results for AmsterTime, 0.4 IOU threshold
* Equal contribution

