NeRMo: Learning Implicit Neural
Representations for 3D Human Motion Prediction
——Supplementary Material——
Dong Wei, Huaijiang Sun, Xiaoning Sun(

)

, and Shengxiang Hu

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China

In the supplementary, we first provide more implementation details (Section
A and demonstrate the derivation of efficient meta-optimization (Section B). In
Section C, we provide a detailed analysis explaining why a time-index model
is not suitable for the task of human motion prediction. We also provide the
detailed training and inference algorithms (Section D), several additional experiments (Section E), limitation and future work (Section F).

A

Implementation Details

We set the shape of joint-specific latent code z as 256, which is then incorporated into the temporal Fourier features with 256-dimension through concatenation. We use VQ-VAE [12] for pre-processing and train a codebook with a
size of 1024 × 512. The number of learnable query embeddings of codebookcoordinate attention is 256, and the dimension of each embedding is 128. We
employ FCBlock with a feature dimension of 1024 and a total of 6 FCBlocks,
where each FCBlock consists of a fully connected feed forward layer with layer
normalization, ReLU activations and a skip connection at the end. For maskaware spatial attention, we utilize 6 attention layers with 8 heads in the multihead attention mechanism. For meta-optimization, we only require one inner
loop due to closed-form solution. The model is trained for 150 epochs with a
batch size of 16. Note that all training motions are normalized before being fed
into the network. We employ the Adam optimizer and train the model under
Pytorch framework on a single NVIDIA RTX-3080 GPU.

B

Efficient Meta-Optimization

Different from conventional approaches [4, 11] that explore direct backpropagation through complicated gradient computations to tackle the bi-level optimization, we suppose that the personalized modulation only involves the last layer of
INR while the rest parameters are set as generic rule, achieving high efficiency.
This transforms the inner loop optimization into a simple ridge regression problem with a simple closed-form solution [1, 14].
Mathematically, we denote the network parameters of our generic rule as ϕ =
{ϕe , ϕf , ϕm , λreg , {zj }Jj=1 }, where ϕe , ϕf , ϕm represent the parameters of spatialtemporal encoding, several FCBlocks and mask-aware spatial attention modules,

