Supplementary Materials
Dense Hand-Object(HO) GraspNet with Full
Grasping Taxonomy and Dynamics
Woojin Cho1 , Jihyun Lee1 , Minjae Yi1 , Minje Kim1 , Taeyun Woo1 ,
Donghwan Kim1 , Taewook Ha1 , Hyokeun Lee3 , Je-Hwan Ryu4 ,
Woontack Woo1 , Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
1

1

KAIST,2 Imperial College London,3 Kwangwoon University,4 Surromind

Additional Evaluation

Here, we present additional experimental results with HOGraspNet that are not
included in the main paper. We provide detailed descriptions of the evaluation
setups and the quantitative results across each split type we defined. Additionally, we show qualitative comparisons between HOGraspNet and the publicly
available datasets [19,17,4].
1.1

Evaluation Setup

Split Protocol. The S0 split follows the traditional sequence split, where the
first trial of each subject and grasp scenario is assigned to the test set. For the
S1 split, the 99 subjects are randomly divided into train and test sets at a ratio
of roughly 7:3. For the S2 split, the data from the four camera views are divided
at a ratio of 3:1. Each view corresponds to a different side of the subjects (back,
left, front, and right), and the right-side camera is selected as the test set. In
the S3 split, 30 objects are divided into train and test sets at a ratio of 23:7,
ensuring that all grasp classes are represented in the train set. The cumulative
grasp classes for the objects in both sets are shown in Fig. 1. Lastly, the S4
split separates the total of 28 grasp classes at a ratio of 6:1, with four classes
identified as Intermediate (please refer to Fig. 11) assigned to the test set.
Baseline Network. We report the hand reconstruction results using HFLnet [12] trained on each split. We train each network for 5 epochs using the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4 and a decaying gamma of 0.9 per 2
epochs, while other parameters are set to the default values.
1.2

Evaluation Results

Hand Pose Estimation. We summarize the hand estimation results in Fig. 2.
The S0 split exhibits the highest performance, while the S2 split demonstrates
the lowest, with S4 showing the second lowest performance. As the S0 partitions
the dataset only by sequences, it generally shares common pose spaces between

