GTP-4o: Modality-Prompted
Heterogeneous Graph Learning
for Omni-Modal Biomedical
Representation
Chenxin Li1 , Xinyu Liu1 , Cheng Wang1 , Yifan Liu1 , Weihao Yu1 , Jing Shao2 ,
and Yixuan Yuan1(B)
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Ma Liu Shui, Hong Kong
chenxinli@link.cuhk.edu.hk, yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China

Abstract. Recent advances in learning multi-modal representation have
witnessed the success in biomedical domains. While established techniques enable handling multi-modal information, the challenges are posed
when extended to various clinical modalities and practical modalitymissing setting due to the inherent modality gaps. To tackle these,
we propose an innovative Modality-prompted Heterogeneous Graph for
Omni-modal Learning (GTP-4o), which embeds the numerous disparate
clinical modalities into a uniﬁed representation, completes the deﬁcient
embedding of missing modality and reformulates the cross-modal learning with a graph-based aggregation. Specially, we establish a heterogeneous graph embedding to explicitly capture the diverse semantic properties on both the modality-speciﬁc features (nodes) and the cross-modal
relations (edges). Then, we design a modality-prompted completion
that enables completing the inadequate graph representation of missing
modality through a graph prompting mechanism, which generates hallucination graphic topologies to steer the missing embedding towards the
intact representation. Through the completed graph, we meticulously
develop a knowledge-guided hierarchical cross-modal aggregation consisting of a global meta-path neighbouring to uncover the potential heterogeneous neighbors along the pathways driven by domain knowledge,
and a local multi-relation aggregation module for the comprehensive
cross-modal interaction across various heterogeneous relations. We assess
the eﬃcacy of our methodology on rigorous benchmarking experiments
against prior state-of-the-arts. In a nutshell, GTP-4o presents an initial
foray into the intriguing realm of embedding, relating and perceiving the
heterogeneous patterns from various clinical modalities holistically via a
graph theory. Project page: https://gtp4-o.github.io/.
Keywords: Biomedical Data · Multimodal Learning · Graph Networks

X. Liu and C. Wang—Equal second-author contribution.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 168–187, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_10

