How Video Meetings Change Your Expression
—Supplementary Material—

Video visualizations of qualitative results can be found at the following link:
facet.cs.columbia.edu The supplementary material is structured as follows: in
Sec. A we provide dataset preparation details, and dataset statistics. In Sec. B
we provide additional discussion on the metrics used in our paper for evaluating
our models. In Sec. C we provide a note on the baselines. In Sec. D we provide
further implementation details which we hope can be useful for reproducing
the results, and also provide more information on how the fixed translator-set
baseline was implemented. In Sec. E we provide some more ablation results.
Finally, in Sec. F, we provide additional insights about the differences between
F2F and VC through FacET, and in Sec. G, we provide latent distributions and
dataset-level statistics for the presidents data.

A

Dataset details

To study the differences between VC and F2F conversations, we collect the
ZoomIn dataset, containing 240 hours of conversations in both VC and F2F
settings. We obtain these videos from the YouTube channel “The Daily Talk
Show - Australian Podcast”, where the hosts (mostly two specific individuals)
have conversations on a wide range of topics. Using background and eye gaze as
cues, we are able to annotate the mode of conversation. We then run MediaPipe
face landmark detector [1] on all the frames to obtain 3D facial keypoints. Some
examples can be found in Fig. 1. Each sample clip in our dataset consists of
detections on contiguous 176 frames from both the participants. In cases where
the frame rate is higher, we apply linear interpolation on the keypoints to bring
it down to 25 FPS. For the purpose of our experiments, we only consider those
conversations where there are only two people.
Most of the videos in the ZoomIn dataset are of 1920 x 1080 resolution. We
show some important statistics about our ZoomIn dataset in Tab. 2. We highlight
two positive aspects about this data. First, the conversations that we call as video
conferencing (VC) do not suffer from any quality issues of the second party. This

Table 2: Key statistics about the ZoomIn dataset.
Mode of
conversation

Number
of videos

Average length of
videos (minutes)

Total duration of
videos (hours)

Video conferencing
Face to face

89
279

38.14
39.44

56.58
184.70

Total

368

39.13

241.28

