Latent-INR

A

1

Network Architecture

Base Network: We use an MLP with 10 layers, width of 512 and ReLU nonlinearity as our base network fθ .
Hypernetwork: All hypernetworks hl used to modulate a layer l of the base
network have 3 layers with a hidden dimension of 512 and tanh as non-linearity.
Unless specified, we only modulate the first hidden layer of the base network.
Latents: Each latent Zt corresponding to a frame has a dimension of 512 and
is initialized to be standard Gaussian before training. We set our learning rate
as 5e-4 and used the standard Adam optimizer without any weight decay.

B

Compression

B.1

Fourier Features

We use the multiresolution hash grid for positional encoding in all our models.
In table 5 we show results for full coordinate resolution using fourier features for
positional encoding. Due to lack of a hash grid, the resulting models train upto
30% faster, but at the cost of inferior reconstruction.
B.2

Quantization

Instead of quantizing all components equally, we notice that retaining the latents
and the base network at full precision provides better reconstruction at negligible
additional storage.
B.3

Effect of latent dimension

To study the effect of latent dimension on compression, we train models by
varying it and encode the “bosphore” video from UVG dataset. The results are
presented in Figure 11. We notice that there is positive gains till dimension 512
and diminishing returns thereafter. Hence we choose that as our default latent
size in all our experiments.

C

Video Retrieval

We perform two retrieval tasks on the COIN dataset[53] - class-level, and segmentlevel. In both settings, we use the standard val set as the database. For class-level,
we use the distinct video-level task names in COIN as our query set. For segmentlevel, we use the set of distinct clip-level captions in COIN as our query set. We
get the CLIP ViT-B/32 text embeddings of each of these captions, and these
become our query vectors. For database vectors, we use the per-frame learned latents for each video in the database. For comparison with CLIP, we replace these
database vectors with the CLIP ViT-B/32 image embeddings for each frame. For
class-level retrieval, we consider a result frame a positive match if it belongs to

