NL2Contact: Natural Language Guided 3D
Hand-Object Contact Modeling with
Diffusion Model
Zhongqun Zhang1 , Hengfei Wang1 , Ziwei Yu2 , Yihua Cheng1 ⋆ , Angela Yao1 ,
and Hyung Jin Chang1
1

2

University of Birmingham, UK
National University of Singapore, Singapore

We provide additional materials to supplement our main paper. We first
provide the additional details of the ContactDescribe dataset in Section 1. Furthermore, we provide extra experimental results in Section 2, including more
qualitative results on the HO3D dataset [3] (Section 2.1), more quantitative
evaluation of the alignment between text description and generated contact
(Section 2.2), more visualization of human grasp generation (Section 2.3), more
evaluation of in-the-wild text input (Section 2.4), and some failure cases (Section 2.5).

1

More Details of ContactDescribe Dataset

More statistics. We further illustrate the data distribution of the grasping
behavior over the dataset by quantifying the contact locations. As shown in
Figure 1, the index finger is the most frequently utilized when humans grasp
an object. Following that, the index and middle fingers are commonly engaged,
as people typically manipulate objects using these three fingers, with the other
fingers often playing a supportive role. At the level of finger joints, the fingertip
is used most frequently as it is the most flexible. The palm’s participation in
contact is notably less frequent than that of the fingers, typically observed only
during a “wrap”.
Auto-checker. We leverage ChatGPT to automatically check the generated
descriptions. Below we provide examples:
Q: Is this gasp suitable for using scissors? ‘The person uses the scissors for cutting,
wrapping with the fingertip of thumb and index, along with the middle joint of the
middle finger, while the other fingers form a loose sphere’
A: Yes, the described grasp is suitable for using scissors
Q: Is this gasp suitable for using scissors? ‘The scissors is pinched by the thumb
fingertip, in conjunction with the middle joints of the middle and index finger, while
the remaining fingers support the object.’
A: No, the pinch grasp may lack the fine control needed for accurate cutting with
scissors.

After we obtain the feedback from ChatGPT, we manually revise the descriptions.
⋆

Corresponding author.

