Parameter-Efficient and Memory-Efficient Tuning
for Vision Transformer: A Disentangled Approach
(Appendix)
Taolin Zhang1 *, Jiawang Bai2,3 *, Zhihe Lu3 , Dongze Lian3 , Genping Wang4,B ,
Xinchao Wang3,B , and Shu-Tao Xia1,5
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent 3 National University of Singapore
4
Shenzhen Qiji Technology Co., Ltd.
5
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
ztl23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; jiawangbai@tencent.com;
zhihelu.academic@gmail.com; dzlianx@gmail.com;
genpingwang@163.com; xinchao@nus.edu.sg; xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

1

Analysis on Memory Cost and Entanglement

Memory Cost (GB)

In this section, we conduct an additional experiment to investigate the connection between memory cost and entanglement. To
LoRA
9
achieve varying degrees of entanglement, we
8
fine-tune only one layer of the pre-trained
7
model using LoRA and provide memory us6
age at different positions in Fig. 1.
5
When tuning the highest layer, the degree
4
of entanglement is minimal and the features
3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
of the lower layers remain unchanged, not enFine Tuning Layer
gaging in gradient descent, resulting in a small
memory cost. As the layer being fine-tuned Fig. 1: Memory usage with differbecomes lower, the degree of entanglement in- ent fine-tuning layer.
creases and the intermediate features that participate in gradient descent become
heavier, leading to a larger memory cost.

2

Analysis on Inference Cost

The inference cost of the model is important in some real-world applications.
Compared to the original pre-trained model, SynQT, with the lightweight architectures QSM and KEM, could potentially introduce additional inference costs.
Therefore, we evaluate the inference time, memory usage, and FLOPS in comparison to traditional PETL methods, and present the results along with the
optimal number of tokens in Table 1.
Notably, the low inference speed and high FLOPS of VPT-Shallow [2] are
attributed to its optimal number of tokens on CIFAR100 reaching up to 100. In

