Supplementary Material of
PDT: Uav Target Detection Dataset for Pests
and Diseases Tree
Mingle Zhou1,2,4 , Rui Xing1,2 , Delong Han1,2 , Zhiyong Qi3 , and Gang
Li1,2(B)
1

Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry
of Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in
Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, China
2
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Networks, Shandong
Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan, China
lig@qlu.edu.cn
3
Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographic Information System, School of Earth
and Space Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
4
SHANDONG SCICOM Information and Economy Research Institute Co., Ltd.

1

Data Acquisition

Fig. 1 shows the details of the data acquisition for this work. (a) Orthophoto
images from drones with ultra-high precision. (b) demonstrates our data acquisition process using DJI-ChanSi L2 equipment. (c) consists of two parts, with
the left half showing an overview of the 3D point cloud data and modeling the
entire mountain range. The right half shows the details of 3D point cloud data,
and the characteristics of high resolution of its data can be observed.

2

Crop and Weed Detection Data and Weeds Datasets

In order to further verify the performance of YOLO-DP, the experiment is more
convincing. We conducted experiments on two other publicly available datasets.
Crop and Weed Detection Data: The dataset contains 1,300 images of
sesame crops and different types of weeds (Fig. 2). Each image has a label, and
the image label is in the YOLO format. The dataset contains two categories, crop
and weed (weed is made up of a variety of plants). The image size is 512×512.
This dataset is characterized by rich texture information, which can test the
classification ability of the model.
Weeds: This public dataset uses a database of photos of weeds detected
in soybean plantations (Fig. 3). The original images in the database used were
produced and provided by Eirene Solutions. The database consists of two parts:
92 photos collected by photographers at different points on soybean plantations
and 220 video frames of photographers walking on soybean and corn plantations.
The dataset contains one category: weed, and the image size is 480×480. The
characteristic of this data set is to simulate the real environment, which can test
the detection ability of the model.

