Energy-induced Explicit quantification for
Multi-modality MRI fusion
No Author Given
No Institute Given

1

Supplementary

1.1

Details of attention network

The details of attention-based fusion network in EHF are illustrated. In hierarchical aggregation, the same attention network is utilized to aggregate the
multi-modality MRI. Here, the fusion on tf 4, c4, n4, and w4 is taken for example. Through the attention-based fusion (Fig. 1), the representations of different
modalities (tf 4, c4, n4 and w4) are fused into f 4. Firstly, the multi-modality
representations with the size of C × D × W × H are added as a whole (Af ).
Second, the fused representation is fed into local network to extract the local
attention in channel dimension. The Af is extracted by the convolution and normalization layers with the size of C/r×D×W ×H. Then the ReLU, convolution,
and normalization layers are applied to achieves the local channel-wise attention
(C × D × W × H). Thirdly, the global attention is realized by a global-pooling
and two convolution & normalization layers with the size of C ×1×1×1. Fourth,
the global and local attention are added and converted into sigmoid to achieve
the attention in multi-modality MRI. Finally, the attention is applied to Af
for the attention-corrected fusion (f 4). The above fusion process is applied to
hierarchical multi-modality MRI representations.
1.2

The necessity of alignment

In proposed energy-regularized space alignment of E2 PA, the alignment of different modalities’ representations is based on the representations of different modalities extracted by encoders belong to various spaces. To evaluate the necessity of
alignment before the measurement of consistency in information flow, the representations of the aggregation and multi-modality MRI are calculated to find the
corresponding vector spaces by QR decomposition. As shown in Fig. 2 (brain
multi-modality MRI for the example), the purple dots and coordinate represent
the aggregation representation and corresponding space ([if usion , jf usion ]), and
the blue dots and coordinate represent the multi-modality MRI representation
and and corresponding space ([itf , jtf ]) (taking T2f MRI as an example here).
4
We take the purple (Rf4 usion ) and blue (Rtf
) dots outlined in red as an example
for analysis. For the space of [if usion , jf usion ], the coordinate of Rf4 usion is [3, 4]
4
and the coordinate of Rtf
is [0, 4]. For the space of [itf , jtf ], the coordinate of

