SPAMming Labels: Efficient Annotations
for the Trackers of Tomorrow
Supplementary Material
†

†

Orcun Cetintas1,2 , Tim Meinhardt2 , Guillem Brasó1,2 , and Laura Leal-Taixé2
1

Technical University of Munich
2
NVIDIA

Abstract. This supplementary material offers additional details (Appendix A) and experimental results (Appendix B) of SPAM. To this
end, we provide further information on the architecture of our graphbased model (Appendix A.1) and its application for hierarchical labeling (Appendix A.2). In Appendix A.3, we complete the implementation
details of the main paper. The experimental results in Appendix B.1
demonstrate the superiority of our approach to a common frame-based
labeling method. We compare labeling performance for static and moving cameras in Appendix B.2 and finally discuss about an alternative
evaluation setting in Appendix B.3.

A

Additional Details about SPAM

A.1

GNN Model

Our hierarchical graph-neural network (GNN) utilizes the time-aware message
passing framework introduced in [1]. We use a hierarchy of 10 GNNs operating
over a video clip of 512 frames. At the first level, we employ a GN Nnode , which
considers a temporal window of 10 frames for each node. Subsequent levels,
denoted as GN Nedge , cover 2, 4, ..., up to 512 frames. We follow a simple and
unified approach for all hierarchy levels: GN Nnode and GN Nedge levels share the
same input features and network architecture (as presented in Sec 3.3 of the main
paper). Moreover, GN Nedge levels also share learnable weights across hierarchy
levels. Overall, we rely on a lightweight GNN hierarchy with only approximately
65K parameters running at 20 frames per second (FPS).
A.2

Active Hierarchical Labeling

To fully utilize our hierarchical graph framework, we distribute our annotation
budget B across L hierarchical levels as B1 , . . . , BL , with B1 + · · · + BL = B.
Prioritizing deeper levels enables a more effective allocation of the annotation
budget. Intuitively, in deeper hierarchy levels, nodes represent tracklets rather
than individual detections. We propagate annotator decisions for entire clusters

