– Supplementary Material –
“Where am I?” Scene Retrieval with Language
Jiaqi Chen1 , Daniel Barath1 , Iro Armeni2 ,
Marc Pollefeys1,3 , and Hermann Blum1,4
1

ETH Zürich
Stanford University
3
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab, Zürich
4
University of Bonn
2

In the supplementary material, we show more details regarding our data,
method, and results. More specifically, we first show more examples and details of scene graphs and text-graphs. We then show examples from the process
of transforming a text description into a text-graph. Additionally, we show an
investigation regarding the robustness of our embeddings when different input
pairs are given to the joint embedding model. Lastly, we show qualitative results
of which scenes were matched with which text descriptions.

A

Scene Graph and Text-Graph Examples

A.1

ScanScribe Dataset Example

In Figure 1 we show a detailed labeled example of a 3D scene graph from the
3DSSG [3] dataset. We list the nodes and edges on the right hand side. The purple
text describes the node attributes. The scene graph on the bottom left is labeled
with the corresponding object IDs. We prune the edges of our scene graph based
on a distance threshold, set to 1.5m. We also only consider edges that represent
spatial relationships such as ‘left,’ ‘right,’ ‘behind,’ ‘close by,’ etc. This means we
also prune any edges that are labeled with the following: ‘bigger than,’ ‘smaller
than,’ ‘higher than,’ ‘lower than,’ ‘same symmetry as,’ ‘same as,’ ‘same color,’
‘same material,’ ‘same texture,’ ‘same shape,’ ‘same state,’ ‘same object type.’
This scene graph also corresponds with the text-graph from Figure 2.
In Figure 2 we show a detailed labeled example of a text-graph that corresponds with the scene graph in Figure 1. We correspond the yellow object ID
labels with the labels shown in the scene image on top. The bottom description
also highlights the text-graph objects in yellow. We point out that the text-graph
is a subset of the scene graph.
A.2

Human Dataset Example

In Figure 3 we show a detailed labeled example of a 3D scene graph from the
3DSSG [3] dataset. We list the nodes and edges on the right hand side. Not all
nodes on the right hand side are labeled in the scene graph due to visibility. The
purple text describes the node attributes. The scene graph on the bottom left

