Omni6D: Large-Vocabulary 3D Object Dataset
for Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation
- Supplementary Materials Mengchen Zhang1,2 , Tong Wu3 , Tai Wang2 , Tengfei Wang2 , Ziwei Liu4 , and
Dahua Lin2,3
1

2

A

Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{zhangmengchen,wangtai,wangtengfei}@pjlab.org.cn,
{wt020,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Overviews

In the supplementary materials, we delve deeper into our research, offering
a comprehensive exploration of several aspects mentioned in the main text. We
unpack the details of the Omni6D dataset, exploring its structure and statistics. We provide the construction details of the latest datasets, Omni6D-xl and
Omni6D-Real . We provide a meticulous examination of the experimental procedures and analysis integral to our study. Additionally, we provided detailed
insights into the questionnaire setting and result details regarding the visual
realism of our Omni6D dataset. These supplemental details are invaluable in
facilitating a better understanding of our research methods and discoveries.

B

Dataset Details

B.1

Omni6D overview

Dataset structure. Our dataset is stored in folder-based structure. As illustrated in Fig. S1, it comprises symmetry annotations, point clouds sampled from
3D scanned objects with adjusted canonical poses, and rendered views. We also
provide a Blender-based simulation framework to facilitate users.
Specifically for depth images, we applied a mapping transformation as mentioned in the main text. Original depth maps, saved as EXR files, have float32
precision with an accuracy of approximately 1e−7 and a size of 32 bits per pixel.
Converting these depth maps to RGB format with a scaling factor of 10000
maintains a precision of about 1e−4 , reducing storage size by 25% with 24 bits
per pixel. Due to PNG compression, actual storage can be reduced to 5%-10%
of the original size. Also, our depth map compression method enables direct
visualization in PNG format.

