Supplementary Material for “Robust Incremental
Structure-from-Motion with Hybrid Features"
Shaohui Liu1⋆ , Yidan Gao1∗ , Tianyi Zhang1∗ , Rémi Pautrat2 ,
Johannes L. Schönberger2 , Viktor Larsson3 , and Marc Pollefeys1,2
1

ETH Zurich

2

Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab Zurich

3

Lund University

This document provides a list of supplementary materials that accompany the
main paper. The content of this supplementary material is organized as follows:
– In Section A, we provide details on the construction and maintenance of
vanishing point tracks during the reconstruction process.
– In Section B, we present detailed derivations for uncertainty propagation
from the 2D observations to the 3D points and lines bundle adjusted across
views. In particular, we show how to use sensitivity analysis to derive the
uncertainty of the optimized 3D line in its Plücker form. We further give
details on how to use the propagated uncertainty in the geometric pipeline.
– In Section C, we present details on integration of point-line and VP-line
associations in the hybrid bundle adjustment. We additionally discuss on the
challenges on efficiency and some practical solutions on implementation.
– In Section D, we discuss how to use auxiliary vanishing point correspondences to help improve absolute pose estimation (localization/registration)
by providing more combinations of minimal configurations.
– In Section E, we provide more details on implementation, datasets and
experimental setup.
– Finally, in Section F, we provide some additional results to support the
content of the main paper.

A

Maintenance of Vanishing Point Tracks

As mentioned in the main paper, when a new image is registered, we not only
triangulate and update the 3D points and lines, but also construct vanishing
point (VP) tracks to model the parallelism relations among lines. In practice we
find that the VP matching is a relatively easy task such that computing from the
consensus of line matches generally gives very reasonable results, thus making
VP a good resource to help improve the structures of the 3D line maps. A 2D
VP feature is represented with a 3-dimensional homogeneous coordinate, which
equals the 3D direction in the local frame left multiplied by the intrinsic matrix.
Thus, the cross-view consistency check for VP only involves checking the angle
between two 3D directions.
Similar to points and lines, the incremental update of the VP tracks involve
all the required operations as follows:
⋆

Equal contribution

