Supplementary for MoVideo: Motion-Aware Video Generation with Diffusion
Model
Supplementary Material
1. Experimental Details

tors, we use the discriminator in [4] as the 2D one, and upgrade it by replacing all 2D convolutions to 3D convolutions
as the 3D one. For training, λ1 , λ2 , λ3 and λ4 in the loss
function are set to 1.0, 10.0, 0.8 and 0.8, respectively.
More details are summarized in Table 1 and Table 2.

Architectural and training details. For depth and flowguided video generation, similar to Latent Diffusion [16],
we use the VQGAN encoder [4] to encode the video into the
latent space as 17×32×32×4 and then conduct latent diffusion to generate the video in the latent space. We build our
model based on the 2D UNet from “stable-diffusion-v1.4”.
We add the same numbers of 1D temporal convolution layers and 1D temporal attention layers, respectively after the
2D spatial convolution layers and 2D spatial attention layers. Most of the hyper-parameters, including channel number, convolution kernel size, attention head dim, etc., are
kept the same. To concatenate the depth, warped latent
video and occlusion mask with the noise as the input, we increase input channel of the first convolution layer from 4 to
10. As for f ps, it is encoded by two fully-connected layers
with an in-between ReLU activation layer. During initialization, we initialize the original 2D spatial modules with
the open-sourced weight and pretrain it on Laion-5B [18]
using the unpooled CLIP image embedding [14] for cross
attention. After that, the spatial modules are jointly trained
with the newly added 1D temporal modules, but the learning rate is reduced to be one tenth of the global learning
rate. To stabilize training, we initialize the temporal modules randomly but zero the last layers to make sure that they
have no impact at the beginning of training.
For depth and optical flow generation, we use exactly
the same UNet design as in the video generation stage, but
we halve the channel numbers of each layer and randomly
initialize all layers. For the input video of size 17 × 256 ×
256 × 3, we use MiDaS DPT-Large [15] and RAFT [22] to
estimate the video depth and optical flows, and then resize
them as 17 × 32 × 32 × 1 and 17 × 32 × 32 × 4 (including 2
channels for image-to-video flow and 2 channels for videoto-image flow), respectively. This means both the input and
output channels of this model are 5.
For video decoding, we use a similar strategy to upgrade
the 2D decoder to the 3D decoder. Since there are only convolution layers in the original decoder, we only add temporal convolution layers and do not add temporal attention
layers. In the alignment module, we use a convolution neural network with four 3 × 3 convolution layers and three
ReLU activation layers between them to predict the offset
and mask. Then, the deformable convolution with 3 × 3
kernel and 16 deformable groups is used for flow-guided
deformable alignment. In the refinement module, 30 ResBlocks [5] are used to refine the features. For discrimina-

Classifier-free guidance. For better sampling quality
in diffusion models, we use the classifier-free guidance
(CFG) [8] for depth and optical flow generation, as well as
depth and flow-based video generation. Taking video generation for example, we randomly drop the conditional clip
image feature input as ϵθ (xt , t, d, o, m, ∅) and use to adjust
the predictions at each step t in testing as
ϵeθ (xt , t, d, o, m, c) = ϵθ (xt , t, d, o, m, ∅)+

ω ϵθ (xt , t, d, o, m, c) − ϵθ (xt , t, d, o, m, ∅) ,

(1)

where the guidance scale ω is set as 7.5 in our case. Depth
and optical flow generation are trained and tested in a similar way.
Maximum flow estimation. To estimate the maximum
flow omax during inference, we first initialize omax as 10
and set it as an optimizable tensor. Then, we calculate
the warping error and use the AdamW [12] optimizer with
β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 to optimize omax for 500 iterations. The learning rate is initialized as 10 and scheduled
to halve for every 50 iterations. Since we estimate omax for
each video, the batch size is always 1.
Model testing and evaluation. In testing, we use deterministic sampling from Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) [20] to speed up the reverse denoising process.
For evaluation, we compare our model with other methods on text-to-video generation and image-to-video generation. For text-to-video generation, we report results in three
cases: zero-shot text-to-video generation on UCF-101 [21],
zero-shot text-to-video generation on MSR-VTT [27] and
open-domain text-to-video generation. For evaluation on
UCF-101, following [2, 9, 19], we compare the Inception
Score (IS) [17] by a C3D model [23] trained on UCF-101
and the Frechet Video Distance (FVD) [24]. For MSRVTT, following [1, 2, 9, 19, 26], we compare the Frechet Inception Distance (FID) [6] and the CLIP Similarity (CLIPSIM) [25], which is defined as the average cosine similarity between the CLIP text embedding of the text and the
CLIP image embeddings of all frames. For open-domain
text-to-video generation, we compare our method with the
only open-sourced text-to-video model VideoDiffusion [13]
1

