Supplementary Material for Defect Spectrum: A
Granular Look of Large-Scale Defect Datasets
with Rich Semantics
Shuai Yang1,2⋆ , Zhifei Chen1⋆ , Pengguang Chen3 , Xi Fang3 , Shu Liu3 , and
Yingcong Chen1,2,4
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou
2
HKUST(GZ) - SmartMore Joint Lab
3
SmartMore. Corp
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

In this supplementary, we extended our experiment to incorporate more annotation comparisons with existing datasets in Sec. 1. The detailed generation
settings and more quantitative analysis are discussed in Sec. 2. We also include
more visual cases in Sec. 3 to demonstrate the capacity of our framework to
maintain both fidelity and diversity.

1

Visual Comparison between Original and Defect
Spectrum Dataset

In this section, we first present a visual comparison between ours (the last row)
and the original datasets’ annotation. Figure 1, 2, 3 shows the comparison of
the MVTec dataset, we re-classify the defects based on their type and enabled
more semantic abundance. As for Figure 4 of the VISION dataset, we refined
the original annotation for more granularity. The original DAGM and Cotton
datasets contained no pixel-level annotation, thus we provide our annotation as
shown in Figure 5, 6. We also demonstrate the efficacy of our refined annotations for defect inspection by employing a segmentation model. As illustrated in
Figure 7, 8 and Figure 9, the segmentation model trained on our refined dataset
demonstrates enhanced precision and an improved capability to differentiate between various types of defects, compared to its performance when trained on the
original dataset.

2

Defect Generation

Implementation details In this section, we will first elaborate on the architecture of Defect-Gen. Then we will go over the dataset and training settings of our
model. Lastly, we quantitatively compared it with other methods to demonstrate
the superiority of our method.
⋆

These authors contributed equally to this work.

