Semi-supervised Segmentation of Histopathology
Images with Noise-Aware Topological Consistency
— Supplementary Material —
Meilong Xu1 , Xiaoling Hu2 , Saumya Gupta1 , Shahira Abousamra1 , and Chao
Chen1
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, MA, USA
meixu@cs.stonybrook.edu
1

2

In the supplementary material, we begin with notations for foreground and
background in Sec. 6, followed by a detailed introduction to persistent homology
in Sec. 7. Then, we describe the correspondence between persistent dots and the
likelihood map in Sec. 8. Next, we discuss the differentiability of the noise-aware
topological consistency loss in Sec. 9. In Sec. 10, we provide detailed descriptions
of the datasets, followed by implementation details in Sec. 11. We also provide
the reference of our baselines in Sec. 12. In Sec. 13, we describe the evaluation
metrics in detail. More qualitative results are given in Sec. 14. Finally, additional
ablation studies and results are provided in Sec. 15.

6

Notes on Foreground and Background

Here, we provide some notations about foreground and background in our paper.
Our algorithm uses black as the foreground and white as the background as can
be seen in Fig. 2- Fig. 3 of the main paper and Fig. 6 of the Supplementary. For
better visualization, however, we display the segmentation results and ground
truth with white as the foreground in Fig. 1 and Fig. 5 of the main paper and
Fig. 7 of the Supplementary.

7

Background: Persistent Homology

In algebraic topology [36], homology classes account for topological structures
in all dimensions. 0-, 1-, and 2-dimensional structures describe connected components, loops/holes, and cavities/voids, respectively. For binary images, the
number of d-dimensional topological structures is called the d-dimensional Betti
number, βd .3 Despite the well-understood topological space for a binary image,
the theory does not directly extend to real-world scenarios with continuous, noisy
data. For example, in image analysis, we need a principled tool to reason about
3

Technically, βd counts the dimension of the d-dimensional homology group. The
number of distinct homology classes/topological structures is exponential to βd .

