Exploring the Feature Extraction and Relation
Modeling For Light-Weight Transformer Tracking
Jikai Zheng†1,4 , Mingjiang Liang†2 , Shaoli Huang3 , and Jifeng Ning∗1,4
1

College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi, China
2
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3
Tencent AI-Lab, Guangdong, China
4
Shaanxi Engineering Research Center of Agricultural Information Intelligent
Perception and Analysis, Shaanxi, China
jikai_zheng@163.com, mingjiang.liang@student.uts.edu.au,
shaolihuang@tencent.com, jf_ning@sina.com

Appendix
A.1

More technical details

Pre-trained Backbone Network. We use ViT-Tiny [12], a light-weight visual
Transformer pre-trained model, as the backbone network of our tracker. ViTTiny is based on ViT-Base [7], changing the dim of the feature after passing
through the Patch Embedding layer from C1 =768 to C2 =192, reducing it to
1/4 of the original size. In this way, when X ∈ RB×C×H×W is input to Patch
′
′
′
′
′
′
Embedding, we will get X ∈ RB×C2 ×H ×W instead of X ∈ RB×C1 ×H ×W . This
approach undoubtedly speeds up the model, but along with it, the ability of
feature extraction also decreases. In order to solve this problem, ViT-Tiny relies
on the knowledge of MAE [8] and feature distillation [11, 18] to improve ViT’s
training method and obtain a light-weight visual model that is comparable to
the performance of large models.

Design Basis for Attention Blocks. In the experimental phase, we implemented five Attention Blocks, namely A1 through A5. The core of our design idea
is whether it has the ability to extract features or relation modeling. Hence, in
this study, we have developed three distinct types of Attention Blocks: A1, which
solely focuses on feature extraction; A2 and A3, which incorporate both feature
interaction and relation modeling; and A4 and A5, which exclusively emphasize
relation modeling. Among them, we have designed two forms for the relationship modeling part, namely one-way relationship modeling that only transfers
template information to search and two-way relationship modeling that transfers
information in both directions.
†
*

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

