Supplementary Material for “High-Quality Mesh
Blendshape Generation from Face Videos via
Neural Inverse Rendering”

A

Discussion of Viewpoint Numbers

Our technique gives users the flexibility to use different numbers of cameras to
achieve different levels of geometry quality. As shown in Fig. 1, we qualitatively
demonstrate the geometric reconstruction results under single-view and fourview inputs, where under four-view input, we achieve more accurate geometric
reconstruction of the cheek-puffing expression compared with the single-view
setting. Additionally, in Tab. 1, we conducted a quantitative evaluation of reconstruction accuracy on the Multiface and NeRSemble datasets. We found that
utilizing four-view inputs further reduces geometric errors compared to singleview inputs, indicating that four views provide a more accurate reconstruction
of facial shape. We choose a four-view setup following [4] and believe that our
method is also applicable to other sparse-view setups. Please also note that when
compared with existing SOTA techniques in Fig. 2, our method demonstrates
visually superior results in the single-view scenario, indicating that our method
also works well with single-view input.

B

Evaluation of the Neural Regressor

In our multi-phone captured data, we cannot precisely synchronize the recording
initiation time across devices, so each device records a frame at a slightly different
moment. As frames from distinct devices are not captured simultaneously, they
record varying shapes in motion, necessitating different motion parameters. The
temporal misalignment can be up to 1/60 second since the frame rate is 30 FPS.
Methods like dynamic time warping could be applied here to match the frames
from different views. However, even if it can always find the temporally closest
ones as matches, errors are still there as they are naturally recorded at different
times (shown by Fig. 3). The incorporation of the neural regressor allows us to
implicitly achieve synchronization across cameras under different views, ensuring temporal accuracy in tracking both expression coefficients and head pose.
Without the regressor, temporal nearest frames across devices are erroneously
assumed to depict an identical shape, resulting in diminished reconstruction accuracy. To assess the impact of the neural regressor, we simply “synchronize”
videos from different views by finding the temporally nearest frame, and use this
as a baseline to compare with our method. As depicted in Fig. 4, our method
achieves more accurate geometric details, particularly around the ears. Furthermore, we quantitatively evaluate the regressor on a subject with ground truth

