HybridBooth: Hybrid Prompt Inversion for
Efficient Subject-Driven Generation
** Supplementary Material **
Shanyan Guan1⋆ , Yanhao Ge1,3⋆ , Ying Tai2B , Jian Yang2
Wei Li1 , and Mingyu You3B
1

vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
3
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Shanghai Research Institute for
Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University
{guanshanyan, halege}@vivo.com yingtai@nju.edu.cn myyou@tongji.edu.cn
https://sites.google.com/view/hybridbooth
2

1

Using UNet or MLP structure for the Prompt
Regressor?

Recall that in Sec 4.2, we use the downsample and middle blocks of the UNet [5]
as the prompt regressor. Alternatively, previous direct-regression-based methods
adopt the multi-layer perception (MLP) structure. We compare the effect of
these two kinds of structures. Specifically, we use the MLP structure the same
as FastComposer [8].
Qualitative Results. The qualitative comparison results are shown in Fig. 1.
We take DreamBooth as the reference method for more clear comparison. In
the first line of Fig. 1, we visualized the learned subject word embedding ‘S*’.
We can observe that using UNet structure can better implant detailed subject
characteristics, e.g. lips, hairstyle, forehead. From the editing results shown in
the second line of Fig. 1, the UNet structure is better aligned with the input
image in terms of identity and also with the given guidance prompt. In short,
the UNet structure used in HybridBooth provides better subject and prompt
fidelity.
Quantitative Results. From the quantitative results reported in Tab. 1, we
can observe that using UNet structure as the prompt regressor consistently outperforms using MLP structure in both metrics related to subject-fidelity (CLIP-I,
DINO-I) and prompt-fidelity (CLIP-T).

2

Qualitatively analyzing HybridBooth

Limited by the space of the manuscript, we only qualitatively analyzed the contributions of the propose HybridBooth in Sec. 5.4, including multi-grained feature
merging (DINO and CLIP), mask regularization, number of word embedding.
⋆

Equal contributions. Ying Tai and Mingyu You are corresponding authors.

