Merging Models with Fisher-Weighted Averaging
Michael Matena
Colin Raffel
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{mmatena,craffel}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Averaging the parameters of models that have the same architecture and initialization can provide a means of combining their respective capabilities. In this paper,
we take the perspective that this “merging” operation can be seen as choosing parameters that approximately maximize the joint likelihood of the posteriors of the
models’ parameters. Computing a simple average of the models’ parameters therefore corresponds to making an isotropic Gaussian approximation to their posteriors.
We develop an alternative merging procedure based on the Laplace approximation
where we approximate each model’s posterior as a Gaussian distribution whose
precision matrix corresponds to its Fisher information. We first show that our
“Fisher merging” technique provides a performance boost in settings where simple
parameter averaging is currently used – specifically, robust fine-tuning and model
ensembling. Then, we compare merging to standard gradient-based transfer learning and demonstrate that merging enables a fundamentally different method for
transferring capabilities across models. Specifically, we show that Fisher merging
is competitive with gradient-based transfer learning approaches (while being significantly cheaper) in intermediate-task training and domain-adaptive pre-training.
We also show that our merging procedure makes it possible to combine models in
previously unexplored ways. We release our code to facilitate future research into
methods for merging models.1

1

Introduction

How should we transfer knowledge and capabilities across trained models? One popular approach
is transfer learning [44], which fine-tunes a pre-trained model on a target task through additional
gradient-based training. The preparatory step of pre-training the model on a data-rich task ideally
instills useful “knowledge” into the network’s parameters, which allows the model to learn more
rapidly and effectively when fine-tuned on a downstream task of interest. Transfer learning has
therefore become a particularly important and omnipresent tool across many fields, including natural
language processing [57, 13, 9, 52, 53, 46] and computer vision [43, 24, 68]. Recently, it has been
shown that training on an “intermediate” task between pre-training and fine-tuning can further boost
performance through additional transfer of capabilities from the intermediate task [47, 60, 51, 48].
Alternatively, continued self-supervised training on unlabeled domain-specialized data can serve as a
form of domain adaptation [19].
All of the aforementioned transfer learning methods transfer knowledge by using a trained network
to initialize another network followed by iterative gradient descent. While demonstrably powerful,
several drawbacks arise from this: First, improvements to ancestor models cannot be passed down to
descendants; instead, we must restart the whole process from the improved ancestor model, throwing
away our previous work. For example, if we fine-tune a pre-trained model on a downstream task,
1

https://github.com/mmatena/model_merging

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

