1

LIN, CHAN: SPDCN FOR CAC

Scale-Prior Deformable Convolution for
Exemplar-Guided Class-Agnostic Counting
Wei Lin1

1

Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR

2

SenseTime Group Limited
Beijing, P.R. China

3

The University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia

wlin38-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Kunlin Yang2
yangkunlin@sensetime.com
3

Xinzhu Ma

xinzhu.ma@sydney.edu.au
4

Junyu Gao

gjy3035@gmail.com
5

Lingbo Liu

liulingbo918@gmail.com

Shinan Liu2
liushinan@sensetime.com

Jun Hou2

4

School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics
and Electronics
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an, P.R. China
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hunghom, Hong Kong SAR

houjun@sensetime.com

Shuai Yi2
yishuai@sensetime.com

Antoni B. Chan1
abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Class-agnostic counting has recently emerged as a more practical counting task,
which aims to predict the number and distribution of any exemplar objects, instead of
counting specific categories like pedestrians or cars. However, recent methods are developed by designing suitable similarity matching rules between exemplars and query
images, but ignoring the robustness of extracted features. To address this issue, we propose a scale-prior deformable convolution by integrating exemplars’ information, e.g.,
scale, into the counting network backbone. As a result, the proposed counting network
can extract semantic features of objects similar to the given exemplars and effectively
filter irrelevant backgrounds. Besides, we find that traditional L2 and generalized loss
are not suitable for class-agnostic counting due to the variety of object scales in different
samples. Here we propose a scale-sensitive generalized loss to tackle this problem. It
can adjust the cost function formulation according to the given exemplars, making the
difference between prediction and ground truth more prominent. Extensive experiments
show that our model obtains remarkable improvement and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a public class-agnostic counting benchmark. the source code is available at
https://github.com/Elin24/SPDCN-CAC.
© 2022. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.

