Supplementary Material for
To Supervise or Not to Supervise: Understanding
and Addressing the Key Challenges of Point
Cloud Transfer Learning
Souhail Hadgi1 , Lei Li2 , and Maks Ovsjanikov1
1

LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
Technical University of Munich

2

This supplementary document provides additional details and results about
the frameworks employed in our work. Specifically, we first describe the architectures used in our experiments in Sec. A. Then we detail in Sec. B other pretraining approaches evaluated in our study with their respective configurations.
In Sec. C, we describe our transfer learning protocols and the corresponding
optimization parameters. In Sec. D, we extend the analysis of the discriminative ability of early layers and gradient norm to other configurations. Finally, in
Sec. E we provide additional results on our geometric regularization approach.

A

Architectures

The architectures used in our experiments were selected to be as similar as
possible to original implementations. Some minor changes were made in order
to properly implement pre-training strategies and to keep a consistent encoder
architecture across them. These modifications were not intended to tailor the
architectures to get the best performance, but just to keep consistency.
Unless specified otherwise, encoders share a feature embedding dimension
of 1024 which is projected to a 128 per-point feature dimension for point-level
contrastive-learning and 256 feature dimension for shape-level contrastive learning (see Sec. B).
DGCNN: For both pre-training and fine-tuning, we employed the six-layer
deep part-segmentation architecture as proposed in the original DGCNN work
[11].
PointNet: Modifications were applied to the PointNet architecture to achieve
a uniform encoder suitable for both classification and segmentation tasks, resulting in slight performance differences from the original implementation.
PointMLP: We used the standard (non-elite) version of the original PointMLP
[7] implementation of the encoder. Although no benchmark or implementation
was initially provided for the semantic segmentation task, we add a simple decoder using the PointNet feature propagation module implemented in PointNet++ [9] to evaluate PointMLP on the semantic segmentation downstream
task, enable point-level contrastive learning and apply layer-wise geometric regularization.

