1

1

Supplementary A

Dataset Setup For ImageNet [?], each image data is resized to 256 x 256
resolution. We further utilize mini-ImageNet for steganalysis experiments. For
GTZAN music genre dataset [?], each audio data is cropped to a length of
100,000 samples with a 22,050 sample rate. For the scikit-video dataset, each
video data is resized to 128 × 128 resolution and 16 frames are extracted. From
the Stanford 3D Scanning Repository, we select two samples, the Asian Dragon
and the Armadillo. VoxCeleb2 [?] is a large scale audio-visual dataset, so that it is
widely used for a number of various applications such as visual speech synthesis,
cross-modal transfer task. For VoxCeleb2 dataset, we sample 100 pairs from test
set and each video data and audio data undergo same preprocessing like GTZAN
music genre dataset and scikit-video dataset.
Implementation Details For INR, we use SIREN [?] as the base structure.
In this paper, we refer to the SIREN structure for cover INRs. For single-data
steganography, the neural networks are padded with a ratio of 1.0. For steganalysis
experiments using images, we use 5 hidden layers with a size of 128. The Adam
optimizer with learning rate 1e-4 is used for all modalities.
Distortion evaluation metric To evaluate the distortion between cover
and reconstructed cover data, and secret and revealed secret data, we visualize
3D shapes and employ several evaluation metrics for image, audio, and video.
For image data, we employ Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) [?], Structural
Similarity Index (SSIM), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE). For video data, in addition to PSNR and SSIM we evaluate
Average Pixel Discrepancy (APD) and Perceptual Similarity (LPIPS) [?]. For
audio data, we employ MAE and Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). All data are
represented within the range of 0 to 255.

2

Supplementary B

Ablation study is performed to figure out the effectiveness of the padding rate
in single-data steganography. In this experiment, we set the size of hidden layer
at 128, 128, 192, and 192 for image, audio, video, and 3d shapes, respectively.
The INR architecture for secret data is fixed and that of stego INR depends on
the cover data type and padding rate. Figure 1 shows the comparison between
cover data and stego data which is measured by various evaluation metrics. As
shown in Figure 1, as the padding rate is bigger, which means that the space to
be fitted on cover data is larger, the network overfits well on cover data, resulting
in stego data with high similarities with the cover data. Interestingly, it can be
seen that only adding 50% of the network is enough to get high PSNR, which
means our method is very efficient in making stego INR. This may be due to
the good weight initialization from secret data. Moreover, if the secret and cover
data have the same modality, fitting is well performed.

