Supplementary Material for Zero-Shot
Adaptation for Approximate Posterior Sampling
of Diffusion Models in Inverse Problems
Yaşar Utku Alçalar

and Mehmet Akçakaya

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
{alcal029,akcakaya}@umn.edu

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Irregular Noise Schedules

Sampling process for diffusion models can be accelerated via skipping some steps
in the diffusion process [6, 7, 11]. A straightforward approach is to use uniformly
spaced jumps across the noise schedule (see Fig. 1a) where the sampling path
is uniformly spaced out by the selected number of steps in a regular manner.
A schedule we commonly use in this study is a “15, 10, 5” schedule, which is
pictorially depicted in Fig. 1b. This amounts to partitioning the total number
of steps used in training into 3 parts and taking uniformly spaced 5, 10, and 15
samples from the respective segments, leading to increased sampling frequency
at the lower noise levels. Although the samples are taken uniformly inside a given
segment, each segment has different number of steps, making the whole schedule
irregular (see Fig. 1b). We note that this irregular noise schedule is based on the
ones proposed in [6], and the number of segments and the number of steps in each
segment are chosen for the inverse problem setup based on computation time
constraints while ensuring generalizability. We also note that a superior schedule
may exist for a specific inverse problem, and optimization of these irregular noise
schedules is an open problem to the best of our knowledge.
1.2

Model Details

Pre-trained models for FFHQ and ImageNet were taken from [1] and [6], respectively. Both score models were used without any retraining. For our approximation for the Hessian of the log prior, we utilized Daubechies 4 (db4) wavelet as
the orthogonal wavelet transform. For our database evaluation, we employed 30
timesteps with “15, 10, 5” schedule for 10 epochs. Furthermore, for simplicity, we
opted to initialize the learnable {ζt } and {Dt } values uniformly across steps and
diagonals, respectively. For {ζt } initialization in Gaussian and motion blur, 0.2
was chosen. For random inpainting and super-resolution, 0.1 was used. For all
inverse problem tasks, diagonals of {Dt } were initialized to 0.2. Adam optimizer
with default settings was used.

