Self-Supervised Audio-Visual
Soundscape Stylization
Tingle Li1 , Renhao Wang1 , Po-Yao Huang2 ,
Andrew Owens3 , and Gopala Anumanchipalli1
1

A.1

University of California, Berkeley 2 FAIR, Meta 3 University of Michigan
https://tinglok.netlify.app/files/avsoundscape

Results Video

Our results video on the project webpage shows our model’s ability to restyle
speech to match a variety of input scenes. Additionally, we show:
– Despite being trained only on egocentric walking videos, our model can
successfully be applied to a variety of out-of-domain speech clips, such as
LRS [17], AVSpeech [5], VGG-Sound [3], Into the Wild [10], and the classic
film Roman Holiday.
– Our model can generalize to non-speech sounds taken from BBC Sound Effect
[4], such as the cry of a baby, a barking dog, train chimes, footsteps, and
gunshots.
– We present that the behavior of our model varies with the selected conditional example.
– We find qualitatively that our model can add or remove reverb, transform
close-talking and far-field speech, reduce noise, incorporate ambient sounds,
and enhance the audio quality of old movies.

A.2

Dataset Collection

We introduce the CityWalk dataset, a collection of egocentric videos for audiovisual soundscape stylization. This dataset features a rich diversity of real-world
sound textures, which comprises 3,447 indoor (28%) and outdoor (72%) videos,
with a total length of 2,395 hours. The videos were collected from YouTube,
using search queries such as “City Walk+POV” and “City Walk+Binaural.” Detailed duration statistics are depicted in Figure 1a. As illustrated in Figure 2,
CityWalk contains a wide spectrum of audio recordings, including human speech
and ambient sound, captured in varied environments such as urban streets, train
stations, buses, beaches, shopping malls, mountains, markets, and boats, spanning diverse weather conditions. We also provide top-14 categorical distributions
in Figure 1b, which are acquired from the CLIP [15] predictions.
For data filtering and training in our proposed task, we first split each video
into 10-second clips and run a pre-trained YAMNet model [14] to tag each soundtrack. This step ensures the presence of the targeted audio types within these

