Classification Matters: Improving VAD with
Class-Specific Attention
—Supplementary Material—
∗

Jinsung Lee1 , Taeoh Kim2 , Inwoong Lee2 , Minho Shim2 ,
Dongyoon Wee2 , Minsu Cho1 , and Suha Kwak1
1

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
2
NAVER Cloud, South Korea
https://jinsingsangsung.github.io/ClassificationMatters/

We present omitted experiments and details in this supplementary material
as below:
– Sec. A: Analyzing Previous Models’ Attention Weight Contributions to
Classification Logits
– Sec. B: Implementation for Single-label Datasets
– Sec. C: Detailed Logic of the 3D Deformable Encoder
– Sec. D: Detailed Logic of Localizing Decoder Layer (LDL)
– Sec. E: Detailed Logic of Classifying Decoder Layer (CDL)
– Sec. F: Details of the Hungarian Matching Process
– Sec. G: Comparison with Latest VAD Models
– Sec. H: Experimental Setup
– Sec. I: Additional Ablation Experiments
– Sec. J: Additional Qualitative Results
– Sec. K: Class-wise mAP Comparison

A

Analyzing Previous Models’ Attention Weight
Contributions to Classification Logits

To further investigate the difference between prior transformer-based methods [2,
16] and our model, we analyze how attention weights of the previous models affect
the final classification logits. In summary, we find that prior methods allow their
each class logit to have comparably subtle differences within different classes with
respect to the acquired attention weights, and thus, enforce their transformer
outputs to include more commonly shared semantics across distinct classes.
In Fig. A1, we present how previous methods construct their classification
features. The notations defined in Sec. 4 of the main paper are adaptively reused
for a clearer comparison to our method: we denote the actor feature as f ∈ RNa ×D
and the context feature as V ∈ RT HW ×D . TubeR [16] constructs its classification
feature with a cross-attention layer whose input query is f and input key/value
∗

Work done while doing an internship at NAVER Cloud.

