POA: Pre-training Once for Models
of All Sizes
Yingying Zhang(B) , Xin Guo, Jiangwei Lao, Lei Yu, Lixiang Ru, Jian Wang,
Guo Ye, Huimei He, Jingdong Chen, and Ming Yang
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
qichu.zyy@antgroup.com

Abstract. Large-scale self-supervised pre-training has paved the way
for one foundation model to handle many diﬀerent vision tasks. Most
pre-training methodologies train a single model of a certain size at one
time. Nevertheless, various computation or storage constraints in realworld scenarios require substantial eﬀorts to develop a series of models
with diﬀerent sizes to deploy. Thus, in this study, we propose a novel tribranch self-supervised training framework, termed as POA (Pre-training
Once for All), to tackle this aforementioned issue. Our approach introduces an innovative elastic student branch into a modern self-distillation
paradigm. At each pre-training step, we randomly sample a sub-network
from the original student to form the elastic student and train all
branches in a self-distilling fashion. Once pre-trained, POA allows the
extraction of pre-trained models of diverse sizes for downstream tasks.
Remarkably, the elastic student facilitates the simultaneous pre-training
of multiple models with diﬀerent sizes, which also acts as an additional
ensemble of models of various sizes to enhance representation learning. Extensive experiments, including k-nearest neighbors, linear probing
evaluation and assessments on multiple downstream tasks demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness and advantages of our POA. It achieves state-of-theart performance using ViT, Swin Transformer and ResNet backbones,
producing around a hundred models with diﬀerent sizes through a single pre-training session. The code is available at: https://github.com/
Qichuzyy/POA.
Keywords: Self-supervised Learning · Pre-training Once for All

1

Introduction

Learning generalizable visual representations in a large model by self-supervised
learning has delivered superior performance across a wide range of visual tasks
[10,13,20,46,49,53] in recent years. Nevertheless, when deployed to real-world
applications, a large model has to be adapted to diverse resource limitations in
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_8.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 131–148, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_8

