Diﬀusion Soup: Model Merging for Text-to-Image Diﬀusion Models

A

19

Diﬀusion Soup: Model Merging for Text-to-Image
Diﬀusion Models (Supplementary Material)

Fig. 7: (Left) Diﬀusion Soup Outperforms All Models at All Checkpoints.
We show that optimizing over the number of SGD steps at LR = 1e-6 demonstrates that
at all checkpoints, the souping model outperforms all individual models, as well as the
combined models. The shallow dropoﬀ in performance of the souped model relative to
the steep dropoﬀ of individual models at larger steps is indicative of strong robustness
properties of Diﬀusion Soup. (Right) Souping Outperforms the Paragon even
when Optimizing the Latter for LR and Step Size Jointly. We show that
optimizing over Learning Rates and Step size jointly yields a better Combined Model
Paragon (LR = 5e-7, Num Steps = 80k) than the original used in the main text (LR
= 1e-6, Num Steps = 10k). However, Diﬀusion Soup still outperforms (TIFA 85.9 !
86.2) this new Combined Model Paragon checkpoint.

The supplementary material is organized as follows. Appendix B provides
further details about hyperparameters used to conduct experiments in the paper, alongside ablations that justify our choice of hyperparameters. Appendix
C provides a comparison of Diﬀusion Soup to a computationally expensive Ensemble model. Appendix F provides additional examples of style mixing using
compositions of famous artistic styles. Appendix G provides additional examples
of greedy souping. Finally, Appendix J gives proofs for the main propositions of
the paper.

B

Choices of Hyperparameters and Ablations

The primary focus of our work is to showcase the benefits of Diﬀusion Soup
atop a pre-existing collection of finetuned checkpoints. Specifically, we aim to
demonstrate that regardless of the ingredients provided, souping improves performance over any individual model, or the traditional approach of aggregating
datasets to build one model (the Combined Paragon model). In this section,
we show that regardless of the finetuned checkpoints, souping outperforms its

