Attention Beats Linear for Fast Implicit Neural Representation Generation

1

Supplementary Material
A

The Workflow of the Hyper-network

We design a Transformer-like hyper-network for predicting R-Tokens, which
consists of a data instance encoder and a neural representation decoder. The encoder processes data information and generates feature tokens, while the decoder
converts the processed feature tokens into R-Tokens. The encoder directly utilizes a standard Transformer encoder, while the decoder differs from a standard
Transformer decoder in omitting the masked self-attention layer. We illustrate
the computation process in Fig. 9.
Different from Chen et al . [7] that uses only one Transformer encoder to
generate INRs, our model can independently decide the depth of the encoder and
the decoder according to data size and the design size of R-Tokens, respectively.
Furthermore, in the long term, the intermediate variables of the encoder’s output
can be considered structured data features so that we can integrate them into
other networks as input for downstream tasks.
Hyper-parameters. The default configuration of hyper-parameters in the
experiments includes a 6-head attention mechanism, where each head possesses a
feature dimension of 64. Additionally, the hidden dimension of each feed-forward
layer is set to 3072. The depth of both the encoder and decoder is by default set
to 6 for all experiments.
A.1

Discussion of the Hyper-network Architecture

We compare the speed of convergence between our designed Transformerlike hyper-network architecture and the encoder-only hyper-network architecture
used by Chen et al . [7] on the CelebA dataset.
Analysis of Runtime Memory Efficiency. Denoting the width of the
vector of the tokenized data by Ld and the width of the target representation
feature vector by Lr , we ascertain that the size of the attention map of each layer
of the encoder-only hyper-network is (Ld + Lr ) × (Ld + Lr ). In contrast, within
a transformer-like hyper-network, the attention map with the size of Ld × Lr ,
Ld ×Ld and Lr ×Lr are designed for cross-attention, encoder’s self-attention, and
encoder’s self-attention, respectively. Consequently, the transformer-like hypernetwork’s attention map is comparatively smaller, indicating running time memory efficiency, as shown in Tab. 3. Note that the parameter sizes of “Transformer6+6" and “EncoderOnly12" are similar.
Comparison Results of Runtime Efficiency. Except for the network
depth, all the other hyper-parameters across the two compared architectures remain consistent. Specifically, the experiment setting of the corresponding architecture is presented in Tab. 3. We train these models for 100k steps. The experiment shows that the PSNR value ascends faster with a Transformer-like hypernetwork, implying our design offers better performance, as shown in Fig. 10.

