Supplementary Material of Bidirectional
Uncertainty-Based Active Learning for Open Set
Annotation
Chen-Chen Zong1 , Ye-Wen Wang1 , Kun-Peng Ning2 , Hai-Bo Ye1 , and
Sheng-Jun Huang1 †
1

1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Peking University

Additional Details for Methodology

Similar to Figure 5 in the main paper, we present the t-SNE visualization results for the other four known categories in Figure 1 to further corroborate the
effectiveness of RLNL. We can notice that the unknown class examples are in a
region far from each category, and empirically neural networks are prone to give
overconfident outputs for data in that region.

2

Additional Details for Experiments

Figure 2 presents the variation curves for the classification accuracy of B-Margin
and comparison methods on CIFAR-10 (first column), CIFAR-100 (second column), and Tiny-Imagenet (third column) under an openness ratio of 0.2 and
0.8, respectively. In Figure 3, we just change Margin and B-Margin to LC and
B-LC respectively, and show complete variation curves with openness ratios of
0.2 (first row), 0.4 (second row), 0.6 (third row), and 0.8 (fourth row). Similarly,
we also show the corresponding results for Entropy and B-Entropy in Figure 4.
From these experimental results, we can observe that, in the open-set scenarios,
measuring sample uncertainty based on margin metric tends to perform better
compared to the least-confident metric and entropy metric. Compared to the
comparing methods, B-LC and B-Entropy still achieve the best results in most
cases. The conclusions that can be drawn are consistent with our main paper.
Figure 5 shows the average recognition rate for known class examples across
queries and openness ratios on CIFAR-10 (first column), CIFAR-100 (second
column), and Tiny-Imagenet (third column). Here, we first change Margin and
B-Margin to LC and B-LC and show the results in the first row. Then, we change
to Entropy and B-Entropy and show the corresponding results in the second row.
Here, the results are similar to the B-Margin in our main paper. Therefore, the
conclusions reached are also consistent.

† Corresponding Author: huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn

