Joint-task Self-supervised Learning
for Temporal Correspondence
Xueting Li1⇤, Sifei Liu2⇤, Shalini De Mello2 , Xiaolong Wang3 , Jan Kautz2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
University of California, Merced, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
This paper proposes to learn reliable dense correspondence from videos in a
self-supervised manner. Our learning process integrates two highly related tasks:
tracking large image regions and establishing fine-grained pixel-level associations between consecutive video frames. We exploit the synergy between both
tasks through a shared inter-frame affinity matrix, which simultaneously models transitions between video frames at both the region- and pixel-levels. While
region-level localization helps reduce ambiguities in fine-grained matching by
narrowing down search regions; fine-grained matching provides bottom-up features
to facilitate region-level localization. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
self-supervised methods on a variety of visual correspondence tasks, including
video-object and part-segmentation propagation, keypoint tracking, and object
tracking. Our self-supervised method even surpasses the fully-supervised affinity
feature representation obtained from a ResNet-18 pre-trained on the ImageNet.
The project website can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/uvc2019/.

1

Introduction

Learning representations for visual correspondence is a fundamental problem that is closely related
to a variety of vision tasks: correspondences between multi-view images relate 2D and 3D representations, and those between frames link static images to dynamic scenes. To learn correspondences
across frames in a video, numerous methods have been developed from two perspectives: (a) learning
region/object-level correspondences, via object tracking [2, 42, 44, 37, 49] or (b) learning pixel-level
correspondences between multi-view images or frames, e.g., via stereo matching [35] or optical flow
estimation [29, 41, 16, 31].
However, most methods address one or the other problem and significantly less effort has been
made to solve both of them together. The main reason is that methods designed to address either of
them optimize different goals. Object tracking focuses on learning object representations that are
invariant to viewpoint and deformation changes, while learning pixel-level correspondence focuses on
modeling detailed changes within an object over time. Subsequently, the existing supervised methods
for these two problems often use different annotations. For example, bounding boxes are annotated in
real videos for object tracking [53]; and pixel-wise associations are generated from synthesized data
for optical flow estimation [4, 10]. Datasets with annotations for both tasks are scarcely available and
supervision, here, is a further bottleneck preventing us from connecting the two tasks.
In this paper, we demonstrate that these two tasks inherently require the same operation of learning
an inter-frame transformation that associates the contents of two images. We show that the two
tasks benefit greatly by modeling them jointly via a single transformation operation which can
simultaneously match regions and pixels. To overcome the lack of data with annotations for both
tasks we exploit self-supervision via the signals of (a) Temporal Coherency, which states that objects
or scenes move smoothly and gradually over time; (b) Cycle Consistency, correct correspondences
⇤

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

