The Gaussian Discriminant Variational Autoencoder

1

The Gaussian Discriminant Variational
Autoencoder (GdVAE): A Self-Explainable Model
with Counterfactual Explanations
Supplementary Material
Table of Contents
The Supplement is structured as follows:
– Limitations and societal impacts are discussed in Appendix A.
– In Appendix B, you can find the ELBO derivation (Eqs. (7) and (8)), as well
as proofs for the EM-based approach (Algorithm 1) and the optimality of
linear explainer functions (Eq. (10)).
– Detailed information about the models used, the training process, and experimental specifics, such as compute resources, hyperparameters, dataset,
and asset details, can be found in Appendix C.
– Appendix D delves into the metrics employed for predictive performance
analysis and CF quality assessment.
– Additional results related to hyperparameter tuning, trade-off between consistency and realism (Figs. 9 and 10) as well as supplementary qualitative
results are presented in Appendix E.

A

Limitations and Societal Impacts

A.1

Limitations

We acknowledge several limitations concerning the GdVAE and the evaluation
methodology:
– Our datasets for quantitative evaluation were selected to balance computational efficiency, alignment with previous studies, and adherence to the Reproducibility Checklist, emphasizing the provision of central tendency and
variation (e.g., mean, standard deviation). Unlike prior CF research, our
focus on analyzing both central tendency and variability has led to experiments that are four times more costly (see Appendix C.4). By doing so,
we acknowledge the limitations imposed by our dataset selection criteria,
yet we argue that these limitations are counterbalanced by the gains in the
reproducibility of our experimental results.
– Our method, unlike [30] and [14], enables simultaneous manipulation of all
class-related attributes but lacks fine-grained control over individual image attributes. Incorporating multiple prototypes, as in [13], could enhance
GdVAE’s predictive performance and capability to manipulate individual
image attributes.

