Supplementary:
Efficient Unsupervised Visual Representation
Learning with Explicit Cluster Balancing
Ioannis Maniadis Metaxas1

⋆

, Georgios Tzimiropoulos1 , and Ioannis Patras1

Queen Mary University of London
{i.maniadismetaxas,g.tzimiropoulos,i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

The structure of the supplementary is as follows: In Sec. 1, we study the
effectiveness of ExCB’s cluster balancing module, by examining the relative cluster
sizes after training and comparing it with a similar work, DINO [1]. In Sec. 2
the balancing operator B is analyzed in depth, including the intuition behind
our design choices and ablations regarding their effectiveness. Subsequently,
in Sec. 3, we present a visualization of ExCB’s learned feature representations,
demonstrating that classes are well separated despite the training process being
unsupervised. Finally, to facilitate understanding of ExCB, we provide pseudocode for a training step in Pytorch style in Sec. 4.

1

Cluster Balancing Effectiveness

In this section, we expand on the effectiveness of ExCB’s cluster balancing method.
We present in Fig. 1 the distribution of samples over the clusters for ExCB and
contrast it with DINO [1], a landmark work in the area of clustering-based selfsupervised frameworks. Both ExCB and DINO pretrain with K = 65, 536 clusters,
which facilitates a fair comparison. Differently from the results presented in the
main paper’s Sec. 4, where cluster measurements were made during training (i.e.
over an epoch with the balancing module active), the measurements presented
in Fig. 1 were made via simple inference, using each model’s final weights. The
assignments are calculated on ImageNet’s train set. For DINO we use the publicly
available weights provided for a ViT-S/16 backbone trained for 800 epochs with
multi-crop.
As seen in Fig. 1, for ExCB only 1.6% of clusters are empty, contrasted with
74.7% for DINO. Additionally, the samples among non-empty clusters are much
more evenly distributed, as seen by contrasting Figs. 1a and 1b. These findings
complement the ones presented in the main paper’s Sec. 4, and reinforce our
claims regarding the effectiveness of ExCB’s cluster balancing approach, which
we consider critical for the state-of-the-art performance and remarkable training
efficiency of ExCB. Finally, we believe these findings highlight the effectiveness
of our choice to balance clusters based on explicitly measuring their relative
size, as opposed to relying on proxy metrics, such as, in the case of DINO, the
"centerness" of sample-cluster similarities.
⋆

Corresponding author.

