Supplementary Material:
Learning Dual-Level Deformable Implicit
Representation for Real-World Scale Arbitrary
Super-Resolution
Zhiheng Li1 , Muheng Li1 , Jixuan Fan2 , Lei Chen1⋆ , Yansong Tang2 ,
Jiwen Lu1 , and Jie Zhou1
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
{lizhihan21, li-mh20, fjx23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
leichenthu@tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

2

A

Further Details about RealArbiSR Dataset

Camera Calibration and Camera Setting. We use two checkerboards for
the calibration of the focal lengths in RealArbiSR dataset. The first checkerboard
is designed for the scale factors of ×1.5, ×2.0, ×2.5, ×3.0, ×3.5, and ×4.0. In
this case, the checkerboard is annotated with seven concentric rectangles, which
are labeled by ‘GT’, ‘×1.5’, ‘×2.0’, ‘×2.5’, ‘×3.0’, ‘×3.5’, and ‘×4.0’ at the
top-right corners of the corresponding rectangles, as illustrated in Figure S1(a).
The second checkerboard is designed for the rest scale factors, annotated with
six rectangles with the labels of ‘GT’, ‘×1.7’, ‘×2.3’, ‘×2.7’, ‘×3.3’, and ‘×3.7’,
demonstrated in Figure S1(b). The camera is set to aperture priority mode.
The focus, exposure, white balance, and ISO are set to automatic. We prefer
to capture images in bright light conditions, because captured images tend to
be noisy in the dark environment. We make sure there is no inappropriate blur
due to depth-of-field by manual check. While collecting images, we gradually
zoom out the camera to collect all LR-HR image pairs. For each scene, we take
the images captured at the longest focal length as the ground truths, and the
low-resolution versions are cropped from the red-dotted regions at shorter focal
lengths, as shown in Figure S2.
Image Alignment. We first use the image registration algorithm with luminance adjustment [1] to coarsely align the low-resolution images with their highresolution ground truths, and then crop the corresponding central regions of
all images. In this way, the aberration effect can be minimized in the LR-HR
image pairs. Next, we finer align the cropped LR-HR image pairs by adopting
the image registration algorithm with luminance adjustment again. The borders
of the aligned images are shaved to remove the distorted regions caused by the
registration algorithm. We set 5 iterations for the optimization process of both
⋆

indicates the corresponding author.

