SceneTeller: Language-to-3D Scene Generation
– Supplementary Material –
Başak Melis Öcal1⋆ , Maxim Tatarchenko2 , Sezer Karaoğlu1 , and Theo Gevers1
1

UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam
2
Bosch Center for AI, Robert Bosch GmbH

In this supplementary material, we start by presenting details related to
the implementation (Sec. 1) and evaluation metrics (Sec. 2). Subsequently, the
details of the user study are provided in (Sec. 3). Lastly, additional visual
results of our method and further visual comparisons with text-to-3D scene
generation baselines are provided in (Sec. 4). Our project page is available at
https://sceneteller.github.io/.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Language-driven 3D Layout Generation

In this section, we provide details of the prompt construction process. Samples
of individual prompt components are provided in Tab. 1.
Task specifications. Our task descriptions are adapted from [5] for the conditional 3D layout generation task. Each description starts by the verbal definition
of the task, establishes a standard for the 3D layout format in CSS and then provides unit information for attributes. Constraints regarding undesired prediction
behaviors (e.g., predicting overlapping boxes or placing objects out of bounds)
are appended at the end of the task descriptions. As the common length unit of
CSS is pixels (px), we also employ pixels as the unit similar to [5]. However, we
actually interpret these values in meters.
Condition Format. The query conditions and the conditions of the supporting exemplars share the same format. Each starts by the room type and room
dimensions, and then followed by the textual description Y.
Our framework performs conditional generation based on the textual descriptions instead of pure generation, aiming to provide more control to the end users
in designing their personalized rooms. By supporting textual descriptions with
explicit furniture positions and orientations, our framework empowers users to be
highly specific in their furniture placement preferences. If a different generation
behavior is desired from our layout generation module, conditions of in-context
exemplars can be adjusted accordingly.
Layout Format. Each bounding box within a 3D layout is encoded according
to the CSS style. Bounding box dimensions, center coordinates and orientation
angle are mapped to attributes length, width, height, left, top, depth, orientation,
while category name serves as the selector.
⋆

Correspondence to <b.m.ocal@uva.nl>

