Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Machines

Vinod Nair
vnair@cs.toronto.edu
Geoffrey E. Hinton
hinton@cs.toronto.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 2G4, Canada

Abstract
Restricted Boltzmann machines were developed using binary stochastic hidden units.
These can be generalized by replacing each
binary unit by an infinite number of copies
that all have the same weights but have progressively more negative biases. The learning
and inference rules for these “Stepped Sigmoid Units” are unchanged. They can be approximated efficiently by noisy, rectified linear units. Compared with binary units, these
units learn features that are better for object
recognition on the NORB dataset and face
verification on the Labeled Faces in the Wild
dataset. Unlike binary units, rectified linear
units preserve information about relative intensities as information travels through multiple layers of feature detectors.

1. Introduction
Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) have been
used as generative models of many different types
of data including labeled or unlabeled images
(Hinton et al., 2006), sequences of mel-cepstral coefficients that represent speech (Mohamed & Hinton,
2010), bags of words that represent documents
(Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009), and user ratings of
movies (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007). In their conditional form they can be used to model highdimensional temporal sequences such as video or motion capture data (Taylor et al., 2006). Their most important use is as learning modules that are composed
to form deep belief nets (Hinton et al., 2006).
Appearing in Proceedings of the 27 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Haifa, Israel, 2010. Copyright
2010 by the author(s)/owner(s).

1.1. Learning a Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Images composed of binary pixels can be modeled by
an RBM that uses a layer of binary hidden units (feature detectors) to model the higher-order correlations
between pixels. If there are no direct interactions between the hidden units and no direct interactions between the visible units that represent the pixels, there
is a simple and efficient method called “Contrastive
Divergence” to learn a good set of feature detectors
from a set of training images (Hinton, 2002). We start
with small, random weights on the symmetric connections between each pixel i and each feature detector j.
Then we repeatedly update each weight, wij , using the
difference between two measured, pairwise correlations
∆wij = ǫ(<vi hj >data − <vi hj >recon )

(1)

where ǫ is a learning rate, <vi hj >data is the frequency
with which visible unit i and hidden unit j are on together when the feature detectors are being driven by
images from the training set and < vi hj >recon is the
corresponding frequency when the hidden units are being driven by reconstructed images. A similar learning
rule can be used for the biases.
Given a training image, we set the binary state, hj , of
each feature detector to be 1 with probability
p(hj = 1) =

1
P
1 + exp(−bj − i∈vis vi wij )

(2)

where bj is the bias of j and vi is the binary state
of pixel i. Once binary states have been chosen for
the hidden units we produce a “reconstruction” of the
training image by setting the state of each pixel to be
1 with probability
p(vi = 1) =

1
P
1 + exp(−bi − j∈hid hj wij )

(3)

The learned weights and biases implicitly define a
probability distribution over all possible binary images
via the energy, E(v, h), of a joint configuration of the

