ATOM : L OW-B IT Q UANTIZATION FOR E FFICIENT AND ACCURATE LLM
S ERVING
Yilong Zhao 1 2 * Chien-Yu Lin 2 Kan Zhu 2 Zihao Ye 2 Lequn Chen 2 Size Zheng 2 3 *
Luis Ceze 2 4 Arvind Krishnamurthy 2 Tianqi Chen 4 5 Baris Kasikci 2

A BSTRACT
The growing demand for Large Language Models (LLMs) in applications such as content generation, intelligent
chatbots, and sentiment analysis poses considerable challenges for LLM service providers. To efficiently use
GPU resources and boost throughput, batching multiple requests has emerged as a popular paradigm; to further
speed up batching, LLM quantization techniques reduce memory consumption and increase computing capacity.
However, prevalent quantization schemes (e.g., 8-bit weight-activation quantization) cannot fully leverage the
capabilities of modern GPUs, such as 4-bit integer operators, resulting in sub-optimal performance.
To maximize LLMs’ serving throughput, we introduce Atom, a low-bit quantization method that achieves high
throughput improvements with negligible accuracy loss. Atom significantly boosts serving throughput by using
low-bit operators and considerably reduces memory consumption via low-bit quantization. It attains high accuracy
by applying a novel mixed-precision and fine-grained quantization process. We evaluate Atom on 4-bit weightactivation quantization in the serving context. Atom improves end-to-end throughput (token/s) by up to 7.73×
compared to the FP16 and by 2.53× compared to INT8 quantization, while maintaining the same latency target.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being integrated into our work routines and daily lives, where we
use them for summarization, code completion, and decisionmaking. Studies report that ChatGPT has over 100 million users, with more than 1 billion website accesses per
month (Duarte, 2023). Furthermore, the size and capabilities
of LLMs continue to grow to accommodate a broader range
of tasks. The high inference demand and model complexity
have significantly increased the operational costs, i.e., compute/memory and energy, for LLM service providers to near
$1 million daily (Elimian, 2023).
Unsurprisingly, optimizing LLM serving is becoming a
pressing concern. Most efforts have focused on improving LLM serving throughput, which is typically achieved by
batching requests from various users (Yu et al., 2022; Chen,
2023; Kwon et al., 2023). Batching multiple requests in*

Work done at UW. 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 School
of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, United States 3 School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 OctoAI 5 School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States. Correspondence to: Yilong Zhao <zhaoyilong217@sjtu.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 7 MLSys Conference, Santa Clara, CA, USA,
2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

creases compute intensity and amortizes the cost of loading
weight matrices, thereby improving throughput. Prior work
has explored LLM quantization techniques to further improve batching efficiency. These techniques employ smaller
data types to replace 16-bit floating point (FP16) values,
thereby reducing memory consumption and accelerating
computation (Lin et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2023).
However, current quantization schemes do not leverage the
full extent of capabilities provided by emerging efficient
low-bit hardware support (e.g., Nvidia Ampere (Abdelkhalik et al., 2022) and Qualcomm Hexagon (Wikipedia contributors, 2023)). For instance, several prior approaches have
explored weight-only quantization (Lin et al., 2023; Frantar
et al., 2023). In these quantization schemes, weights are
quantized to a low-bit representation (e.g., INT3), whereas
activations remain in a floating point representation (e.g.,
FP16). Consequently, weights must be dequantized to the
appropriate floating point representation (e.g., FP16) before being multiplied with activations using floating point
representation. Therefore, even though weight-only quantization reduces memory consumption, it still requires costly
floating-point arithmetic, which is inefficient, especially for
large batch sizes.
Another prominent quantization scheme is weight-activation
quantization, where both weights and activations are quantized to low-bit representations. In this scheme, weights and
activations can be directly multiplied using low-precision

