Supplementary Material of
Improving Point-based Crowd Counting and
Localization Based on Auxiliary Point Guidance
I-Hsiang Chen1 , Wei-Ting Chen1,2 , Yu-Wei Liu1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3 , and
Sy-Yen Kuo1,4
1

National Taiwan University, Taiwan
University of California at Merced, USA
3
Google, USA
4
Chang Gung University, Taiwan
{f09921058,f05943089,r12943109}@ntu.edu.tw, mhyang@ucmerced.edu,
sykuo@ntu.edu.tw
2

1

More Experimental Results

1.1

Proposal Selection Analysis

We validate the changes in every proposal considered as part of the crowd and
its offset after implementing Auxiliary Point Guidance (APG). By providing
auxiliary positive and negative points, APG offers a more defined learning target
for proposals, encouraging the model to favor those closer to the actual ground
truth points. This not only concentrates each matched proposal, identified as
part of the crowd, more around the actual ground truth, preventing conflicts
where different proposals match the same ground truth but also ensures that
the overall selected proposals are closer to the target heads (with a smaller
average offset distance), as illustrated in Figure 1, where dots represent the
original positions of proposals and arrows indicate the offsets. The proposed
APG simplifies and enhances the training of offset predictions and confidence
levels, thereby achieving improved counting performance.
Furthermore, for samples with significant viewpoint differences or occlusions,
not utilizing APG might result in multiple points mapping to the same head,
leading to overestimation. Overestimation is particularly likely in situations with
significant viewpoint differences (as indicated by the red circles in the first row
of Figure 2 without using APG) and arm occlusions (as shown by the red circles
in the second row of Figure 2 without using APG). In contrast, APGCC offers
strong cues for selecting the nearest proposal and avoiding farther ones (indicated
by the green circles), thereby playing a crucial guiding role in the learning process
of point-based methods. This ensures a more accurate and conflict-free proposal
selection.
Moreover, using the protocol in Dan et al. [6], we evaluate errors in overestimation and underestimation within our counting results. The results are presented in Table 1, which demonstrate improvements in reducing overestimation

