1

LEE ET AL.: MATERIALNET

MaterialNet: Multi-scale Texture Hierarchy
and Multi-view Surface Reflectance for
Material Type Recognition
Dongjin Lee1

1

Department of Computer Science
and Engineering
Kyunghee University

2

Electronics and Telecommunications
Research Institute

dj923@khu.ac.kr

Hyun-Cheol Kim2
kimhc@etri.re.kr
2

Jeongil Seo

seoji@etri.re.kr

Seungkyu Lee1
seungkyu@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Material is distinguishing characteristic of real world objects. Recognizing unique
texture of certain material type enables improved object detection or semantic segmentation. Incorporating acquired material properties such as surface reflectance of real world
objects makes more realistic and richer 3D models in computer graphics. A robot arm
essentially requires to recognize the stiffness or roughness of target object for precise and
undamaged interaction. Despite the necessities, recognizing material type and its properties from color image is a challenging task. In this work, we propose (1) multi-scale
texture hierarchy extraction network (MSTH-Net) encoding view-independent comprehensive multi-scale textures and their hierarchy and (2) multi-view surface reflectance
extraction network (MVSR-Net) encoding view-specific features revealing surface reflectance of a material type. Finally, MaterialNet is proposed combining MSTH-Net and
MVSR-Net for material type recognition from multi-view color images. Extensive experimental evaluations on six public benchmark datasets show promising performance of
proposed method and potential for practical applications.

1

Introduction

Real world objects are composed of multiple distinguishing materials that are essential
characteristics in determining object category. Altering material composition of an object
changes its sub-category such as wooden vs iron table, fabric vs leather couch. Recognizing
material types enables improved object detection and semantic segmentation. In computer
graphics, material properties such as surface reflectance enable realistic rendering of a 3D
model. Industrial robot arm interacting with many different kinds of objects composed of diverse material types has to react correspondingly for precise grabbing without any damage on
© 2022. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.

