Embodied Understanding of Driving Scenarios

21

Appendix
A

Motivating Questions

To better understand our work, we supplement with intuitive questions.
Q1: Why is the embodied understanding necessary for driving scenarios?
Embodied understanding refers to the ability of an autonomous agent to
observe, comprehend, and interact with its environments incorporating sensory
input and world knowledge [28]. Embodied understanding tasks serve to facilitate the agent’s proficiency in common sense reasoning. For instance, one such
scenario involves deciphering the body language of a pedestrian gesturing for
the ego-vehicle to proceed first. Thus, it can implement more complex and safer
driving strategies, capable of adapting to dynamic and unexpected scenarios. Besides, agents can interact with humans more naturally and offer insights about
the users’ behaviors and expectations, leading to a more intuitive, responsive,
and user-friendly design [60]. Moreover, it enables agents to learn from each
human interaction and adapt over time.
Q2: Why should Vision-Language Models (VLMs) be introduced into the embodied understanding of driving scenes?
One of the critical strengths of VLMs [22,48,63,79] is that it possesses world
knowledge from global data, which can help autonomous vehicles in common
sense reasoning [6, 11]. VLMs enable a more thorough interpretation of scenes,
such as billboards, landmarks, body language, uncommon objects, and more
(please refer to Fig. 12). For these unusual cases, it is hard for end-to-end models [33, 34] to cover them all, even with the introduction of massive additional
data. Nevertheless, VLMs can effortlessly acquire this knowledge. Moreover,
VLMs have the inherent capacity to correlate and generate contextually relevant sentences or instructions based on visual inputs.
Q3: Will the timeliness of the VLMs ensure it is adequate for driving scenarios?
Without optimizations, ELM and other VLMs run about an order of magnitude slower than UniAD [34] (0.62 FPS). However, optimizations for simulated
closed-loop development make practical VLM use in driving possible [76]. Techniques like distillation and quantization in LLM inference can help, and another
approach would be to execute only the final motion stage of an agent at 20
FPS, while the other VQA stages are executed at a lower frame rate. In addition, works like MobileVLM [13] and TinyLlama [96] are addressing the issue of
deploying VLMs on mobile devices, e.g., vehicles.
Q4: Why adapt VLMs to driving rather than adding language inputs to
driving-specific models?

