GTPT: Group-based Token Pruning Transformer

A

1

Ablation study of Curriculum Learning

CL GFLOPs Body Foot Face Hand
✗
✓

1.99
1.99

Whole

66.9 64.9 80.8 42.9
56.5
71.0 70.4 81.0 45.4 59.6(+3.1)

Table 7: Ablation study of curriculum learning.

To ease the challenge of learning whole-body pose estimation, we suggest implementing curriculum learning. This approach enables the model to gradually
tackle increasingly complex tasks, starting with the localization of a few uniform
keypoints before progressing to localizing numerous dense keypoints. To assess
the necessity and effectiveness of curriculum learning in our model, we conduct
ablation experiments. From Tab. 7, the results highlight the significant improvement in accuracy for parts with fewer keypoints, such as body and feet, boosting
their AP by 4.1 and 5.5. The reason is that if we directly learn the whole body
keypoints, parts with more keypoints, such as face and hands, may dominate
the optimization process, leading the model to fall into a local optimum. Consequently, the optimization of the parts with fewer keypoints is under-optimized.

B

Visualizations

B.1

Pruning

To confirm the redundancy of the pruned visual tokens, we visualize the pruning
results by displaying the original images alongside the retained visual tokens
for each group at each stage. Fig. 8 demonstrates that the selected regions for
each group become more refined as the network goes deeper. As anticipated,
each group can focus on the visual tokens that correspond to its keypoints.
Notably, even with a high pruning rate, the facial regions, which have numerous
keypoints but smaller areas, are appropriately retained. And our method still
works well in complex situations such as crowded scenes (Fig. 8(b)), different
body poses(Fig. 8(c)), man-object interaction(Fig. 8(d)), occlusion(Fig. 8(e)),
partial bodies(Fig. 8(f)), etc. In crowded scenes, as shown in Fig. 8(b), we can
accurately prune out the currently estimated figure. When occluded, as shown in
Fig. 8(e), our pruning preserves the unoccluded visual tokens within the group
as much as possible. When there is only a partial body, as shown in Fig. 8(f),
because of the grouping, our method can prune out the visual tokens of the
corresponding region of the corresponding character contained within the current
image.

