Preventing Catastrophic Forgetting through
Memory Networks in Continuous Detection
(Supplementary Material)
Gaurav Bhatt1,2 , James Ross1 , and Leonid Sigal1,2
1

1

University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
2
The Vector Institute for AI, Toronto
https://gauravbh1010tt.github.io/

Implementation Details

Our Deformable-DETR backbone is trained using the original hyperparameters
outlined in [8], excluding their iterative bounding box refinement and the twostage mechanism. Specifically, we set the number of proposals (P) to 300, with
6 encoder/decoder layers, 8 encoder/decoder attention heads, and a dimension
(D) of 256. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate (lr) of 0.01 and
weight decay of 0.0004 for all learnable parameters, except for bounding boxes,
which utilize a learning rate of 0.001. On MS-COCO, we train MD-DETR for
10 epochs for T1 , while the number of epochs for T2 · · · T4 is 5. On VOC, we train
MD-DETR for 45 epochs for both the A and B tasks.
In our memory network, the value of the number of memory units (Nm ) is
set to 100 and a memory length (Lm ) to 10, based on the findings from Figure
3 in the main draft. Likewise, the background thresholding value (δbt ) is set to
0.65, determined from our analysis presented in Table 3 of the main draft. We
select the value of λQ to be 0.01.
Pre-Training. We utilize the HuggingFace transformers repository 3 to construct our framework. Initially, we employ the Deformable-DETR pre-trained
on the LVIS dataset [2] and subsequently fine-tune it to suit our configuration
on MSCOCO and VOC. We also conducted an ablation study using their pretrained model on MSCOCO and observed no significant performance deviation
on VOC.
Additionally, we conducted training of MD-DETR on MS-COCO without
leveraging any pre-trained model. In other words, we initiated training of MDDETR from scratch exclusively on T1 for 50 epochs. Subsequently, we executed
our standard fine-tuning process on the remaining tasks T2 · · · T4 for 5 epochs
each. While training on T1 we use a step-scheduler and perform the scheduling
at the 40th epoch. Moreover, we use multi-scale feature maps extracted from a
ResNet-50 [4], pre-trained on ImageNet [1] (as done in [8]). As illustrated in Table
1, we observed no significant performance distinction between the model pretrained on MSCOCO and the one pre-trained solely on T1 . The pre-trained model
3

https://huggingface.co/

