Supplementary Material of Online Video Quality
Enhancement with Spatial-Temporal Look-up
Tables
Zefan Qu1 , Xinyang Jiang†2 , Yifan Yang2 , Dongsheng Li2 , and Cairong
Zhao†1
1

Tongji University, Shanghai, China
Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China
{qzf, zhaocairong}@tongji.edu.cn
{xinyangjiang,yifanyang,dongsheng.li}@microsoft.com
2

1

Network Architecture

In this section we will illustrate the architecture of our propagation module and
the deep network in the alignment and enhancement module in the training
phase.
The procedure of the STLVQE before the inference phase. The
network flow of STLVQE is detailed illustrated in the Fig. 1 and can be summarized as following steps: (1)Propagation: Selects the reference frames by the
QP value and delivers the information to the alignment module, meanwhile updates the Temporal Cache. (2)Alignment: Compute offset based on features,
then perform deformation on x̃ref to align the reference frames with the current
frame. (3)Enhancement: Spatial compensation is firstly applied to the current
frame, which can fully utilize the sharing feature and increase the receptive field
of ST-LUTs. Then x̃dref and x̃i are quantized and input into Deep LUT Network(DLN) for the Spatial-Temporal Enhancement residual result. After training, we enumerate all the inputs and store the corresponding DLN results into
ST-LUTs(Fig. 1(b)), these transferred ST-LUTs will replace the DLN during
inference phase to reduce the inference time and computing resource consumption(Fig. 1(c)). The only difference between training and inference procedure is
the replacement of the Deep Network with the transferred ST-LUTs. The digit in
Fig.4 represents the pixels position in each kernel which is used for DLN training
and LUT retrieval.
The propagation module. The architecture of the propagation module
is illustrated in Fig. 2. We explain this module in more detail in this section.
The QP value indicates the degree of compression applied to a particular
frame during the encoding process, with a smaller QP value indicating less loss
and higher image quality. By using the QP value, we can select fewer but higher
quality frames among multiple candidate frames without introducing extra computation. Specifically, we set up a Reference Frame Window (RFW) during the
† Corresponding author.

