Customize-A-Video: One-Shot Motion
Customization of Text-to-Video Diffusion Models
Supplementary Materials
Yixuan Ren1 , Yang Zhou2 , Jimei Yang2 , Jing Shi2 , Difan Liu2 ,
Feng Liu2 , Mingi Kwon3 , and Abhinav Shrivastava1
1

University of Maryland, College Park MD 20770, USA
2
Adobe Research, San Jose CA 95110, USA
3
Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea
https://customize-a-video.github.io

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Bypassing Temporal Layers in T2V Models

Many diffusion-based T2V models such as [1,2,4,8] have their denoising network
structure adapted from T2I UNet with temporal convolution and attention layers
injected. The new temporal layers are usually implemented as residual connections. The models are also usually trained on image and video datasets jointly
to acquire both appearance and motion generative capability.
Based on this mechanism, we propose to train our appearance absorbers
with the temporal layers bypassed and the model to perform image generation
tasks on static frames. This shared design further enables us to load third-party
image customization models pre-trained on external image data to serve as ready
appearance absorbers or additional spatial customization modules in our video
applications.

A.2

Patch Training of Appearance Absorbers

Some motions are intrinsically highly associated with postures, such as walking,
running and sitting, and one image can primarily represent them. When the
appearance absorbers have modeled the static postures to fit the appearance in
the first training stage, T-LoRA might have little left to learn such as only the
trivial perturbations across frames.
Therefore, we propose to crop the unordered frames into patches and encourage the appearance absorbers to mainly capture local shapes and textures in the
first training stage. This prevent our appearance absorbers from overfitting on
the global structures fundamentally. In practice, we find that setting the crop
ratio randomly between 0.33 to 0.67 yields the best effect to retain the desired
motion evidently in the second training stage.

