Supplementary Material for:
Invertible Neural Warp for NeRF
Shin-Fang Chng, Ravi Garg, Hemanth Saratchandran, and Simon Lucey
Adelaide University
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
shinfang.chng@adelaide.edu.au
https://sfchng.github.io/ineurowarping-github.io/

In this supplementary material, we provide additional details about our approach, which include the network architecture, experiment settings and results.
Sec. A details the training and implementation details for our approach as well
as baselines. Additional results are presented in Sec. B.

A

Training and Implementation Details

A.1

Our approach

Architecture detail of Invertible Neural Network (INN) We illustrate
the design of our invertible network hΘW in Fig. 1, see [2] for an in-depth explanation about the INN. The network is composed of three main blocks, each
containing a multilayer perceptron (MLP). These blocks are different in their
pattern of partitioning input coordinates along different axes. Within each block,
a randomly chosen axis is used to split the input coordinates (for e.g., [x, y, z]T ).
The first subset of these coordinates (for e.g., z), along with a frame-specific
latent code Φt , is fed into the MLP. The MLP computes a 2D rotation and
translation. This transformation is then applied to the second subset of the input coordinates (for e.g., [x, y]T ). This procedure is repeated for each of the
other coordinates in the subsequent blocks. For all our experiments, we use the
same network architecture. We use three blocks, with each block consisting of
two layers of 128-dim hidden units. Following [2,11], we also apply positional encoding [8] to the MLP’s input coordinates, and we set the number of frequencies
used in this positioning encoding as 6. For the frame-specific latent code, we use
a 16-dimensional code for 2D experiments in Sec. 4.2 of the main paper, and a
128-dimensional code for 3D experiments covered in Secs. 4.3 to 4.6 of the main
paper.
INN (Ours) on LLFF Following BARF [6], we resize the images to 480 × 640.
At each optimization steps, we randomly sample 2048 pixel rays. We use the
same NeRF architecture as in BARF and L2G, see Sec. A.1 for details of the
INN architecture. We used the learning rate for Θrgb at 1 × 10−3 , which decays
to 1 × 10−4 . For the INN field ΘW , the learning rate starts at 5 × 10−4 and
decays to 1 × 10−8 . For the frequencies used for positional encoding γ(.) defined

