1

Facial Affective Behavior Analysis with
Instruction Tuning
Supplementary Material

This is the supplementary material of Facial Affective Behavior Analysis with
Instruction Tuning.

A

Limitations and negative effects

A.1

Limitations

This work also has its limitations. Firstly, we haven’t tried other face-prior feature extractors except for landmark features. We leave this as an exploring
research direction for future work. Secondly, our annotations from the training set also include noise induced by GPT-4V’s hallucinations [15, 16] (see Appendix C.3), which may introduce some bias for models. We think our benchmark
can be regarded as the learning from noisy descriptions task. Thirdly, the metric
we proposed for evaluating the expression recognition ability may not reflect the
nuanced expressions, which could be further improved.
A.2

Negative effects

There also exist some potential negative effects of our EmoLA. Firstly, privacy
issues. Facial affective behavior analysis (FABA) may infringe on users’ privacy,
especially when deploying EmoLA on public spaces or systems. Individuals’ faces
may be unconsciously captured and recorded, leading to privacy concerns. Secondly, misdirections and misjudgments. Our EmoLA is not entirely accurate and
may produce misjudged emotions. This can lead to misunderstanding or misdirection issues, especially in applications like security or judicial systems. Thirdly,
technological abuse. Our method may be abused to suppress dissent or monitor
political activities, thereby leading to social hazard or freedom restrictions.

B

Background of instruction tuning

According to [18], instruction tuning refers to “the process of further training
LLMs on a dataset consisting of (instruction, output) pairs in a supervised
fashion, which bridges the gap between the next-word prediction objective of
LLMs and the users’ objective of having LLMs adhere to human instructions.”
The LLMs are typically trained on large general language corpora, which may
differ from the users’ objectives. As a result, to make the LLMs follow users’
instructions, instruction tuning is proposed. For instance, InstructGPT [13]/

