Prioritized Semantic Learning for Zero-shot
Instance Navigation (Supplementary Materials)
Xinyu Sun1∗ , Lizhao Liu3∗ , Hongyan Zhi, Ronghe Qiu1 , and Junwei Liang1,2†
1
2

AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{csxinyusun,selizhaoliu}@gmail.com, junweiliang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

We organize our supplementary materials as follows:
– In Section A, we demonstrate the detailed collection process and statistics
of the InstanceNav benchmark.
– In Section B, we provide more results on the pilot study.
– In Section C, we provide additional ablation studies on our proposed semantic expansion inference scheme.
– In Section D, we ablate different selections of the Vision-and-Language Model.
– In Section E, we perform additional ablation on the semantic perception
module in our PSL agent.
– In Section G, we provide more implementation details of our PSL agent.
– In Section H, we provide more visualization results.

A

Details and Statistics of HM3D InstanceNav
Benchmark

In this section, we visualize the statistics of our proposed InstanceNav benchmark. In order to construct the language instructions for the text-goal settings,
we randomly select a rendered goal image for each goal instance provided by
the IIN dataset [3], resulting in 795 images. Since the goal images are ensured
to capture perfect coverage of the instance, we are able to generate attribute
descriptions for each image using a multi-modal large language model [10]. For
instance, we instruct the LLM to caption each image using the prompt “Describe
the material and color of the {object} in this image. Describe the surrounding
objects of the {object} in this image.”. The {object} placeholder is replaced by
the specific object category of the instance. In Figure I, we visualize the word
frequency in our generated text descriptions.
For a fair comparison with our proposed method, we re-implement existing state-of-the-art ObjectNav methods and evaluate them on the InstanceNav
benchmark. We leverage the official code to implement the evaluation protocol
for the CoW [2] and ESC [13] baseline. We instruct the agent to find the object
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

