PromptIQA: Boosting the Performance
and Generalization for No-Reference
Image Quality Assessment via Prompts
Zewen Chen1,2 , Haina Qin1,2 , Juan Wang1 , Chunfeng Yuan1 ,
Bing Li1,3(B) , Weiming Hu1,2,4 , and Liang Wang5
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems, CASIA,
Beijing, China
{chenzewen2022,qinhaina2020,jun wang}@ia.ac.cn,
{cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
3
PeopleAl Inc., Beijing, China
4
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University,
Shanghai, China
5
OPPO Hardware System, Beijing, China
leon.wang@oppo.com

Abstract. Due to the diversity of assessment requirements in various
application scenarios for the IQA task, existing IQA methods struggle to
directly adapt to these varied requirements after training. Thus, when
facing new requirements, a typical approach is ﬁne-tuning these models on datasets speciﬁcally created for those requirements. However, it
is time-consuming to establish IQA datasets. In this work, we propose
a Prompt-based IQA (PromptIQA) that can fast adapt to new requirements without ﬁne-tuning after training. On one hand, it utilizes a short
sequence of Image-Score Pairs (ISP) as prompts for targeted predictions,
which signiﬁcantly reduces the dependency on the data requirements. On
the other hand, PromptIQA is trained on a mixed dataset with two proposed data augmentation strategies to learn diverse requirements, thus
enabling it to fast adapt to new requirements. Experiments indicate that
the PromptIQA outperforms SOTA methods with higher performance
and better generalization. The code is available at the link.
Keywords: NR-IQA · Image-Score Pairs · Assessment Requirement

1

Introduction

Image quality assessment (IQA) is a long-standing research in image processing
ﬁelds. Compared to full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) and reduced-reference IQA, noreference IQA (NR-IQA) gains more attention since it removes the dependence
on reference images which are impossible to obtain in real-world applications.
Z. Chen and H. Qin—Equal contribution.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 247–264, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_14

