Supplementary Material for
Differentiable Product Quantization for Memory
Efficient Camera Relocalization
In this supplementary material, we first discuss architectural and implementation details in Section A. Next, we provide additional ablation studies of
the proposed quantization approach for different local image descriptor matchers
in Section B and report additional quantitative and qualitative results in Section C. Finally, we discuss potential negative impact of this work in Section D.

A

Implementation Details

For our single MLP decoder architecture, we use an 2-layer MLP with hidden
dimension 256. The ReLU activation is used for the decoder. For experiments
on the Aachen Day-Night dataset [6, 7], we extract local image descriptors from
database images and create training and validation splits. We optimize our randomly initialized model for 30 epochs with batch size 1000 which takes about
7 hours on a single NVIDIA RTX2080Ti GPU. The model has 131072 parameters in total which is less than 0.5MB of memory. For the Cambridge Landmarks
dataset [3] and the 7 Scenes dataset [8], we use our model pre-trained on Aachen.
However, instead of fine-tuning the whole model on corresponding training and
validation splits, we optimize only LoRA [2] weights of 2048 parameters resulting
in an overhead of 8KB memory.

B

Ablation

In this section, we first conduct several ablation studies to verify the effectiveness
of the proposed approach, including different loss functions in Section B.1 and
different local image descriptor matchers in Section B.2.
B.1

Ablation of Different Loss Functions

To evaluate the effectiveness of our differential product quantization layer, we
conduct ablation studies on the Aachen Day-Night dataset with three different
loss functions. Specifically, we consider: a) combined Triplet loss (as discussed
in the main part); b) vanilla L2 loss [10]; c) the N-pair loss [9]. Unlike traditional loss functions that typically compare a single pair of examples, e.g.,
contrastive loss or triplet loss, N-pair loss extends this idea to consider multiple negative examples simultaneously for each positive pair. This approach aims
to improve the quality of the learned embeddings by enforcing a wider margin
between the positive pairs and the multiple negative examples. Given a batch
with pairs of examples, each pair consists of an anchor x and a positive example

