Within the Dynamic Context: Inertia-aware 3D
Human Modeling with Pose Sequence
Supplemental Material
Yutong Chen⋆1 , Yifan Zhan⋆12 , Zhihang Zhong†1 , Wei Wang1 , Xiao Sun†1 ,
Yu Qiao1 , and Yinqiang Zheng2
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
The University of Tokyo

Due to the limited space of the main text, we provide a detailed description of
our method implementation, the proposed I3D-Human dataset, results of more
ablation studies and on ZJU-MoCap, and also discuss our limitations.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Localized Dynamic Context Encoding:

Our localized dynamic context encoding Φseq (S∆ p) consists of three stages, as
shown in Fig. 2 of the main paper. We instantiate two localized dynamic context
encoders of the same architecture to produce conditions for the rigid transformation and non-rigid transformation modules. The output condition vectors are
concatenated with the sinusoidal positional encodings of the input coordinate to
serve as the inputs to the subsequent transformation modules.
Kinematically-guided Spatial Dependency: For a given context sequence
S∆p and an input coordinate x, we begin by processing each ∆p ∈ R3×K+3
independently within the sequence. Here we leverage a reasonable physical assumption: the impact of a rotating joint is mainly restricted to the kinematic
chains to which it belongs. For instance, the movement of the hips generally has
minimal impact on the appearance of the shoulders. Therefore, the motion and
appearance of a point x is expected to mainly depend on the joints within the
same kinematic chains. With an input coordinate x and its associated blending
weights Wc (x) ∈ RK , we first identify its nearest joint k = arg max Wc (x) to
determine the kinematic chains x lies on. We use the kinematic chains predefined in the skeleton model used by SMPL. Then we gather all joints from the
related kinematic chains. Last, we apply a binary mask to each ∆p to filter out
the unrelated joints that fall outside the kinematic chains. We denote masked
ˆ We describe the effectiveness of this design in Sec. 5.2.
conditions as ∆p.
Spatial Encoding: We then flatten the masked spatial condition ˆ
∆p to an
1D vector and project it to a 16-dim vector by an one-layered MLP with ReLU
activation. We pass the vector of each time step through the same MLP, resulting
in a sequence of 16-dimensional vectors with a length of L.
⋆

denotes authors with equal contributions. † denotes co-corresponding authors.

