LLM as Copilot for Coarse-grained
Vision-and-Language Navigation - Supplementary
Yanyuan Qiao1 , Qianyi Liu2,3 , Jiajun Liu4,5 , Jing Liu2,3 , and Qi Wu1‹
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
CSIRO Data61
5
The University of Queensland
{yanyuan.qiao,qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, liuqianyi2022@ia.ac.cn,
jiajun.liu@csiro.au, jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

1

Modification of Base Agent

We use AutoVLN [2] as the base agent. It mainly consists of two modules: the topological mapping module which builds a topological map during navigation, and the global
action planning module which predicts the next location on the map or a stop action
to end the navigation. For more details on the base agent, please refer to the paper of
AutoVLN [2].
To facilitate the navigation guidance from the LLM, we modify both the base agent’s
language embedding and the action prediction process. Specifically, if the computed
confusion score surpasses the threshold, the guidance information Rguide given by the
LLM is passed through the language encoder of the agent to generate the guidance embedding ER of the guidance. Then, ER is concatenated with the pre-embedded instruction embedding EI as the final language embedding EL , which is used to implement
cross-attentions with topological graphs and visual observations respectively. For action
prediction, we equip the agent with the capability of self-reviewing. Detailedly, the initial predicted logits over the candidates are used to compute the confusion score rather
than to select the next action. If the confusion score is lower than the threshold, which
means the agent is confident in the initial prediction, the agent will select the next action according to the logits. Otherwise, the agent will ask LLM for help and make new
predictions with the help of the guidance information.

2

Additional Ablation Study

Different LLMs We also conducted experiments on the other LLM of Llama2-7B [3]
to validate the generalization of our proposed method. As shown in Table 1, the performance of the Llama2-7B model is competitive with the Vicuna-7B-1.5 model [4].
‹

Corresponding author: Qi Wu

