Supplementary Material: Gated Temporal
Diffusion for Stochastic Long-Term Dense
Anticipation
Olga Zatsarynna1 *, Emad Bahrami1 *, Yazan Abu Farha2 , Gianpiero
Francesca3 , and Juergen Gall1,4
1

University of Bonn, Germany
Birzeit University, Palestine
3
Toyota Motor Europe, Belgium
4
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Germany
*Equal contribution
2

In Sec. 1, we provide implementation details. In Sec. 2, we provide additional
ablation studies and qualitative results for stochastic long-term anticipation. In
Sec. 3, we present additional results for deterministic long-term anticipation.

1

Implementation Details

We implemented our models in Pytorch. For both stochastic and deterministic
settings, we used 5 stages and 9 layers for the GTAN model. For the filters of
the gated convolutions, we set the kernel size to 3, the number of channels to
64, and the dilation factor to 2l , i.e., the dilation factor is increased by a factor
of two with each layer l in a stage. We trained our network with a batch size of
16 using the Adam [8] optimizer with the learning rate 5 · 10−4 on the Breakfast
and Assembly101 datasets. For the 50salads dataset, we used the batch size of
8, set the learning rate to 10−3 .
For stochastic anticipation, we trained our GTD model with T = 1000 denoising steps. During inference, we applied DDIM [13] sampling procedure and used
a subset of D = 50 denoising steps for generating predictions on the Breakfast
and Assembly101 datasets and D = 10 steps on the 50Salads dataset.

2

Stochastic Long-Term Anticipation

2.1

Ablation Study

Gated Convolution. In Fig. 1, we illustrate two examples of gate values taken
from two distinct layers of the second stage of our proposed network. In both
cases, there is a clear difference between observed and future frames visible, not
just in the early layers of the network. For instance, at layer 8, there are some
channels where mainly the frames from the observation (channel 9) or mainly the
future frames (channel 45) are considered. Additionally, the amount of mixing
between observed and future frames changes for different layers. Starting from
almost no mixing in the early layers, more and more mixing between unmasked
and masked parts occurs as the network progresses.

