Learning Neural Volumetric Pose Features for
Camera Localization
Jingyu Lin1⋆† , Jiaqi Gu2† , Bojian Wu3 , Lubin Fan2‡ , Renjie Chen1‡ ,
Ligang Liu1 , and Jieping Ye2
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba Cloud 3 Zhejiang University
sa1022@mail.ustc.edu.cn, gujiaqi.gjq@alibaba-inc.com, ustcbjwu@gmail.com,
lubin.flb@alibaba-inc.com, {renjiec, lgliu}@ustc.edu.cn,
yejieping.ye@alibaba-inc.com
https://gujiaqivadin.github.io/posemap/

1

Supplementary

In the supplementary materials, we provide further insights of PoseMap designs
in Sec. 1.1, implementation details in Sec. 1.2, extended discussions in Sec. 1.3,
and visualizations in Sec. 1.4.
1.1

Technical Details of PoseMap

Our motivation is to improve the performance of camera localization with a novel
feature map called PoseMap. Considering that NeRF itself takes the camera pose
as input and conducts a volumetric rendering process. We surmise that it can
help to identify an appropriate implicit feature representation for the camera
pose.
We build our PoseMap based on the NeRF-W [?] and NeRF-H [?]. These two
methods are designed for synthesizing novel views of complex scenes using only
unstructured collections of in-the-wild photographs with different foreground occlusions and exposure levels. NeRF-W models the scene as a combination of both
shared and image-specific elements, which allows for the unsupervised separation of scene’s content into static and transient components. In our exploration of
pose features, we recognize that the camera pose information is more linked with
the static background. Thus, we design our pose branch to depend on these static
elements. Within this branch, the pose embedding is then thoroughly distilled
from the ground truth camera pose followed by a series of MLPs. To be specific,
Fimage comes from three CNN layers at ( H2 , W
2 , 128). Fposemap is rendered from
H W
the pose branch of NeRF-P at ( 16
, 16 , 256). Both are pixel-wise features.
In order to explore the implicit information of PoseMap, We compare it
with NeRFMap which is directly extracted from the original NeRF. As rendered
and visualized in Fig. 1, the salient region of PoseMap is more related to the
⋆

This work was done when Jingyu Lin was an intern at Alibaba Cloud.
Equal contributions.
‡
Corresponding authors.
†

