Supplementary Material for Beyond Viewpoint:
Robust 3D Object Recognition under Arbitrary
Views through Joint Multi-Part Representation
Linlong Fan , Ye Huang ⋆ , Yanqi Ge , Wen Li , and Lixin Duan
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
fanlinlong703@163.com

The appendix provides: 1) the implementation details of the PANet; 2) additional experimental comparison results; 3) additional experiment analysis; and
4) additional visualization analysis.

1

Implementation details of PANet

We train PANet in two steps similar to MVCNN [4]. Firstly, the pre-trained view
feature extractor is fine-tuned on selected multi-view 2D images for classification. We further train the entire architecture end-to-end, including the attention
model and the adaptive part refinement module, to generate multiple parts for
3D object recognition. PANet is trained on the target dataset using AdamW,
with a learning rate 0.00001 and β = (0.9, 0.98). We use the CosineAnnealingLR
scheduler with T0 = 5, Tmult = 2, and utilize label smoothing regularization with
a value of 0.2. In order to facilitate fair comparisons, we also adopt the same
viewpoint settings as CVR [6] under arbitrary views, with the number of viewpoints ranging from 6 to 20, as shown in Tab. 10, 11. Our model is implemented
based on the Pytorch deep learning platform.

2

Additional experimental comparison results

ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN For a further fair comparison, we follow
the viewpoint sampling strategy of the CVR [6] method, where the number of
viewpoints is randomly sampled from 6 to 20. PANet improves instance accuracy
and class accuracy by 15.34% and 13.2% in ScanObjectNN [5] dataset, it also
improves by 5.01% and 4,7% on the ModelNet [9] dataset. Additionally, we do not
observe a significant decrease in performance even with fewer views. It’s worth
noting that we found from the code of CVR [6] that their viewpoint sampling
method is not strictly random. The CVR method only achieves random sampling
of viewpoint quantities, while the viewpoint positions are continuous. Therefore,
we additionally provide the results of random sampling in Tab. 10, 11, where
both the number and positions of viewpoints are randomized. We notice that the
performance does not significantly change, which also exceeds the CVR method
⋆

Corresponding author

