Supplementary Material:
Statewide Visual Geolocalization in the Wild
Florian Fervers1,2 , Sebastian Bullinger1 , Christoph Bodensteiner1 , Michael
Arens1 , and Rainer Stiefelhagen2
1

1

Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System Technologies and Image Exploitation
{firstname.lastname}@iosb.fraunhofer.de
2
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
rainer.stiefelhagen@kit.edu

Baselines

We report the main results in our paper on the Massachusetts test split of
our dataset. We reimplement SAFA [8], TransGeo [13] and Sample4Geo [2] as
baselines with the cell layout and choice of aerial images as in VIGOR [14]. The
following list provides a detailed description of how these methods are adapted
to our problem setup.
– For SAFA and Sample4Geo, we use the same encoder architecture
ConvNeXt-B [6]. While TransGeo is originally introduced with a ViT-S
encoder, we increase the size to ViT-B with 87M parameters resulting in a
similar size as ConvNeXt-B with 89M parameters [6].
– For Sample4Geo, we use shared weights for the street-view and aerial encoders.
– We apply all models on a single aerial image at twice the size of the cell as
in VIGOR.
– We use a resolution of 640 × 480 for the street-view images and 384 × 384
for the aerial images as in our work.
– We use a Mercator-based layout of the search region as in VIGOR such that
cells in Massachusetts have a size of roughly 30m × 30m.
– Since the HEM strategies in Sample4Geo and TransGeo are designed for
training on smaller datasets over multiple epochs, we use our semi-infinite
mining strategy instead. For TransGeo, we reduce the cluster size to 2, and
utilize 15 independent clusters per batch for a total batch size of b = 30.
SAFA is implemented without HEM.
– Since Sample4Geo relies on a larger batch size, we increase it from 30 to
90 and train for 66k instead of 200k iterations. We use a learning rate of
3 × 10−4 according to the linear scaling rule [3].
– We use a smaller learning rate of 3 × 10−5 in TransGeo which uses a ViT
encoder.
– We use a symmetric cross-entropy loss for Sample4Geo, and a soft-margin
triplet loss for SAFA and TransGeo.

