18

7

S. Jabbour et al.

Supplementary Materials Overview

This supplementary material provides additional details of the paper along with
supplementary results that were omitted from the main paper due to space constraints. In Section 8 we present details and additional supplementary results of
the synthetic dataset experiments. In Section 9, we present details and additional
supplementary results of the real dataset (COCO [19]) experiments. Finally, in
Section 10, we present details and additional supplementary results of the case
study in healthcare (MIMIC-CXR [14, 16]).

8

Synthetic Validation

8.1

Experiments

Dataset. Each image in the dataset is described by a set of concepts describing
distinct colored geometric shapes: {red, green blue} ⇥ {circle, rectangle}. Given
the vector of indicator variables si 2 R6 , we construct the image Xi by randomly
placing each of the shapes in the image such that no two shapes overlap. The
caption for the image is then a string describing each of the shapes in the image,
separated by a comma. For instance, an image containing a red-colored circle
of radius 4 centered at (5, 10) and a blue-colored rectangle with the top-left
corner at (20, 30) and bottom-right corner at (50, 60) would have the caption
“red circle 4 (5, 10), blue rectangle ((20, 30) (50, 60))". We show examples of real
and generated images of the synthetic shapes dataset in Fig. 10. We note that,
while the diﬀusion model does not generate the correct locations for the shapes,
this does not aﬀect downstream classification results which do not rely on shape
locations.
Diﬀusion Model. A diﬀusion model initialized on Stable Diﬀusion [30] was
fine tuned for 105000 iterations on 107,000 images with a batch size of 16 at a
256x256 resolution and a learning rate of 1.0e-4. We fine-tuned only the U-Net
and text-encoder of the model.
Concept Classifier. The concept classifier g was a CNN with 5 layers, each
consisting of a convolution, batch norm, ReLU, and max pooling followed by a
3-layer multilayer perceptron that made six predictions for the presence of the
six shapes. The model was trained on 50,000 images for 15 epochs.
Baselines. We generated Grad-CAM [32] and LIME [28] explanations for the
predicted class of each image. The class prediction was determined by thresholding model predictions that maximized the true positive rate while minimizing
the false positive rate across the test set. Each GradCAM heatmap was first
converted to a binary mask by thresholding at the lowest non-zero value of the
Grad-CAM heatmap. 5 features were used to generate each LIME mask. For every shape in the image, we calculated the intersection over union (IOU) between
the shape and the explanation. Finally, we ranked shapes by their mean IOU
across the entire test set.

