Supplementary for Open-Vocabulary SAM
Haobo Yuan1

, Xiangtai Li1 , Chong Zhou1 , Yining Li2
and Chen Change Loy1
1

, Kai Chen2

,

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Overview. In the supplementary, we provide more details and results to support
our main paper. The contents are presented as follows: we first present more
details and discussions of our method in Sec. S1. Then, we report more results
in Sec. S2. Finally, we present a demo and discuss future work in Sec. S3. Please
refer to our GitHub repo at https://github.com/HarborYuan/ovsam for more
details about the demo and implementation.

S1

Method Discussion

S1.1

Comparison with Recent Joint SAM and CLIP Models

Several recent works [1,4,6,13] also explore joint segmentation and recognition as
one system. Recognize Anything [13] adopts a paradigm for image tagging.
The focus of that work is to build large-scale tagging datasets via automatic
text semantic parsing. The SAM model is only an external module. Therefore, it
cannot perform well with box or mask-level recognition [13]. SAM-CLIP [6] integrates multi-task learning, continual learning techniques, and teacher-student
distillation, where its goal is to build a single model capable of segmentation and
classification. However, its classification capability is limited to the image level
since it does not provide optimization for small objects and falls short of the original CLIP. Conversely, our Open-Vocabulary SAM fuses knowledge from SAM
and CLIP via SAM2CLIP and CLIP2SAM, which keeps the original CLIP and
can support interactive segmentation, instance-level classification, and scale-up
beyond the frozen CLIP. SSA [1] also builds a system that integrates the knowledge from CLIP and SAM. It involves a semantic voting branch for refining the
semantic segmentation results generated by an external semantic segmentation
model and refined by SAM. On the contrary, Open-Vocabulary SAM does not
require the external segmentor and takes visual prompts rather than coarse semantic segmentation results as input. Moreover, Open-Vocabulary SAM focuses
on instance segmentation rather than semantic segmentation. Sambor [4] builds
on frozen SAM and CLIP, but adds a SideFormer to fuse the knowledge. The
SideFormer serves as an adapter for generating object proposals. Compared to
Open-Vocabulary SAM, however, the design keeps two foundation models, which
introduces extra computational costs similar to combined baselines. In addition,
Sambor does not perform interactive segmentation like Open-Vocabulary SAM.

