Adapting to Shifting Correlations with Unlabeled
Data Calibration
Minh Nguyen1 , Alan Q. Wang1 , Heejong Kim2 , and Mert R. Sabuncu1,2
1

Cornell Tech, New York NY 10044, USA {bn244,aw847,msabuncu}@cornell.edu
2
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York NY 10065, USA
hek4004@med.cornell.edu

Abstract. Distribution shifts between sites can seriously degrade model
performance since models are prone to exploiting unstable correlations.
Thus, many methods try to find features that are stable across sites and
discard unstable features. However, unstable features might have complementary information that, if used appropriately, could increase accuracy.
More recent methods try to adapt to unstable features at the new sites
to achieve higher accuracy. However, they make unrealistic assumptions
or fail to scale to multiple confounding features. We propose Generalized
Prevalence Adjustment (GPA for short), a flexible method that adjusts
model predictions to the shifting correlations between prediction target
and confounders to safely exploit unstable features. GPA can infer the
interaction between target and confounders in new sites using unlabeled
samples from those sites. We evaluate GPA on several real and synthetic
datasets, and show that it outperforms competitive baselines.
Keywords: Domain generalization · Invariance · EM · Prevalence

1

Introduction

Real-world data from multiple sites (domains) often diverge from the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumption. Distribution shifts at different sites can cause correlations between (confounding) variables to vary significantly (i.e., instability). For example, different hospitals may use different
imaging equipment, resulting in images appearing differently. Some hospitals
may adopt specific triaging procedures, resulting in correlations between diagnoses and other variables. ML models often struggle to generalize to different
sites (i.e., their performance does not transfer), since models are prone to shortcut learning [17] (i.e., exploit correlations between confounding variables). There
have been several examples of shortcut learning in healthcare [2, 13, 40]. Foundation models [24, 37, 42, 52] trained with large amounts of diverse data can
generalize out-of-the-box, in many difficult problems. However, generalization to
medical imaging is harder because the data distributions and tasks differ significantly from natural images. Besides, training foundation models for medical
imaging is also challenging, as gathering diverse data is difficult and costly.
One way to achieve out-of-domain (OOD) generalization is to avoid unstable
features and only classify using stable features. Methods such as DANN [15],

