An Analysis of Single-Layer Networks
in Unsupervised Feature Learning

Adam Coates
Stanford University
Computer Science Dept.
353 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305

Honglak Lee
University of Michigan
Computer Science and Engineering
2260 Hayward Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Abstract

1

A great deal of research has focused on algorithms for learning features from unlabeled data. Indeed, much progress has been
made on benchmark datasets like NORB and
CIFAR by employing increasingly complex
unsupervised learning algorithms and deep
models. In this paper, however, we show that
several simple factors, such as the number of
hidden nodes in the model, may be more important to achieving high performance than
the learning algorithm or the depth of the
model. Specifically, we will apply several offthe-shelf feature learning algorithms (sparse
auto-encoders, sparse RBMs, K-means clustering, and Gaussian mixtures) to CIFAR,
NORB, and STL datasets using only singlelayer networks. We then present a detailed
analysis of the effect of changes in the model
setup: the receptive field size, number of hidden nodes (features), the step-size (“stride”)
between extracted features, and the effect
of whitening. Our results show that large
numbers of hidden nodes and dense feature extraction are critical to achieving high
performance—so critical, in fact, that when
these parameters are pushed to their limits,
we achieve state-of-the-art performance on
both CIFAR-10 and NORB using only a single layer of features. More surprisingly, our
best performance is based on K-means clustering, which is extremely fast, has no hyperparameters to tune beyond the model structure itself, and is very easy to implement. Despite the simplicity of our system, we achieve
accuracy beyond all previously published results on the CIFAR-10 and NORB datasets
(79.6% and 97.2% respectively).

Andrew Y. Ng
Stanford University
Computer Science Dept.
353 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305

Introduction

Much recent work in machine learning has focused on
learning good feature representations from unlabeled
input data for higher-level tasks such as classification.
Current solutions typically learn multi-level representations by greedily “pre-training” several layers of features, one layer at a time, using an unsupervised learning algorithm [11, 8, 18]. For each of these layers a
number of design parameters are chosen: the number
of features to learn, the locations where these features
will be computed, and how to encode the inputs and
outputs of the system. In this paper we study the effect of these choices on single-layer networks trained by
several feature learning methods. Our results demonstrate that several key ingredients, orthogonal to the
learning algorithm itself, can have a large impact on
performance: whitening, large numbers of features,
and dense feature extraction can all be major advantages. Even with very simple algorithms and a single layer of features, it is possible to achieve state-ofthe-art performance by focusing effort on these choices
rather than on the learning system itself.

Appearing in Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS)
2011, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA. Volume 15 of JMLR:
W&CP 15. Copyright 2011 by the authors.

215

A major drawback of many feature learning systems
is their complexity and expense. In addition, many
algorithms require careful selection of multiple hyperparameters like learning rates, momentum, sparsity
penalties, weight decay, and so on that must be chosen through cross-validation, thus increasing running
times dramatically. Though it is true that recently introduced algorithms have consistently shown improvements on benchmark datasets like NORB [16] and
CIFAR-10 [13], there are several other factors that affect the final performance of a feature learning system. Specifically, there are many “meta-parameters”
defining the network architecture, such as the receptive field size and number of hidden nodes (features).
In practice, these parameters are often determined by
computational constraints. For instance, we might use
the largest number of features possible considering the
running time of the algorithm. In this paper, however, we pursue an alternative strategy: we employ
very simple learning algorithms and then more care-

