Embracing Events and Frames with Hierarchical
Feature Refinement Network for Object
Detection–Supplementary Material
Hu Cao1 , Zehua Zhang1 , Yan Xia1,4 , Xinyi Li1 , Jiahao Xia2 , Guang
Chen3⋆ , and Alois Knoll1
1

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
{hu.cao,zehua.zhang,yan.xia,super.xinyi,k}@tum.de
2
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Jiahao.Xia@student.uts.edu.au
3
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
guangchen@tongji.edu.cn
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

1

More Experimental Details

1.1

Datasets

DDD17. The vehicles in the DDD17 dataset were manually labeled by the
authors of [11] to create the PKU-DDD17-Car dataset for object detection tasks.
Additional details about the PKU-DDD17-Car dataset are outlined in Tab. 1.
DSEC. The original dataset comprises 53 sequences captured in three distinct
regions of Switzerland. RGB frames are captured using the FLIR color camera, which boasts a resolution of 1440 × 1080. The original DSEC dataset [5]
lacks the required labels for object detection. The labels introduced in [18] is
used in this work. This annotated dataset consists of a total of 41 sequences,
allocated for training (33 sequences), validation (3 sequences), and testing (5
sequences). Notably, the dataset covers a wide range of lighting conditions, from
ideal to highly challenging. This diversity guarantees comprehensive testing of
vision systems, ensuring their robustness and applicability in real-world settings.
Additionally, unlike the DDD17 dataset, in which both event data and RGB data
are sourced from the same DAVIS camera, the raw event data and RGB data in
the DSEC dataset are not aligned; they do not correspond to the same frame.
Therefore, additional preprocessing of the raw DSEC data is essential. Further
details regarding the preprocessing steps are provided below:
Homographic transformation. To address the misalignment between the event
data and RGB data, the two types of data need to be transformed into the same
frame. The dataset provides a baseline of 4.5 cm between the two cameras,
allowing for the transformation to a common viewpoint. In our pre-processing,
we leverage the homographic transformation induced by pure rotation, as derived
in Eq. 1, to align the scene from an RGB frame to an event-camera frame. It’s
⋆

Corresponding author

