Path-CLIP: Efficiently Adapting CLIP for Pathology Image Analysis

1

Datasets

1.1

Pathology image classification tasks

1

The datasets used to evaluate our framework are collected from two distinct
pathology projects [35, 39]. Both projects make their data available as patches,
which are extracted from H&E stained Whole Slide Images (WSI) digitized from
Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) slides. Each dataset aims to detect
different cancerous tissues. The stain used in both datasets is hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E), a commonly-used stain.
PatchCamelyon (PCam) [35] classification. PCam is a patch dataset extracted from Camelyon16 challenge [2]. The original 400 WSIs from Camelyon16
were digitized breast tissue with potential metastasized cancerous tissue on the
lymph nodes. The original WSIs were scanned at 40× resolution but later downsampled to 10×. The WSIs were collected from two different centers. PCam
extracted 327,680 patches at 96×96 resolution and labeled them positive or negative. Positive labeled patches present tumor tissue in the central 32×32 patch
region. There are an equal amount of positive and negative labeled samples.
MHIST [39] classification. MHIST contains 3,152 patches from colorectal
regions at 224 × 224 pixel resolution. These patches were extracted from 328
WSIs scanned at 40× resolution. Each patch may be labeled Hyperplastic Polyp
(HP) or Sessile Serrated Adenoma (SSA). HP is the majority class with 68.59%
of labels. Labeling colorectal polyps between HP and SSA is challenging due
to high inter-pathologist disagreement. Seven pathologists contributed to the
ground truth to ensure reliable labels.
1.2

GM/WM segmentation task

Besides the two pathology classification tasks above, we follow [19] and evaluate
our proposed approach on a grey/white matter segmentation task in pathological
slides. For this dataset, we have 30 gigapixel slides with an average resolution
of 50, 000 × 60, 000 by an Aperio AT2 scanner at 20X magnification. We follow
the previous work [19] to split 20 slides into the training/validation set while
10 slides into the hold-out test set. We tile these gigapixel slides into patches at
256 × 256 and convert it into a weakly-supervised task [23].
1.3

Multi-task objective in pathology image analysis

The digital pathology domain mandates the execution of multiple tasks for comprehensive analysis, encompassing segmentation, classification, and/or detection
tasks, as shown in Fig 5. Therefore, proposing an efficient method to swiftly
adapt a large-scale model to multiple downstream tasks would be exceptionally
advantageous, enabling the attainment of the final analysis objective within a
reasonable timeframe. It is impractical if the fine-tuning requires heavy computational resources when the learning tasks are separated from the analysis objective.

