Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything
in 3D Scenes
—– Supplementary Material —–
Mingqiao Ye, Martin Danelljan, Fisher Yu, and Lei Ke ♠
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

In this supplementary material, we first conduct additional experiment analysis of our Gaussian Grouping in Section 1, including multi-granularity, segmentation efficiency, quantitative editing evaluation and robustness. Then, in
Section 2, we describe the detailed process of annotating our proposed LERFMask datasets with the visualization of annotation examples. We further provide a more detailed 3D object inpainting and style transfer pipeline description
in Section 3. Finally, we illustrate the algorithm pseudocode of our Gaussian
Grouping and more implementation details in Section 4, including the method
limitation analysis. Please refer to the attached Gaussian-grouping-supp.mp4 for
an extensive 3D results comparison.

1

Supplementary Experiments

Segmentation Efficiency In Fig. 1, we compare the segmentation results with
SA3D [2] on the proposed LERF-Mask dataset for open-world 3D segmentation.
Our Gaussian Grouping shows great advantages in segmentation efficiency. Using
the same machine, our Gaussian Grouping jointly segments all objects of the
3D scene in 9 minutes, while SA3D requires 35 minutes for each object due
to its inverse rendering design in 3D voxel grids. To segment each object of the
3D scene, SA3D repeatedly needs separate new training, which makes SA3D
time-consuming and not user-friendly in multi-object segmentation or editing
scenarios.
Multi-Granularity of Masks As in Fig. 2, our method can process SAM’s
anything masks at different granularity levels in the multiple views as follows:
Step 1). Firstly, SAM predicts dense anything mask proposals (including
both large-granularity and small-granularity ones) for each frame.
Step 2). Then, these masks are scored and sorted based on their mask areas.
Masks are ranked in descending (from large to small) or ascending (from small
to large) order to pick varying levels of granularity for the label of each pixel.
Step 3). Furthermore, we filter large-area or small-area masks through their
overlapping IoU with a threshold.
Step 4). For mask association, masks are temporally propagated in a bidirection to obtain in-clip consensus. Refer to Sec 3.2 of Deva [3] for details.
♠

Corresponding Author

