CoDA: Instructive Chain-of-Domain Adaptation
with Severity-Aware Visual Prompt Tuning
(Supplementary)
Ziyang Gong1∗ , Fuhao Li2* , Yupeng Deng3* , Deblina Bhattacharjee4* ,
Xianzheng Ma5† , Xiangwei Zhu1† , and Zhenming Ji1†
1

2

Sun Yat-sen University, China
Wuhan University of Science and Technology, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
5
Independent Researcher

The supplementary material is organized as follows: (1) Additional results of
Iterations between MIC and MIC with CoDA in Section A.1; (2) Ablation studies of severity threshold in A.2; (3) Additional ablation studies of CoD in A.3; (4)
Discussion about Severity-Aware Visual Prompt Tuning in B.1 including motivation of the Severity metric and visualization of visual prompts; (5) Discussion
about the generated dataset in B.2 containing three rationales and demonstration of images generated with different stages of phrasal prompts.

A

Additional Results

A.1

Additional quantitative and qualitative results.

We also study the experimental setting of Cityscapes to ACDC, where we train
CoDA with 40k and 60k iterations, respectively. The best results of CoDA are
trained with 60k Iteration. As shown in Table 1, the Origin MIC [5] underperforms, even with an increased number of iterations, showing a 0.6% mIoU decline
in performance. However, MIC with CoDA outperforms the Origin MIC when
trained for both 40k and 60k iterations, thereby demonstrating the impact of
MIC with CoDA. Specifically, MIC with CoDA obtains a 0.8% mIoU improvement when trained for 60k iterations. The results show that CoDA enhances the
performance of MIC. We show additional qualitative results under night, fog,
rain, and snow adverse scenes in Fig 5, 6, 7, and 8, respectively.
Ablation studies of CoDA components We conduct experiments to show
the necessity of each component in CoDA in Table 4. we combine 1, 2, and 4 rows
to reveal that the prerequisite of SAVPT is the good foundation brought by the
CoD+traditional strategy. From 4, 5, and 7 rows, we know that XG and SAVPT
need to collaborate to maximize the effects with 0.1% to 3.8% gain from 4 to 7
rows and 2.1% to 3.8% gain from 5 to 7 rows. Combining 6 and 7 rows, results
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.

