7. APPENDIX

7

Appendix

7.1

Limitations & Future Work

1

While our LoRAdapter is a general method to condition LoRAs and can be
applied to any type of deep learning model, we have only shown its eﬀectiveness
in text-to-image diﬀusion models based on Stable Diﬀusion. Applying LoRAdapter
to fully transformer-based diﬀusion models such as DiT [19] or large language
models remains an interesting future direction to further verify its model-agnostic
capabilities.
7.2

Impact Statement

This work aims to improve the control over generated images using text-to-image
(T2I) diﬀusion models by introducing an eﬃcient and holistic method of adding
additional conditioning to them. While previous methods enabled similar control
over either the style or structure of the generated images, they were held back
by requiring large auxiliary networks or being limited to only applying to one
modality. As this work introduces a universal and more flexible approach to
introducing additional conditioning that is not inherently limited to only one
particular network architecture, it aids in making highly specific control over
the generation process more accessible. This extension of the capabilities of T2I
diﬀusion models, similar to progress in improving base models, carries the risk
of further enabling the generation of more believable disinformation or harmful
content.
7.3

Style and Structure Conditioning

Joint Conditioning In Figure 7 of the main paper, we show examples of joint conditioning where we use our LoRAdapter for both style and structure conditioning.
The first three columns show a reconstruction task with perfectly matching style
and structure conditioning. The resulting samples (third row) are very close to
the original images (top row), indicating the superb composability of multiple
LoRAdapters. The last three columns show samples where the style and structure
conditioning do not match. In the fifth column, we show the combination of the
depth of the red car with the style of the green car: Not only does the color of
the sample match the style image but the design of the green car is successfully
applied, e.g. the headlights are round as opposed to the more edgy headlights of
the red car. The background is also transferred correctly.
To further evaluate the performance of joint conditioning, we conducted
additional experiments with the style and structure conditioning coming from
diﬀerent classes (Figure 8). Even though the classes are completely diﬀerent,
LoRAdapter can still sensibly combine the two conditioning.
Lastly, we investigate the eﬀects of using a much larger adapter such as
ControlNet to provide structure guidance (Figure 11) instead of our eﬃcient LoRAbased adapter. We either use our method for both style and HED conditioning

