S EM G RASP: Semantic Grasp Generation
via Language Aligned Discretization
Kailin Li1,2 , Jingbo Wang2 , Lixin Yang1 , Cewu Lu1,2(B) ,
and Bo Dai2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{kailinli,siriusyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{wangjingbo,daibo}@pjlab.org.cn, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. Generating natural human grasps necessitates consideration
of not just object geometry but also semantic information. Solely depending on object shape for grasp generation conﬁnes the applications of prior
methods in downstream tasks. This paper presents a novel semanticbased grasp generation method, termed SemGrasp, which generates
a static human grasp pose by incorporating semantic information into
the grasp representation. We introduce a discrete representation that
aligns the grasp space with semantic space, enabling the generation of
grasp postures in accordance with language instructions. A Multimodal
Large Language Model (MLLM) is subsequently ﬁne-tuned, integrating
object, grasp, and language within a uniﬁed semantic space. To facilitate the training of SemGrasp, we compile a large-scale, grasp-textaligned dataset named CapGrasp, featuring over 300k detailed captions
and 50k diverse grasps. Experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that SemGrasp eﬃciently generates natural human grasps in alignment with linguistic intentions. Our code, models, and dataset are available publicly
at: https://kailinli.github.io/SemGrasp.
Keywords: Semantic Grasp Generation · Discrete representation ·
MLLM

1

Introduction

In applications such as AR/VR and embodied robotics, the ability to generate
human-like grasps for a given object is of substantial value. The goal of grasping
extends beyond simple object lifting; it involves alignment with human intent
and preparation for subsequent manipulation tasks, such as avoiding hot water
in a mug or preparing to open a bottle cap (Fig. 1 left). Hence, relying solely
on the geometric information of objects is inadequate. Combining the semantic
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 7.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 109–127, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_7

