Plug-and-Play Learned Proximal Trajectory

19

Plug-and-Play Learned Proximal Trajectory for 3D
Sparse-View X-Ray Computed Tomography
Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we provide additional details on different aspects of the
main text:
• In Sec. A, we present our private Cork-CBCT dataset as well as the public WalnutCBCT dataset [21].
• In Appendix B, we provide the full mathematical development of the convergence
analysis in Sec. 3.5.
• In Appendix C, we give more details on how we save the pre-defined optimization
trajectory that we sample from during training.
• In Appendix D, we provide additional details on how we implement the evaluation, the training and inference procedures of our method, as well as compared
approaches in Tabs. 1 and 2.
• In Appendix E, we detail how we perform the ablation study in Sec. 4.4.
• In Appendix F, we provide additional visual illustrations of the results presented in
Sec. 4.

A

Datasets

A.1

Cork-CBCT

The Cork-CBCT dataset we use in this work is a collection of 38 natural cork stoppers acquired with a Cone-Beam geometry acquisition setup. This dataset is composed
of acquisitions with 720 radiographs, acquired with a 1024 × 1024 flat panel detector
(Perkin Elmer XRD0821, CsI scintillator) along a circular trajectory with a 0.5 degree angular step. The acquisitions were performed with an X-ray tube (Viscom 225
kV micro-focus tube with a tungsten target) using the following parameters: intensity
450µA, voltage 40kV and no additional filter. The corresponding CT reconstructions
of size 1024 × 1024 × 1024 voxels are obtained using a primal-dual splitting algorithm [11]. The distance between the source and the rotation axis (source-to-axis
distance), the distance between the source and the detector (source-to-detector
distance) and the detector pixel size (pixel-size) are respectively 190 mm, 637
mm, and 0.2 mm. As emphasized in the illustrations in Fig. 6, the objects almost span
the entire height of the detector but are not very large. For fair comparisons, the previously mentioned metrics are computed on a central crop of size 512 × 512. Similar
to Coban et al. [16], to avoid cone-beam artifacts and the evaluation of the metrics on
empty slices, we remove the first and last 150 slices of each reconstruction from the
evaluation procedure.
A.2

Walnut-CBCT

For completeness, we also present the Walnut-CBCT dataset, although all details are
present in the following work [21]. This dataset is composed of 42 walnut acquisitions,

