JointDreamer: Ensuring Geometry Consistency
and Text Congruence in Text-to-3D Generation
via Joint Score Distillation
—Supplementary Material—
Chenhan Jiang1 *† , Yihan Zeng2 *, Tianyang Hu2 , Songcun Xu2 , Wei Zhang2 ,
Hang Xu2 , and Dit-Yan Yeung1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
∗
Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author: jchcyan@gmail.com
https://jointdreamer.github.io

This supplementary material consists of five parts, including technical details
of the experimental setup (Sec. A), the derivation of Joint Score Distillation
(JSD) (Sec. B), additional ablation analysis (Sec. C), additional experimental
results (Sec. D) and the Janus prompt list (Sec. E).

A

Experimental Setup

A.1

Details of JointDreamer Pipeline.

In our main text, we adopt MVDream MMVS as the energy function for the overall JointDreamer pipeline. Since MVDream fine-tunes on SD-V2.1, we retain SDV2.1 as a diffusion model. The whole training procedure includes 6k iterations,
taking around 1.5 h with batch size 4 on 1 Nvidia Tesla A800 GPU. Specifically, we warm up NeRF for the initial 600 training iterations with SDS and
adopt JSD for the remaining iterations. We adopt the common time-annealing
and resolution-increasing tricks from the open-source implementation, together
with the two proposed mechanisms including the Geometry Fading scheme and
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) Scale switching strategy. We set t = 0.98 with
resolution 64 for the first 3k iterations and then anneal into t ∼ U (0.02, 0.50)
with resolution 256 for the extra 2k iterations. Starting from iteration 5k, we
scale up the resolution to 512 and conduct the two proposed mechanisms, where
the learning rate of the density network is reduced from 1e − 2 to 1e − 6 and
the CFG scale is switched from 30 to 50. The Geometry Fading scheme and
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) Scale switching strategy allow greater influence
from coherence guidance in JSD on geometry optimization in the early training
stages and enhance the fidelity of textures in later stages.
A.2

Details of Binary Classification Model.

In this part, we will elaborate on the model architecture and training procedure
of the binary classification model that is discussed in Sec.4.2 in the main paper.

