Supplementary Material:
ColorPeel: Color Prompt Learning with Diffusion
Models via Color and Shape Disentanglement
Muhammad Atif Butt1 , Kai Wang1⋆ , Javier Vazquez-Corral1,2 , and Joost
van de Weijer1
1

Computer Vision Center, Spain
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Spain
{mabutt,kwang,jvazquez,joost}@cvc.uab.es
2

A

Learning Colors with Existing Methods

As elucidated in the paper, current T2I diffusion models offer users the ability to
generate objects in desired colors by incorporating linguistic color descriptions
in the prompts. Although these diffusion models have showcased remarkable capabilities in generating images from textual prompts, they encounter challenges
in accurately reproducing specific colors. One of the primary reasons for this
limitation is the broad spectrum of colors encompassed by linguistic color names
(e.g., pink, blue, green), which can represent numerous combinations of hues and
shades. For example, color blue alone encompasses various shades such as navy
blue, sky blue, and royal blue. Consequently, generated images may not exactly
match the intended color. As depicted in Fig. S1(a) and Fig. S1(c), even when
prompted with standard color names, stable diffusion model [6] and Rich-Text
method [2] struggle to distinguish between different color variants.
Another method of specifying precise colors is by including exact color values
or hex color codes in the prompts to synthesize objects. The results depicted in
Fig. S1(b) reveal that diffusion model struggles to interpret hex or RGB values
directly, as these models lack embeddings for such representations. Next, we
consider T2I personalization methods to learn color embeddings based on new
text tokens. We use seminal T2I personalization baselines i.e., TI [1], DB [7],
and CD [5]. First, we learn color embeddings from fully-colored images using
RGB/hex values. However, as shown in Fig. S1(d), these methods employ a
naive transfer learning approach. While they are able to learn shapes or objects,
they fail to learn from plain color images. To gain further insight into this issue,
we extract attention maps from final timestep of the training process, as shown in
Fig. S2. It is evident from Fig. S2(a) that the employed personalization methods
struggle to focus on color region when entire image is colored. To address this
limitation, we generate basic 2D/3D shapes using RGB/hex values. With this
training setup, we observe that employed methods, while still performing poorly,
show some focus on color regions. However, as demonstrated in the main paper,
these methods tend to mix colors due to non-aligned token initialization.
⋆

Corresponding Author

