Supplementary Material of Training-free Video
Temporal Grounding using Large-scale
Pre-trained Models
Minghang Zheng1 , Xinhao Cai1 , Qingchao Chen2 , Yuxin Peng1 , and
Yang Liu 1,3⋆
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{minghang,qingchao.chen,pengyuxin,yangliu}@pku.edu.cn
xinhao.cai@stu.pku.edu.cn
2

This supplementary material provides additional information and visualization relating to our method. In Section 1, we provide more implementation details
about the LLM prompt. In Section 2, we provide more visualization results.

1

Implementation Details of LLM Prompting

We propose the LLM prompting to enable LLMs to analyze query texts, identify
multiple potential events therein, and analyze the order and relationship of these
events. Specifically, we request the large language model to:
– Reasoning: Analyze the user’s query and infer the sub-events it may contain.
– Order of sub-events: Provide each sub-events in chronological order.
– Relationships between sub-events: Consider three types of relationships: Single event, simultaneously (i.e. the sub-events occur simultaneously), and sequentially (i.e. the sub-events occur sequentially).
– Textual descriptions: Generate text descriptions for each sub-event. Due to
the uncertainty in LLM output, we request multiple descriptions for each
event to enhance the stability.
We require the LLMs to output in the JSON format and provide LLMs an
exemplar for in-context learning. The complete prompt is:
LLM prompt
The user will input a text query describing human activities in a
video. Your task is to analyze the user’s query and break it down into
one or more sub-queries, each of which describes only a single simple
action. Then, you need to provide multiple textual descriptions for each
sub-query as comprehensively as possible. Finally, you need to analyze
the temporal relationships between these sub-queries, including whether
⋆

Corresponding author

