Supplementary Material for
ControlCap: Controllable Region-level Captioning
Yuzhong Zhao1 , Yue Liu1 , Zonghao Guo1 , Weijia Wu2 , Chen Gong3
Qixiang Ye1 , and Fang Wan1⋆
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhaoyuzhong20, liuyue171, guozonghao19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{qxye, wanfang}@ucas.ac.cn
2
Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
weijiawu96@gmail.com
3
University of Virginia, Virginia, USA
chengong@virginia.edu

A

Detailed Experimental Settings

Clarifications of Control Words. During the training phase, the control
words are chosen by parsing the ground-truth captions (detailed in Fig. 2). During inference, the control words are chosen by filtering the output words of the
region tagging head with a threshold t. The influence of t on captioning performance is shown in Fig. 9 (main paper). t = 1 shows the baseline result, where
no control words are introduced. When t ∈ [0.75, 1), high-confidence control
words are introduced, which significantly boosted the METEOR score by alleviating the caption degeneration issue. When t ∈ [0, 0.75), noisy control words
are introduced, which causes performance drops.
Combining with Existing Detectors. Considering that dense captioning requires the model to initially generate dense bounding-boxes, we utilize a GRiT [6]
model trained on the VG to acquire object locations. During the inference stage,
we use the bounding boxes and object scores predicted by GRiT, and then replace its predicted caption with ControlCap to get the final result.
GPT-4v Preference. As shown in Fig. 1, we provide a visualized example of
GPT-4v preference experiment, which is conducted in Tab. 3 in the main paper
(Personal information is masked). Caption1 is generated by ControlCap with
interactive control “you” (Recognized scene text), and Caption2 is generated
by ControlCap with no control. Due to the usage limit of GPT4v, we test 100
samples in each scenario. To isolate the influence from the self controls, the
experiment is conducted with a ControlCap model trained on VG without region
tagging module and self controls.
The Selection of Region Tags and Control Words. As shown in Fig. 2,
we provide a detailed pipeline for Fig. 4 (middle) in the main paper. A regionlevel caption is parsed in two ways. First, nouns (NN) and adjectives (JJ) are
extracted by Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging, while subject tag set and object
⋆

Corresponding Author.

