Short Text Topic Modeling with Topic Distribution
Quantization and Negative Sampling Decoder
Xiaobao Wu1 Chunping Li1 Yan Zhu2 Yishu Miao3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Southwest Jiaotong University 3 Imperial College London
wxb18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cli@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
yzhu@swjtu.edu.cn, y.miao20@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

sports scores games soccer league tennis ncaa players football
sports tennis soccer hockey games football beach match players
sports match cup hockey olympic football players sport league
sports football sport league games tennis champions club
sports football league game tennis players hockey games scores

Topic models have been prevailing for many
years on discovering latent semantics while
modeling long documents. However, for short
texts they generally suffer from data sparsity because of extremely limited word cooccurrences; thus tend to yield repetitive or
trivial topics with low quality. In this paper,
to address this issue, we propose a novel neural topic model in the framework of autoencoding with a new topic distribution quantization approach generating peakier distributions
that are more appropriate for modeling short
texts. Besides the encoding, to tackle this
issue in terms of decoding, we further propose a novel negative sampling decoder learning from negative samples to avoid yielding
repetitive topics. We observe that our model
can highly improve short text topic modeling
performance. Through extensive experiments
on real-world datasets, we demonstrate our
model can outperform both strong traditional
and neural baselines under extreme data sparsity scenes, producing high-quality topics.

1

bad additional abstract aspectj behave displayed customise accept
abstract behave accept additional bad displayed customise
abstract accept behave additional adding long many administration

Table 1: Repetitive and trivial topics from short texts.
Repetitive words are underlined.

Introduction

In addition to formal documents, short texts play
an increasingly more important role in the era of
information explosion where people could instantly
share ideas, feelings, and comments via short text
fragments, including tweets, headlines, and product
reviews, etc. The latent semantics or topics discovered among these short texts can be utilized in many
applications, such as content summarization (Ma
et al., 2012), classification(Zeng et al., 2018a), and
recommendations (Zeng et al., 2018b; Mehrotra
et al., 2013). However, conventional topic models
(Blei et al., 2003) work reasonably well on various kinds of long documents, but perform poorly
on short texts. The main underlying reason is that
the co-occurrence information from short texts is
extremely limited as known as the data sparsity

problem which hinders the topic models from learning effective semantics and high-quality topics in
a pure unsupervised learning fashion. Therefore,
several approaches have been proposed to alleviate this issue. One simple approach is to yield
pseudo texts (Quan et al., 2015), so that the conventional topic models can apply, e.g., user data
(Weng et al., 2010), hashtags (Mehrotra et al., 2013)
and external corpora (Zuo et al., 2016), but auxiliary information is not always available. In another vein, extra structural information or semantics are incorporated with the models. For instance,
Biterm Topic Model (BTM) (Yan et al., 2013) directly constructs the topic distributions over unordered word-pairs (biterms); Generalized Pólya
Urn-DMM (GPUDMM) (Li et al., 2016) applies
auxiliary pre-trained word embeddings to introduce
external information from other sources. However,
the data sparsity problem of short texts remains to
be solved, especially resulting in repetitive and trivial topics. For example, as illustrated in Table 1, we
can see several repetitive topics about sports including repeated words like “football”, “games”, and
“tennis”, and trivial topics composed of incoherent
words are discovered from short texts. These topics
are of low quality and could impair the performance
of downstream tasks.
In this paper, we aim to design a model that can
generate high-quality topics from short texts and
is more robust to rigorous data sparsity scenarios

1772
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1772–1782,
November 16–20, 2020. c 2020 Association for Computational Linguistics

