EMDM: Eﬃcient Motion Diﬀusion Model
for Fast and High-Quality Motion
Generation
Wenyang Zhou1 , Zhiyang Dou2,3,4(B) , Zeyu Cao1 ,
Zhouyingcheng Liao2 , Jingbo Wang5 , Wenjia Wang2 , Yuan Liu2 ,
Taku Komura2 , Wenping Wang6 , and Lingjie Liu3
1

2

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
zhiyang0@connect.hku.hk
3
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
4
TransGP, Hong Kong, China
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
6
Texas A&M University, College Station, USA

Abstract. We introduce Eﬃcient Motion Diﬀusion Model (EMDM) for
fast and high-quality human motion generation. Current state-of-theart generative diﬀusion models have produced impressive results but
struggle to achieve fast generation without sacriﬁcing quality. On the
one hand, previous works, like motion latent diﬀusion, conduct diﬀusion within a latent space for eﬃciency, but learning such a latent space
can be a non-trivial eﬀort. On the other hand, accelerating generation
by naively increasing the sampling step size, e.g., DDIM, often leads to
quality degradation as it fails to approximate the complex denoising distribution. To address these issues, we propose EMDM, which captures
the complex distribution during multiple sampling steps in the diﬀusion
model, allowing for much fewer sampling steps and signiﬁcant acceleration in generation. This is achieved by a conditional denoising diﬀusion
GAN to capture multimodal data distributions among arbitrary (and
potentially larger) step sizes conditioned on control signals, enabling
fewer-step motion sampling with high ﬁdelity and diversity. To minimize
undesired motion artifacts, geometric losses are imposed during network
learning. As a result, EMDM achieves real-time motion generation and
signiﬁcantly improves the eﬃciency of motion diﬀusion models compared
to existing methods while achieving high-quality motion generation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Frank-ZY-Dou/EMDM.

Z. Dou—Project Lead.
Collaborating with Tencent Games.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 2.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 18–38, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_2

