ARKitScenes: A Diverse Real-World Dataset
For 3D Indoor Scene Understanding
Using Mobile RGB-D Data

arXiv:2111.08897v3 [cs.CV] 12 Jan 2022

Gilad Baruch ∗ Zhuoyuan Chen
Thomas Gebauer

Afshin Dehghan

Brandon Joffe

Tal Dimry

Daniel Kurz

Yuri Feigin

Arik Schwartz

Peter Fu

Elad Shulman

Apple

arkitscenes@group.apple.com

Abstract
Scene understanding is an active research area. Commercial depth sensors, such
as Kinect, have enabled the release of several RGB-D datasets over the past few
years which spawned novel methods in 3D scene understanding. More recently
with the launch of the LiDAR sensor in Apple’s iPads and iPhones, high quality RGB-D data is accessible to millions of people on a device they commonly
use. This opens a whole new era in scene understanding for the Computer
Vision community as well as app developers. The fundamental research in
scene understanding together with the advances in machine learning can now
impact people’s everyday experiences. However, transforming these scene understanding methods to real-world experiences requires additional innovation
and development. In this paper we introduce ARKitScenes. It is not only the
first RGB-D dataset that is captured with a now widely available depth sensor,
but to our best knowledge, it also is the largest indoor scene understanding data
released. In addition to the raw and processed data from the mobile device,
ARKitScenes includes high resolution depth maps captured using a stationary
laser scanner, as well as manually labeled 3D oriented bounding boxes for a
large taxonomy of furniture. We further analyze the usefulness of the data for
two downstream tasks: 3D object detection and color-guided depth upsampling. We demonstrate that our dataset can help push the boundaries of existing
state-of-the-art methods and it introduces new challenges that better represent
real-world scenarios.

1 Introduction
Indoor 3D scene understanding is becoming key for many applications in the domains of augmented reality, robotics, photography, games, and real estate. More recently, modern machine
learning techniques have fueled many state-of-the-art scene understanding algorithms. A variety
of methods are addressing different parts of the challenge, like depth estimation, 3D reconstruction, instance segmentation [1, 2, 3], object detection [4, 5, 6, 7] and more. Most of these research
works are enabled through a variety of real and synthetic RGB-D datasets that have been made
available over the past few years [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Even though commercially available RGB-D sensors, like Microsoft Kinect, have made collection of such datasets possible, it is still
∗ Authors are listed in alphabetic order and contributed equally.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

