FoundPose: Unseen Object Pose Estimation
with Foundation Features
(Supplementary Material)
Evin Pınar Örnek1 Yann Labbé2 Bugra Tekin2 Lingni Ma2
Cem Keskin2 Christian Forster2 Tomas Hodan2
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Meta Reality Labs

This supplement provides additional qualitative results of FoundPose, the proposed
method for 6D pose estimation of unseen objects, and describes the supplementary video.

1

Additional qualitative evaluation

The following pages show qualitative results on the seven core BOP datasets: LM-O [1],
T-LESS [5], TUD-L [6], IC-BIN [2], ITODD [3], HB [7], and YCB-V [8]. As in Fig. 4
of the paper, each example shows the query image crop with the CNOS mask in white
(top left), retrieved templates (middle row), and matched patch descriptors of the crop
and the template that led to a pose with the highest number of inlier correspondences
(bottom row). The contour of the 3D object model in the ground-truth pose is shown in
red, the coarse pose in blue, and the refined pose in green (top right). The ground truth
is not publicly available for ITODD and HB and, therefore, not shown. To make the
bottom row less cluttered, we show only up to 100 matches with the smallest cyclical
distance of patch descriptors [4]. The colors of patch descriptors are given by the top
three PCA components calculated from patch descriptors extracted from all templates
of the given object.
We show nine examples per dataset. The first six are examples where the refined pose
is close to the ground-truth pose, while the last three are examples where the final pose is
less accurate due to challenges such as imperfect segmentation masks or heavy occlusion.

2

Supplementary video

The attached video shows the same qualitative results as on the following pages, with
each result followed by an animation of the featuremetric pose refinement process. The
first part of the video shows six examples per dataset with more accurate estimates, while
the second part (starting at 7:55) shows three examples per dataset with less accurate
estimates. For each refinement iteration, the animation shows the model contour in the
current pose estimate in green and the model contour in the ground-truth pose in red.
The points at which we calculate the featuremetric error (magenta represents low while
cyan represents high per-point error) are also shown. The sum of the per-point errors,
which is shown in a text overlay, defines the error that is minimized in the process (see
Sec. 3.5 of the paper). Note that the refinement process was run for up to 30 iterations
to obtain the final pose, while the animation shows only up to 15 iterations.

