Supplementary Materials for
DreamView: Injecting View-specific Text
Guidance into Text-to-3D Generation
In this supplementary material, we provide the details of the dataset we
rendered and our implementations (Section 1). Additionally, we present more
qualitative text-to-3D generation results in Section 2, including more comparisons, more results with general prompts, and combining DreamView-2D with
another 2D-lifting technique. And we also discuss directly applying our injection
module to other text-to-image models for 3D generation and some other ways to
exploit the view-specific guidance. Besides, we discuss two potential ways to reduce the users’ burden to write view-specific prompts in Section 3. The dataset,
model, and code will be released at here.

1

More Implementation Details

Rendering Details. Our dataset is rendered from the Objaverse [3] dataset,
which contains more than 800k 3D assets. We follow the following pipeline to
construct our dataset.
1. Rendering: For each 3D asset, we first normalize the object at the center
covered by a bounding box between [−0.5, 0.5]. Then, we random sample a
camera elevation between [0, 30] and adjust the camera distance to ensure
the entire 3D object is visible at any azimuth. Last, we uniformly render 32
images for the 3D object, starting from azimuth=0, and the camera position
is saved at the same time. The illuminant comes from a three-point light
source. The rendered size is set to be 512 × 512, and the background of the
rendered image is a gray background. In total, we render ∼435k 3D assets,
resulting in ∼14M rendered images.
2. Captioning: We apply the BLIP-2 [5] captioning model to caption the rendered images. For each image, we generate 5 captions. Then, we use CLIP [11]
to select one caption with the highest CLIP score with the rendered image,
forming the view-specific text.
3. Merging: We use GPT-4 [9] to merge the 32 view-specific text, forming the
overall text. The input of GPT-4 is a sentence templated as “Given a set
of descriptions about the same 3D object, distill these descriptions into one
concise caption. The descriptions are as follows: ‘text’. Avoid describing the
background. The caption should be:”, where the ‘text’ is the used 32 texts.
We show some samples from our dataset in Figure 1. As we can see, the viewspecific text does describe the content visible from its corresponding viewpoint.
For example, only the cape (robe) can be seen in the sample’s first and fourth
image views in the top-right corner, so their texts only describe the cape (robe,

