Delving into Adversarial Robustness on
Document Tampering Localization
(Supplementary Materials)
Huiru Shao1,2 , Zhuang Qian1,2 , Kaizhu Huang3 ,
Wei Wang1 , Xiaowei Huang2 , and Qiufeng Wang1B
1

1

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, China
2
University of Liverpool, UK
3
Duke Kunshan University, China
Qiufeng.Wang@xjtlu.edu.cn

Different impact factors on adversarial training

Attack budget epsilon (also termed as perturbation upper bound or perturbation range) and attack iteration T are important impact factors on adversarial
robustness evaluation. In this subsection, we compare adversarial robustness of
another four AT models against PGD attack under different attack budgets with
a fixed attack iteration of 4 and various attack iterations with a fixed attack budget of 4/255. We conduct all experiments of this subsection on T-Sroie.
1.1

Impact of epsilon

Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b shows the robustness of [1] and [2] respectively against PGD
attacks under different attack budgets (ϵ = 4, 8, 12, 16, 20) with a fixed attack
step of 4. It is observed that the performance of the five adversarial training
methods all drop as the attack budget increases. For example in Fig. 1a, the
performance of PGD-AT and DDC-AT is close to 0 and Trades-AT is slightly
superior to them when ϵ = 20. SegPGD-AT refines it and our method further
boosts the performance over SegPGD-AT by a large margin.
1.2

Impact of T

We show the performance of [1] and [2] under other attack iterations T =
8, 12, 20, 40, 100 with ϵ = 4 in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b respectively. The impact
factor of attack iteration affects the performance of adversarial training to some
extent. Especially for Trades-AT, the performance is close to 0 when T = 100.
Our method is also superior than SegPGD and DDC-AT shown in Fig. 2a and
Fig. 2b. PGD-AT is close to our performance shown in Fig. 2a and is slightly
superior than ours when T = 12, 20. But as iteration increases, our method is
more promising than it. Our method is superior to other adversarial training
among different iterations.

