Supplementary Material for ‘Free-ATM:
Harnessing Free Attention Masks for
Representation Learning on Diffusion-Generated
Images’
David Junhao Zhang1∗ , Mutian Xu2,4† , Jay Zhangjie Wu1 , Chuhui Xue3 ,
Wenqing Zhang3 , Xiaoguang Han2,4 , Song Bai3 , and Mike Zheng Shou1‡
1

2

Show Lab, National Univeristy of Singapore
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
ByteDance
4
The Future Network of Intelligence Institute, CUHK-Shenzhen

Section A

More Related Work and Discussion

Representation Learning on Synthetic Data. Prominent studies such as
BigdatasetGAN [10] and StableRep [18] have delved into the domain of representation learning on synthetic images. These endeavors, along with our own,
can be delineated into two stages as shown in Fig. A. 1)The first stage pertains
to the creation of synthetic images. During this stage, BigdatasetGAN employs
BigGAN for the production of synthetic images and further enhances this process
by using human-annotated semantic masks to train a segmentation branch. This
branch is subsequently utilized to derive the semantic masks for the synthetic
images. StableRep adopts a diffusion model and employs captions for a single
class to generate multiple samples within a positive pair. Differently, our approach
utilizes diffusion models to generate both the images and the attention masks.
This is advantageous as diffusion models naturally yield these attention masks
during the image generation process, thereby obviating the need for additional
computational efforts and the necessity for additional human annotation of masks.
2) As shown in Fig. A, the second stage is representation learning on synthetic
images. BigdatasetGAN introduces an additional segmentation head within the
contrastive learning framework to facilitate predictions and compute the loss
between these predictions and the semantic masks generated in the first stage.
StableRep employs multiple samples from one positive pair to refine contrastive
learning. Our method, however, leverages the free attention masks and simple
yet effective adaptation to augment various representation learning frameworks
including vision-language pretraining, masked image modeling, and contrastive
learning. After these stages, the pretrained backbones are applied to different
downstream tasks.
∗

Work is partially done during an internship at ByteDance.
Project lead.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

