Visual Alignment Pre-training for Sign Language
Translation Supplementary Material
Peiqi Jiao1,2 , Yuecong Min1,2 , and Xilin Chen1,2
1

Key Laboratory of AI Safety of CAS, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
peiqi.jiao@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {minyuecong, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

This supplementary material provides more details of our method that are
not included in the main paper due to page limit. We first present additional
implementation details in Sec. A. Then, we present additional ablation results
on the choice of baseline (Sec. B.1), the selection of text encoder (Sec. B.2), the
influence of training data size (Sec. B.3), the selection of tokenizer (Sec. B.4),
the initialization of embedding layer (Sec. B.5), and the depth of the shallow
translation module (Sec. B.6). After that, we discuss the collapse of visual encoder (Sec. B.7), provide the results of using T5 in VAP (Sec. B.8), and explore
the transferability of visual encoder pre-trained on different datasets (Sec. B.9).
Finally, we summarize the limitation of our method in Sec. C and illustrate
the potential negative impacts in Sec. D. More qualitative results are provided
in Sec. E.

A

Additional Implementation Details

Setting on How2Sign and OpenASL. For How2Sign, we employ a similar
setting as [5], involving the use of lowercase during training and truecasing [3] to
restore the original capitalization during evaluation. For OpenASL, we employ
the tokenized texts for both training and evaluation as done in [4].
Network Architecture and Training Strategy. We provide the details of
network architecture and training strategy in Tab. A. Specifically, the V-L mapper refers to vision-language mapper, and three-layer transformer denotes a standard sequence-to-sequence Transformer with 3 layers of encoder and 3 layers of
decoder. SGD (0.04) and Adam (2e-5) indicate the adopted optimizer and maximum learning rate. For the switch of optimizer, as [1] states, we adopt SGD
with a large learning rate during the pre-training stage for better generalization,
and switch to Adam with a small learning rate later for fast convergence.

B

Additional Results

B.1

Choice of Baseline

As mentioned in Sect. 4.1, a three-layer Transformer is adopted as the translation module in our baseline method, which is different from the mBART used in

