1

A

Detailed Implementation

We conducted the main experiments using the pre-trained GLIP-L model since
GLIP [12] is the most representative fusion-based VLPMs. We adhered to the
evaluation metrics outlined in the original GLIP paper, incorporating inference
FLOPs and trainable parameters as criteria for efficient training. Unless specified
otherwise, we used the following experimental settings. In GLIP-L, each fusion
layer was augmented with the unified prototype tokens, each of a length denoted by k. For each benchmark, we chose different values of k after conducting
10-fold cross-validation. To be noted that, due to ODinW13’s task complexity,
an aggressive cross-validation strategy was employed on one of its sub-datasets,
Aquarium, to determine the hyperparameter k. The 1st and 2nd columns in
Table.1 of the main text show values determined by the k value confirmed on
COCO’s validation set [14], serving as an example. We provide the determined
k values for COCO [14], LVIS [4], and ODinW13 [11] in Tab. 1 of the supplementary material. We used uniform random initialization between -1 and 1 for
the unified prototype tokens. Regarding other settings, we followed the full finetuning settings presented in the original GLIP paper, including learning rate,
training epochs, optimizer, etc.
Table 1: k values for COCO, LVIS, and ODinW13.
COCO [14] LVIS [4] ODinW13 [11]
k=120
k=120
k=200

Regarding comparison methods, since they are not specifically designed for
fusion-based VLPMs, we had their hyperparameters optimally adjusted through
cross-validation on COCO for GLIP-L, and applied these hyperparameters on
other settings. Specific hyperparameter details for the comparison PEFT methods are provided in Tab. 2. Implementation details for some comparison methods need to be specified. "LoRA" [6] and "BitFit" [16] were applied exclusively
to the dual encoders’ stems for PEFT operations, whereas "LoRAXM HA " and
"BitFitXM HA " were specifically targeted at X-MHA layers. "LoRAXM HA " replaces all linear projections inside the X-MHA by LoRA linear projections. UPT
designs self-attention structures to map dual-modality tokens which are then
split and assigned to text and image latent spaces [17]. However, the token-wise
split proposed in its original publication is impractical because the text and image latent spaces have different dimensions. Thus, UPT was reimplemented by
channel-wise split due to the unavailability of the source code and the impractical token-wise split in its original paper. Other configurations not explicitly
mentioned, such as insertion positions, were kept at their default settings.
A.1

Dataset details and splits

COCO serves as a well-established benchmark for object detection. LVIS is a
challenging dataset characterized by a long-tail distribution. We report results

