On Pretraining Data Diversity
for Self-Supervised Learning
Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud1,2⋆⋄ , Tuhin Das2⋆ , Fabio Pizzati2⋆
Philip H.S. Torr2 , and Adel Bibi2† , Bernard Ghanem1†
KAUST
University of Oxford
1

2

Abstract. We explore the impact of training with more diverse datasets,
characterized by the number of unique samples, on the performance of
self-supervised learning (SSL) under a fixed computational budget. Our
findings demonstrate that increasing pretraining data diversity enhances
SSL performance, albeit only when the distribution distance to the downstream data is minimal. Notably, even with an exceptionally large pretraining data diversity achieved through methods like web crawling or
diffusion-generated data, among other ways, the distribution shift remains a challenge. Our experiments are comprehensive with seven SSL
methods using large-scale datasets such as ImageNet and YFCC100M
amounting to over 200 GPU days. The code and trained models will be
available at https://github.com/hammoudhasan/DiversitySSL.
Keywords: self-supervised learning · distribution shift · data diversity

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has recently emerged as a new paradigm to pretrain large vision models at scale [26, 27, 47]. Leveraging the ability to learn
from unlabelled data, pretraining on millions—or even billions [27, 53]—of images turned from an unachievable goal to a common practice. This exposure to
extremely diverse datasets, i.e., composed of a remarkable number of unique
samples, granted impressive performance and unprecedented generalization capabilities to a growing number of vision models [47]. Large-scale datasets, in
conjunction with substantial computational resources, have been the key driving forces for the success of SSL-based approaches. For instance, SEER [26],
pretrained for approximately 11 GPU years on a billion images, exemplifies
the massive computation and data resources employed for these models. It has
become the implicit norm that increasing computation and data is beneficial,
without any detailed analysis of how they separately impact SSL effectiveness.
In particular, it is not clear to what extent large datasets are responsible for
the impressive generalization capabilities of SSL models. Indeed, consider the
⋆

Equal contribution † Equal supervision ⋄ Work done during a research visit at Oxford

