Supplementary Document:
MapTracker: Tracking with Strided Memory
Fusion for Consistent Vector HD Mapping
Jiacheng Chen1∗ , Yuefan Wu1∗ , Jiaqi Tan1∗ , Hang Ma1 , and
Yasutaka Furukawa1,2
1

Simon Fraser University

2

Wayve

The supplementary document provides remaining system details (§A,§B,§C) and
additional experimental results (§D) as mentioned in the main paper. Please also
refer to the video results at our project page https://map-tracker.github.io,
demonstrating the local and global reconstructions in the video format with the
input perspective image streams.
⋄ §A: Remaining details of MapTracker, including 1) The transformation loss
for PropMLP; 2) The query propagation module; and 3) The strided memory
selection mechanism.
⋄ §B: Remaining details/analyses of our consistent vector HD mapping benchmarks, including details on 1) consistent ground truth generation; 2) the
track extraction algorithm for detection-based baseline approaches; and 3)
the consistency-aware mAP (C-mAP).
⋄ §C: Details of our online merging algorithm that generates the global vector
HD maps from per-frame reconstructions.
⋄ §D: Additional experimental results and analyses, including 1) The C-mAP
results of all methods using the track extraction algorithm with different lookback parameters; 2) Check the temporal consistency of MapTR’s ground truth
data using our consistent-aware benchmarks; and 3) Additional qualitative results.

A

Remaining Details of MapTracker

This section explains the remaining details of MapTracker (refer §3 of the main
paper).
A.1

Transformation loss details

The transformation loss Ltrans trains the PropMLP to ensure the latent transformation maintains the geometry and class type. The inputs and outputs of
the PropMLP are described in §3.3, Figure 2, and Figure 3 of the main paper.
For the propagated vector latents M∗VEC (t − 1) from t − 1 to t, we apply the
vector output heads to get the predictions Y∗ (t − 1). We then derive the ground
truth Ŷ∗ (t − 1) by directly applying the transformation matrix to the ground

