Supplementary Material
TextDiffuser-2: Unleashing the Power of
Language Models for Text Rendering
Jingye Chen∗13 , Yupan Huang⋆ 23 , Tengchao Lv3 , Lei Cui3 ,
Qifeng Chen1 , Furu Wei3
1
2
HKUST
Sun Yat-sen University 3 Microsoft Research
qwerty.chen@connect.ust.hk,
{yupanhuang,tengchaolv,lecu,fuwei}@microsoft.com, cqf@ust.hk

A

Samples for training the layout planner

As shown in Figure 1, we demonstrate more data for training the layout planner,
including samples with keyword specifications and samples without keyword
specifications.

B

Choice of the maximum length L

During the training process, the composed sequence (i.e., the prompt combined
with text content and position) has a maximum length limit. As shown in Figure 2, by analyzing the MARIO-10M dataset [1], we notice that the composed
sequence for 94.0% of the samples is less than 128 in length, and all samples
are below this threshold during the evaluation. Obviously, we can increase the
maximum length to a larger value, such as 256, accommodating 99.2% of training samples. However, enlarging the length limit would also result in increased
computational costs, such as raising the single sample inference time from 6 to 7
seconds. Therefore, the choice of length limit should be made based on practical
considerations, balancing between the model’s capability and efficiency.

C

More visualizations of layout prediction

As depicted in Figure 3, we showcase more layout prediction results. We specify the keywords to be rendered in the first two rows. The language model has
the capacity to organize the specified keywords, placing related keywords in the
same line and generating aesthetically pleasing layouts. Notably, the final row
of predictions includes words not present within the prompt. For instance, the
model substitutes “200g” for “200gram”. It is a logical substitution, given that
both terms convey the same meaning. Additionally, the model replaces the misspelled term “RRAINBOW” in the prompt with the correct term “RAINBOW”.
This further showcases the flexibility of the layout planner M1 .
⋆

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.

