Anytime Continual Learning for Open
Vocabulary Classification
Zhen Zhu , Yiming Gong , and Derek Hoiem
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{zhenzhu4,yimingg8,dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract. We propose an approach for anytime continual learning (AnytimeCL) for open vocabulary image classification. The AnytimeCL problem aims to break away from batch training and rigid models by requiring
that a system can predict any set of labels at any time and efficiently
update and improve when receiving one or more training samples at any
time. Despite the challenging goal, we achieve substantial improvements
over recent methods. We propose a dynamic weighting between predictions of a partially fine-tuned model and a fixed open vocabulary model
that enables continual improvement when training samples are available
for a subset of a task’s labels. We also propose an attention-weighted
PCA compression of training features that reduces storage and computation with little impact to model accuracy. Our methods are validated
with experiments that test flexibility of learning and inference.
Keywords: Continual learning · Anytime learning · Open-vocabulary
classification

1

Introduction

Continual learning aims to improve a system’s capability as it incrementally
receives new data and labels, which gains increasing importance with the expanding scale and applications of visual learning. Continual learning for classification is traditionally approached with discrete label spaces. Adding labels
or tasks over time changes the problem landscape, thereby increasing the difficulty of learning. The open vocabulary setting, however, frames classification
as comparing continuous feature and label embeddings. Any images and textual
labels can be embedded, so learning in this setting involves only improving on
the existing problem definition, which may be more amenable to continuous improvement. Although open vocabulary models can predict over arbitrary label
sets, even models like CLIP [38] that are trained on internet-scale data have
unsatisfactory performance on many tasks [48, 49].
Our work aims to continually improve open vocabulary image classifiers as
new labeled data is received. We call this “anytime continual learning” because the goal is to improve efficiently any time new examples are received and
to maintain the ability to predict over arbitrary label sets at any time.

