Supplementary Materials for DiffClass
Zichong Meng1 , Jie Zhang2 , Changdi Yang1 , Zheng Zhan1 , Pu Zhao⋆1 , and
Yanzhi Wang⋆1
1

Northeastern University, Boston MA 02115, USA
2
ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland

We further discuss our proposed approach with the following supplementary
materials:
– Appendix A: Visualization of Synthetic Images.
– Appendix B: Additional Experimental Results.
– Appendix C: Performace on Synthetic and Combined Test Data.
– Appendix D: Detailed Derivation for Equation (1).
– Appendix E: Potential Improvements for Our Method.

A

Visualization of Synthetic Images

We present the synthetic images generated using our method in Fig. A1. We
sample those synthetic images from the last incremental task on ImageNet100
with N = 20. We also present synthetic images generated from Stable Diffusion
V1.5 and real images of the same classes for comparison.
From Fig. A1, we can see synthetic images with full details from our exemplarfree CIL framework are closer to real images of the same classes in terms of style,
context, and domain. At the same time, they also preserve real data privacy
without remembering absolute details.

B

Additional Experimental Results

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct additional
experiments for CIL settings with a larger first task on the ImageNet100 dataset.
Following previous works [1, 3, 4, 6–8], we conduct experiments for three CIL
settings: (i) N = 6 with 50 classes for the first task and 10 classes for each of
the other 5 tasks (6 tasks in total); (ii) N = 11 with 50 classes for the first task
and 5 classes for each of the other 10 tasks (11 tasks in total); (iii) N = 21 with
40 classes for the first task and 3 classes for each of the other 20 tasks (21 tasks
in total).
We present the experimental results in Tab. A1. We notice that although
certain methods (such as PASS, IL2A, SSRE, FeTrIL, SSRE, and DDGR) originally perform poorly in equally split tasks, they achieve significantly better
performance in imbalanced spliting settings with large first task. These methods
⋆

Corresponding Author

