Learning Chain of Counterfactual Thought for
Bias-Robust Vision-Language Reasoning
(Supplementary Materials)
Yifeng Zhang , Ming Jiang , and Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN 55455, USA
{zhan6987, mjiang}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

1

Introduction

In our main paper, we have presented Counterfactual Bias-Robust Reasoning
(CoBRa) a novel counterfactual visual reasoning dataset with paired examples and rich annotations of reasoning processes, and Chain of Counterfactual
Thought (CoCT), a bias-robust chain-of-thought (CoT) method that employs
counterfactual thinking for improved generalizability for large vision-language
models (LVLMs). Both of them address the knowledge bias hidden in LVLMs
and contribute to better generalizability across different scenarios. The supplementary material provides additional experimental results and implementation
details of our proposed work:
1. Sec. 2 details the construction process of the CoBRa dataset, offering insights
into its design, including knowledge representations, knowledge editing rules,
reasoning functions, and the generation of questions, answers, and counterfactual images.
2. Sec. 3 expands on the implementation details of CoCT, particularly focusing
on training the TLM for predicting bias-robust reasoning processes.
3. Sec. 4 provides additional experimental analyses, including (1) model performance on other comprehensive LVLM benchmarks, (2) impacts of the
number of in-context examples on model performance, and (3) additional
qualitative examples demonstrating the CoCT prompts based on in-context
examples from our CoBRa dataset.

2

CoBRa Dataset Creation

To supplement the main paper’s introduction of CoBRa’s automated generation
pipeline, this section delves into the core components that enable its functionality. These include: (1) a unique knowledge graph representation for both visual
and knowledge features, (2) a set of graph editing rules for manipulating the
knowledge graph to create counterfactuals, (3) reasoning functions that sample
questions based on the graph, (4) a question engine that generates questionanswer pairs, and (5) diffusion models used for inpainting counterfactual images.

