Supplementary material for “Gaussian in the
Wild”
Dongbin Zhang∗ , Chuming Wang∗ , Weitao Wang, Peihao Li, Minghan Qin,
and Haoqian Wang†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University

A

Video demo

We strongly recommend readers to watch the video demo provided in webpage.
The video showcases the novel view synthesis achieved by GS-W across various scenes, based on different reference images. It also illustrates the variations
in scene appearance attained through the interpolation of different dynamic
features df . Additionally, we provide a visual comparison between GS-W and
CR-NeRF in terms of novel view synthesis and appearance tuning. The video
illustrates GS-W’s superior reconstruction of scene geometry and precise capture of environmental factors from the reference images, maintaining multi-view
consistency. Furthermore, it highlights GS-W’s ability to adjust scene appearance in a manner more aligned with human perception by weighting the features
extracted from the reference images.

B

More implementation details

B.1

Model parameters

Below, we provide a detailed overview of the network parameters and other
hyperparameter settings in GS-W. The Unet’s encoder utilizes the first 8 subconvolution modules from a pre-trained ResNet-18 to extract image features.
On the other hand, the decoder for generating K + 1 feature maps comprises 4
up-sampling convolution modules, along with a decoder including 3 up-sampling
convolution modules for producing the visibility map. The two decoder modules
are both equipped with batch normalization and ReLU activation functions. To
reduce computation, there are no skip connections between the encoder and the
visibility map generating decoder during the forward process. Transpose convolution is employed for up-sampling, with the number of channels for each feature
map fixed at 16. The learning rate for the Unet network gradually decreases from
2 × 10−3 to 2 × 10−5 .
The Fusion network Mf consists of two MLP modules, each with 3 and 2
hidden layers, and each with hidden unit counts of [128, 96, 64] and [48, 48],
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

