Explorative Inbetweening of Time and Space
Supplementary Material

1

Perceptual Study

We conducted a perceptual study to measure human preference between our
method and the corresponding baseline. Using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT),
each participant was presented with 30 pairwise results. The participants were
instructed to select the video they found more “realistic, of higher quality, and
exhibiting more natural motions and transitions”. In each pair, one video was randomly assigned to be from our method, while the other one was the corresponding generation from the closest baseline. The videos presented were randomly
selected from either of the three tasks. To ensure the validity of the responses, we
included 5 control trials within these comparisons with clearly unnatural videos.
From this study, we collected 66 valid responses. The preference rate, indicating
the proportion of participants favoring our method over the baseline, was then
calculated based on the valid responses.
The results are shown in Table 1. The study shows a clear preference for
our method in all three tasks with an overall average preference rate of 83.67%.
Particularly, we obtain the higher rate on view-bound results with a 97.79%
preference rate. Note that this task (generating camera trajectories from two
sparse and unposed views) has traditionally been considered difficult, as also
acknowledged by Du et al . [1]. While the quality of their method significantly
degrades when no camera pose is given, exhibiting blurry and unclear images,
our work retains the sharpness and quality of SVD and generates reasonable
camera trajectories.

Overall Avg. View bound Identical bound Dynamic bound
83.67%
97.79%
70.28%
82.94%
Table 1: Perceptual study: Preference rates for each of the three subtasks, compared
against Du et al . [1], Text2Cinemagraph [2] and FILM [3].

2

Further Discussion

Probing I2V models. The bounded generation task along with TRF can offer
a unique lens to evaluate SVD’s world dynamics understanding. Given two observations, we can analyze how the I2V model connects the motion trajectory,

