FAFA: Frequency-Aware Flow-Aided
Self-Supervision for Underwater Object Pose
Estimation — Supplementary Material
Jingyi Tang1,2∗ , Gu Wang1∗ , Zeyu Chen1 , Shengquan Li2 , Xiu Li1,2(
and Xiangyang Ji1

)

,

Tsinghua University
{tangjy21@mails.,wanggu1@,chen-zy22@mails.,li.xiu@sz.,xyji@}tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
lishq@pcl.ac.cn
1

Abstract. This document supplements our main manuscript entitled
FAFA: Frequency-Aware Flow-Aided Self-Supervision for Underwater Object Pose Estimation. We first present more details about our proposed
architecture for self-supervision, as well as some detailed training objectives from Sec. B, which is extended from Sec. 3 in the main paper.
We further provide additional quantitative results, an ablative study and
more qualitative results in Sec. C, Sec. D and Sec. E, respectively. Limitations are discussed in Sec. F. We also provide a discussion of potential
negative societal impact in Sec. G.

A

More Implementation Details

Rendered images generation. We render multiple images around P0 online.
i
i
, yawi∆ ,
, z∆
Given a pose P0 , a sef of small random perturbations ∆i =[xi∆ , y∆
i
i N
pitch∆ , roll∆ ]i=1 is employed to generate a set of PN . Subsequently, N synthetic
images {Iis }N
i=1 are rendererd with the object model M. We only render a synthetic image based on the P0 and the random noise is set to x∆ , y∆ , yaw∆ , pitch∆ ,
roll∆ ∼ U (0, 15), as well as z∆ ∼ U (0, 50). In the self-supervised stage, we take
x∆ , y∆ , yaw∆ , pitch∆ , roll∆ ∼ U (0, 7.5), as well as z∆ ∼ U (0, 15).

B

Detailed Training Objectives

During our pre-training stage, we train the network with labeled data to predict
both the flow and object pose iteratively. To supervise them in each iteration,
we initially obtain the ground-truth flow fe based on pose P0 and the groundtruth pose e
P, and then compute the supervised loss Lsup . On the other hand,
we establish multi-level alignment terms for self-supervised training, including
the image-level terms Lphoto , Lwarp−mask , Lf low , the feature-level term Lf eat ,
and Lpose . In this section, we introduce the details of Lsup , Lf low and Lpose .
∗ Equal contribution.

Corresponding author.

