Supplementary Material of
Region-Native Visual Tokenization
Mengyu Wang1,5(†) , Yuyao Huang1,5(†,‡) , Henghui Ding4 ,
Xinlong Wang2 , Tiejun Huang2 , Yao Zhao1,5,6 ,
Yunchao Wei1,5,6() , and Shuicheng Yan3
1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3
Skywork AI
4
Institute of Big Data, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
5
Visual Intelligence + X International Joint Laboratory of the Ministry of Education
6
PengCheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Organization of Supplementary Material
1. Section 1: Editing Operation
2. Section 2: Implementation Detail

1

Editing Operation

In this section, we will describe the details of the operations associated with
various editing effects. A corresponding schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 1.
Geometry Level Geometry-level operations refer to only manipulating the region masks while maintaining the region embeddings unaltered. Moving, scaling,
and shape modification are all categorized as geometry-level operations, as depicted in Fig. 1 (a), (b), and (c), respectively. The processes of moving and
scaling are executed through affine transformations, while shape modification
is accomplished through interactively brushing by users. Following these operations, for the empty areas that emerge in the original position of the edited
object, we assign each pixel to be included in the nearest background area.
Feature Level Feature-level operations maintain the region masks unchanged
while replacing the corresponding region embeddings with those from another
object or another image. This facilitates local feature/style transfer without
impacting geometric characteristics. An example is illustrated in Fig. 1 (d), where
the color of the mushroom cap is altered through replacing the embedding with
one from another image.
Geometry and Feature The erasing, adding and replacement of objects require
manipulation of both masks and embeddings. In Fig. 1 (e), the deletion of the
masks and embeddings associated with the mushroom leads to erase it from
the image. Following deletion, each pixel in the empty area is assigned into the

