20

H. Luo et al.

A

Experiments Details

In this section, we describe the details of the implementations (Appendix A.1),
the hyperparameters (Appendix A.2), and the task settings (Appendix A.3).
A.1

Implementations

We build our framework based on PyTorch [46] and use the implementations of
Transformer tricks from the codebase x-transformers5 . We pre-train a VQGAN
with the images extracted from BAIR and downstream tasks based on the released code6 . We use 8×A100 Nvidia GPU and 64 CPU cores for the pre-training
run, while using one single A100 Nvidia GPU and 16 CPU cores for each training
run. 10 hours are required to pre-train PVDR. For the online stage, 12 hours
are required to train on each Meta-World [88] task, and 18 hours are required
to train on each RLBench [29] task. The details of the implementations are as
follows.
PVDR Structure. We implement all modules in PVDR as Transformer-based
structures. Overall, the structures of the modules in PVDR, including a visual
dynamics encoder, a visual dynamics prior, a visual dynamics decoder, an action
alignment module, and a critic network, are shown in Figure 8. These modules
use a pre-trained VQGAN to compress the raw frames into grids of visual tokens and subsequently employ the Spatial-Temporal Transformers [79] to process
spatial-temporal visual token sequences. The modules differ from each other in
the input data type and the post-processing form of the hidden states. Specifically, the visual dynamics representations are in the same shape as visual token
grids and are viewed as grids of prompts that will be concatenated with the visual
token grids. During the decoding process, the hidden state of each visual token
will be projected onto a vector, whose dimension equals the size of the VQGAN
codebook. The softmax value of each dimension is viewed as the probability of
the corresponding code. For a quick decoding process, we do not use the beam
search. Instead, we recurrently use the code with the highest probability to form
a grid and directly decode one visual frame with VQGAN.
ST Transformer. In our PVDR implementation, the core structure is the SpatialTemporal Transformer (ST Transformer). For a lower attention computation
burden, an ST Transformer uses cross-stacked spatial and temporal attention
blocks to, respectively, process the information in spatial and temporal sequences.
Generally, we design spatial and temporal attention blocks following MaskViT [24].
As shown in Figure 9, the spatial attention blocks process the attention map of
visual tokens at the same timestep, while the temporal attention blocks process
the attention map of visual tokens in a small local spatial window alongside the
temporal sequence.
5
6

https://github.com/lucidrains/x-transformers
https://github.com/CompVis/taming-transformers

