Model Stock: All we need is just a few fine-tuned
models
– Appendix –
Dong-Hwan Jang1,2⋆
1

NAVER AI Lab

2

Sangdoo Yun1†

Dongyoon Han1†

Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
†
corresponding authors

In this Appendix, we provide in-depth analysis and additional insights to complement the main text of our study on Model Stock, our novel approach to
fine-tuning and weight merging. The contents are summarized as follows:
– We examine the angle norm consistency of fine-tuned weights across various
settings in §A, extending the observations discussed in §2.1.
– We provide detailed proofs of geometric properties of fine-tuned weights in
§B.
– We study the importance of reducing variance for performance in out-ofdistribution scenarios in §C, showcasing the test error landscape across various datasets and elaborating on the explanations in §2.2.
– We provide detailed proofs in §D for the optimal interpolation ratio in our
method §3.
– We discuss prior studies through the lens of our findings in §E.
– We provide an additional analysis of the interpolation ratio in §F.
– We present experimental settings of §4 in §G.
– We present additional experiments of Model Stock in §H
Each section aims to offer a comprehensive understanding of our method’s underlying principles and its broad applicability in machine learning.

A

Angle and Norm Consistency

We argue that, as discussed in §2.1, angles and norms of fine-tuned weights would
remain consistent across fine-tuned models, independent of various factors. These
factors include architecture type (ViTs [4], ResNet [7], ConvNeXt [14]), optimizers (SGD, AdamW [15]), augmentations (RRC [20], RandAug [3]), datasets (CIFAR [9], ImageNet [19]), or the initialization of the classifier (zero-shot, LP as in
LP-FT [10]). We depict the layer-wise angle and norm of 5 fine-tuned weights for
each category based on different random seeds. We give detailed illustrations for
each setting at the end of the Appendix to enhance readability (refer to Fig. H–
O). Across all these settings, the angle and norm of weights exhibit a surprising
level of consistency.
⋆

Work done during an internship at NAVER AI Lab.

