Making Large Language Models Better Planners
with Reasoning-Decision Alignment
Zhijian Huang1⋆ , Tao Tang1⋆ , Shaoxiang Chen2 , Sihao Lin3 , Zequn Jie2 ,
Lin Ma2 , Guangrun Wang4 , Xiaodan Liang1,5B
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Meituan Inc.
3
University of Technology Sydney 4 Sun Yat-sen University
5
Research Institute of Multiple Agents and Embodied Intelligence, Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

1

Additional Details

1.1

Implementation Details

We adapt LLaVa [2] as the foundation LLM in our RDA-Driver. To denote the
final trajectory output format, we add special tokens "<SOT>" (Start of Trajectory) and "<EOT>" (End of Trajectory) at the beginning and end of the
trajectory, respectively. In the perception data annotated by DriveLM [3], it is
necessary to predict the specific coordinates in the image. However, due to the
difficulty and lower priority of the coordinate prediction task, and to encourage the model to focus more on overall logical reasoning rather than excessively
focusing on detailed predictions, we remove the coordinate part during the training process, retaining only the object’s camera position in the image, i.e., <c4,
CAM_FRONT>. Finally, we train RDA-Driver with LoRA [1] strategy.

2

Additional Results

2.1

Few-shot learning

To assess the model’s ability in logical reasoning and causal inference, we conducte few-shot experiments using 10%, 50%, and 100% of the training data, as
shown in 1. Even with a small number of samples, i.e., 10% of the training data,
RDA-Driver demonstrate a competitive end-to-end decision-making capability,
despite the full dataset containing only 4072 samples. As the amount of data
increases, the model consistently achieves better performance.

3

Additional Visualizations

3.1

More Qualitative Results

As illustrated in Fig. 1, we presents examples showcasing the logical reasoning of
RDA-Driver. By responding to CoT prompts related to perception, prediction,
⋆
B

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

