Supplementary Material for
Omni6DPose: A Benchmark and Model for
Universal 6D Object Pose Estimation and
Tracking
This supplementary material provides additional statistics of Omni6DPose,
visualization of SOPE dataset, the details of GenPose++ implementation, and
additional experiments and analysis.

A

Additional Information of Omni6DPose

In this section, we provide additional statistical details about the Omni6DPose
dataset, showcasing its characteristics and diversity. Specifically, it includes the
statistics of full object categories, object symmetries, and materials. Additionally, to demonstrate the annotation quality of the ROPE dataset, we visualize
the annotated poses of objects.
A.1

Statistics of Full Object Categories

Figure 1 illustrates the frequency of occurrence for all object categories within
the Omni6DPose dataset, demonstrating the diversity of object categories covered. This diversity poses new challenges for universal 6D object pose estimation and is conducive to facilitating downstream applications, such as object
rearrangement [3] and robot manipulation [1].
A.2

Statistics of Object symmetries

In the domain of 6D object pose estimation, one of the principal challenges is mitigating the ambiguity issue arising from object symmetry. Omni6DPose includes
a spectrum of objects characterized by distinct symmetry attributes, broadly
classified into three categories: asymmetric objects such as cameras, continuously
symmetric objects exemplified by bottles, and discretely symmetric objects, typical examples being boxes. Further delineation within Omni6DPose segregates
discretely symmetric objects based on the count of peaks in the distribution of
the objects’ poses, categorized into Bimodal, 4-peak, 8-peak, and 24-peak classifications. The detailed statistical outcomes are illustrated in the left section of
Figure 2. This vast diversity of object symmetries compels the development of
new strategies and techniques for precise 6D object pose estimation.
A.3

Statistics of Object Materials

Objects in daily life are made from diverse materials, such as transparent glass
mugs and reflective knives. Precise 6D object pose estimation across different

