SafaRi:Adaptive Sequence Transformer for
Weakly Supervised Referring Expression
Segmentation
(Supplementary Material)
1,2⋆

Sayan Nag

2

2

, Koustava Goswami , and Srikrishna Karanam
1

University of Toronto
sayan.nag@mail.utoronto.ca
2
Adobe Research
{koustavag,skaranam}@adobe.com

A

Additional Related Work

Unsupervised Referring Expression Comprehension (REC). Referring
Expression Comprehension (REC) is a grounding task which involves localizing
an object present in an image with respect to a textual description of that object
[9, 12, 17, 23, 24, 42, 47]. With the introduction of Vision-Language Pretrained
(VLP) models [5,8,15,26], it has been possible to develop Unsupervised or ZeroShot REC (ZS-REC) methods [11, 31, 33, 43]. CPT [43] colors region proposal
boxes and utilizes a captioning model for predicting the colored proposals that
are linked to the textual expressions. RedCircle [31] employs visual prompting by
drawing circular contours outside the detected object proposals and subsequently
ranking them based on the obtained CLIP scores. However, it majorly lacks the
understanding of the spatial relationships among the detected proposals.
Referring Video Object Segmentation. Referring Video Object Segmentation (R-VOS) is a cross-modal task with the objective to segment the target object in all video frames, referred by a linguistic description. Existing approaches
comprises of (i) bottom-up methods where RES algorithms are applied independently at the frame-level [30, 44], (ii) top-down methods where a language
grounding model selects the best object tracklet from a candidate set of tracklets initially constructed by propagating the detected object masks from key
frames [16], and (iii) query-based method which introduce a small set of object
queries that are conditioned on the referring expression for the target object [38].
However, most of these methods are trained in a fully-supervised manner on the
benchmark R-VOS datasets. Conversely, in this work we consider a Zero Shot
R-VOS (ZS-R-VOS) task where we apply our model (trained on RES task) in a
zero-shot manner.
Sequence-to-Sequence (seq2seq) Modeling in Vision Tasks. Seq2seq modeling has displayed immense success in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
⋆

Work done during internship at Adobe Research.

