RPBG: Towards Robust Neural Point-based Graphics
in the Wild – Supplementary Material
A

Further Discussions

By extensive experiments, we have demonstrated the promising potential of pointbased methods for NVS, especially the great generalizability and robustness of RPBG
on varying scenes, with perceptually satisfactory rendering results. We make a visual
comparison on Museum of T&T dataset [13] in Fig. 1 to demonstrate the varying sources
of rendering artifacts and thus further discuss the fundamental differences between
RF-based and point-based methods.
The privilege of adopting triangulated point clouds as the scene representation has
been partially discussed in the main paper, as the points have contained all the verified
co-visibility information across images. Besides, the point-based representation enables
certain editing of the target scene, which is more difficult for RF-based methods. Please
refer to Appendix C for the cases of scene editing.
We also consider the convolutional patch-wise rendering scheme by RPBG plays an
important role in achieving perceptually good renderings. A similar ideology is explored
in [29] by enforcing structural supervision on a group of rendered pixels.
As the framed area in Fig. 1(a) shows, the rendering noise is mainly caused by
under-representation of RF, which is further due to the sparsity of input views (lack of
ray intersections). RF-based methods aim to represent the target scene loyally, where
each inquiry is supposed to be a frank reflection of local optical properties. In this way,
RF-based methods render an image in pixels without considering the context information,
establishing better pixel-to-pixel correspondence (thus higher PSNR).
We would like to in particular mention a series of RF-based methods, e.g., MVSNeRF [7], DS-NeRF [8], Point-NeRF [30], DDP [19], which incorporate geometric prior
information for optimizing NeRFs. They either adopt more explicit 3D proxies [7, 30]
than RFs, or enforce supervision on the rendered depth [8, 19] to accelerate reconstruction or handle sparse views. However, their rendering scheme is still RF-based volume
rendering, leaving the relevant drawbacks remain. For the readers’ information, we also
include the evaluation of DS-NeRF [8] in Tab. 2.

B

Dense Triangulation

We here elaborate the details of the dense triangulation procedure to obtain the point
clouds.
Recall that the NVS datasets consist of images and corresponding camera parameters
(intrinsics and extrinsics). To ensure the alignment between the poses and the reconstructed point clouds, we first triangulate sparse SIFT [14] points with COLMAP [21],
where we only optimize the 3D coordinates, leaving the camera parameters frozen.
Based on the sparse triangulation, we follow the view selection strategy in [31],
and choose 4 neighboring images with the best co-visibility for each image. Then we
estimate a depth map for each image, by aid of the top-4 neighboring images, with

