Diffusion Model is a Good Pose Estimator from
3D RF-Vision (Supplementary)
Junqiao Fan1 , Jianfei Yang1,2⋆ , Yuecong Xu1 , and Lihua Xie1
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{fanj0019, jianfei.yang, xuyu0014, elhxie}@ntu.edu.sg
2

Appendix
1

mmWave Human Sensing

In Figure 1, we illustrate the utilization of mmWave radar for human sensing, which detects human actions within a range of 3-5 meters from the radar.
This process generates mmWave point clouds (PCs). Simultaneously, a keypoint
annotation system such as VICON, Mocap, or Cameras is deployed to record
ground-truth human poses for reference. The mmWave radar-based human pose
estimation refers to training a neural network to estimate human poses using
mmWave radar point clouds as input.
For general mmWave human sensing, FMCW (Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave) chirp signals are transmitted and their reflections are received
through antenna arrays. These chirp signals are defined by parameters such as
start frequency fc , bandwidth B, and duration Tc . To generate radar PCs [15],
range-FFT separates different frequency components f from the IF signals, enabling the extraction of object distances using the formula R = cf2BTc , where c
is the speed of light. Doppler-FFT measures phase changes ω of the IF signals,
λω
facilitating the calculation of object velocities using v = 4πT
, where λ is the
c
wavelength of the chirp. Elevation angles φ and azimuth angles θ of the detected
ωx
objects are determined based on φ = sin−1 ( ωπz ) and θ = sin−1 ( cos(φ)π
), where
ωx is the phase change between azimuth antennas and corresponding elevation
antennas, and ωz is the phase change of consecutive azimuth antennas. Finally,
the Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) of the detected point clouds are calculated as
follows: x = Rcos(φ)sin(θ), z = Rsin(φ), and y = (R2 − x2 − z 2 ).

2

The Diffusion Model for Human Pose Generation

Forward process. The forward process involves the gradual sampling of increasingly noisy human poses, resulting in an intermediate distribution of noisy
poses that serve as training guidance. Here, k ∈ [1..K] denotes the diffusion steps,
⋆

J. Yang is the project lead.

