Ladder Variational Autoencoders
Casper Kaae Sønderby⇤
casperkaae@gmail.com

Tapani Raiko†
tapani.raiko@aalto.fi

Søren Kaae Sønderby⇤
skaaesonderby@gmail.com

Lars Maaløe‡
larsma@dtu.dk

Ole Winther⇤,‡
olwi@dtu.dk

Abstract
Variational autoencoders are powerful models for unsupervised learning. However
deep models with several layers of dependent stochastic variables are difficult to
train which limits the improvements obtained using these highly expressive models.
We propose a new inference model, the Ladder Variational Autoencoder, that
recursively corrects the generative distribution by a data dependent approximate
likelihood in a process resembling the recently proposed Ladder Network. We
show that this model provides state of the art predictive log-likelihood and tighter
log-likelihood lower bound compared to the purely bottom-up inference in layered
Variational Autoencoders and other generative models. We provide a detailed
analysis of the learned hierarchical latent representation and show that our new
inference model is qualitatively different and utilizes a deeper more distributed
hierarchy of latent variables. Finally, we observe that batch-normalization and
deterministic warm-up (gradually turning on the KL-term) are crucial for training
variational models with many stochastic layers.

1 Introduction
The recently introduced variational autoencoder (VAE) [10, 19] provides a framework for deep
generative models. In this work we study how the variational inference in such models can be
improved while not changing the generative model. We introduce a new inference model using
the same top-down dependency structure in both the inference and generative models achieving
state-of-the-art generative performance.
VAEs, consisting of hierarchies of conditional stochastic variables, are highly expressive models
retaining the computational efficiency of fully factorized models, Figure 1 a). Although highly
flexible these models are difficult to optimize for deep hierarchies due to multiple layers of conditional
stochastic layers. The VAEs considered here are trained by optimizing a variational approximate
posterior lower bounding the intractable true posterior. Recently used inference are calculated
purely bottom-up with no interaction between the inference and generative models [10, 18, 19]. We
propose a new structured inference model using the same top-down dependency structure in both
the inference and generative models. Here the approximate posterior distribution can be viewed
as merging information from a bottom up computed approximate likelihood term with top-down
prior information from the generative distribution, see Figure 1 b). The sharing of information (and
parameters) with the generative model gives the inference model knowledge of the current state of the
generative model in each layer. The top down-pass then recursively corrects the generative distribution
with a data dependent approximating the log-likelihood using a simple precision-weighted addition.
⇤

Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
‡
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
†

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

