Mahalanobis Distance-Based Multi-view
Optimal Transport for Multi-view Crowd
Localization
Qi Zhang1 , Kaiyi Zhang1,2 , Antoni B. Chan3 , and Hui Huang1(B)
1

Visual Computing Research Center, College of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
qi.zhang.opt@gmail.com, zhangkaiyi2022@email.szu.edu.cn,
hhzhiyan@gmail.com
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ),
Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China
abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract. Multi-view crowd localization predicts the ground locations
of all people in the scene. Typical methods usually estimate the crowd
density maps on the ground plane ﬁrst, and then obtain the crowd locations. However, existing methods’ performances are limited by the ambiguity of the density maps in crowded areas, where local peaks can be
smoothed away. To mitigate the weakness of density map supervision,
optimal transport-based point supervision methods have been proposed
in the single-image crowd localization tasks, but have not been explored
for multi-view crowd localization yet. Thus, in this paper, we propose
a novel Mahalanobis distance-based multi-view optimal transport (MMVOT) loss speciﬁcally designed for multi-view crowd localization. First,
we replace the Euclidean-based transport cost with the Mahalanobis distance, which deﬁnes elliptical iso-contours in the cost function whose
long-axis and short-axis directions are guided by the view ray direction.
Second, the object-to-camera distance in each view is used to adjust the
optimal transport cost of each location further, where the wrong predictions far away from the camera are more heavily penalized. Finally,
we propose a strategy to consider all the input camera views in the
model loss (M-MVOT) by computing the optimal transport cost for each
ground-truth point based on its closest camera. Experiments demonstrate the advantage of the proposed method over density map-based
or common Euclidean distance-based optimal transport loss on several
multi-view crowd localization datasets.
Keywords: Multi-view · Optimal transport · Crowd localization
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5 2.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 19–36, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_2

