Deep Cost Ray Fusion for
Sparse Depth Video Completion
Supplementary Material
Jungeon Kim1 , Soongjin Kim1 , Jaesik Park2 , and Seungyong Lee1
1

POSTECH, South Korea
Seoul National University, South Korea
{jungeonkim,kimsj0302,leesy}@postech.ac.kr
jaesik.park@snu.ac.kr
2

A

Network Architecture

Cost volume creation. For the RGB image feature extractor, we adopt the
image feature extractor used in NeuralRecon [12]. The feature extractor is a
lightweight variant of MnasNet [13] initialized with pretrained weights obtained
from ImageNet [5] and utilizes the architecture of Feature Pyramid Network [6] to
extract multi-scale features. For 3D convolutional U-Net, we employ the network
architecture used in CostDCNet [4].
Ray-based cost volume fusion module. Figure 8 illustrates the architecture
of our ray-based cost volume fusion module, where additional details (not shown
in Figure 4), including normalization, activation functions, and linear embedding
of voxel features within cost volumes, are presented. We utilize pseudo-3D convolutions [10] to reduce computational costs when considering spatially adjacent
voxel features.

B

Training Details

Our network training procedure consists of two phases. In the first phase, we
make batches where each one has randomly picked RGB-D images (four images
in our setting) from the dataset. We use these batches to train all learnable parts
except for the cross-attention module.
In the second phase, we make batches where each one has four consecutive
RGB-D images to learn temporal fusion. Here, the first sample in the batch is
used to train learnable parts except for cross-attention. Such batch configuration
is necessary because the first frame does not have the cost volume of the previous
frame to fuse. The second to last samples in the batch are used to train all parts,
including cross-attention, that learn to fuse volumes incrementally.
Once the training finishes, we can utilize the network to fuse cost volumes
incrementally. In addition, to handle the single-view settings, where only a single
RGB-D image was given, we disabled only the cross-attention module in the
trained network. With this scheme, we report all experimental results in the
single-view setting.

