Improving Image Generation with Better Captions

James Betker∗†
jbetker@openai.com

Gabriel Goh∗†
ggoh@openai.com

Li Jing∗†
lijing@openai.com

Tim Brooks†

Jianfeng Wang‡ Linjie Li‡ Long Ouyang† Juntang Zhuang† Joyce Lee† Yufei Guo†
Wesam Manassra†

Prafulla Dhariwal†

Casey Chu†

Yunxin Jiao†

Aditya Ramesh∗†
aramesh@openai.com

Abstract
We show that prompt following abilities of text-to-image models can be substantially improved by training on highly descriptive generated image captions.
Existing text-to-image models struggle to follow detailed image descriptions and
often ignore words or confuse the meaning of prompts. We hypothesize that this
issue stems from noisy and inaccurate image captions in the training dataset. We
address this by training a bespoke image captioner and use it to recaption the
training dataset. We then train several text-to-image models and find that training
on these synthetic captions reliably improves prompt following ability. Finally, we
use these findings to build DALL-E 3: a new text-to-image generation system, and
benchmark its performance on an evaluation designed to measure prompt following,
coherence, and aesthetics, finding that it compares favorably to competitors. We
publish samples and code for these evaluations so that future research can continue
optimizing this important aspect of text-to-image systems.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative modeling have allowed text-to-image generative models to achieve
drastic performance improvements. In particular, tackling the problem with sampling-based approaches such as autoregressive generative modeling[27, 2, 1, 20, 30] or using diffusion processes[25,
6, 11, 12, 19, 22] have allowed us to decompose the problem of image generation into small, discrete
steps which are more tractable for neural networks to learn.
In parallel, researchers have found ways to build image generators out of stacks of self-attention
layers[15, 3, 4]. Decoupling image generation from the implicit spatial biases of convolutions
has allowed text-to-image models to reliably improve via the well-studied scaling properties of
transformers.
Combined with a sufficiently large dataset, these approaches have enabled the training of large
text-to-image models which are capable of generating imagery which is rapidly approaching the
quality of photographs and artwork that humans can produce.
∗

Equal contribution
OpenAI
‡
Microsoft
†

