SINDER: Repairing the Singular Defects of
DINOv2 — Appendix
Haoqi Wang1 , Tong Zhang1 , and Mathieu Salzmann1,2
1

A

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
2
Swiss Data Science Center, Switzerland

Details on PCA Visualization

Our PCA visualization in Figures 1 and 3 follows the procedure in [8]. Given the
feature map of an image, containing H\times W patch tokens, we first extract the
three leading principal components of these tokens. Each token will become a
dim-3 vector after the PCA. Then we scale each component to the range 0-255
and interpret them as the RGB channels. The tokens are reshaped to resolution
H\times W , and we get the resulting PCA visualization.

B

Visualization of Clamping Singular Values

As a sanity check in Section 2, we clamp the singular value of the weights of linear
layers in DINOv2 to a smaller value. The PCA visualization is shown in Figure 5.
For each linear layer, we decompose the weight matrix using SVD (for example,
W=USV^T ) and then clamp the singular values S to be less than a threshold
\gamma  and get \protect \tilde  {S}  . At last, we replace the weight matrix with U\tilde {S}V . In Figure 5, we
compared with \gamma =2.0, 1.5, and 1.3, respectively. We can see that as \gamma  decreases,
the norms of defective patches also decrease, and the number of defective tokens
becomes less. However, when gamma is too small, the semantics of the feature
maps seem corrupted. So we would prefer learned optimal singular values rather
than trimming them according to some manually designed thresholds.

C

Visualization of Learning Target

We visualize the learning target defined by Equation (7) in the last row of Figure 6. The feature maps of the 9th, 19th, 29th, and 39th layers for the villa
image are illustrated. For demonstrative purposes, we show the learning targets
for all pixels, which are visually smooth. However, in real fine-tuning, only pixels
that are detected as defective contribute to the loss. The corresponding singular
defects using mask threshold \mu =4 are shown in the third row in Figure 6.

