18

A

Y. Mansour et al.

Dataset

ImageNet-mini [11] is the dataset we used for joint training, which has 100 classes and
60000 images, where 38400 images are selected as the training set. We artificially add
noise to the images. After adding noise, if the value of pixels is above 1 or below 0,
the value is clipped to 1 or 0 respectively. It should be noted that we generate the noise
on the test samples with a unique seed, but the noise for the training samples is totally
random, that means the noise of each training sample varies at each epoch.
For test-time adaptation, in addition to ImageNet-mini, we adopt CT [31], fastMRI
[44] , SIDD-small [1], DND [28], PolyU [41] and FMDD [46]to test our method on
different datasets.
CT dataset involves 2D breast CT simulations, where the simulated breast phantom
has random fibro-glandular structure and high-contrast specks. The phantom allows for
arbitrarily large training sets to be generated with perfectly known ground truth. The
data set consists of ground truth images, 128-view sinogram data, and the corresponding 128-view filtered back-projection (FBP) image. We only use the ground truth data
as the clean images, and manually add Gaussian noise (var=0.005) on them.
fastMRI is an MRI image dataset. We used the images obtained through root-sumof-squares reconstruction of the corresponding multi-coil k-space data as the clean images. We manually add Gaussian noise with standard deviation of 0.005 (pixel values
range from 0 and 1) to get the noisy images. It should be noted that fastMRI consists
of grayscale images, we expand the number of channels of these images to 3 before
inputting them into the denoising model.
SIDD-small is the Smartphone Image Denoising Dataset. The noise on images is
naturally generated by optical sensors, and clean images are obtained by averaging multiple shots. Since the images in SIDD are high resolution (4K), we split each image into
several 448 ⇥ 448 patches.
PolyU is PolyU-Real-World-Noisy-Images-Dataset, which is a natural noise dataset,
where the images are captured by different cameras, i.e., Canon (Mark 5D, 80D, 600D),
Nikon (D800), and Sony (A7 II). We adopt the cropped images in their GitHub repository (https://github.com/csjunxu/PolyU-Real-World-Noisy-Images-Dataset). The size
of each image is 512 ⇥ 512.
DND is Darmstadt Noise Dataset, which is a natural noise dataset. The authors
capture pairs of images with different ISO values and appropriately adjust exposure
times, where the nearly noise-free low-ISO image serves as the reference. To derive the
ground truth, they also correct spatial misalignment, cope with inaccuracies in the exposure parameters through a linear intensity transform based on a novel heteroscedastic
regression model, and remove residual low-frequency bias that stems, e.g., from minor
illumination changes [28]. They split the images into 512 ⇥ 512 patches. The ground
truth images are not available. For testing purposes, the denoised images must be sub-

