COMPOSE: Comprehensive Portrait Shadow
Editing Supplementary Materials
Andrew Hou1,2 , Zhixin Shu2 , Xuaner Zhang2 , He Zhang2 , Yannick
Hold-Geoffroy2 , Jae Shin Yoon2 , and Xiaoming Liu1
1

Michigan State University
{houandr1,liuxm}@msu.edu
2
Adobe Research
{zshu,cezhang,hezhan,holdgeof,jaeyoon}@adobe.com

1

Additional Discussions Regarding Prior Methods

We delve into face relighting and shadow editing methods in greater detail to
highlight the novel contributions of COMPOSE. We again emphasize that our
core contribution is our decomposition of the environment map representation
into ambient light and an editable gaussian dominant light source that can manipulate all shadow attributes (intensity, light size, and position). This also enables preserving the ambient light in the original source image through compositing with ID . As emphasized in the main paper, existing relighting methods [5–7]
that use environment maps as the lighting representation will completely change
the lighting environment to perform shadow editing by providing an entirely
new environment map. This is unsuitable for many computational photography
applications where the desire is to edit the facial shadows alone and to preserve the ambient light of the original environment. However, aside from these
methods, some relighting and shadow editing methods are able to preserve the
ambient light but lack a comprehensive set of shadow editing capabilities. Zhang
et al. [8] controls the degree of shadow softening but can’t intensify shadows.
They don’t consider shadows resulting from decreasing light size and can’t alter shadow position. Futschik el al. [2] are similarly able to control the degree
of shadow softening while maintaining the ambience of the original photo, but
they’re completely limited to shadow softening. Hou et al. [3] model shadow position/intensity, but don’t model light size and can’t edit shadow shape. They
also don’t properly disentangle existing light sources from albedo and source
image shadows will remain baked in. Nestmeyer et al. [4] use a single light direction (xyz) and thus can model shadow position but not intensity or light size.
Notably, none of these methods can handle shrinking the light to both
intensify the shadow and change its shape or need to completely modify the photo’s environment in order to do so. This is due to the lack of a
suitable lighting decomposition, which is enabled by our method’s separation of
the environment map into ambient light and an editable gaussian dominant light
source. The editable gaussian is what enables flexible control over all shadow attributes (including shrinking the light size), while the ambient light estimation
helps preserve the remaining lighting attributes of the original photo. Another

