16

Li. et al.

Mamba-ND: Selective State Space Modeling for Multi-Dimensional
Data
Appendix

7

Additional Discussions

7.1

Eﬀective Receptive Field (ERF)

We visualize the eﬀective receptive field (ERF) [40] of Mamba-ND in Fig. 6. ERF
is computed by setting the gradient of the center patch to one and backpropagating through the network. In particular, we visualize the ERF of ImageNet-1K
pretrained weights of Mamba-ND against the Bi-directional and Uni-directional
baseline (Tab. 6, row 5 and Tab. 6, row 4). Sensitivity is measured by the whiteness of a pixel in the visualization. The Uni-Directional model exhibits a sharp
cutoﬀ and is insensitive to all patches after it in the flattened sequence. This is
clearly undesirable in data where causal relations do not exist. The Bi-Directional
model exhibits a global receptive field, but it is heavily biased in the horizontal
direction. This is also undesirable because images can have vertical structures.
The Multi-Directional model exhibits a more uniform pattern in the sensitivity
visualization, which explains their superior performance.
7.2

Depths versus Widths

In Sec. 5.5, we showed that a complicated multi-directional design may not necessarily lead to improved performance over the alternating-directional baseline.
We hypothesize that this result is related to the eﬀective depth of the model.
Each of the block-level designs can be represented by a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) of layers, where the direction of edges implies the computation order.
In this interpretation, designs other than H+H-W+W-T+T- are trading tree
depths for widths. Existing literature [56] shows that depth is more important
than width in deep neural networks. Our results seem to reaﬃrm this conclusion.

8

Additional Ablation Studies

8.1

Additional ImageNet and HMDB-51 Results.

HMDB-51 and UCF-101 training requires ImageNet pretrained weights. Due
to architectural diﬀerences, diﬀerent HMDB-51 experiments may load diﬀerent
ImageNet pretrained weights. For completeness, we provide full results indicating
which weights are loaded for each experiment. All models are trained with a
learning rate of 1e-3 and a patch size of 16 for both pretraining and finetuning.
We report the results in Tab. 8.
In addition to the results already referred to in the main paper, we also
incorporate additional experiments on applying an alternating design to Bi-SSM.

