Textual Grounding for Open-vocabulary Visual
Information Extraction in Layout-diversified
Documents
Mengjun Cheng1,2 , Chengquan Zhang3 , Chang Liu4 , Yuke Li1 , Bohan Li3 ,
Kun Yao3 , Xiawu Zheng5 , Rongrong Ji5 , and Jie Chen1,2
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen,
China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Vision Technology, Baidu Inc.
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
School of Information Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn; chenj@pcl.ac.cn

Supplementary Material
A

Details about Evaluation of LLM-based Methods

We infer LLM-based models for the visual information extraction task by multiple rounds of question-answering tasks. The input query is comprised of three
parts: the prefix task description, the document context, and the question for
specific keys. The prefix task description is used to introduce the task for models.
We use the following as our prefix task description:
"You are a document-understanding AI, who reads the contents in the given
document image and tells the information that the user needs. Respond with the
original content in the document image, do not reformat. No extra explanation
is needed."
The following input is the document context. For MLLMs, images are directly
used as the document context. For LLMs, we use the official OCR words extracted from documents by an open-source OCR engine and convert those words
into sequences with spaces split. We then build questions for specific keys with
the template of "What is the { }?". The description of keys such as "title" and
"total price" are filled into the brace to generate sentences like "What is the
title?" and "What is the total price?". Since there are multiple keys for each
document type, the questions for each document image are multiple also. Therefore, we ask models for each document image multiple times. Note that for the
LLaMA2 [1] model, we use the Chinese version since the SVRD [2] benchmark
comprised eight document types with Chinese mainly. Likewise, the three parts
of the input question are also translated into Chinese. The words extracted from
documents are retained.
In measuring inference time, we focus solely on the model’s run time, excluding additional durations like OCR extraction or query generation. The models’

