FineMatch: Aspect-based Fine-grained Image
and Text Mismatch Detection and Correction (
Supplementary Material)
Hang Hua 1 , Jing Shi 2 , Kushal Kafle2 , Simon Jenni2 , Daoan Zhang1 ,
John Collomosse2 , Scott Cohen2 , and Jiebo Luo1
1

University of Rochester
2
Adobe Research
{hhua2, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, dzhang52@ur.rochester.edu
{jingshi, kkafle, jenni, collomos, scohen}@adobe.com

1

Explanations and Examples for Mismatch Aspects in
FineMatch

We present the definition of the four aspects in FineMatch. Entities are objects within an image that can be recognized by VLMs. In FineMatch, we define
the entities using the same concepts in Flickr 30K Entities [2]. The terms Attributes and Relations follow the definitions provided by the Visual Genome
(VG) Attribution/Relation framework [1]. However, the categories are limited in
VG, while in FineMatch the attributes and relations are open-set. Numbers
refers to the count of entities in the image. We also provide the examples for
each aspect in Figure 1.

2

Statistical Results for FineMatch

We provide extended statistical results for the quantity and quality analysis
across all data sources within FineMatch. Figure 2 illustrates the weights and
relations distribution among the data source, data domain, and the number of
mismatched aspects within the captions. Additionally, Figure 3 shows the distribution of the CLIP scores between the captions and the images in FineMatch.
Analysis from Figure 3 indicates that the average CLIP score across the three
data sources ranges between 0.3 and 0.35. This suggests a comparatively high
similarity level between the mismatched captions and the images, making it challenging for models to discern discrepancies between the captions and images.

3

Evaluation Framework

In this study, the BERT Score is computed using the bert-base-uncased model
weights, with the threshold T set as 0.55 for these conditions. Below, we present
the pseudo-code for ITM-IoU. The notation for all variables is consistent with
that outlined in Section 3.

