Depicting Beyond Scores:
Advancing Image Quality Assessment through
Multi-modal Language Models
—Supplementary Material—
Zhiyuan You12∗ , Zheyuan Li26∗ , Jinjin Gu34∗ , Zhenfei Yin34 ,
Tianfan Xue1† , and Chao Dong235†
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 University of Sydney
5
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology 6 University of Macau
zhiyuanyou@foxmail.com zheyuanli884886@gmail.com jinjin.gu@sydney.edu.au
zyin7056@uni.sydney.edu.au tfxue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk chao.dong@siat.ac.cn
∗
Contribute Equally † Corresponding Author
Project Page: https://depictqa.github.io
2

A1

Overview

This Supplementary Material is structured as follows. Dataset details are described in Sec. A2, followed by the methodology details in Sec. A3. Sec. A4
provides additional ablation studies. More quantitative results, qualitative results, and failure cases are presented in Sec. A5.

A2

Dataset Details

In this section, we provide additional descriptions and statistics of the introduced
M-BAPPS dataset.
In-context learning for response generation. As detailed in the main
paper, GPT-4 [5] is employed to convert human-annotated questionnaire options
into a natural language paragraph. Yet, GPT-4 tends to produce responses that
are overly verbose and potentially misleading. To mitigate this, we supply GPT4 with two human-written examples to align the generated responses with a
consistent writing style. Empirically, in-context learning effectively resolves these
issues, yielding high-quality responses.
Questions in the question set. We show various question examples in the
qualitative results of Task–1 (quality description, Fig. A10 & A11), Task–2 (quality comparison, Fig. A12 & A13), and Task–3 (comparison reasoning, Fig. A14,
A15, & A16). This corroborates that users may express similar questions in
different sentences, as discussed in the main paper.
Statistics of the response length in our M-BAPPS dataset are illustrated
in Tab. A1. We present metrics on both word count and string length. For the

