Privacy-Preserving Adaptive Re-Identification
without Image Transfer : Supplementary
Materials
Hamza Rami1,2 , Jhony H. Giraldo1 , Nicolas Winckler2 , and Stéphane
Lathuilière1
1

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
2
Atos

In this supplementary material, we provide results and analysis of additional
experiments and present additional details about the Fed-Protoid.
– We provide the pseudo-code of Fed-Protoid to give more details about its
algorithmic structure.
– We present a set of experiments focused on the source prototypes, initially
showing the significance of utilizing the global model for their computation
instead of the pseudo client. Subsequently, we highlight the impact of reducing the number of source prototypes in the performance of Fed-Protoid.
– We include a detailed analysis regarding the sensibility of the hyperparameters of Fed-Protoid.
– We compare the distributed MMD with the original MMD and some Domain
Generalization (DG) Re-ID methods.

1

Fed-Protoid: Algorithm

For completeness, we detail the Fed-Protoid algorithm as follows:

2

Additional experiments on the source prototypes:
computation and communication

2.1

Impact of Global model in source prototype computation

In this section, we present experimental results for both Fed-Protoid and FedProtoid++, showing the advantages of utilizing the global model for computing
source prototypes. The results shown in Table 1 indicate that across the two
configurations MS → M and MS → C, we obtain superior performance when
the prototypes are derived from the global model instead of the pseudo-client
model. The effectiveness of using the global model in prototype computation
can be attributed to its ability to bridge the gap between the source and target
domain distributions. Essentially, the prototypes generated by the global model
represent a median distribution that lies between those of the source and target
domains. This intermediary positioning facilitates more efficient optimization of

