Supplementary Materials for Auto-GAS:
Automated Proxy Discovery for Training-free
Generative Architecture Search
Lujun Li1 , Haosen Sun1 , Shiwen Li2 , Peijie Dong3 , Wenhan Luo1 , Wei Xue1 ,
Qifeng Liu1 , and Yike Guo1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Xidian University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
lilujunai@gmail.com;hsunas@connect.ust.hk;shiwenlisw@gmail.com;
pdong212@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn;whluo.china@gmail.com;weixue@ust.hk;
liuqifeng@ust.hk;yikeguo@ust.hk

In this supplemental material, we provide additional details on the proposed
Auto-GAS method to enhance understanding through thoughtful extra explanations, analyses, and technical specifics omitted from the main paper due to
length constraints.

A

More discussions

A.1

Analyzing Different Proxy Formations

To demonstrate the superiority of the feature calculation method of our AutoGAS, we conduct further experiments to facilitate a broader comparison. Specifically, we employ four different correlation calculation methods on the CIFAR-10
dataset to measure the correlation between sample features:
• Hessian Trace [21]: This method measures the average trace of the second
derivative of the loss function with respect to network weights. This slight
difference in performance may be attributed to the fact that Hessian Trace
method focuses on the loss landscape’s curvature, which provides insights for
evaluating the stability and convergence behavior of the candidate generator
architectures.
• L_2 norm: The L_2 norm represents the Euclidean length of sample features,
serving as a metric for the overall size and distribution of features. The
results are inferior to Auto-GAS, with an IS of 7.56 and FID of 24.62. Their
discrepancy might be because the L_2 norm overlooks higher-order statistics
and interactions between features.
• Entropy: Entropy measures the diversity and uncertainty of sample features. The generated images yield a slightly higher IS compared to the L2
norm (IS=7.7, FID=25.43).
Corresponding authors.

