Factorized Diﬀusion: Perceptual Illusions by Noise Decomposition

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Pixel Diﬀusion Model

19

For all experiments we use the pixel diﬀusion model DeepFloyd IF [33], as opposed to more common latent diﬀusion models. This is because the frequency
subband, color space, and motion decompositions are not meaningful in latent
space. For example, averaging channels in latent space does not correspond to an
interpretable image manipulation. Interestingly, using our method to construct
hybrid images with a latent diﬀusion model, by blurring latent codes, works to
an extent but is easily susceptible to artifacts (see Appendix F), so we opt to
use a pixel diﬀusion model which is more consistent and principled.
A.2

Hybrid Images

DeepFloyd IF [33] generates images in two stages. First at a resolution of 64 ⇥ 64
and then at 256⇥256. Because of this, we adopt the convention that our values
are specified for the 64 ⇥ 64 scale, and are scaled by 4⇥ for the 256 ⇥ 256 images.
We use a relatively large kernel size of 33 at both scales to minimize edge eﬀects.
We use values ranging from = 1.0 to = 3.0 for all hybrid images except
for those in Fig. 3, in which we sweep the value of .
A.3

Triple Hybrids

Triple hybrids are quite diﬃcult to synthesize, and as such we manually select
the sigma values and prompts to generate high-quality samples. Specifically, we
use 1 values from 1 = 0.8 to 1 = 1.0 and 2 values from 2 = 1.2 to 2 = 2.0
for all triple hybrids in Fig. 1 and Fig. 14.
A.4

Upscaling

DeepFloyd IF additionally uses a third stage which upscales from 256 ⇥ 256 to
1024 ⇥ 1024. We also use this stage, but because it is a latent model, we do
not apply our method. We upscale using only the prompt corresponding to the
highest frequency component or the color component.

B

Human Studies

We use Amazon Mechanical Turk for the human study. 77 “master workers” were
asked the following questions for each hybrid image pair:
• “Which image shows [prompt_1] clearer?”
• “Which image shows [prompt_2] clearer?”
• “Which image is of higher quality?”

For low frequency prompt questions, we downsample the images accordingly
in order to help participants more easily see the content. For the high frequency
prompt questions, as well as the quality questions, we display the images at full
resolution. Participants were shown 8 hybrid image pairs in a random order.

