Supplementary Material: Joint RGB-Spectral
Decomposition Model Guided Image
Enhancement in Mobile Photography
Kailai Zhou1 , Lijing Cai1 , Yibo Wang1 , Mengya Zhang1 , Bihan Wen3 ,
Qiu Shen†1,2 , and Xun Cao1,2
1

School of Electronic Sciene and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems with Extreme
Performances of MOE, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{calayzhou, cailijing, ybwang, 522023230161}@smail.nju.edu.cn,
bihan.wen@ntu.edu.sg, {caoxun, shenqiu}@nju.edu.cn

1

More Details about Mobile-Spec Dataset

1.1

Mobile-Spec Dataset Overview

In Figure 1, we present a diverse collection of representative samples from the
Mobile-Spec dataset. It can be found that the Mobile-Spec dataset comprises two
parts. The first encompasses images captured by the smartphone and hyperspectral camera, while the second comprises images related to shading, reflectance,
and material segmentation. The 16-bit input paired with corresponding 8-bit
target images are constructed for the task of tone enhancement, predominantly
featuring outdoor scenes with high dynamic range. It should be noted that both
16-bit input and 8-bit target images are in the sRGB color space, and we focus on
the tone enhancement task rather than learning the whole pipeline from raw data
to final output. The hyperspectral images, obtained using the GaiaSky-mini2 [1],
are intended to overcome the limitations in the spectral imaging capabilities of
mobile devices. On the right side of Figure 1, we showcase shading, reflectance,
and material segmentation images for each sample. The shading and material
segmentation images serve as targets for the prediction of the joint RGB-Spectral
decomposition model. Notably, the shading images are averages of the 850-1000
nm bands in hyperspectral images. It reveals that the near-infrared bands can
approximately delineate the distribution of shadows and illumination in outdoor environments. The material segmentation images, on the other hand, are
meticulously labeled by human annotators. Our Mobile-Spec dataset aims to
establish a high-quality foundation, offering insights and laying the groundwork
for further exploration of spectral information in mobile photography.
1.2

Alignment of Dual-Camera System

Dual Camera System. Figure 2(a) showcases our dual-camera setup, featuring the high-end commercial smartphone and the GaiaSky-mini2 hyperspec-

