(Supplementary Material)
Learning to Enhance Aperture Phasor Field
for Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging

In this supplementary material, we provide additional details related to the
topics discussed in the manuscript. The contents of the supplementary material
are as follows:
– Details of the analysis of frequency components and effects of noise, discussed in Section 3 of the manuscript (Section A).
– Details of our method including network architecture, noise parameters, and
wave propagation for the reconstruction (Section B).
– Details of the dataset (Section C).
– Details of the experiment setup (Section D).
– Details of baselines and additional comparison with more baseline methods
(Section E).
– Additional experimental results (Section F).
– Further discussion on societal impact, supervision of the reconstructed volumes, imaging systems, and neural networks for NLOS imaging (Section G).
– Error bar to validate the reproducibility of the proposed method (Section H).

A

Frequency Components Analysis Detail

In Section 3.2 of our main paper, we discovered the effects of noise across the
frequency components by visualizing reconstruction results of FK [10], one of
the representative NLOS methods. These reconstruction procedures include a
band-pass filter that discards signals outside a specific frequency range (i.e., for
a range B, a band-pass filter retains all frequency components within the range
B and discard all other components). For better comprehension, to visualize
signals in Figure 1, we omitted some of the lowest frequency components having
too large amplitudes (10 lowest frequency components).
Here, we further visualize reconstruction results on frequency-filtered measurements using various NLOS methods: back-projection (BP), LCT [16], and
RSD [11]. We also provide results of these methods on real-world measurements
of Statue [10], to better discover the effects of noise and frequency filtering. As
shown in Fig. 9, in most cases, all methods produce the noise-robust results with
details of the objects in when incorporated with the band-pass filter retaining
the range B (near the central frequency).

