AFreeCA: Annotation-Free Counting
for All
Adriano D’Alessandro(B) , Ali Mahdavi-Amiri , and Ghassan Hamarneh
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada
{acdaless,amahdavi,hamarneh}@sfu.ca

Abstract. Object counting methods typically rely on manually annotated datasets. The cost of creating such datasets has restricted the versatility of these networks to count objects from speciﬁc classes (such
as humans or penguins), and counting objects from diverse categories
remains a challenge. The availability of robust text-to-image latent diffusion models (LDMs) raises the question of whether these models can
be utilized to generate counting datasets. However, LDMs struggle to
create images with an exact number of objects based solely on text
prompts but they can be used to oﬀer a dependable sorting signal by
adding and removing objects within an image. Leveraging this data,
we initially introduce an unsupervised sorting methodology to learn
object-related features that are subsequently reﬁned and anchored for
counting purposes using counting data generated by LDMs. Further,
we present a density classiﬁer-guided method for dividing an image
into patches containing objects that can be reliably counted. Consequently, we can generate counting data for any type of object and
count them in an unsupervised manner. Our approach outperforms
unsupervised and few-shot alternatives and is not restricted to speciﬁc
object classes for which counting data is available. Code available at:
github.com/adrian-dalessandro/AFreeCA.
Keywords: Object Counting · Synthetic Data · Feature Learning

1

Introduction

Object counting is an important task in computer vision, with diverse applications such as crowd analysis [11,26,31], wildlife monitoring [1], and traﬃc analysis [9]. These tasks, historically reliant on fully-supervised methods, demand
detailed annotations that are labor-intensive to collect. For instance, the annotation of 5,109 images for a crowd counting dataset necessitated 3,000 h, averaging 35 min per image [29]. Although semi-supervised approaches have sought to
reduce this burden by requiring annotations for only a subset of the data, they
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5 5.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 75–91, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_5

