Supplementary Material for:
Merging and Splitting Diffusion Paths for
Semantically Coherent Panoramas
Fabio Quattrini , Vittorio Pippi ,
Silvia Cascianelli , and Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

In this document, we report additional results of our proposed MAD approach
for inference-time adaptation of diffusion models for generating long images. We
explore the effect of changing the application stage and varying the number of
application steps, present more detailed information regarding the user study,
and offer further comparisons with SD-L. Additionally, we report other qualitative results, also at different aspect ratios, and further discuss the limitations.

1

Effect of the Application Stage

In Tables 1 and 2, we report a quantitative analysis of the effects of applying
MAD at different stages in the noise prediction model of the considered LDM
and LCM. We observe that when MAD is applied only in the bottleneck (Mid
blocks), FID, KID, and mGIQA values are comparable to those obtained with
the baseline in which MAD is never applied and the perceptual coherence is lower
than in the other settings. On the other hand, I-LPIPIS, I-StyleL, and mCLIP
get better when MAD is applied more (i.e., in all blocks) and in later stages
of the U-Net (i.e., in the upsampling blocks). The same trend can be observed
from the LDM qualitatives in Fig. 2.

2

Effect of the Number of Application Steps

We report a quantitative analysis (Tab. 3) and a more exhaustive qualitative
analysis (Fig. 1) on the effect of the number of inference timesteps in which the
proposed MAD operator is applied (defined by the hyperparameter τ ). In this
experiment, we use the considered LDM run for 50 reverse process steps and
apply MAD at each timestep from the first one up to a certain threshold. As we
can see, 15 steps lead to a good trade-off between variety and uniformity.

3

Details of the User Study

Here, we report further details on the user study conducted to assess human
preference between images generated with our approach or with two other Stateof-the-Art ones (namely, MultiDiffusion [1] and SyncDiffusion [3]). For each ap-

