Modeling Label Correlations with Latent Context
for Multi-Label Recognition
(Supplementary Material)
Zhaomin Chen1 , Quan Cui2 , Ruoxi Deng1 , Jie Hu1 , and Guodao
Zhang3,∗
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Informatics for Safety & Emergency of Zhejiang
Province, Wenzhou University
2
Waseda University
3
Institute of Intelligent Media Computing, Hangzhou Dianzi University
{chenzhaomin123, ruoxii.deng}@gmail.com, cui-quan@toki.waseda.jp,
israel1987@126.com, guodaozhang@hdu.edu.cn

1

Generic Multi-Label Image Recognition

1.1

Ablation Studies

The Effect of Different Depths of Transformer: We show the performance
results with different depths of Transformer for our model in Fig. 1 (a). It could
be observed that even using a one-layer Transformer, we still achieve competitive
results. This result demonstrates the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed
method. Furthermore, for transformers with three layers, we can obtain the best
result. And when equipped with more layers, the performance drops slightly.
We conjecture that more layers will bring more parameters, which can result in
over-fitting.
The Effect of Different Mask Ratios: We also analyze the importance of
the mask ratio. We change the values of r in a set of {0, 0.1, 0.2, ..., 0.9}, as
depicted in Fig. 1 (b). In experiments, we choose the optimal value of r by crossvalidations. We can see that when r = 10%, it can obtain the best performance.
If r is too small, such as r = 0%, modelling label correlations with partial label
failed. While if r is too large, it will make the inference process more difficult
and cause performance degradation.
The Effect of Different α and β: To study how the hyperparameters α and
β affect the performance accuracy, we conduct the ablation study on the MSCOCO dataset. We change the values of α in a set of {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0},
as shown in Fig. 2 (a). We observe that when α = 1.0, our method can achieve
the best performance. Slightly increasing the α value would not influence the
performance significantly, which proves the robustness of our method. However,
*

Corresponding authors

