Distributed Active Client Selection With
Noisy Clients Using Model Association
Scores—Supplementary Document
Kwang In Kim
POSTECH, Korea
kimkin@postech.ac.kr

Additional results: Figure 1 presents the results of experiments in scenarios
where malicious clients possess clean data labels but intentionally transmit
random model updates. These updates were deliberately calibrated to match the
magnitude of legitimate model updates, derived from their original, unaltered
labels. When requested, these clients provided loss values calculated using the
original labels. On the other hand, in Fig. 2, malicious clients transmit the
negation of their genuine model updates. Figure 3 shows scenarios where label
errors were introduced by randomly assigning class labels from uniform class
distributions. In Figs. 4 and 5, data heterogeneity was adjusted by allocating
⌊0.1Y ⌋ and ⌊0.3Y ⌋ classes, out of the total Y classes, to each client, extending
the experimental framework of McMahan et al. [3].
Figure 6(a–b) presents the results of an algorithm that combines InvLoss
and RFA, referred to as InvLoss+RFA. InvLoss+RFA initially selects clients using
InvLoss at each round and then constructs the final model update by using
RFA from the selected clients. However, the results consistently demonstrated
inferior performance compared to InvLoss, highlighting the inherent challenge of
achieving both communication efficiency and robustness through a combination
of existing algorithms.
In Fig. 6(c–d), we present additional comparison results including Fang and
Ye’s robust federated learning algorithm (RFL) [1], Shejwalkar and Houmansadr’s
Byzantine robust learning algorithm (Byz) [4], and Xu et al.’s label noise correction
approach (FeC) [5]. We also present a variation of our algorithm, Ours (w/o
pseudo-min), which normalizes the model association Q values using the actual
minimum of all Q values instead of the pseudo minimum in Eq. 10 of the main
paper. This does not require knowledge of one reliable client.
Table 1 shows the results of statistical significance tests in comparison to the
baseline Random.
Discussion: Our global association score is based on the Pearson correlation
coefficients of the model update vectors, capturing up to second-order joint
dependence. While higher-order dependence could potentially be more effective
for analyzing noisy clients, it would also be more computationally demanding.
Future work should explore the feasibility of efficiently using such higher-order
dependence.

