MMVR: Mmwave Multi-View Radar dataset and benchmark

A

17

Contributions

M. Rahman, P. Wang, and P. Boufounos contributed to the development of
the MMVR testbed. M. Rahman and P. Wang coordinated and participated in
data collection. P. Li and P. Wang established the annotation pipeline for labels used in object detection, pose estimation, and segmentation with P. Wang
contributing to label curation. S. Kato and P. Wang worked on the pose estimation baseline with S. Kato evaluating benchmarks under various data splits
and protocols and visualizing the results. R. Yataka, A. Cardace, and P. Wang
contributed to the object detection and segmentation baselines with R. Yataka
evaluating benchmarks under various data splits and protocols benchmarks and
visualizing the results. M. Rahman and P. Wang worked on the initial alignment
between the camera and radar frames, the camera-radar calibration, and the
signal processing pipeline to generate radar heatmaps. R. Yataka contributed to
the refined alignment between camera and radar frames. S. Kato, R. Yataka, and
P. Wang contributed to data segmentation, sequence splits, and the organization
of the final data structure. P. Wang initiated the MMVR eﬀort for indoor perception applications at MERL and led the project from its inception. P. Wang
and P. Boufounos supervised the project.

B

Responsibility to Human Subjects

Our data collection for MMVR was approved by our institutional review board
(IRB). We initiated a call-for-volunteers in our institution and recruited 25 participants. At the beginning of each data session, we informed participants about
our experiment, its research goal, the procedure, potential exposure to highfrequency radio frequency waves, and the use of the camera. We notified the
participants that de-identified data would be made publicly accessible for research purposes. A consent form was signed by all participants.

C

Limitations and Potential Harms

Our dataset MMVR has limitations regarding annotations and benchmarks. Our
annotation pipeline is based on RGB images. In cases of natural occlusion (chair,
table, sofa) in a cluttered room of P2, the annotated BBox, keypoints, and segmentation pixels are also occluded or have extremely low reliability. As a result, it
is unclear if radar-based approaches can lead to better perception performance
than camera-based approaches under these natural occlusions. The maximum
number of subjects in a session is limited to 3. Radar perception in a dense crowd
is less explored and the dataset is extremely limited. Although radar perception
has fewer privacy concerns than the camera, MMVR can be potentially utilized
to classify and estimate attributes of subjects such as gender, size, height, and
gait. It may be also used to advance technologies for indoor surveillance without
acknowledgment or permission.

