Appendix For AddMe: Zero-shot Group-photo
Synthesis by Inserting People into Scenes
Dongxu Yue1,2 ⋆ , Maomao Li1 , Yunfei Liu1 , Qin Guo2 , Ailing Zeng1 ,
Tianyu Yang1 , and Yu Li1
1

International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA), 2 Peking University
http://addme-awesome.github.io/page/

The appendix is organized as follows. In appendix A, we present more implementation details of our method. Then, in appendix B, we show details of our evaluation metrics and effect of mask size in our AddMe. Next, we display more experimental results in appendix C. Last, we give more information on the dataset
construction and the corresponding statistics in appendix D.

A

Implementation Details

We train our model based on the Stable Diffusion inpainting model 1 , using
OpenCLIP ViT-H/14 [4] as the image encoder. We incorporate the ID-Adapter
in all 16 major blocks of the SD model, adding it in the cross-attention layer
and including the portrait attention module after each self-attention layer. Our
model is trained on a single machine with 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs (80GB), with
a batch size of 16 per GPU for 500k steps. During training, we resize the shortest
side of the image to 512 and then process the image to a resolution of 512×512.
The trainable parameters in the first and second stages are 46.58M and 198.42M,
respectively. Our model is based on SD 1.5. To deal with arbitrary mask shapes,
we utilize both bounding box masks and masks of arbitrary shapes with a probability of 0.5 each. It should be noted that we follow the same training details
in the naive solution.
A.1

Inference

During inference, our model requires a reference ID image Iref , a target scene
image Itarget , a square or arbitrarily shaped mask M , optional text prompts T ,
and spatial control conditions such as pose or depth map. Following previous
image editing methods [3, 7, 14, 17], we adopt DDIM sampler [11] with 50 steps,
and set the guidance scale to 7.5.
Classifier-free Guidance. To enable classifier-free guidance [6], during training, we randomly drop the text or reference image condition with a probability
of 0.05, and simultaneously drop both text and reference image conditions with
⋆
1

This work was done during Dongxu’s internship at IDEA.
https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting

