Surface Reconstruction from 3D Gaussian
Splatting via Local Structural Hints
Qianyi Wu1(B) , Jianmin Zheng2 , and Jianfei Cai1,2
1

Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
{qianyi.wu,jianfei.cai}@monash.edu
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, Singapore
asjmzheng@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. This paper presents a novel approach for surface mesh reconstruction from 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20], a technique renowned
for its eﬃciency in novel view synthesis but challenged for surface reconstruction. The key obstacle is the lack of geometry hints to regulate the
optimization of millions of unorganized Gaussian blobs to align to the
true surface. This paper introduces local structural hints during training to address the challenge. We ﬁrst leverage the prior knowledge from
monocular normal and depth estimations to reﬁne the covariance and
mean of Gaussian primitives, enhancing their organization and providing
crucial normal information for surface extraction. However, due to the
highly discrete nature of Gaussian primitives, such geometry guidance
remains insuﬃcient for the alignment with the true surface. We then
propose to construct a signed distance ﬁeld by a moving least square
(MLS) function over the Gaussians in each local region. More importantly, we further propose to jointly learn a neural implicit network to
mimic and regularize the MLS function. The joint optimization helps
the optimization of Gaussian Splatting towards accurate surface alignment. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of
our method in achieving superior mesh quality compared with the SoTA
surface reconstruction for 3DGS. More resources can be found on our
project page: https://qianyiwu.github.io/gsrec.
Keywords: 3D Gaussian Splatting · Surface Reconstruction

1

Introduction

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20] has garnered signiﬁcant attention in the
realm of 3D computer vision for its exceptional eﬃciency in modeling 3D radiance ﬁelds. Given multi-view images with corresponding camera poses, 3DGS
initializes Gaussian primitives from a sparse point cloud that comes from
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 25.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 441–458, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_25

