Learning to Model the Tail

Yu-Xiong Wang
Deva Ramanan
Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw,dramanan,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We describe an approach to learning from long-tailed, imbalanced datasets that
are prevalent in real-world settings. Here, the challenge is to learn accurate “fewshot” models for classes in the tail of the class distribution, for which little data
is available. We cast this problem as transfer learning, where knowledge from
the data-rich classes in the head of the distribution is transferred to the data-poor
classes in the tail. Our key insights are as follows. First, we propose to transfer
meta-knowledge about learning-to-learn from the head classes. This knowledge is
encoded with a meta-network that operates on the space of model parameters, that
is trained to predict many-shot model parameters from few-shot model parameters.
Second, we transfer this meta-knowledge in a progressive manner, from classes
in the head to the “body”, and from the “body” to the tail. That is, we transfer
knowledge in a gradual fashion, regularizing meta-networks for few-shot regression
with those trained with more training data. This allows our final network to capture
a notion of model dynamics, that predicts how model parameters are likely to
change as more training data is gradually added. We demonstrate results on
image classification datasets (SUN, Places, and ImageNet) tuned for the long-tailed
setting, that significantly outperform common heuristics, such as data resampling
or reweighting.

1

Motivation

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have revolutionized the landscape of visual recognition,
through the ability to learn “big models” with hundreds of millions of parameters [1, 2, 3, 4]. Such
models are typically learned with artificially balanced datasets [5, 6, 7], in which objects of different
classes have approximately evenly distributed, very large number of human-annotated images. In
real-world applications, however, visual phenomena follow a long-tailed distribution as shown in
Fig. 1, in which the number of training examples per class varies significantly from hundreds or
thousands for head classes to as few as one for tail classes [8, 9, 10].
Long-tail: Minimizing the skewed distribution by collecting more tail examples is a notoriously
difficult task when constructing datasets [11, 6, 12, 10]. Even those datasets that are balanced along
one dimension still tend to be imbalanced in others [13]; e.g., balanced scene datasets still contain
long-tail sets of objects [14] or scene subclasses [8]. This intrinsic long-tail property poses a multitude
of open challenges for recognition in the wild [15], since the models will be largely dominated by
those few head classes while degraded for many other tail classes. Rebalancing training data [16, 17]
is the most widespread state-of-the-art solution, but this is heuristic and suboptimal — it merely
generates redundant data through over-sampling or loses critical information through under-sampling.
Head-to-tail knowledge transfer: An attractive alternative is to transfer knowledge from data-rich
head classes to data-poor tail classes. While transfer learning from a source to target task is a well
studied problem [18, 19], by far the most common approach is fine-tuning a model pre-trained on the
source task [20]. In the long-tailed setting, this fails to provide any noticeable improvement since
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

