S1

InpaintNet

sentation yields a more vivid expression, such as a more
pronounced lip shape and expressions like ”cringing eyebrows.” This constraint could potentially be addressed by
incorporating a more advanced 3DMM model in the future.

InpaintNet is designed to effectively eliminate artifacts
caused by the warping operations by predicting residual maps of pixels. The network takes five warped lowresolution feature maps fw and the corresponding lowresolution masks mw as input to output five residual lowresolution feature maps fr . Adding fr to fw produces
the final low-resolution feature maps fo . Inspired by
UNet, InpaintNet has a simple yet powerful architecture
for multi-scale feature extraction. The network consists
of an encoder with an input layer and four downsampling
layers, and a decoder with four upsampling layers and an
output layer. Each downsampling and upsampling layer
includes two convolutional layers with batch normalization and ReLU activation. Skip connections are utilized
in the decoder to preserve and fuse low-level and highlevel feature information during upsampling, enhancing
the network’s ability to capture fine details and perform
efficient artifact correction without compromising on detail or quality. The specific structure and layer configuration are illustrated in Figure S1.

Figure S2: Comparisons of 3DMM expression parameters
with varying accuracy. Left: prediction-based 3DMM expression parameters. Right: optimization-based 3DMM
expression parameters.

S3

More results can be seen in our provided supplementary video. Our approach can create high-fidelity talking
avatar videos with natural facial expressions that are consistent with the given content.

𝑓"

𝑓!

Figure S1: Detailed structure of InpaintNet. The blue
layer represents the encoder layer, which consists of two
convolution layers. The green layer represents the decoder layer, which also consists of two convolution layers. The yellow layer represents the output layer of the
decoder, which has only one convolution layer.

S2

Video Demo

3DMM Representation

Although our method achieves high generative quality, its
performance is constrained by the accuracy of the 3DMM
model. Figure S2 illustrates this limitation, contrasting
results obtained with prediction-based 3DMM parameters
(left) to those with optimization-based parameters (right),
which provide higher accuracy. A finer 3DMM repre1

