Enhancing Cross-Subject fMRI-to-Video
Decoding with Global-Local Functional
Alignment
(Supplementary Material)
Chong Li⋆ , Xuelin Qian⋆§ , Yun Wang⋆ , Jingyang Huo, Xiangyang Xue† ,
Yanwei Fu† , and Jianfeng Feng
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{lichong23,jyhuo22}@m.fudan.edu.cn,
{xlqian,19110850009,xyxue,yanweifu,jffeng}@fudan.edu.cn

1

More Implementation Details

Pretraining In order to mitigate the impact of variations in fMRI data collected by different machines and individuals, we utilized a large-scale fMRI Pretrained Transformer Encoder (fMRI-PTE) [3], pretrained on the extensive UK
Biobank dataset [2]. Subsequently, we performed additional fine-tuning on both
the benchmark dataset [5] and our curated dataset, employing an autoencoder
training framework [3]. More specifically, we processed the original 256×256
fMRI surface image using a patch size of 16. Each patch was then transformed
into a 1024-dimensional embedding using 24 layers of transformer with 16 heads.
The resulting features, with a dimensionality of 257×1024, served as the output
of the encoder. Subsequently, only the [CLS] token was input into another set
of 24 transformer layers for decoding and reconstructing the original fMRI surface image. Mean square error (MSE) was used as the loss function during this
process.
This methodology allows the encoder to compress the each fMRI frame into
a 1 × 1024 vector and then reconstruct the original fMRI, thereby acquiring a
comprehensive understanding of fMRI data. Moreover, to prevent the encoder
from accessing the test set data, unlike MinD-Video [1], we exclusively conducted
fine-tuning on the training set data. In this phase, the batch size was set to 64
with a learning rate of 1e-4. To prevent overfitting, we applied a weight decay
of 0.01, and the training was limited to 2000 steps.
Contrastive Learning During the contrastive learning phase, to mitigate overfitting, we applied data augmentation for image and text. Random cropping was
employed for images, while text underwent synonym augmentation and random
⋆: Equal contributions.
§: Dr. Xuelin Qian is now with Northwestern Polytechnical University.
†: Corresponding authors.

