Diffusion Models for Open-Vocabulary
Segmentation
Supplementary Material
Laurynas Karazijav, Iro Laina, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian Rupprecht
Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{laurynas,iro,vedaldi,chrisr}@robots.ox.ac.uk

In this supplementary material, we provide additional experimental results,
including further ablations and qualitative comparisons (Appendix A), consider
the limitations and broader impacts of our work (Appendix B), and conclude
with additional details concerning the implementation (Appendix C).

A

Additional experiments

This section provides additional experimental results of OVDiff.
A.1

Additional Comparisons

Category filter. To ensure that the category pre-filtering does not give our
approach an unfair advantage, we augment two methods (TCL [3] and OVSegmentor [26], which are the closest baselines with code and checkpoints available)
with our category pre-filtering. We evaluate on the Pascal VOC dataset (where
the category filter shows a significant impact; see Table 3) and report the results
in Tab. A.2. We observe that TCL improves by 0.6, while the performance of
OVSegmentor drops by 0.1. On the contrary, our method benefits substantially
from this component, but it still shows stronger performance without the filter
than baselines with.
Influence of Γ segmentation method. We also further investigate the use
of CutLER [23] to obtain segmentation masks. We also provide example results
of segmentation in Fig. C.4. In Tab. A.3, we devise a baseline where CutLERpredicted masks are used to average the CLIP image encoder’s final spatial tokens
after projection. Averaged tokens are compared with CLIP text embeddings to
assign a class. While relying on pre-trained components (like ours), this avoids
support set generation. In the same table, we also consider whether the objectness
prior provided by CutLER could be beneficial to other methods as well. We
consider a version of TCL [3] and OVSegmentor [26] which we augment with
CutLER. That is, after methods assign class probabilities to each pixel/patch, a
majority voting for a class is performed in every region predicted by CutLER.
This combines CutLER’s understanding of objects and their boundaries, aspects
where prior methods struggle, with open-vocabulary segmentation. However, we
observe that this negatively impacts the performance of these methods, which
we attribute to only a limited performance of CutLER in complex scenes present

