Supplementary Material

A

Further Explanations

A.1

TTA with Data Augmentation Approaches

Data augmentation is being used across various fields to enhance robustness
against distribution shifts, including supervised [19,20], semi-supervised [15], and
self-supervised learning [1]. Similarly, in TTA, MEMO [21] applies multiple data
augmentations to a single input. Notably, it utilizes 64 data augmentations on
test-time input to minimize marginal entropy and enables more stable adaptation
than TENT [17]. Here, MEMO applies data augmentation to the input and
tunes the classifier by minimizing the averaged prediction over augmentations.
In contrast, Decorruptor uses augmentation when training the diffusion model
for robustness against distribution shifts before adaptation.
A.2

Detailed Contributions of Decorruptor

We clarify our Decorruptor is a classifier-agnostic generator that modifies corrupted images into clean images. Decorruptor allows for obtaining stable performance through the ensemble of multiple decorrupted images. Moreover, it can
also remove corruption from images with out-of-distribution (OOD) classes, making them usable for downstream tasks. This is supported by VideoTTA results
(Section 5.4) in the main text. These are key differences from other EM-based
TTA approaches (e.g., EATA, SAR, and DeYO) and a single robust model (e.g.,
PIXMIX). Following Eq. (10), the final prediction is obtained by ensembling the
predictions of the generated clean images with the original prediction. This indicates that Decorruptor can be applied orthogonally with other TTA methods
that modify the original prediction. Note that the single Decorruptor checkpoint
was utilized across all datasets, methods (e.g., EATA and PIXMIX), and tasks
(e.g., image and video classification), demonstrating its versatility. Furthermore,
Decorruptor achieves a threefold increase in speed and superior performance
compared to the data augmentation-based model updating baseline.
A.3

Justification/Implication of Universal Prompt:

We chose the general text prompt (Clean the Image) to handle any unknown
distribution shifts at test time (i.e., corruption levels and types), Other valid
prompts (e.g., Decorrupt the image) will also work while they are fixed during training and inference time. To clarify it, since this prompt is fixed, our
Decorruptor can be considered an image-to-image translation model that reverts
corrupted images to their clean image counterparts.

