1

Controllable Contextualized Image Captioning:
Directing the Visual Narrative through
User-Defined Highlights
Supplementary Material
1

Datasets and Implementation Details

Dataset Details. We conduct our experiments on Wiki-Web2M [2], a largescale webpage dataset containing two million Wikipedia article pages with text
and images organized by sections, allowing context to be defined easily. Specifically, we follow the official split on the contextual image captioning task, with
2,222,814/124,703/124,188 samples for train/val/test split respectively. Each
sample consists of an image paired with its relevant context derived from the
webpage data. The structured data allows for a more flexible definition of context at different levels. In the presented experiment, the context of images is
constructed by combining the page title, section title, section text, and captions
of the remaining images in the section of the webpage.
Model Details. We adopt LongT5 (tglobal-base) [4] as the underlying architecture for both proposed methods as well as the weight predictor for R-Ctrl,
due to its superior efficiency compared to Prefix Global used in [2] with only a
marginal trade-off in performance. We use CLIP-large [12] to extract the frozen
image feature, and we adopt T5-large [13] to derive the token-level relevance
scores for training.
Hyperparameter Details. Input texts are truncated to a length of 512 tokens,
and the output length is set to 128 for all methods except P-Ctrl, where an
output length of 192 is used in account for the extra prompting tokens. For PCtrl, the threshold value to derive the training highlights prompt is set to θ =
0.3. Furthermore, we impose an upper limit of 40 on the number of prompting
words during training to prevent scenarios where an excessively lengthy prompt
could constrain the space available for the caption. For R-Ctrl, we set the weight
recalibration value to α = 0.1 for controlled caption generation. During training,
all methods are optimized with an AdamW [8] optimizer with a linearly decaying
learning rate of 5e − 5 and betas (0.9, 0.999). The models are trained on a single
NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, with a batch size of 12 for 3 million steps. In addition,
the weight predictor for R-Ctrl is trained using cross entropy loss with the same
optimizer and a batch size of 20 for 1 million steps.
GPT-4V Evaluation Details. In terms of highlights selection, we prompt
GPT-4 to select N = 10 highlighted component candidates from contexts, and

