Stepping Stones: A Progressive Training Strategy
for Audio-Visual Semantic Segmentation
(Supplementary Material)
Juncheng Ma1 , Peiwen Sun2 , Yaoting Wang3 , and Di HuB3,4
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
majuncheng21@mails.ucas.ac.cn
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
sunpeiwen@bupt.edu.cn
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, China
yaoting.wang@outlook.com
dihu@ruc.edu.cn
4
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Search and Recommendation

1

More Qualitative Comparison

In this section, we conduct a more comprehensive qualitative comparison across
all three subtasks, contrasting our approach with AVSbench [6] and AVSegformer [2]. For the S4 task, illustrated in Fig. A1, all three methods demonstrate
satisfactory performance, yet ours exhibits slight superiority in terms of segmentation accuracy and audio-visual alignment. For the MS3 task, depicted in
Fig. A2, our method notably surpasses other approaches in sound source determination and segmentation accuracy. Finally, for the AVSS task, as depicted in
Fig. A3, our approach remarkably outperforms prior methods in both establishing audio-visual correspondence and semantic comprehension.

2

Generalization of Stepping Stones Training Strategy

To further validate the generalization of our approach, we present some results to
illustrate the enhancement on AVSBench and AVSegformer through the Stepping
Stones strategy. As depicted in Figs. B4 and B5, the application of the Stepping
Stones strategy yields significant improvements on both audio-visual alignment
and semantic comprehension.
In the main paper, we simulated three levels of accuracy for the first-stage
results during experiments to validate the generalization of Stepping Stones.
These levels, termed low, high and oracle, correspond to first-stage results with
IoU values of 77.10%, 83.65%, and 100% (averaged across S4, MS3, and V2
subset), respectively. Figs. B4 and B5 present results obtained at high level.
B

Corresponding author.

