1

1

Controlling the World by Sleight of Hand:
Supplementary Material

Please see coshand.cs.columbia.edu for webpage and code.
1.1

Dataset Details

SomethingSomethingv2 The dataset contains over 180k videos of humans
performing pre-defined, basic actions with everyday objects. The actions fall under 174 prescribed categories. We exclude videos that belong to the ‘pretending’
category and videos that do not include hands, as these are not relevant to our
task. We utilize hand bounding box annotations provided in the Something-Else
dataset [3], however we note that bounding boxes can quite easily and accurately
be obtained from off-the-shelf methods such as GroundingDINO [1] making this
approach scalable to larger-scale datasets.
In-the-wild Dataset To test the robustness of CoSHAND outside of the SomethingSomethingv2 dataset, we collected 45 videos of ourselves interacting with
objects in our lab and home settings against various backgrounds. These interactions are listed below (note that some of these actions have multiple videos
associated with them, hence only 25 actions are present but with possibly multiple instances per action): opening books, knocking a bottle over, pushing a
bottle, lifting a box, opening a container, pulling a chair, pushing a chair, opening a drawer, moving a keyboard across the table, putting pack of gum inside
drawer, squishing a soft ball, poking play dough, rotating a bulb, pushing a
pencil which then pushes a box, stacking eraser and spray, stacking eraser and
marker, separating two markers, moving an eraser across the whiteboard, moving a marker to the side, putting an eraser inside a mug, putting a box inside a
mug, moving a pencil behind a mug, separating a picture frame and a bottle ,
moving a bottle to the side, squishing a pillow.
1.2

Training Details:

We finetuned our model on an 8×A100-80GB machine for 7 days and use AdamW
[2] with a learning rate of 10−4 for training. We reduce the image size to 256 ×
256 (with a 32 × 32 latent dimension), in order to be able to increase the batch
size to 192 because larger batch sizes allows for increased training stability and
convergence rates. (Note that with more compute and a larger latent space,
we could achieve higher quality results as more spatial information would be
preserved). We experiment with variations of the classifier free guidance scale
at test-time (see ??). UCG, TCG, and, CoSHAND are initialized with the Stable
Diffusion provided checkpoint.

