Formula-Supervised
Visual-Geometric Pre-training
– Supplementary Material –
Ryosuke Yamada*1,2 , Kensho Hara*1 ,
Hirokatsu Kataoka1 , Koshi Makihara1 , Nakamasa Inoue1,3
Rio Yokota1,3 , and Yutaka Satoh1,2

,

1

AIST, 2 University of Tsukuba, 3 Tokyo Institute of Technology
* equal contribution
Project Page; https://ryosuke-yamada.github.io/fdsl-fsvgp/

A

FSVGP details

This section describes the details of our Formula-Supervised Visual-Geometric
Pre-training (FSVGP). Section A.1 details the Visual Geometric Fractal Database
(VG-FractalDB). Section A.2 details a unified model for pre-training VG-FractalDB.
A.1

VG-FractalDB construction details

This section delineates the methodology employed in constructing the VG-FractalDB,
focusing on using 3D Iterated Function Systems (3D-IFS) [1] and our dataset
diversity and consistency between visual and geometric modalities.
3D-IFS is a mathematical framework for generating fractal geometry. It is
central to defining the categories and variations in VG-FractalDB. Formulasupervised consistency labels in VG-FractalDB are linked to the 3D-IFS parameters. In certain 3D-IFS parameter cases, the 3D fractal point cloud is concentrated in a part of the 3D space. Therefore, the quality of the 3D fractal point
cloud is checked based on the variance threshold to exclude such 3D fractal point
clouds. Only the 3D fractal point clouds whose variance value exceeds the variance threshold value in all axes are defined as the categories of VG-FractalDB.
The variance threshold ensures a wide variety of fractal shapes. For augmenting
within each category, we used FractalNoiseMix proposed by Yamada et al. [8].
This augmentation technique enriches the dataset with a broader range of fractal
geometries by augmenting 3D fractal models by mixing other 3D fractal models.
The 3D fractal models are then projected onto 2D planes to generate fractal images. This process randomly selects a camera viewpoint in 3D space. A
perspective projection transformation maps point clouds onto a 2D plane. This
particular transformation is chosen to accurately maintain the relative size and
shape of 3D objects in the 2D rendering. Each parameter must be defined to
achieve a realistic projection, such as the viewing angle (focal length), aspect
ratio, and near and far planes. We set the focal length to 45 degrees, the aspect
ratio to 1.0, and the near and far planes to 1.0 and 100, respectively. The camera

