20

L. Tian et al.

A

Implementation Details

A.1

The structure of NePhi NDFs

NePhi NDFs contain one forward transformation φθ1 and one backward transformation
φθ2 . The transformation maps are modeled by adding a displacement vector field u to
the identity transform, namely φ{θ1 ,θ2 } (x, z(x)) = x + u{θ1 ,θ2 } (x, z(x)). To be noted,
our proposed NDFs do not restrict the type of implicit function we use for u(x, z(x)),
as long as the input is kept as (x, z(x)) and the output is a vector of the same dimension as x. This work uses Modulated Periodic Activations from Mehta et al. [28] with
MLPs as uθ . uθ1 and uθ2 share the same structure but have separate parameters θ1 and
θ2 . We use two hidden layers with 512 hidden feature dimensions with each followed
by sin activation functions [43]. We use a Fourier feature mapping [48] to embed the
coordinates.
A.2

The structure of CNN Encoder fθ3

For the encoder, we use a convolutional neural network (CNN) that accepts the concatenation of I A and I B as input and outputs the global latent code zg . The CNN contains
several layers, with each layer composed of one convolution, one batch normalization,
and one LeakyRelu. The kernel size and stride of the convolutional layer are set to 3
and 2, respectively. The numbers of the input channel is 2 for the first layer. We use 6
layers and the numbers of the output channel are set to [8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256]. After
the CNN layers, we flatten the feature map and pass it to two fully connected layers. For
high-resolution images, the dimension of the feature maps before the fully connected
layers could be large. In such a scenario, we iteratively append layers with an output
channel dimension of 256 as the final layer, provided that the dimension of the feature
map remains greater than 3 after the last layer.
We diverge from an intermediate layer, which is succeeded by a convolutional layer,
to generate the local latent code zl . The branching point is determined by the dimension
of the intermediate feature map. We opt to branch from the feature map that most closely
resembles 16×16 for 2D and 16×16×16 for 3D feature maps. Fig. 5 shows the structure
of fθ3 when the input image has the shape of 175 × 175 × 175.
A.3

Experimental Details

We set the parameters for all experiments with λ1 = 10, λ0 = 1e − 2, and dimensions
for both zg and zl to 32. The similarity ratio is defined as 2e − 2, and the number of
sampling points is constrained to a maximum of 10e5. The regularizer ratio is established at 1e − 4, and the number of sampling points is restricted within the range of 10
to 500.
For the COPDGene dataset, the training of NePhi spans 2600 epochs, utilizing a
batch size of 32. The model selected for evaluation is determined by the highest validation score on the validation set, where the validation score is assessed using the DICE
score of the lung segmentation map. This configuration remains consistent across all

