Supplementary Material for Reshaping the
Online Data Buffering and Organizing
Mechanism for Continual Test-Time Adaptation
Zhilin Zhu1,2 , Xiaopeng Hong1,2⋆ , Zhiheng Ma3,4,5 , Weijun Zhuang1,2 , Yaohui
Ma1,5 , Yong Dai2 , and Yaowei Wang2,1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
3
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computility Microelectronics
5
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
{zhuzhilin, weijunzhuang}@stu.hit.edu.cn hongxiaopeng@ieee.org
zh.ma@siat.ac.cn yh.ma@siat.ac.cn chd-dy@foxmail.com wangyw@pcl.ac.cn

In the supplementary material, we provide more analysis and experiments
on this paper. In Appendix A, we provide a detailed explanation of different
adaptation settings involved in Tab. 1. Appendix B provides additional class
activation mapping (CAM) visualization results as supplementary empirical observations. Appendix C provides more details and comprehensive results of the
semantic segmentation CTTA task. In Appendix D, we provide an additional
comparison with a recent approach that uses a buffer to solve temporal correlation, demonstrating the effectiveness of the buffering and organizing mechanism
in our method in simultaneously addressing three key challenges in CTTA.

A

Detailed Explanation on Different Adaptation Settings

In Tab. 1, we compare different adaptation settings and distinguish them based
on four aspects: the available data form of the source domain and target domain, the distribution and access mode of the target domain data stream during
adaptation. A stationary distribution means that the data on the target domain
obeys the same distribution, while a continually changing distribution indicates
that the distribution of data on the target domain changes over time. Regarding
the access mode, offline means that the model has multiple epochs of access to
the entire set of test data, while online means that the input is a single-pass
data stream and the model can only process the current batch of data at a time.
In the following, we provide further explanation for each setting.
Fine-tuning (FT): FT [7, 16] is a popular paradigm in transfer learning, where
parameters of a source model are fine-tuned based on labeled data from the
target domain. The data distribution on the target domain is stationary, and
the model can have multiple rounds of access to the entire labeled target data.
⋆

Corresponding author

