Supplementary Material: TIP: Tabular-Image
Pretraining for Multimodal Classification with
Incomplete Data
Siyi Du⋆ , Shaoming Zheng , Yinsong Wang , Wenjia Bai , Declan P.
O’Regan , and Chen Qin⋆
Imperial College London, London, UK
{s.du23,s.zheng22,y.wang23,w.bai,declan.oregan,c.qin15}@imperial.ac.uk

Broader Societal Impact: Our proposed TIP, which is optimized using statistical techniques, could potentially perpetuate biases and unfairness present
in the training data. For instance, the image-tabular data in the UK Biobank
database [4] is mostly collected from white population and healthy subjects [2,
20]. Previous studies have found that deep learning models could potentially
learn spurious correlations between cardiac diseases and population characteristics and may result in negative societal impacts when generalizing to other
populations [11, 15]. Therefore, further research and deployment based on this
model should take into account these issues, along with potential solutions to
address biases and unfairness.

A

Detailed Data Description

The UK Biobank (UKBB) [4] is used for two cardiovascular disease classification
(diagnosis) tasks: coronary artery disease (CAD) and myocardial infarction (Infarction). This dataset comprises 36,167 subjects. For each subject, we utilized
mid-ventricle slices of its cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) images at three time
phases, i.e., end-systolic (ES) frame, end-diastolic (ED) frame, and a time frame
between ED and ES. In addition, we employed 75 tabular features, including 26
categorical features, e.g., alcohol drinker status, and 49 continuous features, e.g.,
average heart rate, and their detailed information can be found in Tab. 1.
Moreover, we have used a natural image dataset, Data Visual Marketing
(DVM) [12], for a car model classification task with 283 classes. We employed
176,414 image-tabular samples from this dataset. As illustrated in Tab. 2, each
sample has 17 tabular features in total, including 4 categorical and 13 continuous features. For both UKBB and DVM datasets, we pre-processed their tabular
data before using them for our task as in [9]. Additionally, we converted categorical data into ordinal numbers and standardized continuous data using z-score
normalization, with a mean value of 0 and standard derivation of 1.
⋆

Corresponding authors.

