Supplementary Material
Boosting 3D Single Object Tracking with 2D
Matching Distillation and 3D Pre-training
Qiangqiang Wu1 , Yan Xia⋆2 , Jia Wan3 , and Antoni B. Chan1
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
School of Engineering and Design, Technical University of Munich
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Shenzhen
qiangqwu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, yan.xia@tum.de, jiawan1998@gmail.com,
abchan@cityu.edu.hk
2

In this supplementary material, we provide additional details on implementation, overall architecture, ablation study, and qualitative visualization. Sec. A
illustrates the implementation details in our Target-Aware Projection (TAP)
module and 3D trackers (i.e., SiamDisst and MemDisst). Sec. B details the
overall architecture of our proposed 3D trackers including both SiamDIsst and
MemDisst. More ablation studies are conducted in Sec. C. More tacking results
w/ limited training data is shown in Sec. D. The additional results is presented in
5. Sec. F shows the qualitative visualization of the 3D tracking results and projected 2D images w/ or w/o target-aware interaction generated by our approach.
We discuss the limitation and future work in Sec. G.

A

Implementation Details

For the TAP module, it consists of a backbone network, a lightweight crossattention module C and a CNN-based head g. The backbone network and the
head g follow the same implementation in [8]. The lightweight cross-attention
module C is implemented as a simple transformer layer with 2 heads and 96
hidden dimensions. The matching module is used to extract target-aware search
features, which are further input to the voxel-based head in SiamDisst or point
cloud (PC) based head in MemDisst for 3D box prediction. Note that the memory
mechanisms used in STNet [3] and MbpTrack [9] are different, i.e., STNet mainly
focuses on sampling memory points from the initial template frame and the
previous frame, while MBPTrack samples memory points from three historic
frames for matching. Without any modifications, we follow the same memory
sample mechanisms in STNet and MBPTrack to sample the memory points for
training our TAP modules used in SiamDisst and MemDisst, respectively. The
hyper-parameter λ is set to 1.0 for MemDisst and 0.1 for SiamDisst.
Following one pass evaluation [5], we use Precision and Success metrics to
evaluate the 3D tracking performance. Specifically, the Precision metric calculates the AUC for the distance between the centers of the predicted 3D bounding
⋆

Corresponding Author

