Optimizing Illuminant Estimation
in Dual-Exposure HDR Imaging
Mahmoud Aﬁﬁ(B) , Zhenhua Hu , and Liang Liang
Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
mafifi@google.com

Abstract. High dynamic range (HDR) imaging involves capturing a
series of frames of the same scene, each with diﬀerent exposure settings,
to broaden the dynamic range of light. This can be achieved through
burst capturing or using staggered HDR sensors that capture long and
short exposures simultaneously in the camera image signal processor
(ISP). Within camera ISP pipeline, illuminant estimation is a crucial step
aiming to estimate the color of the global illuminant in the scene. This
estimation is used in camera ISP white-balance module to remove undesirable color cast in the ﬁnal image. Despite the multiple frames captured
in the HDR pipeline, conventional illuminant estimation methods often
rely only on a single frame of the scene. In this paper, we explore leveraging information from frames captured with diﬀerent exposure times.
Speciﬁcally, we introduce a simple feature extracted from dual-exposure
images to guide illuminant estimators, referred to as the dual-exposure
feature (DEF). To validate the eﬃciency of DEF, we employed two illuminant estimators using the proposed DEF: 1) a multilayer perceptron
network (MLP), referred to as exposure-based MLP (EMLP), and 2) a
modiﬁed version of the convolutional color constancy (CCC) to integrate
our DEF, that we call ECCC. Both EMLP and ECCC achieve promising
results, in some cases surpassing prior methods that require hundreds of
thousands or millions of parameters, with only a few hundred parameters
for EMLP and a few thousand parameters for ECCC.
Keywords: Computational color constancy · Illuminant estimation ·
HDR imaging

1

Introduction and Related Work

Camera image signal processor (ISP) comprises several modules, each dedicated
to enhancing speciﬁc aspects of the quality of captured raw images by the camera sensor [16]. One key component among these modules is the white-balance

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 12.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 202–219, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_12

