MTA-CLIP: Language-Guided Semantic
Segmentation with Mask-Text Alignment
(Supplementary Material)
Anurag Das, Xinting Hu, Li Jiang, and Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

In this supplementary material, we provide additional experimental results
and technical details that were omitted in the main paper due to space constraints.
– Section 1: Additional details and ablations
• t-SNE Visualization for Pixel-Text vs. Mask-Text Alignment
• Ablation with Mask-Text Contrastive Learning
• Ablation with Mask-Text Score Computation
• Results on PASCAL-Context [10] Dataset
• Params and FLOPs comparison
• Comparison with Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
• Extension to Instance Segmentation
– Section 2: More qualitative results

1

Additional Details and Ablations

t-SNE Visualisation of Mask-Text vs. Pixel-Text Alignment. In this
experiment, we compare Pixel-Text Alignment with Mask-Text Alignment. As
discussed in Sec.1 (main paper), Pixel-Text Alignment methods such as DenseCLIP [11] perform alignment at low-resolution image features and hence suffer
from class-ambiguity problems, particularly along the class boundaries. MaskText Alignment, on the other hand, uses mask representations with inherent
boundary information for alignment. Therefore, such alignment does not suffer
from class ambiguity problems. We experimentally show both alignments using
a t-SNE plot in Fig. 1. Specifically, a given image is fed to the Pixel-Text Alignment based trained DenseCLIP model, and the text along with encoder pixel
features are extracted. Similarly, for our MTA-CLIP, we give the same image as
input to the trained model and extract the mask and text features from the last
Mask-Text Decoder layer. Next, we fit a t-SNE model with these features and
plot the t-SNE embeddings as shown in Fig. 1. We clearly observe that mask
features are better aligned with the text features compared to the pixel features.
Further, we also observe that for all of the classes in Fig. 1, only one mask token
captures the entire class.
Ablation with Mask-Text Contrastive Learning. Mask-Text Contrastive
Learning aims to align mask representations with class-level text representations
(Sec. 3.2.2 in the main paper). Our MTA-CLIP performs such alignment after

