Sinkhorn Distances:
Lightspeed Computation of Optimal Transport

Marco Cuturi
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
mcuturi@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Optimal transport distances are a fundamental family of distances for probability
measures and histograms of features. Despite their appealing theoretical properties, excellent performance in retrieval tasks and intuitive formulation, their computation involves the resolution of a linear program whose cost can quickly become prohibitive whenever the size of the support of these measures or the histograms’ dimension exceeds a few hundred. We propose in this work a new family
of optimal transport distances that look at transport problems from a maximumentropy perspective. We smooth the classic optimal transport problem with an
entropic regularization term, and show that the resulting optimum is also a distance which can be computed through Sinkhorn’s matrix scaling algorithm at a
speed that is several orders of magnitude faster than that of transport solvers. We
also show that this regularized distance improves upon classic optimal transport
distances on the MNIST classification problem.

1 Introduction
Choosing a suitable distance to compare probabilities is a key problem in statistical machine learning. When little is known on the probability space on which these probabilities are supported, various
information divergences with minimalistic assumptions have been proposed to play that part, among
which the Hellinger, χ2 , total variation or Kullback-Leibler divergences. When the probability
space is a metric space, optimal transport distances (Villani, 2009, §6), a.k.a. earth mover’s (EMD)
in computer vision (Rubner et al., 1997), define a more powerful geometry to compare probabilities.
This power comes, however, with a heavy computational price tag. No matter what the algorithm
employed – network simplex or interior point methods – the cost of computing optimal transport
distances scales at least in O(d3 log(d)) when comparing two histograms of dimension d or two
point clouds each of size d in a general metric space (Pele and Werman, 2009, §2.1).
In the particular case that the metric probability space of interest can be embedded in Rn and n is
small, computing or approximating optimal transport distances can become reasonably cheap. Indeed, when n = 1, their computation only requires O(d log d) operations. When n ≥ 2, embeddings
of measures can be used to approximate them in linear time (Indyk and Thaper, 2003; Grauman and
Darrell, 2004; Shirdhonkar and Jacobs, 2008) and network simplex solvers can be modified to run
in quadratic time (Gudmundsson et al., 2007; Ling and Okada, 2007). However, the distortions of
such embeddings (Naor and Schechtman, 2007) as well as the exponential increase of costs incurred
by such modifications as n grows make these approaches inapplicable when n exceeds 4. Outside of
the perimeter of these cases, computing a single distance between a pair of measures supported by
a few hundred points/bins in an arbitrary metric space can take more than a few seconds on a single
CPU. This issue severely hinders the applicability of optimal transport distances in large-scale data
analysis and goes as far as putting into question their relevance within the field of machine learning,
where high-dimensional histograms and measures in high-dimensional spaces are now prevalent.
1

