1

ALIKED: A Lighter Keypoint and Descriptor
Extraction Network via Deformable Transformation

arXiv:2304.03608v2 [cs.CV] 16 Apr 2023

Xiaoming Zhao, Xingming Wu, Weihai Chen*, Member, IEEE, Peter C. Y. Chen, Qingsong Xu,
and Zhengguo Li, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Image keypoints and descriptors play a crucial role
in many visual measurement tasks. In recent years, deep neural
networks have been widely used to improve the performance of
keypoint and descriptor extraction. However, the conventional
convolution operations do not provide the geometric invariance
required for the descriptor. To address this issue, we propose the
Sparse Deformable Descriptor Head (SDDH), which learns the
deformable positions of supporting features for each keypoint and
constructs deformable descriptors. Furthermore, SDDH extracts
descriptors at sparse keypoints instead of a dense descriptor
map, which enables efficient extraction of descriptors with strong
expressiveness. In addition, we relax the neural reprojection error
(NRE) loss from dense to sparse to train the extracted sparse
descriptors. Experimental results show that the proposed network
is both efficient and powerful in various visual measurement
tasks, including image matching, 3D reconstruction, and visual
relocalization.
Index Terms—keypoint, descriptor, deformable, local feature,
image matching

I. I NTRODUCTION
Efficient and robust extraction of image keypoints and
descriptors is critical for many resource-constrained visual
measurement applications, such as simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) [1], computational photography [2],
and visual place recognition [3]. Early methods for keypoint
detection and descriptor extraction relied on human heuristics
[4]–[6]. However, these hand-crafted methods are not sufficiently efficient and robust. To address these issues, many
data-driven approaches based on deep neural networks (DNNs)
have emerged in recent years. Initially, DNNs were used to
extract descriptors of image patches at predefined keypoints
[7]. Subsequently, the mainstream approach became the extraction of keypoints and descriptors with a single network
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 61620106012, the Key Research and Development
Program of Zhejiang Province under Grant No. 2020C01109, and A*STAR of
Singapore under Robotics Horizontal Technology Coordinating Office Project
C221518005. (Corresponding authors: Weihai Chen.)
Xiaoming Zhao, Xingming Wu, and Weihai Chen are with the School
of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China (e-mail: xmzhao@buaa.edu.cn, wxmbuaa@163.com, and
whchen@buaa.edu.cn).
Qingsong Xu is with Department of Electromechanical Engineering, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China
(e-mail: qsxu@um.edu.mo).
Peter C. Y. Chen is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore (email: mpechenp@nus.edu.sg).
Zhengguo Li is with SRO Department, Institute for Infocomm Research,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 1 Fusionopolis
Way, #21-01, Connexis South Tower, Singapore 138632 (email: ezgli@i2r.astar.edu.sg).

[8]–[10], which can often extract more robust keypoints and
discriminative descriptors than hand-crafted methods [11]. We
refer to these methods as map-based methods because they
estimate a score map and a descriptor map using two heads: the
score map head (SMH) and the descriptor map head (DMH).
Then they extract keypoints and descriptors from the score
map and descriptor map, respectively.
Existing map-based methods use fixed-size vanilla convolutions to encode images, which lack the geometric invariance
that is essential for image matching performance. This problem
can be alleviated by estimating the scale and orientation of the
descriptors on the image [9], [12]–[14]. However, the scale
and orientation can only model affine transformations of the
image features, not any geometric transformations of the image
features. We observe that the deformable convolution network
(DCN) [15] can model any geometric transformation by adjusting the offset for each pixel in the convolution, thereby
improving the representational capabilities of the descriptors.
Unfortunately, DCN [15] introduces additional computations
when computing the dense descriptor map, which slows down
the running speed. In order to improve the running speed
when extracting deformable descriptors like DCN [15], we
propose the Sparse Deformable Descriptor Head (SDDH). We
studied existing map-based methods and found that the DMH
has many redundant convolutions in areas without keypoints,
leading to a high computational cost for descriptor extraction.
The SDDH extracts deformable descriptors only at detected
keypoints rather than on the entire dense feature map, making
it more efficient since keypoints are usually fewer than dense
image features. In addition, the SDDH estimates offsets at
M sample locations, inspired by deformable image alignment
[16], instead of using fixed-size convolutional grids like DCN
[15]. The estimated offsets are used to construct descriptors,
and M can be any positive integer, making the SDDH more
flexible and efficient in modeling deformable descriptors.
Afterward, we propose A LIghter Keypoint and descriptor Extraction network with Deformable transformation
(ALIKED) for visual measurement using the SDDH. However,
the SDDH extracts only sparse descriptors, which means there
are no descriptor maps for constructing neural reprojection
error (NRE) loss [10], [17]. To address this challenge, we
propose an elegant solution to relax the NRE loss from dense
to sparse. Instead of constructing dense probability maps,
we construct sparse probability vectors for sparse descriptors, and minimize the distance between the sparse matching
and reprojection probability vectors. This approach not only
overcomes the challenge of lacking dense descriptor maps but

