Time-Efficient and Identity-Consistent
Virtual Try-On Using A Variant of Altered
Diffusion Models
– Appendix –
Phuong Dam1 , Jihoon Jeong1 , Anh Tran2 , and Daeyoung Kim1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{hoangphuong1211, jihooni, kimd}@kaist.ac.kr
2
VinAI Research
v.anhtt152@vinai.io

A

Additional Ablation Study

1

Cross-Attention Effectiveness

In this section, we will answer the question "What is the impact of modification
in the Warping Module?" by exploring how much the cross-attention mechanism
affects the output of the model. Specifically, as mentioned above, we only apply
the cross-attention in the stage of feature map resolution smaller than 64x48. In
the case of removing the cross-attention block, we replace them with the concatenation operation. In this ablation study, we choose to compare the performance
between the warping module with and without the multi-head cross-attention
mechanism (W/o Attn) under with and without the conditional post-processing
block (W/o Conditional Post-processing). Furthermore, we also measure the effectiveness of the post-processing block for both cases. Based on the result in
Table 1, it can be seen that the cross-attention in the warping module provides
a better result in almost all the comparison categories. However, applying crossattention increases the number of parameters by 31% (from 128.4M to 168.5M)
with the resolution here being 512x384. We also visualized the qualitative improvement in Figure 1. It is observable that the absence of the cross-attention
mechanism can result in distorted outputs from the warping module (as illustrated in the first example of Figure 1), potentially degrading the final visual
result. Moreover, in the second example of Figure 1, the collar part of the garment is wrong-warped compared to the cross-attention ones, and the umbrella
label also disappears in the non-cross-attention ones. This comparative analysis
underscores the critical role of cross-attention in preserving detail and maintaining structural integrity in the warping process, thereby substantiating its
inclusion despite the associated increase in computational complexity.
2

Noise Level Efficiency - Prior Assessment

This section explores the impact of varying noise levels on the performance
of the Try-on Module. To ensure a controlled comparison, we use the same

