Weakly-Supervised 3D Hand Reconstruction with
Knowledge Prior and Uncertainty Guidance
**Supplementary Material**
Yufei Zhang1 , Jeffrey O. Kephart2 , and Qiang Ji1
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 IBM Research
{zhangy76, jiq}@rpi.edu, kephart@us.ibm.com

In this supplementary material, we provide additional experiment results:
– Section 1: Evaluation of Incorporating the Hand Physics Knowledge with
Comparison to Existing Techniques
– Section 2: Qualitative Evaluation and Comparison with State-of-the-Arts

1

Evaluation of Incorporating the Hand Physics
Knowledge with Comparison to Existing Techniques

In the main paper, we demonstrate the effectiveness of incorporating the hand
physics knowledge to reduce the reconstruction error and improve the reconstruction physical plausibility. Here, we highlight the advantages of our method
compared to existing techniques aimed at preventing invalid penetration in 3D
reconstructions.
We compare with the method proposed by Tzionas et al. [2] and present the
results in Table 1. As shown, the method proposed by Tzionas et al. [2] can
reduce the penetration rate but their reconstruction accuracy can suffer. The
degraded reconstruction performance stems from their formulation of the nonpenetration loss. They only model the colliding mesh triangles located on the
surface and impose the loss to separate these colliding triangles. In contrast, our
proposed non-penetration loss models the inside mesh vertices and formulates
the non-penetration loss based on their distance to the mesh surface, leading to
a more effective way of preventing invalid penetrations.
Table 1: Evaluation of Incorporating the Hand Physics Knowledge with
Comparison to Existing Techniques. “Baseline” refers to the model trained with
2D hand landmark annotation and incorporating all the hand knowledge except for the
hand physics knowledge. The units of EJ and EJ are in mm, while PR is in percentage.
Method

EJ ↓ EV ↓ PR↓

Baseline

9.6 10.0 11.4

Tzionas et al. [2] 10.3 10.6 1.0
Ours

9.4 9.8 1.9

