Diff-Reg: Diffusion Model in Doubly Stochastic
Matrix Space for Registration Problem
Supplementary Material
Qianliang Wu1 , Haobo Jiang5 , Lei Luo1 , Jun Li1 , Yaqing Ding4 ,
Jin Xie2,3 , and Jian Yang1
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video
Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
4
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical
University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
5
National University of Singapore, Singapore
wuqianliang@njust.edu.cn

This supplementary material provides additional information on matching
matrix space (Sec. 1), more details of network design, experiments, and analysis
about 3D registration (Sec. 2), 2D-3D registration (Sec. 3), the derivation of the
simplified version loss Lsimple (Sec. 4) for denoising module gθ , and limitations
(Sec. 5).

1

Revisiting Doubly Stochastic Matrix.

We can represent the point
clouds P and Q as two graphs, denoted as

G1 = P, EP and G2 = Q, EQ , where EP and EQ are respective edge
sets. The matching matrix between these two graphs is a one-to-one mapping
E ∈ {0, 1}N ×M . In cases where N ̸= M (e.g., N > M ), we can introduce N − M
dummy points in Q to make a square matching matrix, also known as a permutation matrix M = A : A1N = 1N , AT 1N = 1N , A ≥ 0 . Then, we further
employ sinkhorn iterations [5] to convert this non-negative real matrix into a
“doubly stochastic” matrix, which has uniform row sum M and column sum
N [2]. In paticular, in our method, we use the focal loss function to approximate
the predicted full doubly stochastic matrix to a non-full ground truth matching
matrix; the matching scores of inlier correspondences are prone to be higher,
while those of outlier correspondences are prone to be lower. Consequently, we
can safely select the correspondences with the top-k highest matching scores as
our inlier correspondences.
Corresponding Authors

