Elucidating the Hierarchical Nature
of Behavior with Masked Autoencoders
Lucas Stoﬄ , Andy Bonnetto , Stéphane d’Ascoli ,
and Alexander Mathis(B)
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
alexander.mathis@epfl.ch
Abstract. Natural behavior is hierarchical. Yet, there is a paucity of
benchmarks addressing this aspect. Recognizing the scarcity of largescale hierarchical behavioral benchmarks, we create a novel synthetic basketball playing benchmark (Shot7M2). Beyond synthetic data, we extend
BABEL into a hierarchical action segmentation benchmark (hBABEL).
Then, we develop a masked autoencoder framework (hBehaveMAE) to
elucidate the hierarchical nature of motion capture data in an unsupervised fashion. We ﬁnd that hBehaveMAE learns interpretable latents
on Shot7M2 and hBABEL, where lower encoder levels show a superior
ability to represent ﬁne-grained movements, while higher encoder levels
capture complex actions and activities. Additionally, we evaluate hBehaveMAE on MABe22, a representation learning benchmark with short
and long-term behavioral states. hBehaveMAE achieves state-of-the-art
performance without domain-speciﬁc feature extraction. Together, these
components synergistically contribute towards unveiling the hierarchical
organization of natural behavior. Models and benchmarks are available
at https://github.com/amathislab/BehaveMAE.
Keywords: masked autoencoder · action segmentation · behavioral
benchmarks · synthetic movement data · hierarchical representation
learning · behavioral hierarchy

1

Introduction

Natural behavior is inherently hierarchical, i.e., it is built from spatially and
temporally nested subroutines, as has been established in neuroscience and
ethology [8,9,29,40,73]. For example, a game of basketball is characterized by
many part-whole relationships both across space (from groups to individuals to
bodyparts and joints) and across time (from playing basketball to dribbling to
taking a step). Here, we follow the nomenclature of Anderson and Perona [1],
who delineate behavior into its elemental components: movemes, actions, and
activities. Movemes represent the atomic units of behavior, e.g., a step and
hence are akin to phonemes in language; actions comprise stereotypical combinations of movemes (e.g., dribbling, shooting, passing), while activities encompass
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73039-9 7.
c
 The Author(s) 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15122, pp. 106–125, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73039-9_7

