ViLBERT: Pretraining Task-Agnostic Visiolinguistic
Representations for Vision-and-Language Tasks

1

Jiasen Lu1 , Dhruv Batra1,3 , Devi Parikh1,3 , Stefan Lee1,2
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Oregon State University, 3 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present ViLBERT (short for Vision-and-Language BERT), a model for learning
task-agnostic joint representations of image content and natural language. We
extend the popular BERT architecture to a multi-modal two-stream model, processing both visual and textual inputs in separate streams that interact through
co-attentional transformer layers. We pretrain our model through two proxy tasks
on the large, automatically collected Conceptual Captions dataset and then transfer
it to multiple established vision-and-language tasks – visual question answering,
visual commonsense reasoning, referring expressions, and caption-based image
retrieval – by making only minor additions to the base architecture. We observe
significant improvements across tasks compared to existing task-specific models –
achieving state-of-the-art on all four tasks. Our work represents a shift away from
learning groundings between vision and language only as part of task training and
towards treating visual grounding as a pretrainable and transferable capability.

1

Introduction
“... spend the summer linking a camera to a computer and getting the computer to describe what it saw.”
Marvin Minsky on the goal of a 1966 undergraduate summer research project [1]

Since this now famously ambitious summer project, steady progress has been made towards systems
that can demonstrate their visual understanding by generating or responding to natural language in the
context of images, videos, or even full 3D environments [2–8]. These approaches and corresponding
tasks have come to be referred to under the common banner of ‘vision-and-language’. However,
despite the common need to align natural language and visual stimuli – i.e. to perform visual
grounding – approaches for vision-and-language tasks lack a unified foundation to gain this capability.
Instead, the dominant strategy is to start with separate language and vision models pretrained for
other large-scale tasks and then learn grounding as part of task training – often resulting in myopic
groundings that generalize poorly when paired visiolinguistic data is limited or biased [9, 10].
This pretrain-then-transfer learning approach to vision-and-language tasks follows naturally from its
widespread use in both computer vision and natural language processing where it has become the de
facto standard due to the ease-of-use and strong representational power of large, publicly-available
models [11–14] trained on large-scale data sources [15–19]. In these domains, pretrained models can
provide useful information for target tasks, e.g. dog breed-sensitive image features or a well-calibrated
semantic distance between words. While visual and linguistic understandings like these are of course
essential to vision-and-language tasks, equally important is how they relate to one another – e.g. a
perfect visual representation of dog breeds is of little use if a downstream vision-and-language model
fails to associate it with appropriate phrases like “beagle” or “shepherd”. We are therefore interested
in developing a common model for visual grounding that can learn these connections and leverage
them on a wide array of vision-and-language tasks – i.e., we seek to pretrain for visual grounding.
To learn these joint visual-linguistic representations, we look to recent successes in self-supervised
learning which have captured rich semantic and structural information from large, unlabelled data
sources by training models to perform so-called ‘proxy’ tasks. These proxy tasks leverage structure
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

