UL-VIO:
Ultra-lightweight Visual-Inertial Odometry
with Noise Robust Test-time Adaptation
(Supplementary Material)
Jinho Park1 , Se Young Chun2 , and Mingoo Seok1
1

2

1

Columbia University, New York NY 10027, USA
Dept. of ECE, INMC & IPAI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
jp4327@columbia.edu, sychun@snu.ac.kr, ms4415@columbia.edu

Additional data processing and training details

The KITTI Odometry [3] dataset includes recordings of the driving trajectory
on roadways of Karlsruhe whereas the EuRoC MAV [1] dataset has indoor measurement of an aerial vehicle. The Marulan [5] dataset has deliberate yet natural
visual shifts like night, dust, smoke, and rain; it is measured with ground vehicles
not necessarily operated on the roadway. Seq. 36, 38, 39 are recorded in the same
location, leaving the domain gap to environmental factors.
The visual inputs in KITTI are of 1241×376 RGB images, EuRoC of 752×480
grayscale images, and Marulan of 1360×1024 RGB images. We resize the images
to 512 × 256 for all datasets and convert grayscale to RGB images in the case
of EuRoC. The ground truth pose and IMU sequence are sampled at {10, 100}
Hz for KITTI, {20, 200} Hz for EuRoC, and {1, 10} Hz for Marulan. Having
an IMU sampling rate ten times that of the image sampling rate allows us to
use the same inertial encoder Ei architecture for all datasets. We perform linear
interpolation for IMU readings to synchronize according to image timestamps.

2

Visual corruption details

Autonomous vehicles are prone to visual corruption while driving due to many
environmental factors. Vehicles entering a tunnel could encounter shadow-, brightness, and contrast-related domain shifts. Visual degradation due to rain or snow is yet
another apparent visual shift. Such visual corruption is brought up in ImageNetC [4], which has been widely utilized in past TTA works.
We perform visual corruptions using the image manipulation functions with
the highest severity setting from the ImageNet-C dataset wherein the amount
of vision corruptions can be controlled with five distinct severity levels. For Albumentation library-based corruption, we adopt MultiplicativeNoise, RandomRain,
RandomSnow, and RandomShadow functions. We provide the imageries of the visual corruptions in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.

