3DGazeNet: Generalizing 3D Gaze Estimation
with Weak-Supervision from Synthetic Views
Supplementary Material
Evangelos Ververas1,2 , Polydefkis Gkagkos2 , Jiankang Deng1,2 , Michail
Christos Doukas1 , Jia Guo3 , and Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1

Imperial College London, UK
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, UK
3
InsightFace
https://eververas.github.io/3DGazeNet/
2

1

Implementation Details

Data Augmentation As model input we center crop 3 patches (left eye, right
eye and face) resize them to shape 128 × 128 × 3 and stack them channel-wise.
Before stacking the image patches we randomly scale, translate, flip, and add
noise on the color channel with probability 0.5. All geometric augmentations are
also applied to the coordinates of eyes given as ground truth or pseudo-ground
truth. Due to different image quality on each dataset we also add Gaussian blur
to the images. The intensity of the blur is randomly selected from a set of kernels.
Note that we augment each patch with the same augmentation parameters.
Training Details We train our method using a Adam optimizer (weight decay
at 0.0005, and batch size of 128) on a single Tesla V100-PCIE (32GB) GPU. The
learning rate starts from 1e-6, linearly warming up to 1e-4 in the first 3 epochs
and then divided by 10 at 60 and 80 epochs. The training process is terminated
at 100 epochs.
2D Iris Landmark Localization To localize 2D iris landmarks from images
we started by using the model from [7]. Even though the available pre-trained
models of [7] perform well on high resolution datasets, such as ETH-XGaze, they
perform poorly on images with low resolution, such as the ones from Gaze360,
AVA and CMU datsets. To overcome this problem we trained a version of our
mesh-based model using predictions of [7] on high resolution images. In fact, we
first applied [7] on ETH-XGaze and FFHQ datasets which resulted on 2D iris
landmarks for these images. Then, using our pseudo-label generation pipeline
(described in Sec. 3.2 of the paper, fig. 3(c)) we fit 3D eyeballs on these images. Next, we trained a 3D eyeball mesh reconstruction model, with the same
architecture as the one described in the paper but without including the gaze
head. Because of the data augmentation we applied during training (as described
above), this model performs well on images with low resolution, occlusions and
low-light conditions and gives us reliable 2D iris landmarks to either fit 3D eye
meshes on existing gaze datasets using ground truth (fig. 3(b) of the paper) and

