AutoDIR

1

This supplementary is organized as follows:
– In Sec. A, we first introduce our open-vocabulary user interaction application, highlighting its significance in enhancing user engagement.
– Next, in Sec. B, we discuss the trade-oﬀ of selecting adjustable coeﬃcient w
introduced in Sec. 3 of the main body.
– To address the restoration of real-world images aﬀected by multiple unknown
degradations, we present further results in Sec. C.1.
– To further validate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed approach, we present
additional qualitative results in Sec. C.2, including seven image restoration
tasks: denoising, super-resolution, deblurring, deraining, dehazing, low light
enhancement, and deraindrop.
– In Sec. C.3, we conduct additional ablation studies focusing on the semanticagnostic constraint and the structural-correction module, providing deeper
insights into their contributions.
– In Sec. D, we provide full implementation details of our methods and corresponding experiments to for reproducing our results.
– In Sec. E, we conduct a user study specifically targeting the real-world multiple degradation image restoration task. This study aims to provide additional
evidence regarding the perceptual quality and eﬀectiveness of AutoDIR in
comparison to alternative methods.
– In Sec. F, we demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of AutoDIR on real-world unseen
Super-resolution and Denoise datasets.
– In Sec. G, we evaluate SA-BIQA on real-world unseen datasets to illustrate
the robustness of SA-BIQA.

A

Open-Vocabulary User Interaction

As shown in Fig. 1, AutoDIR provides a customizable approach to tailor the
result outputs based on user preferences. Users can eﬀectively modify the input
image by providing corresponding open-vocabulary text prompts. The support
of user interaction highlights the flexibility and adaptability of our proposed
approach, allowing for a highly customizable image enhancement experience.

B

Trade-oﬀ of adjustable coeﬃcient w

The value of w for the weight of the structural correction module introduced in
Sec. 3 of the main body determines the extent to which contextual information
is utilized to recover the final result. Fig. 2 demonstrates that a larger value of
w helps to recover the complex structures e.g. human face, of the original image.
On the opposite, for tasks like super-resolution, a smaller value of w is required
to maintain the generation capability of the latent diﬀusion model.

C

Extensive Experimental Results

This section provides additional visualization and experimental details on datasets
and training settings in the main text’s Sec. 4.

