Reliable Spatial-Temporal Voxels For
Multi-Modal Test-Time Adaptation
Haozhi Cao1 , Yuecong Xu1,2 , Jianfei Yang1,3 ( ) , Pengyu Yin1 , Xingyu
Ji1 , Shenghai Yuan1 , and Lihua Xie1
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{haozhi002,jianfei.yang,pengyu001,xinyu001,shyuan,elhxie}@ntu.edu.sg
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore
yc.xu@nus.edu.sg
3
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University

Abstract. In this appendix, we present more details about our experimental benchmarks, class-wise performance, and efficiency comparison,
and more qualitative comparison with previous methods. Firstly, benchmarks details including class mapping and data preparation procedures
are thoroughly illustrated. Secondly, we provide the detailed description
of implementation details and baseline settings for all previous methods
we compare Latte with. Thirdly, we illustrated the class-wise performance and online efficiency for further analysis. Fourthly, more qualitative comparisons with previous SOTA methods are illustrated to justify
the effectiveness of Latte.

1

Benchmark Details

As mentioned in Sec. 4.1, we conduct our experiments on three different MMTTA benchmarks, including USA-to-Singapore (U-to-S), A2D2-to-SemanticKITTI
(A-to-S), and Synthia-to-SemanticKITTI (S-to-S). Here we provide more details
about the included benchmarks.
1.1

USA-to-Singapore

For U-to-S, we adopt a similar setting of most previous MM-UDA methods [3,8,
11], while the major difference lies in two points. Firstly, considering both source
and target domains are derived from NuScenes [2] with the same class map, we
discard the commonly used class mapping [3, 8] that alleviate the segmentation
challenges and directly utilize the original semantic categories from NuScenes.
Secondly, we release the restriction that only utilizes the points located in the
front camera view and leverage points of full range for 3D networks pre-training
and online updating instead. We modify this setting since SPVCNN [14] usually performs better when receiving the full range of point clouds. Furthermore,
different from other MM-TTA methods, Latte can sometimes leverage the outof-view points through spatial-temporal revisiting (e.g., Latte can refer to points

