Supplemental material:
Geometry Fidelity for Spherical Images
Anders Christensen†,2,3 , Nooshin Mojab1 , Khushman Patel1 ,
Karan Ahuja1,4 , Zeynep Akata3,5,6 , Ole Winther2,7,8 ,
Mar Gonzalez-Franco1 , and Andrea Colaco1
1

Google, USA
Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
3
Helmholtz Munich, Germany
4
Northwestern University, USA
5
Technical University of Munich, Germany
6
Munich Center of Machine Learning, Germany
7
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
8
Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark
andchri@dtu.dk, nooshinmojab@google.com
2

1

Qualitative evaluation of OmniFID

To qualitatively evaluate our proposed Omnidirectional FID, we compute FID
and OmniFID on generated images from three different checkpoints of a finetuned text-to-image generative model. The model is based on a version of Imagen [3] trained on internal datasources, and finetuned using Dreambooth [2] with
a batch size of 16. We finetune the model on the 360-Indoor equirectangular image dataset [1] and use captions generated by a multimodal language model. This
gives us 3252 image-caption pairs after removing duplicate and empty captions.
The captions were generated by giving the multimodal model prompts with
few-shot examples describing the content of corresponding equirectangular images, followed by keywords of e.g. style, lighting, and indoor/outdoor. An example of such a given few-shot example caption is: "living room with couches, TV,
coffee tables and fireplace. french style decoration, daylight, indoor". Finally, we
edit the prompt to be "a panoramic view of a <caption>".
Below, we show example equirectangular image generations from model checkpoints after 5000, 10000, and 20000 steps. The visualized generations are generated from the same prompts across the different checkpoints, where the corresponding prompts were selected randomly. Results show that the FID score is
near-constant across the checkpoints (33.96, 35.42, 34.95, respectively). Further,
although the example generations from the 5000 step model demonstrate that
the model has issues constructing realistic geometry, the FID score is lowest for
this checkpoint. On the contrary, OmniFID decreases monotonically over the
checkpoints as geometry fidelity improves (63.39, 60.38, 55.07, respectively).

†

Work done at Google, USA

