Appendix
6.1

Video results

Please refer to the supplementary website https://homangab.github.io/track2act/ for detailed qualitative results of our framework including robot video evaluations.
6.2

Robot Experiment Details

We perform all robot manipulation experiments with a Boston Dynamics Spot Robot, operated
through end-effector control. The robot is a quadruped with an arm attached to its base. We connect
a front-facing Intel Realsense camera to the base such that it always moves with the robot, and it
static with respect to the base. The end-effector of the arm is a two-fingered gripper. The horizon H
of rollouts is 50 steps, and we operate the robot at a frequency of 5 Hz. For the residual policy, at
each step we predict actions h = 4 time-steps in the future, and execute the first action. We execute
the predicted actions on the robot through an Inverse Kinematics (IK) controller. This controller
converts the end-effector poses to robot joint actions for appropriately manipulating the arm. We
use the IK controller provided by Boston Dynamics for this purpose.
6.3

Track Prediction Model details

We instantiate track prediction as a denoising process through a DiT based diffusion model [68]. Let
I0 denote the first frame of a video, and G denote the goal, which we consider to be the last frame
of the video. For longer videos, we obtain multiple video clips of 4-5 seconds each for training.
Let there be p points in the initial frame to be tracked, such that P0 denotes the set of those points
and let H be the prediction horizon. [Pt ]H
t=1 denotes the future locations of those points in the
subsequent time-steps that we want to predict. In the forward diffusion process, all the points Pt
are corrupted by incrementally adding noise ϵk (k denotes the diffusion time-step), to obtain P̃t , and
converging to a unit Gaussian distribution N (0, I). New samples can be generated by reversing the
forward diffusion process, by going from Gaussian noise back to the space of point locations. To
solve the reverse diffusion process, we need to train a noise predictor Vθ (I0 , G, P0 , k). We design
a DiT Transformer based architecture [68] for Vθ illustrated visually in Fig. 3. Different from the
original DiT model, we condition on embeddings of initial (z0 ) and goal (zg ) images in addition to
that of the diffusion step (zk ). The input to the Transformer in each batch is a sequence of p tokens
corresponding the number of points specified for tracking. The initial P0 points are not noisy, as is
the convention in training conditional diffusion models on time-series data. We train the prediction
model with web videos by considering variable number of initial points p that need to be tracked.
We vary p from 200 to 400. For flexible modeling, the locations of the p points are also randomized,
such that at test-time any set of points in the initial image can be specified. We do not make any
assumptions on objects to be tracked or camera motions in the videos, and do not curate the training
videos in any way apart from ensuring they are of 4-5 second duration.
The model has 24 DiT blocks, with a hidden size of 1024, and 16 heads. The ResNet18 embeddings
of initial image and goal image have dimensions 512. The condition to each DiT block consists
of the sum of initial image embedding, goal image embedding, and diffusion time-step embedding
through adaptive modulation (adaLN) layers. The adaptive modulation layers and final MLP layers
are zero-initialized, and the rest are Xavier uniform initialized. We use Adam optimizer with default
Adam betas = (0.9,0.999) and a constant learning rate of 1e-4 for experiments. The rest of the
architecture and training details are similar to DiT [68].
6.4

Residual Policy Model details

To correct the predicted open-loop plan, with a small amount of embodimen-specific data, we
propose learning a residual policy πres (It , G, τ, [āt ]H
t=1 ) shown in Fig. 4 to correct the predicted end-effector poses in each time-step. So the end-effector pose at time t is ât = āt +
∆at ; where ∆at = πres (It , G, τ, [āt ]H
t=1 ) Instead of predicting just a single residual action ∆at
17

