FunQA: Towards Surprising Video
Comprehension
Binzhu Xie1 , Sicheng Zhang2 , Zitang Zhou1 , Bo Li3 , Yuanhan Zhang3 ,
Jack Hessel4 , Jingkang Yang3 , and Ziwei Liu3(B)
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg
4
The Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, WA, USA
https://github.com/Nicous20/FunQA
Abstract. Surprising videos, e.g., funny clips, creative performances, or
visual illusions, attract signiﬁcant attention. Enjoyment of these videos
is not simply a response to visual stimuli; rather, it hinges on the
human capacity to understand (and appreciate) commonsense violations
depicted in these videos. We introduce FunQA, a challenging video
question answering (QA) dataset speciﬁcally designed to evaluate and
enhance the depth of video reasoning based on counter-intuitive and fun
videos. Unlike most video QA benchmarks which focus on less surprising
contexts, e.g., cooking or instructional videos, FunQA covers three previously unexplored types of surprising videos: 1) HumorQA, 2) CreativeQA, and 3) MagicQA. For each subset, we establish rigorous
QA tasks designed to assess the model’s capability in counter-intuitive
timestamp localization, detailed video description, and reasoning around
counter-intuitiveness. We also pose higher-level tasks, such as attributing
a ﬁtting and vivid title to the video, and scoring the video creativity. In
total, the FunQA benchmark consists of 312K free-text QA pairs derived
from 4.3K video clips, spanning a total of 24 video hours. Moreover, we
propose FunMentor, an agent designed for Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) that uses multi-turn dialogues to enhance models’ understanding of counter-intuitiveness. Extensive experiments with existing VLMs
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of FunMentor and reveal signiﬁcant performance gaps for the FunQA videos across spatial-temporal reasoning,
visual-centered reasoning, and free-text generation.

1

Introduction

The charm of surprising videos, being funny, creative, and ﬁlled with visual illusions, oﬀers enjoyment and attracts engagement from viewers. This type of media
B. Xie, S. Zhang and Z. Zhou—Equal contribution.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_3.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 39–57, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_3

