RaFE: Generative Radiance Fields Restoration
Supplementary Material
Zhongkai Wu1 , Ziyu Wan2 , Jing Zhang1 , Jing Liao2 , and Dong Xu3
1

1

School of Software, Beihang University, China
2
City University of Hong Kong, China
3
The University of Hong Kong, China
ZhongkaiWu@buaa.edu.cn
RaFE.github.io

Overview

In this supplementary material, additional training details and more experimental results are provided, including:
– Training & rendering details of the whole pipeline in Sec. 2.
– Training details of the pre-trained coarse NeRF in Sec. 3.
– More Discussion and experimental results in Sec. 4.
– Details of the calculation of diversity score in Sec. 5.

2

Training & Rendering Details

The input images and corresponding viewpoints are randomly selected during
the training process. We also randomly sample random code z from the normal
distribution. And we use a discriminator learning rate of 0.002 and a generator learning rate of 0.0025. In the early stage of training, we blur the image
to stabilize the training process and reduce the blur kernel size to zero gradually. Furthermore, we use a density regularization which minimizes the density
differences between adjacent sampled points.
For the NeRF-Synthetic benchmark dataset (Blender), we sample 192 points
for each ray, with 128 stratified sampling points and 48 importance sampling
points. We assume that the blender object is in a [−1.5, 1.5]3 cube and set the
near and far plane of the ray to 2 and 6 respectively. For training, we restore 10K
high-quality images randomly selected in 200 training views and we set the batch
size to 32 and the minibatch std group size to 4 for optimizing the generator.
For the forward-facing datasets, we sample 192 points for each ray, with 128
stratified sampling points and 48 importance sampling points. We use normalized
device coordinates (NDC) and set the near plane to 0 and the far plane to 1. The
derivation of NDC can be found in NeRF [4]. The size of the dataset, the batch
size, and the minibatch standard deviation group size are the same as those in
the Blender dataset.

