Supplementaries of Hierarchical Gaussian Mixture
Normalizing Flow Modeling for Unified Anomaly
Detection
⋆

Xincheng Yao1 , Ruoqi Li1 , Zefeng Qian1 , Lu Wang3 , and Chongyang Zhang1,2
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Intelligent Manufacturing, Wuxi Vocational College of Science and
Technology
{i-Dover, nilponi, zefeng_qian, sunny_zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn1 ,
wlulu0327@163.com3

Appendix
In the appendix, please note that some equations, tables and figures are referred
to the corresponding contents in the main text.

A

More Discussions

A.1

Necessities and Motivations

We further explain the necessities and motivations of the individual components
in our method. Through the explanations in this subsection, readers can have a
clearer understanding of how the overall training objective is designed and how
the individual losses are motivated and connected together.
Inter-class Gaussian mixture modeling. The initial motivation of our
method is that NF-based AD methods usually fall into the “homogeneous mapping” issue when applied to the unified AD task. To address this issue, we first
empirically confirm that mapping to multi-modal latent distribution is effective to
prevent the model from learning the bias. The most natural method is to model
multiple Gaussian distributions in the latent space. However, the fixed multiple
Gaussian distribution centers still result in a relatively fixed whole distribution
in the latent space, lacking adaptability. Thus, the inter-class Gaussian mixture
modeling is proposed to increase the adaptability of latent distribution for better
fitting the complex multi-class normal distribution.
Mutual information maximization. The loss function for the inter-class
Gaussian mixture modeling is in Eq. (6), where the logsumexp operator will
sum the exp values of all classes, this means that the Eq. (6) only has the
drawing characteristic to ensure the latent features are drawn together to the
⋆

Corresponding Author.

