RAW-Adapter: Adapting Pre-trained
Visual Model to Camera RAW Images
Ziteng Cui1(B)
1

and Tatsuya Harada1,2

The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Japan
{cui,harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
RIKEN AIP, Chuo-ku, Japan

Abstract. sRGB images are now the predominant choice for pretraining visual models in computer vision research, owing to their ease
of acquisition and eﬃcient storage. Meanwhile, the advantage of RAW
images lies in their rich physical information under variable real-world
challenging lighting conditions. For computer vision tasks directly based
on camera RAW data, most existing studies adopt methods of integrating image signal processor (ISP) with backend networks, yet often overlook the interaction capabilities between the ISP stages and subsequent
networks. Drawing inspiration from ongoing adapter research in NLP
and CV areas, we introduce RAW-Adapter, a novel approach aimed
at adapting sRGB pre-trained models to camera RAW data. RAWAdapter comprises input-level adapters that employ learnable ISP stages
to adjust RAW inputs, as well as model-level adapters to build connections between ISP stages and subsequent high-level networks. Additionally, RAW-Adapter is a general framework that could be used in various computer vision frameworks. Abundant experiments under diﬀerent
lighting conditions have shown our algorithm’s state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance, demonstrating its eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency across a range
of real-world and synthetic datasets. Code is available at this url.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in revisiting vision tasks using
unprocessed camera RAW images. How to leverage information-rich RAW image
in computer vision tasks has become a current research hotspot in various subareas (i.e. denoising [2,76], view synthesis [46], object detection [27,48]). Compared to commonly used sRGB image, RAW image directly acquired by the
camera sensor, encompasses abundant information unaﬀected or compressed by
image signal processor (ISP), also oﬀers physically meaningful information like
noise distributions [47,68], owing to its linear correlation between image intensity
and the radiant energy received by a camera. The acquisition of RAW data, facilitating enhanced detail capture and a higher dynamic range, imparts a unique
advantage in addressing visual tasks under variable lighting conditions in the
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_3.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 37–56, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_3

