——— Supplementary Material ———
Flying with Photons:
Rendering Novel Views of Propagating Light
Anagh Malik1,2⋆ Noah Juravsky1 Ryan Po3
Gordon Wetzstein3 Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1,2 David B. Lindell1,2
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Stanford University
anaghmalik.com/FlyingWithPhotons

S1

Implementation details

S1.1

Proposed Method

The proposed method builds on NerfAcc’s [4] Instant-NGP implementation using
an occupancy grid. We use a batch size of 217 samples for the simulated dataset
and 216 samples for the captured dataset, where each batch aggregates samples
along all rendered rays. For the occupancy grid we use a threshold of 10−2 for
binarization. We preprocess the data by dividing by the factor given in Table S1
and Table S2, where these parameters are roughly the 90th percentile value of
the transient video rendered or captured for a centered view of the scene. We
then tonemap the data by clipping the transient video between the values of 0
and 1 and applying a gamma correction with γ = 5 for simulated data and γ = 2
for captured data. Overall, these parameters are selected to balance contrast and
detail in the rendered transient videos.
S1.2

Transient NeRF

We implement Transient NeRF using the NerfAcc framework based on the description provided by the Malik et al. [5], and the training procedure follows that
of the proposed method, including using 500k iterations for optimization on simulated data and 1M iterations for optimization on captured data. Following the
authors’ description of the method, no proprocessing (i.e., gamma correction) of
the data is applied. Following Malik et al. [5] we use the Mitsuba-based temporal
filter for the simulated dataset.
We also modify the rendering procedure to account for the non-coaxial illumination and imaging setup used in our simulations. Specifically, during the ray
marching procedure we (1) calculate the path length to each sample along the
camera ray, (2) calculate the distance from that point to the point light source
(ignoring occlusions), and (3) assign the corresponding time-resolved radiance
to a transient bin that accounts for the round trip distance from the light source
to the sample and to the camera.
⋆

anagh@cs.toronto.edu

