Continuous Memory Representation for Anomaly
Detection - Appendix
Joo Chan Lee1* , Taejune Kim1,2* , Eunbyung Park1† , Simon S. Woo1† ,
and Jong Hwan Ko1†
1

2

A

Sungkyunkwan University
Robotics Lab, Hyundai Motor Company

Implementation Details

We implemented CRAD in the PyTorch framework, and we used the NVIDIA
A5000 GPU for all evaluations.
Training. We trained our models for 50 epochs, thrice with different seeds
(0,1,2), with a batch size of 64. The learning rate is initially set to 1 × 10−3
and 1 × 10−1 for neural networks and grids, respectively, which are reduced by
a factor of 0.1 once at the 40 epoch. We used AdamW optimizer [2] with weight
decay 1 × 10−2 .
Model configurations. To create the input feature x, we utilized the third
and fourth stage feature maps of EfficientNet-b4 [3], which are resized to 28 × 28
and then concatenated (channel C = 216). We configured both the dimensions
of the local (Cl ) and global coordinates (Cg ) to 2. Additionally, we set the
grid resolution of the local (Rl ) and global (Rg ) representations to 8 and 4,
respectively. In terms of feature refinement, we set the parameters λ1 , λ2 , and
k to be 0.3, 0.7, and 10. For coordinate jittering, we applied Gaussian noise
N (0, 1) scaled by a factor of 0.05 to 50% of pixel-wise features. We designed
the convolutional network ψ with 11 MobileNetV3 [1] blocks that maintain the
number of channels and the spatial resolution. Unless otherwise noted, the model
performances were measured in a unified setting.

B

Additional Experiments

We conducted more extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness in terms
of generalization ability.
B.1

Computational and Parameter Efficiency

We evaluated the model size and computational complexity of CRAD. As shown
in Tab. 1, CRAD requires reasonable storage and computation resources. However, for a fair comparison with UniAD, we downsized the convolutional networks while maintaining the grid configurations, coined as CRAD-S. CRAD-S
exhibits superior performance with reduced memory and computation requirements, demonstrating both effectiveness and efficiency. Furthermore, CRAD has

