Reading Digits in Natural Images
with Unsupervised Feature Learning
Yuval Netzer1 , Tao Wang2 , Adam Coates2 , Alessandro Bissacco1 , Bo Wu1 , Andrew Y. Ng1,2
{yuvaln,bissacco,bowu}@google.com
{twangcat,acoates,ang}@cs.stanford.edu
1
2

Google Inc., Mountain View, CA
Stanford University, Stanford, CA

Abstract
Detecting and reading text from natural images is a hard computer vision task that
is central to a variety of emerging applications. Related problems like document
character recognition have been widely studied by computer vision and machine
learning researchers and are virtually solved for practical applications like reading
handwritten digits. Reliably recognizing characters in more complex scenes like
photographs, however, is far more difficult: the best existing methods lag well
behind human performance on the same tasks. In this paper we attack the problem of recognizing digits in a real application using unsupervised feature learning
methods: reading house numbers from street level photos. To this end, we introduce a new benchmark dataset for research use containing over 600,000 labeled
digits cropped from Street View images. We then demonstrate the difficulty of
recognizing these digits when the problem is approached with hand-designed features. Finally, we employ variants of two recently proposed unsupervised feature
learning methods and find that they are convincingly superior on our benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reading text from photographs is a difficult unsolved computer vision problem that is important for
a range of real world applications. For instance, one application of interest is the problem of identifying house numbers posted on the fronts of buildings. With this information, more accurate maps
can be built and navigation services can be improved. Unfortunately, while highly restricted forms
of character recognition are essentially solved problems (e.g., OCR of printed documents, or recognition of hand-written digits), recognizing characters in natural scenes is more difficult: characters
and digits in photographs are corrupted by natural phenomena that are difficult to compensate for by
hand, like severe blur, distortion, and illumination effects on top of wide style and font variations.
As a result systems based on hand-engineered representations perform far worse on this task than a
typical human. In this work, we seek to solve this problem by employing recently proposed feature
learning algorithms to a new benchmark dataset captured from Google Street View images. Specifically, our dataset includes over 600,000 digit images and closely relates to the recognition task that
one must solve inside a deployed system. We then demonstrate the consistent superiority of learned
representations for this task and their effect on the performance of an end-to-end system. We expect
that improvements made by future researchers on this benchmark will directly transfer to improved
performance on the complete system.
The problem of recognizing characters in images has been extensively studied in the last few
decades, mostly in the context of scanned documents and books [1, 2]. Handwriting recognition
has also been widely addressed by both academia and industry [3]. As a result of focused research
over many years, automated systems can now perform many of these tasks with accuracy rivaling
1

