CLIFF: Continual Latent Diffusion for
Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Supplementary Material
Wuyang Li1 , Xinyu Liu1 , Jiayi Ma2 , and Yixuan Yuan1

(

)

1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Wuhan University
wymanbest@outlook.com, yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

This appendix is organized as follows.
– Appendix A justifies the combinatorial challenge and gives proof of the
implemented KL divergence.
– Appendix B presents the architectural design of the proposed diffusion module.
– Appendix C reports more quantitative results.
– Appendix D discusses technical highlights and limitations.
– Appendix E illustrates more qualitative comparisons.

A

Experimental and Theoretical Justification

A.1

Justifying the Combinatorial Disagreement

During the training stage, existing OVD works [5,23] conduct the object-image and
object-text alignment in a combinatorial manner, which ignores the disagreement
between the image and text objectives. As illustrated in Fig. 1 Left, they reduce
the L1 distance between object embedding xobj and CLIP image embedding
x̂img , and maximize the cosine similarity between object embedding xobj and
associated CLIP text embedding x̂txt , a.k.a., minimizing the angle between xobj
and x̂txt . We can observe that there will be a significant disagreement between
the object-text and object-image objective if the angle θ between x̂img and x̂txt
is not equal to zero, indicating the non-ignorable inconsistency between x̂txt and
x̂img . Further, to study this phenomenon thoroughly, an experiment is conducted
to justify the inconsistency.
We first randomly sample N = 10, 000 region proposals, and then extract
corresponding CLIP image embedding x̂img ∈ RN ×D (D = 512 [21]) by sending
them to the CLIP image encoder, and generate the CLIP text embedding (x̂txt ∈
RN ×D ) by sending the associated class labels into text encoder. After that, we
conduct statistic analysis in terms of the cosine similarity (∈ [-1,1]) between the
image and the associated text embedding cos(x̂img , x̂txt ), and plot the distribution
in Fig. 1 Right. It can be observed that the average cosine similarity between
x̂img and x̂txt is only 0.26 (θ ≈ 75◦ ), indicating a significant inconsistency
between the image and text embedding. Hence, combinatorically optimizing the
object-image and object-text alignment will conflict with sub-optimal results.

