Supplementary Material for MARs: Multi-view
Attention Regularizations for Patch-based
Feature Recognition of Space Terrain
Timothy Chase Jr

and Karthik Dantu

University at Buffalo
{tbchase,kdantu}@buffalo.edu

In this supplementary, we report additional evaluation including a transformation ablation and Mars Crater training results for Moon Navigation and Moon
Lost-in-Space experiments. We also describe model execution times on spacecraft
hardware, MARs per-block regularization curves, additional qualitative results,
and Luna-1 dataset details. A summary of the results in this supplementary is
as follows:
1. When trained on Mars Crater, MARs model variants achieve the best accuracy for Moon Navigation in 4/9 LML (under all transformations).
2. We discover a correlation between learned and architecture-encoded rotation equivariance with the amount of training data. With more training
data (Moon Crater dataset), RIC CA diminishes recognition performance
improving only 3/9 LML to conv2d SE in Moon Navigation considering all
transformations. When trained with the sparser Mars Crater dataset, RIC
CA improved 9/9 LML . MARs (providing additional learned properties) improves 6/9 LML to RIC CA in Moon Navigation with Moon Crater and is
highest overall in 4/9 LML losses (under all transformations).
3. For Moon Lost-in-Space, MARs is highest overall considering all transformations in 4/9 and 6/9 LML trained with Moon Crater and Mars Crater
respectively.
4. Qualitative examples demonstrate better attention alignment with MARs
on post-training test images and per-epoch training evolutions.

1

Additional Results

1.1

Moon Navigation and Moon Lost-in-Space: Transformation
Ablation and Mars Crater Training

Table 1 and Table 2 show Moon Navigation performance across all singular
transformation types in T for model variants trained on Moon Crater and Mars
Crater respectively. Our first observation is that RIC CA and MARs variants
have impressive generalization to the lunar navigation sequence compared with
baseline conv2d models, which fail to form representation spaces that transfer
between the domains. This could be indicative of a correlation between the type
of attention used as all LML losses benefit from spatial attention through CA
layers. In many cases where RIC CA models only mildly improve performance

