How Far Can a 1-Pixel Camera Go?
Solving Vision Tasks using Photoreceptors and
Computationally Designed Visual Morphology
Appendix
Overview
The Appendix provides further discussions, details, and evaluations as outlined
below:
– Sec. 1 presents various controlled analysis experiments: 1) we probe computational designs for transfer across tasks, 2) we show that the photoreceptor agent can do target detection, 3) we show the effectiveness of the design
optimization method, and 4) we evaluate the importance of different design
variables.
– Sec. 2 provides additional visualizations of different designs, including
random, intuitive, and computational designs and their corresponding performance.
– Sec. 3 studies whether photoreceptor sensors allow extracting information
about the state of the world and whether better-performing designs lead
to a more accurate world state estimation.
– Sec. 4 provides additional results of using 4×4 PR grids for continuous
control tasks in DMC.
– Sec. 5 provides a detailed description of our experimental settings. We
provide details on the control policy training process and design optimization.
– Sec. 6 describes details of the human survey used to collect intuitive designs
for both navigation and continuous control tasks.

1

Analysis Experiments and Ablations

1.1

Do designs transfer between tasks?

Optimizing and deploying a visual sensor design for each new task can be timeand cost-consuming. One would wish to optimize a design, deploy it on the robot
once, and recycle it for different downstream applications without needing to repeat the process. Whether this is possible and to what extent is an intrinsic
property of the robot’s morphology and tasks, which we evaluate with the following experiment. We evaluate the performance of different designs (random,
intuitive, and computational) on two pairs of tasks for the same agent morphology. Fig. 1 shows that while there exists a correlation between the performance
on different tasks, some designs are over-specialized for a particular task (signified with red). This suggests that some form of regularization is needed during
the design optimization to achieve a good trade-off between the performance on
different tasks.

