Audio-Vision:
Using Audio-Visual Synchrony to Locate
Sounds
John Hershey ..

Javier Movellan

jhershey~cogsci.ucsd.edu

movellan~cogsci.ucsd.edu

Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515

Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515

Abstract
Psychophysical and physiological evidence shows that sound localization of acoustic signals is strongly influenced by their synchrony
with visual signals. This effect, known as ventriloquism, is at work
when sound coming from the side of a TV set feels as if it were
coming from the mouth of the actors. The ventriloquism effect
suggests that there is important information about sound location
encoded in the synchrony between the audio and video signals. In
spite of this evidence, audiovisual synchrony is rarely used as a
source of information in computer vision tasks. In this paper we
explore the use of audio visual synchrony to locate sound sources.
We developed a system that searches for regions of the visual landscape that correlate highly with the acoustic signals and tags them
as likely to contain an acoustic source. We discuss our experience
implementing the system, present results on a speaker localization
task and discuss potential applications of the approach.

Introd uction
We present a method for locating sound sources by sampling regions of an image that correlate in time with the auditory signal. Our approach is inspired by
psychophysical and physiological evidence suggesting that audio-visual contingencies play an important role in the localization of sound sources: sounds seem to
emanate from visual stimuli that are synchronized with the sound. This effect becomes particularly noticeable when the perceived source of the sound is known to
be false, as in the case of a ventriloquist's dummy, or a television screen. This
phenomenon is known in the psychophysical community as the ventriloquism effect,
defined as a mislocation of sounds toward their apparent visual source. The effect is
robust in a wide variety of conditions, and has been found to be strongly dependent
on the degree of "synchrony" between the auditory and visual signals (Driver, 1996;
Bertelson, Vroomen, Wiegeraad & de Gelder, 1994).
"1'0 whom correspondence should be addressed.

