India writes in many languages and speaks in many more voices.
And yet, communication has never broken down in this subcontinent. With about 2.4% of the world's land surface and a total
of 16% of the world's population (India: A Country Study by James
Heitzman and Robert L. Worden eds. Federal Research Division;
1995), India houses according to one estimate, 1,652 “mothertongues” – including 103 foreign mother tongues (Census 1961 &
Nigam 1972: p. xv).
Writing came to India much earlier than many other civilizations –
from the days of the Indus Valley Civilization, by over four thousand
years ago, and the space has also witnessed emergence of some of
the great writing systems like the Brāhmī and the Kharosthī –
dating back to roughly 500 B.C. Today, India is a space with
perhaps the largest base of books, authors and publication houses
with about at least 70,000 new titles published every year, enjoyed
by over 600 million readers of books in India.
Read on to know more about Indian languages
1.The Indian Linguistic Space
2.Mother-tongues and Languages
3.The Writing Systems
3.1.The Indus Valley Script
3.2.The Brahmi Script
3.3.The Kharosthi Script
3.4.Modern-day Writing Systems
4.Indian States and Multilingualism
5.The Linguistic Recognition
6.The Language Families of India
6.1.The Indo-Aryan Languages
6.2.The Dravidian Languages
6.3.The Austric Family
6.4.The Tibeto-Burman Languages
6.5.Other Languages
7.Indian languages and Knowledge-bases
8.Plurality Index

1. The Indian Linguistic Space
The earliest form of speech in India were reflected in the texts such as Rig-Veda, the
Brahmanas, and the Upanishads - the oldest preserved treatises from which the Indian
"literary" traditions of verse have sprung. The earliest works were composed to be sung
or recited, and were orally transmitted for many generations before being written down.
The oldest among them are the thousand-odd hymns of the Rig-vedas dating back to two
millenium B.C. , composed in what is called the Vedic Sanskrit. The Vedas, which derived
from the root vid - "to know", tried capturing knowledge that came from the quest for
the
unknown.
The Indian literary tradition demonstrated that early Indian creative writers interacted
very closely with critical thinkers, and a very rich interpretive tradition developed just as
they excelled in literary creativity in a number of genres – beginning from poetry and in

