1

Probabilistic Weather Forecasting with
Deterministic Guidance-based Diffusion Model
- Supplementary Material 1

Introduction

In this Supplementary material, we provide the following details:
– The limitation of high-diversity probabilistic forecasting model.
– Detailed information about the PNW-typhoon dataset.
– Additional qualitative results.
– Architecture details of DGDM.

2

Ensemble using previous diffusion model

Not only DGDM, but also probabilistic models such as PreDiff [1] provide diverse results that can be used for ensemble methods. Fig. 1 shows the visualization comparison of ensemble results of probabilistic models and deterministic
model [5] on the Moving MNIST dataset. The near future (step 1) is easy to
predict from the given information, so all models predict accurately. However,
since the far future (step 10) is harder to predict, the deterministic model produces blurry results, while the probabilistic model generates clear results, but
does not predict the location and shape of the digits. In particular, the digit
8 in the last frame is hard to recognize because it has changed shape, and the
digit 3 is misplaced a lot. Ensemble with these 10 samples, simply averaged from
sampling these results, shows blurrier results than TAU. DGDM is able to use
ensemble methods without degradation because it controls the possible future
with deterministic branches.

3

Detailed in the PNW-Typhoon dataset

The PNW dataset serves as a valuable resource for forecasting extreme weather
events, particularly in the Pacific region, through the analysis of satellite observations. This dataset provides insights into atmospheric conditions during
typhoon occurrences using data obtained from the GK-2A satellite. All data
preprocessing strictly adhered to the official GK2A user manual1 to maintain
the integrity of the GK2A physical value data. The spatial resolution of the
dataset is 768 × 768, covering latitudes and longitudes from (90, 100) to (0,
1

https : / / nmsc . kma . go . kr / enhome / html / base / cmm / selectPage . do ? page =
satellite.gk2a.intro

