LaRa: Efficient Large-Baseline Radiance Fields

A

19

Limitations and Discussions

Our LaRa demonstrates a remarkable efficiency feed-forward model that achieved
high-fidelity all-around novel-view synthesis and surface reconstruction from
sparse large-baseline images. However, our approach struggles to recover highfrequency geometry and texture details, mainly due to the low volume resolution.
Enhancing our approach with techniques such as gradient checkpointing or mixedprecision training can potentially increase training batch size as well as volume
resolution. We have also noticed that our method can yield inconsistent rendering results when the geometry is incorrectly estimated or when reconstructing
multi-view inconsistent inputs, as demonstrated in the comparison video. This
occurs because our method utilizes second-order Spherical Harmonic appearance
modeling. Although such modeling can capture view-dependent effects, it also
introduces a stronger ambiguity between geometry and appearance. We believe
that incorporating our method with a physically-based rendering process can
potentially address this issue. In addition, our work assumes posed inputs, but
estimating precise camera poses for sparse views is a challenge in practice. Incorporating a pose estimation module [66] into the feed-forward setting is an
orthogonal direction to our work.

B

Acknowledgements

We thank Bozidar Antic for pointing out a bug that resulted in an improvement
of about 1dB. Special thanks to BinBin Huang and Zehao Yu for their helpful
discussion and suggestions. We would like to thank Bi Sai, Jiahao Li, Zexiang Xu
for providing us with the testing examples of Instant3D, and Jiaxiang Tang for
helping us to construct a comparison with LGM. This project was supported by
the ERC Starting Grant LEGO-3D (850533) and the DFG EXC number 2064/1
- project number 390727645.

C

More Visual Results

Finally, we report more qualitative results on the testing sets, as shown in
Figure 8,Figure 9, and Figure 10.

