Can Less be More? When Increasing-to-Balancing
Label Noise Rates Considered Beneficial
Yang Liu
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Jialu Wang
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
faldict@ucsc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we answer the question of when inserting label noise (less informative
labels) can instead return us more accurate and fair models. We are primarily inspired by three observations: 1) In contrast to reducing label noise rates, increasing
the noise rates is easy to implement; 2) Increasing a certain class of instances’
label noise to balance the noise rates (increasing-to-balancing) results in an easier
learning problem; 3) Increasing-to-balancing improves fairness guarantees against
label bias. In this paper, we first quantify the trade-offs introduced by increasing a
certain group of instances’ label noise rate w.r.t. the loss of label informativeness
and the lowered learning difficulties. We analytically demonstrate when such an
increase is beneficial, in terms of either improved generalization power or the
fairness guarantees. Then we present a method to insert label noise properly for
the task of learning with noisy labels, either without or with a fairness constraint.
The primary technical challenge we face is due to the fact that we would not know
which data instances are suffering from higher noise, and we would not have the
ground truth labels to verify any possible hypothesis. We propose a detection
method that informs us which group of labels might suffer from higher noise
without using ground truth labels. We formally establish the effectiveness of the
proposed solution and demonstrate it with extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

The presence of training label noise is generally considered harmful. Typically the goal of learning
with noisy labels is to improve the training by reducing the amount of noise in the training data
[4, 11]. This paper discusses the feasibility of the opposite strategy and shows cases when adding
label noise, leading to a scenario with less informative labels, will result in more accurate and fair
models. We are primarily motivated by three observations:
Observation I: Reducing label noise is hard, but increasing it is easy. While the literature has
provided us with solutions to perform data cleaning, they often require a highly customized training
process. Their lack of theoretical rigor has also posed challenges when performing evaluations.
On the other hand, as we will see later, increasing label noise is easy — one can always do so by
randomly flipping the current noisy labels to increase it further.
Observation II: Increasing a certain class of instances’ noise rate to balance the noise rates
results in an easier learning problem. When label noise is class-dependent (label class Y = +1
v.s. Y = −1), popular noise-tolerant learning algorithms typically require the knowledge of noise
rates [25]. However, the learner often needs to identify the unknown noise rates by some estimation
procedure [26, 27, 36]. We articulate that the mis-specification of noise rates will introduce additional
learning errors, especially when the label noise is asymmetric (see Theorem 1). On the other
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

