Panel-Specific Degradation Representation for
Raw Under-Display Camera Image Restoration
- Supplementary Material Youngjin Oh1 , Keuntek Lee1 , Jooyoung Lee3 , Dae-Hyun Lee3 , and Nam Ik
Cho1,2
1

1

Department of ECE & INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{yjymoh0211,leekt000,nicho}@snu.ac.kr
2
IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
3
SK hynix Inc., Korea
{jooyoung2.lee,daehyun1.lee}@sk.com

Examples from Our Dataset

In this first section of our supplementary material, we provide samples of visualized images in our dataset in Figs. 1, 2 and 3. The simplified ISP used to
visualize the raw images to RGB images, also explained in the main paper, are
demosaicing, white balancing, and gamma correction in sequence. Specifically,
we used MATLAB function ‘demosaic’ [6] with option ‘gbrg’ as our Bayer pattern is G-B-R-G. We then multiply the gains of R channel and B channel by 1.82
and 1.61, respectively. We are able to fix the white-balance gains as we have a
single camera; thus we have a single sensitivity function unique to that sensor.
Finally, we apply MATLAB function ‘lin2rgb’ for gamma correction. The process is the same for clean images and UDC images to exclude all other external
factors in the conversion process other than the panel’s presence. Discussion on
the usage of simplified ISP is provided in Sec. 6.

2

Details on UDC Dataset Collection

We provide details on the hardware and environmental settings required to reproduce our work on collecting the data, should any fellow researchers need to
collect additional data on UDC image restoration. Most importantly, we need
to ensure that the images captured from the monitor screen closely resemble
images captured from real natural scenes. For this, it is important to minimize
any sampling errors. This requires both the monitor device resolution and the
image resolution to be sufficiently high and the contrast ratio to be well-defined.
In this context, we capture images selected from DIV2K dataset [1] displayed on
a 32-inch monitor with a resolution of 6016×3384 pixels and a contrast ratio of
1,000,000:1 with the frontal camera of Samsung Galaxy S23 Ultra. The reason we
chose this camera instead of UDC smartphone cameras is because UDC smartphones such as Samsung Galaxy Z-Fold 3 prohibit saving raw data for frontal

