Supplementary Material:
Unlocking the Potential of Federated Learning:
The Symphony of Dataset Distillation via Deep
Generative Latents
Yuqi Jia∗1 , Saeed Vahidian∗1 , Jingwei Sun1 , Jianyi Zhang1 , Vyacheslav
Kungurtsev2 , Neil Zhenqiang Gong1 , and Yiran Chen1
1
Duke University
{yuqi.jia,saeed.vahidian,neil.gong,yiran.chen}@duke.edu
2
Czech Technical University
vyacheslav.kungurtsev@fel.cvut.cz

The supplementary material is organized as follows: in Subsection 1 additional experiments are provided to compare the performance of FedDGM with
the state-of-the-art on high resolution datasets such as ImageNet. This Section further, presents an ablation study on the impact of different local training
epochs on the performance of FedDGM; Section 2 presents the related work to
this paper; Section 3 clarifies the subsets of the ImageNet dataset that are used
in this paper; Section 4 discusses broader impact and limitations and finally,
Section 5 presents the ethical considerations.

1

Experiment

1.1

Performance Comparison on High-resolution Datasets.

This subsection complements subsection 4.2 of the main paper. In this section,
we present additional experimental results that explore the correlation between
performance improvement and the degree of statistical data heterogeneity. Our
objective is to scrutinize whether the conclusions drawn from CIFAR-10 hold
true for other high-resolution datasets, specifically subsets of ImageNet.
The reported results in Table 1 demonstrate a significant improvement achieved
by FedDGM compared to the state-of-the-art. FedDGM led to a remarkable improvement of 15%, and 4% over FedDM for the most (α = 0.01) and the least
(α = 0.9) heterogeneous setting. These findings further reinforce the claim that
greater data heterogeneity correlates with amplified performance improvement in
the global model trained through our dataset distillation method FedDGM . For a
concise comprehension of the key findings within these extensive tables, we have
summarized the average accuracy in the last column of Table 1 in Fig. 1.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

