Online Temporal Action Localization with
Memory-Augmented Transformer
Supplementary Material
Youngkil Song∗

Dongkeun Kim∗

Minsu Cho

Suha Kwak

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{songyk,kdk1563,mscho,suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr
https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/MATR/

This supplementary material provides contents omitted in the main paper
due to the page limit. In Sec. A, we provide further explanation regarding the
2D temporal positional encoding used in the start decoder of the instance decoding module. Sec. B presents the memory queue update procedure. In Sec. C,
we analyze AP scores for each class in the THUMOS14 and MUSES datasets.
Sec. D describes additional experimental details including hyperparameter settings. Sec. E presents in-depth analysis of our framework including the effects
of the hyperparameters and the post-processing. Sec. F gives more qualitative
results of our model on the THUMOS14 dataset.

A

About 2D Temporal Positional Encoding

In this section, we provide a more detailed explanation regarding the implementation of the 2D temporal positional encoding, which is applied to the key for
the cross-attention layers of the start decoder in the instance decoding module. As explained in Sec. 3.3, the key for the cross-attention layers consists of
the memory queue concatenated with the current segment features. Therefore,
the 2D temporal positional encoding should encompasses the relative position
of segments within the memory queue and the relative position of the frames
within the segment. Note that the relative position is defined with respect to the
current frame and the position of the current segment features it belongs to.
To be specific, we explain a practical example of illustrating the application
of the 2D temporal positional encoding. Consider a scenario where the memory
queue stores 4 segment features, and each segment is composed of 4 frames. If
the indices of the segments stored in the memory queue are 3, 4, 9, and 10, with
the current segment indexed as 13, then the indices for the memory features
of the start decoder are 3, 4, 9, 10 and 13. In this case, the relative segment
positions from the current segment are 10, 9, 4, 3, and 0, respectively, while the
relative frame positions within each segment are 3, 2, 1, and 0. These two relative
positions are encoded using sinusoidal positional encoding of dimension D/2
each, then concatenated to obtain the D-dimensional positional encoding. By
separating the relative segment positions from relative frame positions, the 2D
*

Equal contribution.

