Supplementary Materials of ”Pose Guided Fine-Grained Sign Language Video Generation”
1. More Experiment results
1.1. High-resolution results
The reason why we used 128*128 resolution is to reduce training costs. To verify the effectiveness of our method at higher
resolutions, we conducted experiments on Phoenix 2014T at 256*256 (with a reduced training dataset, using only one pair
of source and driving images per video, which is 1/5 of the original amount). As shown in Fig.1, and Tab.1, our method has
great potential at high resolution, with significant improvements in clear hand region details compared to the baseline.

1.2. Results on large scale dataset
We tested our method on the large-scale sign language dataset How2Sign (using the same setting as 1.1, with one-fifth of
the original training size), and the results are shown in Fig.2 and Tab.1. We achieved satisfactory generation results. We
believe that for SLVG tasks, a larger vocabulary (representing action diversity) may bring less generalizability improvement
compared to a larger number of signers (representing signer diversity).

1.3. Back-translation result
We did not use back-translation because the checkpoint of the SLT method used in the original paper is not open-sourced,
making it difficult for future work to compare fairly. Instead, we requested the checkpoint of the CorrNet+ method [2], which
the author promised would be released soon, to test our results at 256x256, as shown in Tab.1. For intelligibility, we will
collaborate with sign language experts to conduct intelligibility assessments in our future research.

1.4. Cross-dataset results
In fact, our method has good generalizability, as shown in Fig.2, where we used a model trained on WLASL2000 and tested
it on How2Sign in a zero-shot setting. WLASL2000 consists of sign language data from over 100 signers, and we believe
that increasing the number of signers in the training data will lead to better generalizability according to our experiments.

2. More discussion
2.1. Heatmap selection
We were inspired by the Two-stream SLR method [1] in using heatmaps for pose guidance, which has the advantage of having
the same dimension as image features, making it easy to interact with image features. All the experimental results show that
using dense heatmaps provides more spatial information than using OpenPose’s sparse graph or keypoint coordinates, which
helps guide the generation of detailed parts.

2.2. Cross-person optical flow quality
We employ TPSMM for Motion Generation. Specifically, we estimate 100 keypoints using ResNet-18 (corresponding to 20
sets of TPS transformations, with each transformation having 5 keypoints). These keypoints are then used to generate 20 TPS
transformations, thereby generating optical flow information.
During cross-person generation, the semantic information corresponding to keypoints from different persons remains
consistent (as illustrated in Fig.1). Consequently, the quality of the generated optical flow is sufficiently
[1] Chen, Y., Zuo, R., Wei, F., Wu, Y., Liu, S., Mak, B.: Two-stream network for sign language recognition and translation. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 35, pp. 17043–17056 (2022) 1
[2] Hu, L., Feng, W., Gao, L., Liu, Z., Wan, L.: Corrnet+: Sign language recognition and translation via spatial-temporal correlation
(2024) 1

