[Supplementary Material]
Learning Diffusion Models for Multi-View
Anomaly Detection
Chieh Liu1 , Yu-Min Chu1 , Ting-I Hsieh1 , Hwann-Tzong Chen1,2 , and Tyng-Luh
Liu3
1

National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
2
Aeolus Robotics, Taiwan
3
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

A

Experimental Results on MVTec 3D-AD

A.1

Settings of MVTec 3D-AD Dataset

The MVTec 3D-AD dataset [1] is different from the Eyecandies dataset [2]. Each
instance in the MVTec 3D-AD dataset contains a single view RGB image and
the corresponding 3D point cloud data. We simply convert the point cloud data
into a normal map using the open3d software and then fine-tune the UNet and
ControlNet in the same configurations. Since there is only a single image view
in this case, we omit the feature loss during training. We update the weight of
the pre-trained UNet, which is the Stable Diffusion Model version 1-5 utilized in
the same architecture. In the inference phase, we set the noise intensity to 40
and the step size to 20, and we use the concatenated features from the decoder
block-1 and block-2 of the UNet. In other methods such as BTF [6], M3DM [7],
Shape-Guided [3], etc., the anomaly score for image level typically implemented a
reweight mechanism between RGB score and 3D score. Therefore, our approach
only performs a weighted sum of RGB and 3D image level scores. An important
difference is that we do not adjust the score map.
A.2

Comparisons with Other Methods

We compare our approach with the state-of-the-art methods and evaluate them
on the MVTec 3D-AD dataset [1] using the Img-AUROC and the Pix-AUROC
metrics. Because current reconstruction-based methods CFM [4] and MMRD [5]
typically require training a model for each category rather than employ a single
model for all classes. In addition, CFM requires different backbones to handle
2D RGB and 3D data. Our approach is competitive to reconstruction-based
methods and shows strong capabilities across various datasets even without
using the key technique of feature loss. In Table 1, our method achieves aboveaverage Img-AUROC scores in each category, which allows us to attain an overall
competitive average score. In Table 2, the Pix-AUROC score approaches nearperfect performance. Even though the MVTec 3D-AD provides only a single
image view, our method performs especially well.

