External Knowledge Enhanced 3D Scene
Generation from Sketch
(Supplementary Material)
Zijie Wu1∗ , Mingtao Feng2 , Yaonan Wang1 ,
He Xie , Weisheng Dong2 , Bo Miao3 , and Ajmal Mian3
1

1

Hunan University
Xidian University
3
University of Western Australia
2

Here, we provide more details about our proposed method, covering both explicit and implicit scene generation (Sec. A) from freehand sketch and entities.
Additionally, we offer more details of our proposed knowledge base in Section B.
In Section C, we present an inconsistency test between sketch and entity selection. We provide two visualization examples illustrating missing furniture in the
sketch and missing furniture in the entity. Moreover, we introduce a solution for
the concatenation of condition designs to equip the model with the ability for
self-correction (Sec. D). It is important to note that all generations discussed
here are fully generated. Finally, we give more details of our evaluation metrics and conduct an additional comparison using human evaluation as metric in
Sec. E.

A

Sketch based Knowledge enabled Scene Generation

Returning to the scene generation ability of our proposed model, in this section,
we present additional visualizations for 3D generation from freehand sketch and
selected entities in scene generation (shown in Figure A), as well as for scene
completion (both explicit completion and implicit generation shown in Figure
B). We ensure that the edge detection sketches match the hand drawn ones. Our
conditional method produces plausible 3D scenes that are more faithful to the
input sketch descriptions. Note that all presented scenes are generated by our
model in an end-to-end manner without any retrieval, resulting in realistic and
high-quality scenes.

B

Details of Knowledge Base

Here, we give the construction details of knowledge base, including entity candidates for different scene categories and the knowledge base specifics.
B.1

Scene Categories

We construct the knowledge base from two datasets in our paper. The object
types from which the knowledge base is constructed are listed below:

