Supplementary Material: Attention Decomposition
for Cross-Domain Semantic Segmentation
Liqiang He

and Sinisa Todorovic

Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
{heli,sinisa}@oregonstate.edu

This supplementary material complements our main paper with the following
analysis and qualitative results:
1) Comparison to DAFormer.
2) Failure Cases.
3) Societal Impact and Future Work.
4) Additional Qualitative results.

1

Comparison to DAFormer

Fig. 1 compares the results of ADFormer and DAFormer [2] on the SYNTHIA
[6]→Cityscapes [1] domain shift. The rightmost two columns also compare the
results of the two models in the respective zoomed-in image windows. In the
top row, DAFormer predicts the part of the bus as ‘vegetation’ and ‘car’, and
in the middle row, DAFormer fails to correctly predict the rectangular shape
of the ‘traffic sign’. In the bottom row, DAFormer oversegments the object in
the white dashed window as a mix of ‘car’, ‘pole’, ‘building’, and ‘traffic sign’.
ADFormer appears to perform better for these examples, and, in particular, in
the bottom row, ADFormer predicts the object in the zoomed-in window as ‘car’.
The three examples demonstrate that ADFormer is successful in segmenting
whole objects, whereas DAFormer tends to oversegment them. One reason is that
ADFormer uses the query tokens for predicting whole segmentation masks of the
classes present in the image, while DAFormer is aimed at pixel-wise prediction.

2

Failure Cases

Fig 2 shows two failure cases of ADFormer on the GTA [5]→Cityscapes domain
shift. In the two white dashed windows, ADFormer incorrectly predicts the ‘traffic
sign’ as ‘pole’. This suggests that the query tokens of ADFormer were not learned
well to reliably distinguish differences between ‘traffic sign’ and ‘pole’. To address
this issue, one could try to better fine-tune the hyper-parameter of the query
classification loss in the set loss.

3

Societal Impact and Future Work

Societal Impact: Our work makes fundamental contributions to Computer
Vision and Deep Learning, and as such may give rise to a wide range of societal

