Supplement
Yogesh Kumar

and Pekka Marttinen

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland

A

Detailed Experiment Setup

A.1

Pretraining with Expert Annotations

For pretraining both CLIP and eCLIP models, we utilize the MIMIC-CXR
dataset. Expert annotations, in the form of heatmaps, are derived from a subset
of MIMIC-CXR, the EGD-CXR dataset [22], which comprises of 1080 samples.
We employ the author’s oﬃcial preprocessing code to convert the eye-tracking
fixation data into heatmaps. The data tuple (image, text, heatmap) is then
used for training with contrastive learning. We employ two dataloader: one for
the main dataset without heatmap (“main loader”) and another for the subset
with expert heatmaps (“expert loader”). In each training iteration, one batch is
fetched from each loader; the CLIP model processed only the main batch, while
the eCLIP model has the flexibility to use either just the main batch or both
batches. Listing 2.1 shows the Pytorch-like pseudocode for the eCLIP model.
The utilization of the expert batch in eCLIP is determined by a curriculum
probability, initially set to zero during the cold start phase. This probability
linearly increases to pmax during the warmup phase, then linearly decreases to
pmin during the cool-down phase, where it remains for the remainder of the
training process. pmax was set to 0.5 for all experiments, while pmin was set to
0.05 for the ViT Base model and to 0.1 for all other models.
A.2

m2 -mixup vs m3 -mixup

We illustrate m2 -mixup in Fig. 3, where embeddings from image and text domains are mixed to mitigate the modality gap, as proposed by Oh et al. [33].
Oh et al. [33] further introduce m3 -mixup, which combines m2 -mixup with corresponding unimodal mixups. Specifically,
Lm3 = LCLIP + Lm2 + Luni

For further details, please refer to Oh et al. [33].
A.3

Linear Probe Experiments

In our linear probe experiments, we utilize the CLIP and eCLIP with Swin Tiny
as the image encoder following other recent similar works [54,59]. The pretrained
model’s image encoder is entirely frozen and we append a linear layer for classification. This layer’s output dimension is set to 1 for the Pneumonia dataset, 8 for

