AD3: Introducing a Score for Anomaly
Detection Dataset Difficulty Assessment Using
VIADUCT Dataset
Jan Lehr1(B) , Jan Philipps1 , Alik Sargsyan2 , Martin Pape1 ,
and Jörg Krüger3
1

Fraunhofer IPK, Pascalstraße, 8-9, 10587 Berlin, Germany
jan.lehr@ipk.fraunhofer.de
2
Ngene LLC, 3 Hakob Hakobyan Street, 0033 Yerevan, Armenia
3
TU Berlin, Straße des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany

Abstract. The field of visual Industrial Anomaly Detection (IAD) has brought
forth many new semi-supervised learning methods in recent years. At the same
time, there have been few new datasets for benchmarking the methods. The most
popular dataset is MVTec-AD dataset, because of its diversity of categories and
availability of industrial objects. But many methods already achieve AUROC
scores of more than 99 % on the MVTec-AD dataset. The defects of the categories
that the dataset provides appear to be easily detectable. Furthermore, there is no
existing approach to statistically describe the defects that need to be found in IAD
datasets. This paper presents a new dataset for visual industrial anomaly detection and a novel approach for Anomaly Detection Dataset Difficulty assessment
with the AD3 score. The new dataset named VIADUCT contains 49 categories
and 10,986 high resolution images from eleven different sectors. Through the
support of several manufacturing companies, numerous real inspection problems
are presented through the dataset. It contains a large number of different defects
with detailed pixel-wise annotations. The VIADUCT dataset is compared with
other state of the art datasets to underline its added value. Therefore, we provide
an overview for each dataset regarding the number of categories, images, defect
categories and defects. In addition to these obvious comparisons the defects of
the datasets are described with the AD3 score. This novel score is used to analyze
the size of the defects and the similarity between the defect and its corresponding object. Using seven selected methods from industrial anomaly detection, a
benchmark is performed on the new dataset, showing that there is still potential
for improvement. It is shown that the VIADUCT dataset is the largest dataset
in the field of image-based industrial anomaly detection. In addition to its very
small defects which are hard to recognize, the dataset also offers the greatest variance of possible defects and the most defect classes. Describing the datasets with
AD3 score it can be found that VIADUCT dataset have the most inconspicuous
defects. With the AD3 score we are able to create a-priori knowledge for every
single defect in IAD datasets. The AD3 score correlates with the results of the
IAD method benchmark, showing that it can be used to estimate defect detection difficulty. In the future, new objects can be assessed to see whether defects
can be recognized using IAD methods before an energy-intensive benchmark is
performed. The simple calculation of the AD3 score generates valuable a-priori
knowledge and can save resources.
c The Author(s) 2025

A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15126, pp. 449–464, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73113-6 26

