Appendix: Interpretability-Guided Test-Time
Adversarial Defense
Akshay Kulkarni1

and Tsui-Wei Weng2

1

CSE, UC San Diego
HDSI, UC San Diego
{a2kulkarni,lweng}@ucsd.edu
2

In this document, we provide extensive implementation details and additional
performance analysis. Towards reproducible research, we will release our complete
codebase and saved importance rankings for the reported base models in this
GitHub repository. The appendix is organized as follows:
– Section A: Related Work
– Section B: Implementation details
◦ Analysis experiments setup (Sec. B.1)
◦ Base models (Sec. B.2)
◦ Evaluation setup (Sec. B.3)
◦ Miscellaneous details (Sec. B.4)
– Section C: Experiments
◦ Extended comparisons (Sec. C.1, Table 2)
◦ Extended analysis (Sec. C.2, Table 4, 3, 5, Fig. 1, 3, 2)
◦ Efficiency analysis (Sec. C.3, Table 6)

A

Related Work

Connections between interpretability and robustness.
Several works [6, 13, 16, 20, 26, 29] use sparsity to improve adversarial robustness.
Eigen and Sadovnik [13] replace standard convolutions with top-k convolutions
that only output the sum of top-k channels instead of all channels for each
convolutional filter. This requires the model to be trained from scratch. Bai et
al. [6] introduce learnable channelwise activation suppressing modules which
select some channels to be masked. This adds new learnable parameters and also
requires the model to be trained from scratch.
A line of work [16, 20, 29] focuses on pruning aiming to train a model with
robust pruning objectives using both original and adversarial images to obtain a
sparser, more robust model. Xiao et al. [26] propose a method similar to [13] except
that they replace ReLU with a top-k activation function instead of modifying the
convolutional layers. But their approach deliberately relies on gradient masking,
which is apparent from their highly irregular or jagged loss surfaces. However,
these methods require retraining or training from scratch, which is expensive. In
contrast, our method indirectly leverages sparsity without requiring any training.

