Supplementary Material for
3D Reconstruction of Objects in Hands
without Real World 3D Supervision
Aditya Prakash, Matthew Chang, Matthew Jin, Ruisen Tu, and Saurabh Gupta
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{adityap9,mc48,mjin11,ruisent2,saurabhg}@illinois.edu
https://bit.ly/WildHOI

In this supplementary document, we first provide additional implementation
details about the 2D mask guided 3D sampling (Sec. A.1) and 2D slice based 3D
discriminator (Sec. A.2) used in our approach (Sec. A). Next, we provide examples
of hand-object tracks on VISOR (Fig. A, Fig. B), qualitative comparisons of
our HORSE model with AC-SDF on MOW (Fig. C, Fig. D) & HO3D (Fig. E),
failure cases of our model (Fig. F) and visualizations of cross-section maps used
in the discriminator (Fig. G).

A

Architecture Details

A.1

2D Mask Guided 3D Sampling

We supervise the occupancy network F via consistency in masks in multiple views
of the object. Let’s assume we have multiple views {I1 , . . . , In } and corresponding
segmentation masks for objects of interaction in these n views {M1 , . . . , Mn }.
Given this setup, we compute the occupancy labels for a point x as sgt =
∩ni=1 Mi (xpi ) and train using Lvisual-hull = CE(s, sgt ) where CE is cross-entropy
loss, s = f (x; I, θa , θw , θc K) is the predicted occupancy at x and xpi = πθiw (x)
is the projection of x into the image Ii using FrankMocap [6] predictions of the
hand pose and camera parameters.
Camera pose: We assume that the hand is rigidly moving with the object. Thus,
the relative pose of the hand between different views reveals the relative camera
pose across views. Consider all poses w.r.t object. Let ci T o denote the camera
pose in view i. Thus, relative pose between two views, i.e. ci T cj = ci T o ∗ oT cj .
Using the hand pose estimated, w.r.t camera, from FrankMocap, this can be
written as ci T cj = ci T hi ∗ hi T o ∗ oT hj ∗ hj T cj . Since we assume that hand is rigid
w.r.t object, hi T o = hj T o and hi T o ∗ oT hj = I. Thus ci T cj = ci T hi ∗ hj T cj .
Sampling details: An important consideration is assigning ground truth labels
to the 8192 sampled points since we rely on FrankMocap predicted hand pose
and camera parameters which may be inaccurate. First, we uniformly sample
4096 3D points in [-1,1]3 in the wrist coordinate frame and consider the points
projecting into the object mask in all views as occupied. Since all these 4096
points may not be occupied, we use rejection sampling to repeat the procedure,
for maximum of 50 times, until we get 4096 occupied points. Moreover, due to

