1

TexDreamer: Towards Zero-Shot High-Fidelity
3D Human Texture Generation
—Supplementary Material—
In this supplementary material, Sec. 1 provides more information regarding
the ATLAS dataset construction. Sec. 2 presents more analysis of TexDreamer
training. Sec. 3 show more qualitative results of TexDreamer, including both
text-to-UV and image-to-UV. We also present more human textures included in
our ATLAS dataset.

1

More Details of ATLAS Construction

Text Augmentation. To acquire multi-view images for fictional characters, we
use text augmentation to promote the consistency of generated character identities. Tab. 1 provides details about view-related and other description prompts.
The positive prompt Tpos is used to condition the main generation direction.
We describe Tpos with character identity Tid , generate poses Tpose and other
descriptions Tother .
ChatGPT Prompt Structure. We divide avatar descriptions into four categories: detailed description, fictional character, celebrity, and general description.
For each category, we design distinct generation templates. For each category
in Fig. 1, “[ ]” content is included with every prompt, “( )” indicates the content
appears randomly.
Materials. We provide more material settings for rendering textured humans.
To achieve authentic human-like material, we set “dielectric specular reflection”
to 0.1, and increase the “Roughness” to 0.6. Moreover, “Sheen Tint” is 0.5,
“Clearcoat Roughness” is 0.03, and “Index of refraction for transmission” (IOR)
is 1.45. The “Alpha” channel remains to be 1.

Table 1: Overview of prompts we used for ATLAS sample texture image generation.

front
view

back
left
right

Tpos
front side, from front, the
front of Tid
backside, from back, the
backside of Tid
left side, from left
right side, from right

Tneg
backside
front, face, head

front, back
front, back
overexposed, nude, layman work,
black background, diffuse rendering,
worst quality, teeth, smile, open mouth,
other
daylight
eyes closed

