Pseudo-keypoint RKHS Learning for
Self-supervised 6DoF Pose Estimation
(Supplementary Material)
Yangzheng Wu

and Michael Greenspan

RCVLab, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ingenuity Labs,
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
{y.wu, michael.greenspan}@queensu.ca

S.1

Overview

We document here some addition implementation details and results. The detailed structures of keypoint radial voting network Mv and Convolutional RKHS
Adapter MA are described in Sec. S.2 and shown in Figs. S.2 and S.1. Sec. S.3
describes the visualized radial pattern (shown in Fig. S.3) of the dragon object
in TUDL, which inspired us to use a CNN (Mv ) to simulate the voting process. The ARV SD , ARM SSD , ARM SP D , and AR results of all datasets we used
for all ablation studies are summarized in Sec. S.4 and listed in Fig. S.4 and
Tables S.1, S.2, S.3, and S.4. The detailed ADD(S) results for each category
of object on LM and LMO are listed in Tables S.6 and S.5, and ADD-S AUC
results on YCB are shown in Table S.7.

S.2

Network Diagrams

The structure of Adapter network MA is shown in Fig. S.1. Each conv block
comprises 3 × 3 convolution, batch normalization, and ReLu layers. Inputs of
MA , i.e. x8s, x4s, x2s, upx2s, upx4s, and upx8s are feature maps extracted from
each step of Mr . x8s stands for the 8th step of the encoding ResNet block, and
upx8s is the 8th step of the decoding block, etc. Outputs of each column of conv
blocks are concatenated and mapped into RKHS by a linear layer.
The keypoint radial voting network Mv structure is shown in Fig. S.2. The
input of Mv is the inversed radial map Vbr−1 , defined in the main paper. Mv
comprises 5 convolution layers with a kernel size of 3 and stride of 1. A linear
layer maps the feature map into the shape of n×4 comprising n×2 projected 2D
keypoints K, n classification labels C, and n confidence scores S.
Estimated keypoints are organized into clusters based on geometric constraints when multiple instances of the same object appear within an image.
More precisely, the estimated keypoints are grouped into instance sets by sorting the mean absolute differences of the Euclidean distances between keypoints
defined on the CAD model, and those being estimated.

