Supplementary Material:
GeometrySticker: Enabling Ownership Claim of
Recolorized Neural Radiance Fields
Xiufeng Huang1,2 , Ka Chun Cheung2 , Simon See2 , and Renjie Wan1⋆
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA
xiufenghuang@life.hkbu.edu.hk, {chcheung, ssee}@nvidia.com,
renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk

S1

Overview

This supplementary document provides more discussions, implementation details, and further results that accompany the paper:
– Section S2 explains the uniqueness of our method by comparing with the
current NeRF ownership claiming methods under NeRF recolorizations.
– Section S3 explains the effectiveness of applying the Laplace Cumulative
Distribution Function (CDF) with learnable parameters.
– Section S4 introduces the details of our reference colors and visualizes their
corresponding recolorization results for NeRF. These recolorization methods
are applied to different NeRF architectures to validate ownership for the
recolorized NeRF.
– Section S5 presents the implementation details of our method, including the
network architectures and the training process.
– Section S6 provides additional results, including additional qualitative results
of the main paper.

S2

Uniquesness

As shown in Fig. S1, we demonstrate the uniqueness of using our GeometrySticker to claim ownership of a recolorized NeRF model. The current ownership protection methods such as CopyRNeRF [5] and StegaNeRF [3] can only
claim the ownership when recolorization is not conducted. However, since the
recent developments of NeRF recolorization methods [1, 2, 7], if a model owner
Bob creates a NeRF model and watermark the model with CopyRNeRF [5] or
StegaNeRF [3], the hidden ownership information could be vulnerable when a
malicious user applies unauthorized recolorization on the NeRF model. Our GeometrySticker can be robust under different recolorizations. A model owner Alice
can watermark her NeRF model by GeometrySticker, which can keep the hidden information consistent under different recolorizations and reliably extract
the binary message from the recolorized NeRF renderings.
⋆

Corresponding author.

