GIVT: Generative Infinite-Vocabulary Transformers —
Supplementary Material
A

Additional discussions

Why continuous latents for images?
Continuous latents naturally fit
intrinsically continuous-valued data such as image representations, and avoid
excessive compression and the resulting information loss induced by VQ. Removing VQ also avoids the well-documented challenges of stochastic-gradientbased discrete representation learning: VQ-VAE [49] and its variations require
a VQ optimization problem, which on its own is NP-hard, to be solved jointly
with an embedding learning problem. A large body of literature [7, 27, 33, 37, 49]
focuses on mitigating issues resulting from these optimization diﬃculties, such
as low vocabulary utilization (Sec. 1). For example, [46] avoids vector quantization by using a product codebook, but still relies on non-diﬀerentiable scalar
quantization. In contrast, with GIVT we obtain SOTA results based on a -VAE
which does not include any non-diﬀerentiable operations and does not require
any advanced tricks from the VQ literature [7, 27, 33, 37, 49].
Continuous latents vs. infinite vocabulary
In theory, continuous (i.e.,
real-valued) latents/tokens always imply an infinite vocabulary when mapping
them exactly to a discrete code. In other words, the infinite vocabulary is a
consequence of continuous latents. In practice, continuous latents are represented
with finite precision, e.g., float32, but using the raw 32-bit representation as a
discrete code would still imply an impractically large vocabulary size 232 ⇡ 4.3B
for a single latent dimension. GIVT directly models the continuous latents and
avoids materializing this vocabulary.

B

Architecture details

Architecture details for diﬀerent model variants used for image generation are
listed in Table 5. We rely on the standard pre-LN setup (see, e.g., UViM vtt.py
for a concrete implementation). For the UViM experiments, we use GIVT-Causal
with the Default config and a cross-attention layer inserted after every selfattention layers as in [33] to fuse visual features extracted from the input RGB
image.
Adapters are constructed by stacking 8 convolutional, bijective iRevNet blocks
[28] with hidden channel dimension 4d (resulting in 112k additional parameters
for d = 16). Each block consists of 3 Conv layers, interleaved with GroupNorm
and ReLU, and has identical input and output shapes w ⇥h⇥d (i.e., the adapter
is applied to the VAE latent z before reshaping it into a sequence). We base our
iRevNet block on the reference implementation iRevNet.py, replacing BatchNorm with GroupNorm and removing subsampling layers.
1

