Boosting Transferability in Vision-Language
Attacks via Diversification along the Intersection
Region of Adversarial Trajectory
Sensen Gao 1,3 ⋆ , Xiaojun Jia 2∗† , Xuhong Ren 2 ,
Ivor Tsang 2,3 , and Qing Guo 3†
1

Nankai University, Tianjin, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),
Singapore
2

In this supplementary material, we present our visualizations of multimodal
data perturbations and the formulation of attacks. Additionally, we delve into the
intersection region of adversarial trajectories and the rationale behind the improvement in transferability. Moreover, we explore adversarial attacks on Large
Language Models (LLMs) and compare the time efficiency. Furthermore, we provide more detailed results regarding cross-model transferability.
– In Section 1, we present visualizations of the perturbations caused by our
multimodal adversarial attack methods on both image and text modalities.
– In Section 2, we present attack formulation, which outlines the step-by-step
process of generating adversarial images and texts.
– In Section 3, we explore the proportions of clean images, last adversarial
images, and adversarial images in the intersection regional optimal samples,
as well as the changes in these proportions during the iteration process.
– In Section 4, we discuss the rationale behind the transferability improvement
of our method compared to SGA.
– In Section 5, We employ the VLP models as surrogates to generate adversarial examples and explore the adversarial robustness of existing state-ofthe-art LLMs.
– In Section 6, we compare the time costs between SGA and our method.
– In Section 7, we present more detailed results about cross-model transferability, incorporating the R@5 and R@10 metrics, as well as extending the
analysis to the MSCOCO dataset and different perturbation settings.

1

Visualization on Multimodal Dataset

In Figure A1, we present the adversarial perturbations of our method for both
image and text modalities. As mentioned in our experimental setup, we perturb
only one token for text and use an 8/255 perturbation for images. The first two
lines represent the clean image and the adversarial image, respectively. The third
line indicates the added adversarial perturbation. The last two lines represent
⋆

co-first authors; † co-corresponding authors

