Receler: Reliable Concept Erasing of
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models via
Lightweight Erasers
——–Supplementary Material——–
Chi-Pin Huang⋆1,† , Kai-Po Chang∗1 , Chung-Ting Tsai2 ,
Yung-Hsuan Lai2 , Fu-En Yang3 , and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3,‡
1

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University
2
National Taiwan University, 3 NVIDIA
†
f11942097@ntu.edu.tw, ‡ frankwang@nvidia.com

This supplementary material includes additional details of the main manuscript
and offers more analysis of the experiments. In Appendix A, we discuss the limitation of Receler. Next, we present additional experimental setup and implementation details, including the algorithm, in Appendix B. Finally, we provide more
quantitative and qualitative results in Appendix C and Appendix D, respectively.

A

Limitation

This work leverages an adapter-based lightweight eraser for efficient and reliable
concept erasing while preserving the pre-trained weights, thus preserving the
model’s intrinsic capabilities. However, a limitation of this approach is that if
an attacker gains access to the model weights, they could potentially remove the
eraser and restore the original model. This limitation is shared with recent works
on unlearning and model editing, such as SPM [10], EUL [2], and T-patcher [7].
These works all consider a scenario where model access is restricted to API
calls in online services like Midjourney3 , DALL·E4 , and stability.ai5 , making it
difficult for attackers to access the model weights.

B

Additional Experiments Details and Analysis

B.1

Datasets

Object Erasure. We provide further details and analysis of the paraphrased
prompts from CIFAR-10 concepts. First, the instruction we used for ChatGPT to
generate these prompts are as follows: “Give me 50 distinctive prompts that can
be used to generate images of {concept}. Ensure high quality in the completion
of this task ”. In Fig. 7, we analyze whether the concept to be erased is explicitly
⋆

Equal Contribution
https://www.midjourney.com/home
4
https://openai.com/dall-e-3
5
https://stability.ai/
3

