Supplementary Material
Yini Fang∗1 , Jingling Yu∗1 , Haozheng Zhang2 , Ralf van der Lans1 , and
Bertram Shi1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, HK
2
University of Durham, Durham, UK
{yfangba, jyubj}@connect.ust.hk, haozheng.zhang@durham.ac.uk, rlans@ust.hk,
eebert@ust.hk

We provide more details about our collected dataset in this document.

1

Preparation

Prior to conducting the experiment, a selection of 22 wine products from 21 distinct brands was made from the Bivino website3 , along with 27 yogurt products
from 13 different brands sourced from the Walmart website4 . For each type of
product, 20 items were designated as target packages, and a total of 100 shelf
images were created by arranging these packages in permutations on a twodimensional grid shelf. The arrangement for the wine products was made into 2
rows and 11 columns, whereas the yogurt products were organized into 3 rows
and 9 columns. The images were generated with a resolution of 1680 × 1050
pixels.
The data collection involved 39 subjects aged between 18 and 30 years old,
with 47% male and 53% female participants. Eye-tracking data was collected
using the Tobii T60XL eye tracker, with a sampling rate of 60Hz.

2

Collection Process

The experimental procedure involved instructing the subjects to search for a specific target product within the given shelf image. A screenshot of the instruction
provided to the subjects is shown in Figure 3.
To ensure variability, we randomly assigned 30 unique combinations of target
products and shelf images to each subject. In each trial, the target product was
initially displayed for a duration of five seconds, followed by the presentation
of the corresponding shelf image. The participants were instructed to locate
the target product and click on it within a time limit of three seconds. Their
compensation was contingent upon both the speed and accuracy of finding the
target product.
A total of 1170 scanpaths were collected during the experiment. We utilized
the Binocular-Individual Threshold algorithm [2] to cluster the raw gaze samples
into fixations. This algorithm takes into account binocular viewing and leverages
3
4

https://bidvino.com/
https://www.walmart.com/

