GS-Pose: Supplementary
Pengyuan Wang1 , Takuya Ikeda2 , Robert Lee2 , and Koichi Nishiwaki2
1

1

Technical University of Munich Germany
2
Woven by Toyota, Japan

ShapeNet Objects for Our Training

CPPF [5] leverages synthetic models from ShapeNet [1] for the network training,
where a large amount of synthetic object models are collected per category. However, only a small amount of objects are needed for our pipeline and we randomly
selected only 10 CAD models from the ShapeNet objects for the training. As is
mentioned in NOCS [4], ShapeNet objects contain object meshes that do not
look real or have topology problems which results in rendering failures, therefore we manually remove meshes with defects. Training objects of bottle, bowl,
camera, can, laptop and mug categories are visualized in Fig. 1, and the trained
networks are evaluated on NOCS and Wild6D [6] dataset. Even though part of
the objects in certain categories such as cans and mugs are textured with single
colors and have large domain gap in comparison with real textures, our network
robustly captures the semantic features and can be applied on real data after
training. The objects in the chair category for our training are visualized in Fig.
2 and the result is evaluated in the SUN RGB-D [3] dataset. We observe that the
chair category has a large variety of shapes and the part of the model textures
are single-colored. Despite the challenging task setup including heavy occlusions,
our method shows great improvements in comparison with the CPPF baseline
in the SUN RGB-D dataset.

2

Detailed Evaluations on NOCS dataset

Inputs Preprocessing The masks from the NOCS dataset contain inaccurate segmentation results and leads to point cloud outliers, therefore radius
outlier removal is applied to filter the sparse background points from the partial
inputs.
Evaluation Results per Category The evaluation of our method on
NOCS dataset for each category is reported in Tab. 1. It is observed that bottle,
∗
∗
and 3D50
. The
camera and can categories have relatively low scores for 3D25
scores for bottle and can are low due to missing bounding box predictions in
∗
the dataset. The 3D50
score for the camera is low because the testing cameras
have large deformation in the camera lens, which is hard to be approximated
by affine transformation of shape priors. For the 5°5cm, 10°5cm, 15°5cm scores,
the camera category is low. The mug category has a lower score in 10°5cm because of the difficulty of rotation estimation based on mug handles. Despite this,

