Supplementary Document - PreciseControl:
Enhancing Text-To-Image Diffusion Models with
Fine-Grained Attribute Control
Rishubh Parihar⋆1 , Sachidanand VS∗1 , Sabariswaran Mani2⋆⋆ , Tejan Karmali1 ,
and R. Venkatesh Babu1
1

Vision and AI Lab, IISc Bangalore
2
IIT Kharagpur
Project Page

Ethics statement. We propose a face personalization method that might be
useful for fake news generation as it enables the generation of persons in novel
contexts. However, this issue is not limited to this work as it exists in several
personalization approaches [4, 19] and generative models [12]. Nonetheless, recent works [7] have leveraged the power of the same personalization approaches
for removing concepts or biases from T2I models.

A

Index

In this supplementary document, we provide a comparison with encoder-based
inversion methods (Sec.B) followed by discussions on limitations (Sec.C) and
implementation details (Sec.D). Next, we present ablation over different design choices (Sec.E) for mapper training, face-restoration results (Sec.F), and
subject-specific tuning (Sec.G). We present additional comparison results for attribute editing (Sec.H). We present editing results using InterfaceGAN edit directions (Sec.I). Finally, we provide additional single-subject and multi-subject
composition results (Sec.J and K) and prompts used (Sec.L).

B

Additional baseline comparisons

We compare our proposed method with recent encoder-based personalization
methods in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. To demonstrate the robustness of our method
across datasets, we curated two new datasets that are potentially unseen by the
diffusion models during training for fairness.
1. Synthetic-faces [SF] - We create a dataset of 30 individuals generated
from pretrained StyleGAN2 on FFHQ [5] dataset.
2. Real-faces [RF] - We extract frames from RAVDESS [10] video emotion
recognition dataset. This dataset contains videos of 24 individuals acting
different expressions captured in a lab environment. We extract one frame
⋆
⋆⋆

Equal contribution
Work done during internship at VAL, IISc

