Supplementary Material:
Modality Translation for Object Detection Adaptation
Without Forgetting Prior Knowledge
Heitor Rapela Medeiros , Masih Aminbeidokhti , Fidel Alejandro Guerrero Peña ,
David Latortue , Eric Granger , and Marco Pedersoli
Laboratoire d’imagerie, de vision et d’intelligence artificielle (LIVIA)
Dept. of Systems Engineering, ETS Montreal, Canada
{heitor.rapela-medeiros.1, masih.aminbeidokhti.1,
fidel-alejandro.guerrero-pena.1,
david.latortue.1}@ens.etsmtl.ca,
{eric.granger, marco.pedersoli}@etsmtl.ca

In this supplementary material, we provide additional information to reproduce our
work. The code is available at https://github.com/heitorrapela/ModTr.
This supplementary material is divided into the following sections: Detailed diagrams
(Section 1), Different fusion strategies (Section 2), Quantitative Results (Section 3),
in which we provide additional numerical results in terms of APs, Qualitative Results
(Section 4), in which we provide additional visualizations and Additional Modality:
Canny Edges (Section 5), in which we show experiments with edges extracted from IR
images using Canny edge detector.

1

Detailed Diagrams

In this section, we expand and detail the diagrams provided in the main manuscript.
In Figure 1, we describe the traditional approach of employing specialized detectors
for individual modalities. For example, we depict an RGB detector (highlighted in purple) and two IR detectors (highlighted in green and yellow), with each trained over a
different dataset.
In Figure 2, we illustrate the proposed ModTr. This method involves using a single
pre-trained detector model typically trained on the more prevalent data, i.e., RGB, and
additional input adaptation network. For clarity, the RGB modality (along with the RGB
detector) is depicted in purple, while an adaptation block of ModTr is shown in green
for one IR modality and in red for the other IR modality with different distribution.
Lastly, we present a final diagram (Figure 3), depicting a detector trained on the
joint distribution of all modalities. The detector, shown in purple, undergoes training
with all available modalities. While this approach enables the model to learn shared
features, it may not be optimal. Nevertheless, it incurs a lower memory cost compared
to employing one detector for each modality.

2

Different fusion strategies

Here, we present a comprehensive overview of the alternative fusion strategies we explored. In addition to the element-wise product fusion, which produced the best re-

