Supplementary Material
WorldPose: A World Cup Dataset for Global 3D
Human Pose Estimation
Tianjian Jiang∗1 , Johsan Billingham∗2 , Sebastian Müksch1 , Juan Zarate1 ,
Nicolas Evans2 , Martin R. Oswald1,3 , Marc Polleyfeys1,4 , Otmar Hilliges1 ,
Manuel Kaufmann1 , and Jie Song†1
1

ETH Zürich
2
FIFA
3
University of Amsterdam
4
Microsoft

In this supplementary material, we provide additional information to complement the main text: 1) more implementation details about the data creation (see
Sec. 1), 2) more details about the baselines (see Sec. 2), and 3) more statistics
and sample images from WorldPose (see Sec. 3).

1

Data creation

1.1

Static Camera Calibration

For static camera calibrations, we developed a GUI program designed for the
manual annotation of 2D points, as is shown in Fig. 1. This tool simplifies the
process of adding and editing annotations. It also offers additional features, like
1) zooming, which is crucial for achieving pixel-level accuracy, and 2) previewing,
where it dynamically updates the estimation of camera parameters using the
annotated 2d points and generates preview results of the projection of the field
markings.
Subsequently, we employ the Canny detector [3] to extract the field markings from OpenCV [2]. The calibration results from the previous stage are also
utilized to remove uninteresting lines. The detected lines are then converted into
a distance field matrix, where each element of the matrix represents the distance to the nearest field markings. With the distance field we can further refine
the camera parameters by minimizing the distance of the projected point of the
field markings to the closest line pixel. The detected field markings and distance
matrix are visualized in Fig. 2.
However, there are still several problems remained: 1) by default, we only
estimate the k1 and k2 distortion coefficients of the cameras. However, this may
not be sufficient in some cases, especially for side cameras with wide angles. These
cameras need to be handled separately, and usually, adding the k3 coefficient is
sufficient to achieve relatively good results. 2) another issue is that even when
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work
Now at HKUST(GZ)&HKUST

