Supplementary Material for Find n’ Propagate:
Open-Vocabulary 3D Object Detection in Urban
Environments
Djamahl Etchegaray1 , Zi Huang1 , Tatsuya Harada2 , and Yadan Luo ⋆1
1

UQMM Lab, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
2
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
{uqdetche, helen.huang, y.luo}@uq.edu.au, harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Overview
This supplementary material provides complementary details to better understand the main paper. A brief overview of the sections is available below:
– 1: Visualisation of Detection Results under §Setting 1 and §Setting 3
– 2: Further Implementation Details
• 2.1: Filtering Strategies in Iterative Self-Training
– 3: More Ablation Studies
• 3.2: Greedy Box Oracle
• 3.3: Self-Training Objectives
• 3.4: Top-down Projection
• 3.5: Discussions on CLIP2Scene Zero-shot Results

1

Visualisation

To achieve a better understanding of the proposed approach, we provide more
visualisations of qualitative analysis on the derived Box Seeker (column 2),
Find n’ Propagate (column 3) and Top-down self-training on §Setting
1 in Fig. 1. The top row gives the corresponding multi-view images of the studied
point cloud. The base classes are highlighted in blue while the novel ones are
colored in red. Points are coloured based on the class of the ground truth box
they are in to help highlight which objects have been missed, if they do not fall
in any ground-truth box their colour is grey. The figure shows the significant
increase in the novel recall by using Find n’ Propagate over a strong baseline
Top-down self-train. Further, it establishes the number of new objects that
were able to be found/refined in self-training. The detailed comparisons can be
found in the captions of each figure.
§Setting 3. We previously evaluated our novel proposal generation on nuScenes,
demonstrating the effectiveness on both base and novel classes. Visualisations of
these proposals for all classes are available in Fig. 1 (column 2). Further to our
⋆

Correspondence to Yadan Luo (y.luo@uq.edu.au)

