Supplementary File - Forget More to Learn More:
Domain-specific Feature Unlearning for
Semi-supervised and Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Hritam Basak∗ and Zhaozheng Yin
Dept. of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, NY, USA
∗
hbasak@cs.stonybrook.edu

1

Details of Domain-specific and Domain-agnostic Features

Our proposed “learn, forget, then learn more method focuses on identifying and learning domain-specific features first (subsection 3.1 of main paper), then unlearning them
(subsection 3.2), followed by learning more domain-agnostic features (subsection 3.3).
We prioritize domain-agnostic features (i.e., task-specific features, which are good
for domain-adaptive classification tasks) over domain-specific ones (i.e., features related to a specific domain), mitigating bias from domain knowledge. Domain-agnostic
features, primarily capturing shape and structural information (main paper Fig. 1 - first
row), differ from target-specific features, which encapsulate finer color and texture details specific to a target domain (shown in Figure 2). Due to limited or no annotations in
the target domain, extracting discriminative target-specific representations with a CNN
is extremely challenging. Hence, our approach prioritizes extracting common representations shared between the source and target domains, i.e., domain-agnostic features.
Unlike previous SSDA and UDA methods that incidentally acquire domain-agnostic
representations as a secondary objective, our work primarily emphasizes on this aspect,
surpassing the efficiency of prior approaches (refer to Table 1-4 of main paper).
Domain-specific encoders are designed to proficiently classify images from the same
domain (Eq.1 of paper), while consciously refraining from extracting valuable representations from out-of-domain images (Eq.2 or paper). Minimizing Eq.4 ensures that the
network learns predominantly domain-specific features, complemented by some domainagnostic ones. In section 3.2, we disentangle and unlearn domain-specific features, enhancing the prominence of domain-agnostic (i.e., task-specific) ones in mapped images,
and adeptly learn features crucial for classification.

2

Additional Results and Analysis

We provide additional results and an in-depth analysis of our proposed workflow in this
section. This complements our findings in the main manuscript.
2.1

Latent Feature Visualization

In addition to the t-SNE plot for SSDA (as shown in Figure 5 and subsection 4.7 of
the main manuscript), we provide similar findings for UDA setting, both class-wise and

