Scene-aware Human Motion Forecasting via
Mutual Distance Prediction
Supplementary Material
Chaoyue Xing1 , Wei Mao1 , and Miaomiao Liu1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia1

A

Implementation Details

As demonstrated in Figure 2 of the main paper, our method is built on GCNs,
GRUs and a 3DCNN. To encode the historical motion X, we use a 1-layer GRU
with a hidden dimension of 128 for both mutual distance prediction network and
motion forecasting network. Similarly, we use two other GRUs with the same
hidden size to encode the predicted per-vertex signed distance and the per-basis
point distance respectively. The 3D scene signed distance volume S ∈ RN ×N ×N
is encoded via a 3DCNN. From which, we extract a scene feature vector of size
128.
As discussed in our main paper, for each human motion, we crop a fixed-size
scene volume surrounding the last observed pose and the origin of the cropped
scene is the root joint location of such pose. In particular, the scene volume is
cropped as a cube. Each face of such cube is a1 meters away from its origin
making it a cube of 2a1 meters side length. The basis points are sampled from
a sphere of radius equal to a2 meters centred at the origin of the scene. Specific
settings for different datasets are presented as follows: for the Humanise dataset,
both a1 and a2 are set to 2.0 meters. In the GIMO dataset, a1 is 2.0 meters and
a2 is 2.5 meters. For the GTA-IM and PROX datasets, a1 and a2 are each set
to 2.5 meters. Since our model predicts the human body mesh, we also feed the
SMPL-X shape parameters [4] into the network. In particular, the body shape
parameter is first encoded as a 32-dimensional feature vector by a 2-layer MLP
and then concatenated with all other inputs at each prediction step.

B

Results on GIMO Dataset

We provide quantitative comparisons on GIMO dataset, presented in Tables 1.

C

Long Term Prediction

To validate our model’s ability to forecast long-term motions, we provide results
in Table 2. We follow the setup in [3] to predict the future 60 frames (2 seconds)
given the past 30 frames (1 second). We feed the predictions to the pre-trained

