Lego

1

Lego: Learning to Disentangle and Invert Personalized
Concepts Beyond Object Appearance in Text-to-Image
Diffusion Models - supplemental document
– We go over Lego’s limitation and ethical use of personalized generative models in Section 7
– Please refer to Section 8 to see the effect of increasing the number of reference
images for performing Lego.
– In Section 9 we show that the learned subject embedding by Lego can also
be used and it performs similar to TI.
– To see Lego inverted concepts applied to more subjects, please see
Figure 11.
– If you are interested in details of the experimental design such as text
templates and how P and N were chosen for each concept, please refer to
Section 11.
– For details on the prompts used in generating concepts using the
baseline and details on the VQA study, please see Section 12.
– 200 images generated using Lego and 200 images generated using the baseline
are shown in Figures 16 to 29.
– We show how ELITE [51] and ControlNet [56] perform in inverting general
concepts in Section 13.
– The full results for our ablation study can be found in Section 15.

7

Limitations and Ethical Statement

Lego struggles to invert concepts beyond the capabilities of the backbone, like
facial expressions with earlier versions of Stable Diffusion. Our research is dedicated to ethical and responsible data use, emphasizing the need for socially
responsible applications in personalized visual media.

8

The Effect of Dataset Size

In our experiments, we only used 4 images per experiment; 2 reference images
of the subject only and 2 reference images of the concept applied to the subject.
We trained Lego for the "closed eyes" and "raised arms" concept with 2, 4 &
8 concept images and 2 subject-only images. We then generated 100 images for
each concept. We then used our LLM-VQA evaluation setting to evaluate Lego’s
performance in each of these settings. For the concept of "closed eyes", Lego
achieved an accuracy of 75% when 2 concept images were shown to Lego. This
increased to 83% for both experiments with 4 and 8 concept reference images.
Similarly, for the concept of "raised arms", an accuracy of 78% was achieved with
only 2 concept images. Using 4 and 8 concept images increased the accuracy to
80% and 81% respectively.

