Supplementary Material for "Exploiting
Dual-Correlation for Multi-frame Time-of-Flight
Denoising"
Guanting Dong, Yueyi ZhangB , Xiaoyan Sun, and Zhiwei Xiong
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
gtdong@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, sunxiaoyan, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

1

Residual Channel Attention Block

In the main manuscript, we introduced the Residual Channel Attention Block
(RCAB) within the context of the Residual Combination Operation for depth
prediction and the Feature Extractor during the confidence-guided residual pyramid estimation phase. Here, we delve deeper into the details of RCAB and
present ablation experiments to analyze its impact.
Architecture of RCAB. We employ the RCAB to extract the features from the
concatenation of depth and amplitude maps for balancing the time consumption
and ToF denoising performance. In addition, different from SHARP-Net [2], we
incorporate a channel attention layer to combine the estimated confidence-guided
residual pyramid instead of a 1 × 1 convolution layer.
The detailed architecture of the RCAB is shown in Fig. 1. For the Feature
Extractor, the RCAB takes the features from the above block F as input to
′
obtain the aggregated feature F . In the Residual Combination Operation, the
RCAB takes as input the concatenation of the dot product of the residual pyramid and the confidence pyramid at each level. RCAB outputs a coarse depth
residual Rcoarse , which is employed to remove the MPI and shot noise in ToF
depth images.
Ablation study. To validate the effectiveness of RCAB, we conduct experiments
to compare our method against its variants, as shown in Table 1. We create
three variants by removing RCAB from our network: ‘FE w/o RCAB’, ‘RCO
w/o RCAB’, and ‘Ours w/o RCAB’. "FE w/o RCAB" refers to a variant of
our network that includes a feature extractor of 3 × 3 convolutions. "FE w/o
RCAB" also describes a variant of our network that employs a 1×1 convolution to
combine the confidence-guided residual pyramid. ‘Ours w/o RCAB’ represents
a variant of our network without RCAB. By comparing these variants with
our method across all error levels, we observe that introducing RCAB is more
effective in regions with low error levels and plays a crucial role in high-error
areas with geometric details.

