Supplemental Materials for
ComboVerse: Compositional 3D Assets Creation
Using Spatially-Aware Diffusion Guidance
Yongwei Chen1∗† , Tengfei Wang2∗ , Tong Wu3 ,
Xingang Pan1 , Kui Jia4 , and Ziwei Liu1
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
https://cyw-3d.github.io/ComboVerse/
2

A

Quantitative Ablation Analysis

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed SSDS, we performed an ablation
analysis and have shown qualitative results in Fig. 10 in the main paper. Beyond visual comparison, we also provide quantitative ablation analysis in table
S1. Two CLIP models, including CLIP B/16 and ResNet50 backbones, are utilized to examine different guidance configurations in object combinations. To
disentangle geometry and appearance quality, we evaluate multi-view CLIP similarities for both colored rendering and untextured geometry rendering. Base
only imposes reconstruction loss in the reference view, lacking additional guidance in novel views. Applying either a standard SDS loss or depth loss from a
depth prediction model as spatial guidance yielded sub-optimal CLIP scores for
color and geometry. However, by strengthening the attention to spatial layout
through the proposed SSDS loss (full), the full model achieves the best result,
confirming its enhanced spatial control over standard SDS. As discussed in Sec.
3.3, high noise intervals ([800, 900]) were selected for Stable Diffusion during
SSDS due to their bigger impact on the spatial layout of a generated image.
We also experiment with SSDS with different sample ranges of noise timesteps,
low noise range ([100, 200]), and uniform noise range ([20, 980]) and observe a
performance drop.

B

Validation of improvement on leaking pattern.

Fig. S1 illustrates our improvements in addressing the leaking pattern issue.
As shown in the image, the side view of the Wonder3D reconstruction exhibits
leaking patterns in both geometry and texture, while our reconstruction method
effectively mitigates this phenomenon. Leaking patterns are common in other
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done when interning at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

