Supplementary: X-Former: Unifying Contrastive
and Reconstruction Learning for MLLMs
Sirnam Swetha1 , Jinyu Yang2 , Tal Neiman2 , Mamshad Nayeem Rizve2 ,
Son Tran2 , Benjamin Yao2 , Trishul Chilimbi2 , and Mubarak Shah1,2
1

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
swetha.sirnam@ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu
2
Amazon
{viyjy, taneiman, mnrizve, sontran, benjamy, trishulc}@amazon.com

The supplementary material is organized as follows. First, we provide additional
details in Section 1 along with computational cost, zero-shot retrieval and parameter comparison in Section 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 respectively.
In Section 2, we present the fine-tuning experiments followed by the Largescale experimental results in Section 3. We report additional ablation analysis
in Section 4, and present additional qualitative results in Section 5. Finally,
we present fine-grained query analysis in Section 6 and additional fine-grained
evaluations in Section 7.

1

Details

Implementation Details Our model undergoes pre-training for nine epochs
in Stage-1 and one epoch in Stage-2, with OPT employed for Stage-2 alignment.
Consistent with [7], we opt to utilize the output features from the second-tolast layer of CLIP-ViT and the parameters of the frozen ViTs and LLMs are
converted into FP16. The AdamW optimizer with [β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98] and
a weight decay of 0.05 is used. We use cosine learning rate decay with a peak
learning rate of 1e-4 and a linear warmup of 2k steps. Images are resized to
224 × 224 with random resized crop and horizontal flip augmentations applied.
The masking ratio for MAE-ViT is set to 50%. During Stage-2 training, the
minimum learning rate is maintained at 5e-5.
Note that BLIP-2 does not release the captions utilized for training. Therefore we use the WebCapFilt captions from BLIP [8] for the LAION115M, SBU,
and Conceptual Captions datasets, each of which contains one synthetic caption
per image. For BLIP-2 training, the authors perform further processing using
CapFilt method to generate 10 synthetic captions per image. These captions,
along with the original caption, are ranked using CLIP ViT-L/14 image-text
similarity, and the top 2 captions per image are retained as training data. During training, one caption is randomly selected.
For fair comparison, we train BLIP-2 and our model on same training dataset
and report results. Additionally, we present results with F lanT 5XL [3] model,
which is trained with a prefix language modeling loss as mentioned in BLIP-2.
For further details, please refer to Section 3.

