Supplementary Materials: One-stage
Prompt-based Continual Learning
Youngeun Kim , Yuhang Li , and Priyadarshini Panda
Yale University, CT, USA
{youngeun.kim,yuhang.li,priya.panda}@yale.edu

1

Experimental Details

We maintain the prompting configuration (i.e. lengths and locations) for L2P
and DualPrompt as suggested by the CodaPrompt paper. The detailed configurations are as follows: L2P incorporates a prompt pool of size 20, a total prompt
length of 20, and selects 5 prompts from the pool for inference. DualPrompt
utilizes a length 5 prompt in layers 1 ∼ 2 and length 20 prompts in layers 3 ∼ 5.
CodaPrompt uses a prompt length of 8 and 100 prompt components. For all PCL
methods, including our OS-prompt, we employ the Adam optimizer [1] with β1
= 0.9 and β2 = 0.999, using a batch size of 128 images. We use cosine-decaying
learning rate scheduling with learning rate 1e − 3. All images are resized to
224x224 and normalized. CIFAR-100 is trained for 20 epochs, and ImageNet-R
for 50 epochs.
To train a prompt pool in our method, we freeze prompts from the previous
stages (1 ∼ N −1) and only train N stage’s prompt. For example, for 10-task class
incremental continual learning, we add 10 prompts to the prompt pool for each
stages and only train newly added 10 prompts. To initialize the new prompts,
we use Gram-Schmidt process [3] at the start of each new task, as described
in CodaPrompt official Github implementation. Furthermore, in alignment with
prior PCL implementations, we substitute the predictions from prior-task logits
with negative infinity during the training phase of the current task. Note that
we do not use the query attention proposed in CodaPrompt.

2

Does stronger ViT improve performance?

Setup. Here we provide the architecture details of advanced ViTs used in our
work. We use pre-trained models from PyTorch Image Models (timm) 1 .
• Swin-Transformer-v2 [2] introduces three primary technical contributions
to advance large-scale models in computer vision: firstly, a combined residualpost-norm method with cosine attention to enhance training stability; secondly, a
log-spaced continuous position bias technique that allows seamless transfer from
low-resolution pre-training to high-resolution downstream tasks; and thirdly,
1

https://huggingface.co/timm

