Neural Sparse Voxel Fields

Lingjie Liu†∗, Jiatao Gu‡∗, Kyaw Zaw Lin , Tat-Seng Chua , Christian Theobalt†
†
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
‡
Facebook AI Research  National University of Singapore
†
{lliu,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
‡
jgu@fb.com  kyawzl@comp.nus.edu.sg

dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Photo-realistic free-viewpoint rendering of real-world scenes using classical computer graphics techniques is challenging, because it requires the difficult step of
capturing detailed appearance and geometry models. Recent studies have demonstrated promising results by learning scene representations that implicitly encode
both geometry and appearance without 3D supervision. However, existing approaches in practice often show blurry renderings caused by the limited network
capacity or the difficulty in finding accurate intersections of camera rays with the
scene geometry. Synthesizing high-resolution imagery from these representations
often requires time-consuming optical ray marching. In this work, we introduce
Neural Sparse Voxel Fields (NSVF), a new neural scene representation for fast
and high-quality free-viewpoint rendering. NSVF defines a set of voxel-bounded
implicit fields organized in a sparse voxel octree to model local properties in each
cell. We progressively learn the underlying voxel structures with a diffentiable
ray-marching operation from only a set of posed RGB images. With the sparse
voxel octree structure, rendering novel views can be accelerated by skipping the
voxels containing no relevant scene content. Our method is typically over 10 times
faster than the state-of-the-art (namely, NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020)) at inference
time while achieving higher quality results. Furthermore, by utilizing an explicit
sparse voxel representation, our method can easily be applied to scene editing
and scene composition. We also demonstrate several challenging tasks, including
multi-scene learning, free-viewpoint rendering of a moving human, and large-scale
scene rendering.

1

Introduction

Realistic rendering in computer graphics has a wide range of applications including mixed reality,
visual effects, visualization, and even training data generation in computer vision and robot navigation.
Photo-realistically rendering a real world scene from arbitrary viewpoints is a tremendous challenge,
because it is often infeasible to acquire high-quality scene geometry and material models, as done in
high-budget visual effects productions. Researchers therefore have developed image-based rendering
(IBR) approaches that combine vision-based scene geometry modeling with image-based view
interpolation (Shum and Kang, 2000; Zhang and Chen, 2004; Szeliski, 2010). Despite their significant
progress, IBR approaches still have sub-optimal rendering quality and limited control over the results,
and are often scene-type specific. To overcome these limitations, recent works have employed deep
neural networks to implicitly learn scene representations encapsulating both geometry and appearance
from 2D observations with or without a coarse geometry. Such neural representations are commonly
combined with 3D geometric models, such as voxel grids (Yan et al., 2016; Sitzmann et al., 2019a;
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

