Flash-Splat: 3D Reflection Removal with
Flash Cues and Gaussian Splats – Supplement
In this supplementary material, we show results on three additional scenes
(Sec. 1), describe each scene’s setup (Sec. 2), conduct more comparison experiments (Sec. 3), report quantitative performance (Sec. 4), and provide more
details of an ablation study (Sec. 5). Additionally, our project webpage shows
the rendered videos of the transmitted and reflected 3D scenes separated by
our proposed method, which outperforms the separation by NeRFReN [3].

1

Additional Scenes

In addition to the 4 scenes we presented in Section 5, we show results on three
additional scenes. We evaluate our proposed method and the baselines on these
scenes in the same way as described in Section 4. As shown in Figure 15, 16,
17, our proposed method significantly outperforms the baselines in terms of
reflection transmission separation.

2

Scene Descriptions

In cases of strong specular reflections, such as the scenes in our captured dataset,
it is challenging even for humans to identify which objects belong to the transmitted scene, and which belong to the reflected scene. Therefore, to help readers
understand the setup of our scenes, we briefly describe the transmitted and reflected scenes for each of our 7 scenes (4 in the main paper, 3 in the supplement).
– Figure 5, Office (main paper). The transmitted scene is a bookcase in an
office with a glass wall. We set up our camera in the corridor facing inside
the office. The reflected scene is a study area at the end of the corridor.
– Figure 6, Game Controller (main paper). The transmitted scene is a
game controller in a black case with a glass cover. Note that the glass surface
is horizontal to the ground. The reflected scene is a door with a glass window
(you can also see the corridor through the door’s window). The door is upside
down due to reflection.
– Figure 7, Lens Stage (main paper). The transmitted scene is a lens stage
with several lenses on it. The lens stage is covered with a glass case. The
reflected scene consists of tables and chairs.
– Figure 8, Outdoor Scene (main paper). We took photos of a toy and a
power bank inside a glass window from outdoors. The reflected scene includes
some bags on an outdoor table, with plants and another building’s windows
(mildly defocused) 20 meters away in the background.
– Figure 15, Shelf (supplement). The transmitted scene is a shelf with boxes,
bags, and batteries on it. The reflected scene consists of tables and chairs.

