18

Fu et al.

Supplemental Materials: Cross-Domain Few-Shot Object
Detection via Enhanced Open-Set Object Detector
We first provide the implementation details in Sec. 7, and then show more
experimental results of our proposed methods in Sec. 8. Finally, in Sec. 9, more
details about our proposed benchmark are provided.

7

Implementation Details

We implement six methods for CD-FSOD as in Sec. 5.1, including “ViTDeT-FT”
adapted from ViTDeT [27], Detic [56], “Detic-FT” adapted from Detic, DEViT [52], “DE-ViT-FT” from DE-ViT, and our “CD-ViTO”. For all the models,
as stated in Sec. 3.1, we follow the “pretrain, finetuning, and testing" pipeline,
and the models pretrained on COCO are taken directly as the result of the
pretrain stage. The finetuning and testing details are as follows.
ViTDeT-FT: We finetune the whole ViTDeT using target support images
as training data. Specifically, the AdamW is used as the optimizer, the tuning
epoch is set as 100. As for the learning rate, we initially set it as 1.0 and as
the finetuning progressed, the learning rate is first reduced to 0.1, and finally to
0.01. The fine-tuned model is used for inference directly.
Detic: Detic is an open-vocabulary based object detection method that can
detect any novel object without finetuning, thus we skip the finetuning step and
perform the testing stage directly.
Detic-FT: Detic-FT is the same as the vanilla Detic except that we finetune
it on target support images. The SGD optimizer with a learning rate of 0.02 is
used for optimizing the network.
DE-ViT: Despite not using category information, DE-ViT builds a powerful
open-set detector for arbitrary objects and achieves the SOTA performance in
both the open-vocabulary setting and the few-shot setting. Thus, we use the
DE-ViT model well-trained on the COCO dataset to perform direct inference
on the CD-FSOD benchmark. Note that the hyperparameter Top-K (K) in DEViT has a large impact on the results. Experimentally, we find that setting K to
1 produces better results on the CD-FSOD benchmark when inference is done
directly without finetuning. Consequently, we set K to 1, while maintaining all
the other settings consistent with the vanilla DE-ViT configuration.
DE-ViT-FT: We build DE-ViT-FT by finetuning the MDET , MCLS of DEViT (as studied in Tab. 5). All the other implementation details e.g., optimizer,
and learning rate are the same as our CD-ViTO.

