OpenKD: Opening Prompt Diversity for Zeroand Few-shot Keypoint Detection
(Supplementary Material)
Changsheng Lu1 , Zheyuan Liu1 , and Piotr Koniusz2,1
1

The Australian National University 2 Data61/CSIRO
changshengluu@gmail.com, zheyuan.david.liu@outlook.com,
piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

Summary of the supplementary material:
– §A presents more details about how to interpolate auxiliary texts with
LLM. The chain-of-thought prompting and the examples of text interpolation are given to showcase the efficacy of the proposed method.
– §B provides the examples of diverse text prompts and text parsing.
More details about the construction of diverse text prompt sets are given.
– §C depicts more details about implementation.

A

Details of Text Interpolation

We use the LLM to perform text interpolation I t (z; t(p1 ), t(p2 ), c) by asking
a good question, i.e., designing a good prompt to LLM. The detailed vanilla
prompt is given as follows:
“Please give me three most common body parts/keypoints at z between t(p1 )
and t(p2 ) of c. Pay attention to the left and right. Please answer in concise
words like “1. 2. 3.”. Please do not include t(p1 ) and t(p2 ) in answers. Provide
no excessive explanations.”
In the above formulation, z is the interpolation node, t(pi ) is the name of starting
or end point, and c is the object name. In order to produce the structured output,
several constraints can be appended to the prompt. For example, “Pay attention
to the left and right” could help LLM take care of the symmetry of animal
anatomy.
Although the vanilla prompt can deal with most cases, we require a more
advanced prompt to improve the reasoning of LLM, as the keypoint types may
be complex. The Chain of Thought (CoT) [48] has been demonstrated to be an
effective method to improve the reasoning of LLM. Inspired by CoT, we propose
the improved prompt with CoT as follows:
Q: Please give me one most common body part/keypoint at 1/2 between
left-front knee and left-front paw of an animal. Please answer in concise words.
Provide no excessive explanations.
A: The starting point is left-front knee. The end point is left-front paw. The
answer should be between the starting point and end point. Left-front ankle is
between the starting point and end point. The answer is left-front ankle.

