TF-FAS: Twofold-Element Fine-Grained Semantic
Guidance for Generalizable Face Anti-Spoofing
Xudong Wang12∗ , Ke-Yue Zhang2∗ , Taiping Yao2 † , Qianyu Zhou3 ,
Shouhong Ding2 , Pingyang Dai1 † , and Rongrong Ji1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wangxd@stu.xmu.edu.cn {pydai, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn
{zkyezhang, taipingyao, ericshding}@tencent.com; zhouqianyu@sjtu.edu.cn
1

In this supplementary material, we provide more experimental results and more
details about prompts to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Firstly, we strictly follow FLIP [4] to further evaluate TF-FAS on large-scale Face
Anti-Spoofing datasets. Then, we demonstrate more details about the content
and category prompts. The code is released at https://github.com/xudongww/TFFAS

1

Extended Experiments

To validate the generalization performance of our proposed method, we strictly
follow FLIP [4] to further evaluate TF-FAS on Protocols 3, across large-scale
Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS) datasets CASIA-SURF (S), CASIA-CeFA (C), and
WMCA (W) with scenarios such as CS → W indicating C, S as sources and W
as the target. The experimental results are shown in Table 1. We find that our
proposed method surpassed the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in CS →
W and SW → C settings by +0.125 and +8.4 in terms of Half Total Error Rate
(HTER), respectively. Such performance again demonstrates the effectiveness of
the proposed method in cross-domain generalization.

2

Prompts Details

In this section, we provide a comprehensive explanation of the prompts used in
TF-FAS, including content prompts and category prompts. Firstly, we introduce
the generation process of content prompts and demonstrate some examples in
public datasets. Then the category prompts are introduced with the prompts
for different attacks in the MCIO and WCS dataset, including print, replaying,
funny eyeglasses, and 3D mask attacks.
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

