Safe-CLIP: Removing NSFW Concepts from
Vision-and-Language Models
Supplementary Material
Samuele Poppi∗1,2 , Tobia Poppi∗1,2 , Federico Cocchi∗1,2 ,
Marcella Cornia1 , Lorenzo Baraldi1 , and Rita Cucchiara1,3
1

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
name.surname@unimore.it
2
University of Pisa, Italy
name.surname@phd.unipi.it
3
IIT-CNR, Italy

In the following, we present additional materials about Safe-CLIP. In particular,
we provide further analyses on the ViSU dataset and additional experimental results starting from different CLIP model variants (i.e. CLIP ViT-L/14@336 and
OpenCLIP ViT-H/14). Moreover, we report further experimental comparisons,
an analysis of the quality preservation of generated images and textual sentences, and additional qualitative results. Finally, we present a discussion about
the possible ethical implications and limitations of the proposed approach.

A

ViSU Dataset Analysis

I2P-ViSU category mapping. As reported in Sec. 4.4 of the main paper, we
map the 20 NSFW concepts contained in our ViSU dataset to the seven broader
categories employed in the I2P dataset [11]. The category mappings are reported
in Table 6, showing for each I2P category the corresponding ones from the ViSU
dataset. As it can be seen, the outlined mapping ensures a coherent alignment of
the categorization in ViSU with the broader categories defined in I2P, facilitating
an accurate comparative analysis in our experiments.
Word distributions. As an additional comparison, we show in Fig. 5 the word
clouds extracted from I2P textual prompts and the unsafe textual sentences
contained in the ViSU test set. The most frequent words from the I2P benchmark generally correspond to the typical words present in Stable Diffusion text
Table 6: Mapping of ViSU categories to I2P [11].
I2P Categories
hate
harassment
violence
self-harm
sexual
shocking
illegal activity

ViSU Categories
hate
harassment
violence, suffering, humiliation, harm, abuse, brutality, cruelty
suicide
sexual, nudity
bodily fluids, blood, obscene gestures
illegal activity, drug use, theft, vandalism, weapons

