Supplementary materials for DIM: Dyadic
Interaction Modeling for Social Behavior
Generation
Minh Tran∗

, Di Chang∗

, Maksim Siniukov, and Mohammad Soleymani

University of Southern California, Institute for Creative Technologies
soleymani@ict.usc.edu

A

Metrics for evaluation

In this section, we further define our metrics in detail as a supplement to the
main text.
– Frechet Distance (FD): Motion realism is evaluated through the distributional discrepancy between the generated and actual ground-truth motions.
This is quantified by calculating the Fréchet Distance (FD) [3] within the
domains of facial expressions and head poses across the entire motion sequence.
– Paired FD for synchrony (P-FD): Listener-speaker dynamics quality is based
on the distances between distributions of listener-speaker pairs. We concatenate the generated listener motions with speaker motions and calculate
Fréchet Distance (FD) [3].
– Mean Squared Error (MSE): MSE between generated and ground-truth motions.
– SI for Diversity (SID): In L2L [6], the diversity of predictions of facial and
head motions is assessed using k-means clustering. This approach facilitates
the evaluation of variation within predicted results by calculating the entropy
of the histogram of cluster ids within each sequence.
– Variance (Var): Following L2L [6], this metric measures the variance of the
listener motions on time series.
– Residual Pearson Correlation Coefficient (rPCC): The Pearson Correlation
Coefficient (PCC) [5, 9], evaluates the motion of the face and head on a
frame-by-frame basis, indicating how the listener’s movements correlate with
those of the speaking individuals. The L1 distance is utilized to quantify the
discrepancy between the generated PCC and the ground truth PCC.

B

Modality Ablation & Online Behavior Generation

We present the results of our modality ablation and online behavior generation
experiments for DIM-Listener on ViCo in Table 1. In the modality ablation
*

equal contribution

