6DGS: 6D Pose Estimation from a Single
Image and a 3D Gaussian Splatting Model Supplementary material
Bortolon Matteo1,2,3 , Theodore Tsesmelis1 , Stuart James1,4 ,
Fabio Poiesi2 , and Alessio Del Bue1
1

1

PAVIS, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genoa, IT
2
TeV, Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Trento, IT
3
Università di Trento, Trento, IT
4
Durham University, Durham, UK

Introduction

The provided supplementary material shows extra details, results, and figures
to support the main findings presented in the main manuscript. In Section 2 we
present the inference time performance of each method for the task of 6D pose
estimation. Section 4 oﬀers additional figures showing qualitative results and
discussions as mentioned in the main paper. These extra results aim to make
the study clearer and more complete, providing further useful insights into our
proposed 6DGS pipeline.

2

Inference time

In Tab. 1 we detail the timings of each method. It can be noted from the table
that our approach is the only one that is able to run under 1s and near to
real-time performance at 16FPS. In general, it is possible to notice how time
slightly increases in the Mip-NeRF 360°dataset due to the higher complexity of
the scenes. The increase in computational complexity can be attributed to several
factors, including the size of the neural models required for iNeRF and Parallel
iNeRF, as well as the quantity of ellipsoids used in NeMo+VoGE for each of the
two datasets (i.e. ⇡ 150000 ellipsoids for Tanks&Temples and ⇡ 300000 for MipNeRF 360°, while in NeRF models Tanks&Temples use ⇡ 50% less parameters
than Mip-NeRF 360°). As it can be noticed 6DGS is able to handle both datasets
and especially the the Mip-NeRF 360°scenes without issues.
Considering the diﬀerent methods, we can notice that NeMo+VoGE requires
the most time. This derive from the processing algorithm that struggles with
large number of ellipsoids. In regards to the analysis-by-synthesis methods, iNeRF represents the fastest method, with Parallel NeRF being the second fastest.
However, all methods show a considerable higher running time in contrast to
6DGS.
Project page: https://mbortolon97.github.io/6dgs/
Corresponding author: mbortolon@fbk.eu

