CoSIGN

A

1

Limitations

Compared to traditional diffusion-based inverse problem solvers (DIS), CoSIGN
reduces number of sampling steps to 1-2 NFEs. However, the training of a ControlNet for each inverse task may limit the generalizability of the proposed
method. Although we demonstrated its robustness against number of angles
and noise scales in sparse-view CT reconstruction, a performance gap still exists
when adapting the trained ControlNet to a different task. Future works may explore ways to utilize few-shot adaptation method for the training of ControlNet,
or improve zero-shot inference ability of the proposed method.

B

Implementation Details

We implement our proposed algorithm (CoSIGN) based on the consistency model
(CM) codebase5 so that we can make use of the CM checkpoint pretrained on the
LSUN bedroom dataset [52]. The UNet structure of CM contains 6 resolution
levels for the input size of 256×256. There are two residual blocks for each
resolution level in both the encoder and the decoder. In the architecture of the
additional encoder for guiding the CM backbone with the conditional input, we
replaced each decoder layer with a zero-initialized convolution layer. We also add
a zero-convolution layer before the additional encoder. We maintain the middle
block in CM at the end of the additional encoder. The output of the middle
block will pass through a zero-initialized convolution layer before entering the
CM. We inject these conditions into CM by directly adding them with the skip
connections between the encoder and the decoder. For medical images, we change
the input channel of the first layer in both CM and the additional encoder into
one.
In experiments on natural images, we train the additional encoder for 50k
steps with a batch size of 144. In experiments on medical images, we start from
training the diffusion model since no pretrained checkpoint is available. Specifically, we first train an EDM [16] model on LDCT training set [29] for 9k steps
with a batch size of 144. Then we distill this diffusion model into a consistency
model by training for another 12k steps. Finally, we train the additional encoder
for 9k steps with the CM backbone frozen. We do not train these models for
further steps since it might induce over-fitting on such a small dataset.
We adopt the forward operator of different inverse problems from DPS codebase6 and add hard measurement constraints like DDNM [48] into it.
For evaluation, we adopt codes from DPS [3] to calculate PSNR and SSIM
whereas codes from CM [44] to calculate FID. Following [44], the intermediate
noise level is determined by ternary search in multistep sampling.
5
6

https://github.com/openai/consistency_models
https://github.com/DPS2022/diffusion-posterior-sampling

