Supplementary Material of “SQ-LLaVA:
Self-Questioning for Large Vision-Language
Assistant”
Guohao Sun1 , Can Qin2 , Jiamian Wang1 , Zeyuan Chen2 , Ran Xu2
Zhiqiang Tao1
1

1

, and

Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, US
2
Salesforce AI Research, CA, US

Overview

We provide more results, discussions, and qualitative examples of the proposed
SQ-LLaVA in 13B scale.
1. Ablation study of SQ-LLaVA trained on two visual instruction dataset (Section 2.1).
2. Evaluation on an additional vision-language benchmark (Section 2.2).
3. Qualitative examples of image description and self-questioning (Section 3).

2

Zero-shot Multilingual Capability

2.1

Ablation Study

In Table 1, we conduct experiments with different architecture designs and
training strategies on five benchmarks for SQ-LLaVA-13B. For a fair comparison,
we train the baseline models on our local machine with the same training recipe
of LLaVA-LoRA [4]. Specifically, we present the baseline model, our full model,
and three ablated models by removing one component each time. We adopt the
dataset [4] with 558k for pre-training (PT) and 665k for fine-tuning (FT). As
compared, self-questioning (SQ) achieves 0.6% improvement in average accuracy,
indicating the effectiveness of visual self-questioning in improving visual language
understanding. Besides, we introduce the prototype extractor (Proto) to enhance
visual representation, achieving 0.6% improvement in average accuracy. With
all three components incorporated, we observe a 2.5% improvement in average
accuracy among five benchmarks.
As shown by the bottom block of Table 1, we conduct experiments with the
same ablation settings but with a larger scale of the visual instruction data [1]
(i.e., for both PT and IT). Overall, SQ-LLaVA achieves 2.5% improvement
over the baseline model after training on the smaller dataset and achieves 3.2%
improvement after training on the larger dataset. In Table 1, we observe that the
proposed SQ-LLaVA achieves significant improvement over the baseline models

