GRM: Large Gaussian Reconstruction Model for
Efficient 3D Reconstruction and Generation
Supplementary Material
Yinghao Xu1⋆ , Zifan Shi1,2⋆ , Yifan Wang1 , Hansheng Chen1
Ceyuan Yang3 , Sida Peng4 , Yujun Shen5 , and Gordon Wetzstein1
Stanford University
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Zhejiang University
5
Ant Group
1

2

This supplementary material is organized as follows. We first introduce implementation details of our GRM (Appendix A) . Then, we evaluate the geometry
quality of our GRM against the baselines (Appendix B). We also present the
details of mesh extraction from 3D Gaussians in Appendix C. Finally, we show
additional results on 3D reconstruction and generation to evaluate the flexibility
and effectiveness of our approach (Appendix D).

A

Implementation Details

Network Architecture and Training Details. We illustrate the details of
network architecture and training in Tab. 1.
Training Data. We obtain multi-view images from Objaverse [2] as training
inputs. Objaverse contains more than 800k 3D objects with varied quality.
Following [5], we filter 100k high-quality objects, and render 32 images at random
viewpoints with a fixed 50◦ field of view under ambient lighting.
Test Data. We use Google Scanned Objects (GSO) [3], and render a total of
64 test views with equidistant azimuth at {10, 20, 30, 40} degree elevations. In
sparse-view reconstruction, the evaluation uses full renderings from 100 objects
to assess all models. For single-view reconstruction, we restrict the analysis to
renderings generated at an elevation angle of 20 from 250 objects.
Deferred Backpropagation. Our model generates 4 × 512 × 512 Gaussians,
consuming a significant amount of GPU memory. We would only be able to train
our model with a batch size of 2 on 80GB A100 GPUs. Deferred backpropagation [13] is an important technique for saving GPU memory in large batch-size
training. With it, we are able to scale up the batch size to 8, consuming only
38GB per GPU. We provide a pseudo code (Algorithm 1) to demonstrate how
we implement it in our model training.
⋆

Equal Contribution

