1

Parrot: Pareto-optimal Multi-Reward
Reinforcement Learning Framework for
Text-to-Image Generation
Supplementary Material
This supplementary material provides:
– Sec. A: implementation details, including the training details, and details of
quantitative experiments.
– Sec. B: more ablation studies on original prompt guidance and training scheme
of Parrot.
– Sec. C: more visual examples to show the advancements of Parrot.

A. Implementation Details
Training Details. We conduct our experiments with Jax implementation of
Stable Diffusion 1.5 [4]. In terms of diffusion-based RL, we sample 256 images
per RL-tuning iteration. For policy gradient updates, we accumulate gradients
across all denoising timesteps. Our experiments employ a small range of gradient
clip 10−4 . We keep negative prompt as null text.
Details of Quantitative Experiments. From Parti [5] prompts, we generate
images of dimensions 512 × 512. In all experiments in the main paper, we apply
reward-specific preference expressed as “<reward 1>, <reward 2>, <reward 3>,
<reward 4>”, which is optional to select one or several rewards. Reward models
are aesthetics, human preference, text-image alignment and image sentiment.
During the inference stage, the guidance scale is also set as 5.0 for the diffusion
sampling process. We employ the AdamW [3] as optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999 and a weight decay of 0.1.

B. Prompt Guidance and Training Scheme
Original Prompt Guidance. In Fig. 1, we provide additional ablation study
of original prompt centered guidance by adjusting the guidance scale w1 and w2 ,
which determines visual changes from original prompt and expanded prompt,
respectively. We assigned 5 to both w1 and w2 in most of our experiments,
which shows better text-image alignment performance in Fig. 1.
Ablation Study on Training Scheme. Fig. 2 provides ablation study comparing variation of the Parrot: Stable Diffusion, the prompt expansion network (PEN) tuning only, T2I model fine-tuning only, Parrot without joint optimization, and Parrot. In the second column, without fine-tuning the T2I diffusion model does not lead to significant improvements in terms of texture and
composition. Furthermore, the third column demonstrates that fine-tuning the
diffusion model enhances texture and perspective, yet this improvement is hindered by the limited information in the text prompt. We also observe that the
quality of images from joint optimization surpasses that of combining decoupled
generative models.

