Appendix of latentSplat:
Autoencoding Variational Gaussians
for Fast Generalizable 3D Reconstruction
1

Content

In this supplementary material, we give details regarding architecture and evaluation in Sections 2 and 3. We provide a separate comparison with the closest
generative baseline in Sec. 4. Section 5 deals with the evaluation of 3D consistency using videos. We present visualizations of intermediate results as well as
model uncertainty underlining the advantages of latentSplat as a fast generative approach in Section 6. Finally, we provide additional qualitative results in
Section 7. Please also refer to the supplemental video for results in motion.

2

Architecture Details

Our architecture is composed of an encoder, a decoder, and a discriminator.
Encoder We adapt the encoder from pixelSplat [3] to our setting. It consists of
a pre-trained DINOv1 ViT-B/8 [1] backbone, an epipolar transformer [5], and a
Gaussian sampling head. We upscale the local patch tokens from the backbone
by repeating them for the original patch size and add the linearly projected
global class token to obtain a feature map in the orginal image resolution. The
epipolar transformer has two blocks with four-head attention [5] to 32 samples
of each pixel’s epipolar line. The token dimensionality is 128 and for computational feasibility we downscale the input feature maps by a factor of 4 in each
dimension. To prevent a bottleneck with low spatial dimensions in form of the
epipolar transformer, we add a skip connection in the original resolution. Finally,
the Gaussian sampling head employs simple linear projections with activation
functions specific to the individual parameters of the Gaussians like normalized
quaternions for rotation and scaled and shifted sigmoid for scale. The resulting
variational Gaussians exhibit spherical harmonic coefficients up to a degree of 4
for RGB and a Gaussian distribution of spherical harmonic coefficients up to a
degree of 2 for features of dimensionality 4 (LDM VAE [8] feature size).
Decoder We adapt the pre-trained VAE decoder from LDM [8]. It is a fully
convolutional architecture consisting of four upsample blocks, each consisting
of two residual blocks. We add 1x1 convolutions as skip connections to feed
in downscaled versions of the intermediate auxiliary RGB renderings and the
feature maps to each upsample block. In order to avoid noisy gradients, we
initialize the weights of these additional layers to zero.
Discriminator We finetune the pre-trained discriminator from LDM [8]. It is a
very small CNN with three strided convolutions as hidden layers such that it does
not have a global receptive field and only predicts the likelihood of patches [6].

