Supplementary materials for
Plug and Play: A Representation Enhanced
Domain Adapter for Collaborative Perception
Tianyou Luo , Quan Yuan† , Guiyang Luo , Yuchen Xia, Yujia Yang,
Jinglin Li
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{lty349,yuanquan,luoguiyang,yuchen.xia,yangyj2022,jlli}@bupt.edu.cn
†
Corresponding Author

In this supplementary material, we first provide a detailed introduction to
the current mainstream point cloud feature encoders, especially two of them
involved in the experiment, in Appendix A. Next, we will introduce how to use
self-supervised learning (SSL) for pre-training, in Appendix B. We supplement
three additional experiments to further validate the effectiveness of our model,
in Appendix C.

A

Point Cloud Feature Encoders

The current mainstream point cloud feature encoders are PointPillar [2] , VoxelNet [4], and SECOND [3]. Due to significant differences in model architecture and processing pipelines between PointPillars and VoxelNet, there exists
a substantial domain gap between two models. These encoders use voxelization
techniques, mapping continuous point cloud to discrete voxel grids, then utilize
convolution neural networks as backbone networks to process structured voxel
data, ultimately obtaining a 2D feature map from a BEV perspective. Specifically, VoxelNet, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), divides a 3D space into equally spaced
voxels and groups points based on the voxel they belong to. However, due to factors such as distance, occlusion, and uneven sampling, the LiDAR point cloud is
sparse and its density varies across the entire space. Therefore, after grouping,
the number of points in each voxel is different. VoxelNet introduces a hyperparameter R, which randomly samples a fixed number of points for voxels with more
than R points, and fills voxels with less than R points with zeros. This helps
reduce sampling bias and increase training diversity. It then employs stacked
Voxel Feature Encoding layers to encode each voxel, followed by 3D convolutions to further aggregate local voxel features, transforming the point cloud into
a high-dimensional voxel representation. Finally, the Region Proposal Network
is used to take this representation as input and generate detection results.
PointPillar, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), differs from VoxelNet in that it only partitions the entire point cloud into numerous columns on the xOy plane, each of
which has a height equal to the point cloud’s height (approximately infinite in
the z-direction, thus not requiring hyperparameters to control the z-dimension).
Point cloud sampling works the same as VoxelNet. Due to compression of information in the spatial height, PointPillar transforms the entire point cloud data

