Revisiting Calibration of Wide-Angle
Radially Symmetric Cameras
– Supplementary Material –
Andrea Porfiri Dal Cin1 , Francesco Azzoni1 ,
Giacomo Boracchi1 , and Luca Magri1
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
firstname.lastname@polimi.it

In this document, we provide additional details concerning the main paper
that could not be included in the manuscript due to space limitations.

7

Additional Details on Camera Models

7.1

Camera Model Ambiguity

In Sec. 1 of the main paper, we refer to the problem of camera ambiguity that
makes end-to-end calibration ill-posed and challenging for camera models with
inherent ambiguities. This section shows that the EUCM and DSCM camera
models are ambiguous, while the UCM camera is not. We formally define an
ambiguous camera model to better elucidate the issues of ambiguity.
Definition (Ambiguous Camera Model). A camera model M is considered
ambiguous if there exists at least one pair of intrinsic parameter configurations
iM = (f, d1 , . . . , dn ), i′M = (f ′ , d′1 , . . . , d′n ) that result in the same projection
equations.
It is important to emphasize that, in practical scenarios, identifying whether
a camera model is ambiguous is impractical due to the complexity inherent in
the projection equations, making analytical approaches largely ineffective. Consequently, establishing whether a camera model M is ambiguous often involves
an exhaustive search across potential parameter configurations to identify at
least one pair resulting in identical camera projection equations.
Determining whether two configurations (sets of camera parameters) are ambiguous, i.e., if they represent the same physical camera, hinges on the reprojection error calculated by back-projecting image points onto the unit sphere
with one set of parameters and then reprojecting these points onto the image
plane with the other set of parameters. When the reprojection error is zero or
within numerical precision for two different sets of parameters, then projection
equations are equal, and thus, the camera model is ambiguous.
We investigate camera model ambiguities by proceeding as follows:
(i) We confine our search for ambiguities to baseline configurations by setting
the sensor size at 400 × 400px and the Angular Field of View (AFOV) to 150◦ .

