SegIC: Unleashing the Emergent Correspondence
for In-Context Segmentation
Lingchen Meng1,2
Shiyi Lan3
3
Jose M. Alvarez
Zuxuan Wu1,2†
1

A

Hengduo Li4
Yu-Gang Jiang1,2

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
4
NVIDIA
University of Maryland

Additional Implementation Details

In this section, we provide additional details of the mask decoding and training
pipeline.
Mask decoding. Inspired by recent query-based segmentation methods [1–
4], we utilize a lightweight query-based mask decoder to effectively map the
in-context enhanced image features and object query to an output mask. We
employ a learnable object query that will be used for the decoder’s output.
The workflow of SegIC is concisely summarized in Pytorch-style pseudocode, as
presented in Algorithm 1. Initially, the image feature and in-context instructions
are projected into the same feature space for mask decoding. Subsequently, the
projected in-context features are leveraged to enhance the image feature and
object feature. The mask decoder then executes a multi-layered decoding process,
structured as a four-step procedure within each layer, including (1) self-attention
for the concatenated object query; (2) cross-attention from the image feature to
the object query; (3) cross-attention from the query back to the image; and (4)
calculating the mask. The mask calculation is performed using the image feature
and the first element of the concatenated object feature, which corresponds to
the position of the initial object query.
Training pipeline. In our main experiments, we adopt a mixed training scheme
using both semantic segmentation datasets (COCO and ADE20k) and instance
segmentation datasets (COCO and LVIS), as presented in Algorithm 2. We do
not focus intensively on adjusting the dataset ratios, instead opting for uniform
dataset-level sampling. For the segmentation datasets, we employ large-scale
jittering (ranging from 0.1 to 2.0) for both the target image and in-context examples. These in-context examples are constructed based on the semantic class
label of the target image, sampling one class per image during training. In the
case of instance segmentation datasets, in-context examples are generated by
applying two separate data augmentations to the same image. The instances
from these differently augmented views then serve as mutual in-context examples. Our standard data augmentation techniques for this task include random
resizing cropping (ranging from 0.3 to 1.0), random color jittering (with a 0.2
probability), and random horizontal flipping (with a 0.1 probability).

