Generalizable Facial Expression Recognition
Supplementary Material
Yuhang Zhang , Xiuqi Zheng, Chenyi Liang, Jiani Hu, and Weihong Deng
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zyhzyh, xiuqizheng, liangchenyi, jnhu, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

1

Pipeline of Our Method

We summarize the pipeline of our method in Alg. 1. We utilize fixed pre-trained
large model ffixed to extract generalizable face features for any given facial expression recognition (FER) samples. To mimic how humans recognize expressions, we train a newly initialized FER model f from scratch to extract useful
expression-related features from the given face features. We assume that if the
FER model learns how to extract expression features from given face features,
it can generalize to other unseen FER domains based on the generalizable face
features extracted from pre-trained large models. We input the learned mask of
the FER model to a sigmoid function to reduce overfitting. The learned sigmoid
mask is multiplied with the fixed face features to select useful expression-related
features. To make the selected features generalizable, we separate them according to the channel dimension into seven pieces corresponding to the seven basic
expression classes. Each piece of the selected features represents the features of a
certain expression class. To further increase the generalization ability, we make
the channels within each piece as diverse as possible through a diverse loss. The
training loss is calculated by summing the classification loss, separation loss, and
the diverse loss.

2

Implementation Details on AffectNet

Implementation details are slightly different on AffectNet dataset as it is largescale and imbalanced. The learning rate is 0.0001 and the gamma of the scheduler
is 0.8. As AffectNet is extremely imbalanced, we adopt a balanced sampler to
keep the samples of each class similar within each batch. The training epoch is 20
instead of 60 because AffectNet has much more training samples than RAF-DB.

3

Mean Accuracy

We display the accuracy of each class on FERPlus in Table 1. From the results,
we conclude that our method achieves the best accuracy on most of the expression classes. Our method also performs the best regards of the mean accuracy
of all classes.

