Multi-Task Learning as Multi-Objective Optimization
Ozan Sener
Intel Labs

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
In multi-task learning, multiple tasks are solved jointly, sharing inductive bias
between them. Multi-task learning is inherently a multi-objective problem because
different tasks may conflict, necessitating a trade-off. A common compromise is to
optimize a proxy objective that minimizes a weighted linear combination of pertask losses. However, this workaround is only valid when the tasks do not compete,
which is rarely the case. In this paper, we explicitly cast multi-task learning as
multi-objective optimization, with the overall objective of finding a Pareto optimal
solution. To this end, we use algorithms developed in the gradient-based multiobjective optimization literature. These algorithms are not directly applicable to
large-scale learning problems since they scale poorly with the dimensionality of
the gradients and the number of tasks. We therefore propose an upper bound
for the multi-objective loss and show that it can be optimized efficiently. We
further prove that optimizing this upper bound yields a Pareto optimal solution
under realistic assumptions. We apply our method to a variety of multi-task
deep learning problems including digit classification, scene understanding (joint
semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, and depth estimation), and multilabel classification. Our method produces higher-performing models than recent
multi-task learning formulations or per-task training.

1

Introduction

One of the most surprising results in statistics is Stein’s paradox. Stein (1956) showed that it is better
to estimate the means of three or more Gaussian random variables using samples from all of them
rather than estimating them separately, even when the Gaussians are independent. Stein’s paradox
was an early motivation for multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1997), a learning paradigm in which
data from multiple tasks is used with the hope to obtain superior performance over learning each task
independently. Potential advantages of MTL go beyond the direct implications of Stein’s paradox,
since even seemingly unrelated real world tasks have strong dependencies due to the shared processes
that give rise to the data. For example, although autonomous driving and object manipulation are
seemingly unrelated, the underlying data is governed by the same laws of optics, material properties,
and dynamics. This motivates the use of multiple tasks as an inductive bias in learning systems.
A typical MTL system is given a collection of input points and sets of targets for various tasks per
point. A common way to set up the inductive bias across tasks is to design a parametrized hypothesis
class that shares some parameters across tasks. Typically, these parameters are learned by solving an
optimization problem that minimizes a weighted sum of the empirical risk for each task. However,
the linear-combination formulation is only sensible when there is a parameter set that is effective
across all tasks. In other words, minimization of a weighted sum of empirical risk is only valid if
tasks are not competing, which is rarely the case. MTL with conflicting objectives requires modeling
of the trade-off between tasks, which is beyond what a linear combination achieves.
An alternative objective for MTL is finding solutions that are not dominated by any others. Such
solutions are said to be Pareto optimal. In this paper, we cast the objective of MTL in terms of finding
Pareto optimal solutions.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

