Training Normalizing Flows with the Information
Bottleneck for Competitive Generative Classification

Lynton Ardizzone*

Radek Mackowiak*

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (CA)
lynton.ardizzone@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
radek.mackowiak@gmail.com
∗
Equal contribution

Carsten Rother

Ullrich Köthe

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University

Abstract
The Information Bottleneck (IB) objective uses information theory to formulate
a task-performance versus robustness trade-off. It has been successfully applied
in the standard discriminative classification setting. We pose the question whether
the IB can also be used to train generative likelihood models such as normalizing
flows. Since normalizing flows use invertible network architectures (INNs), they
are information-preserving by construction. This seems contradictory to the idea
of a bottleneck. In this work, firstly, we develop the theory and methodology of
IB-INNs, a class of conditional normalizing flows where INNs are trained using
the IB objective: Introducing a small amount of controlled information loss allows
for an asymptotically exact formulation of the IB, while keeping the INN’s generative capabilities intact. Secondly, we investigate the properties of these models
experimentally, specifically used as generative classifiers. This model class offers
advantages such as improved uncertainty quantification and out-of-distribution detection, but traditional generative classifier solutions suffer considerably in classification accuracy. We find the trade-off parameter in the IB controls a mix of
generative capabilities and accuracy close to standard classifiers. Empirically, our
uncertainty estimates in this mixed regime compare favourably to conventional
generative and discriminative classifiers. Code: github.com/VLL-HD/IB-INN

1

Introduction

The Information Bottleneck (IB) objective (Tishby et al., 2000) allows for an information-theoretic
view of neural networks, for the setting where we have some observed input variable X, and want
to predict some Y from it. For simplicity, we limit the discussion to the common case of discrete
Y (i.e. class labels), but results readily generalize. The IB postulates existence of a latent space Z,
where all information flow between X and Y is channeled through (hence the method’s name). In
order to optimize predictive performance, IB attempts to maximize the mutual information I(Y, Z)
between Y and Z. Simultaneously, it strives to minimize the mutual information I(X, Z) between X
and Z, forcing the model to ignore irrelevant aspects of X which do not contribute to classification
performance and only increase the potential for overfitting. The objective can thus be expressed as
LIB = I(X, Z) − β I(Y, Z) .

(1)

The trade-off parameter β is crucial to balance the two aspects. The IB was successfully applied in
a variational form (Alemi et al., 2017; Kolchinsky et al., 2017) to train feed-forward classification
models p(Y |X) with higher robustness to overfitting and adversarial attacks than standard ones.

In this work, we consider the relationship between X and Y from the opposite perspective – using
the IB, we train an invertible neural network (INN) as a conditional generative likelihood model
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

