BeyondScene: Higher-Resolution Human-Centric
Scene Generation With Pretrained Diffusion
(Supplementary Material)
Gwanghyun Kim1⋆ , Hayeon Kim1⋆ , Hoigi Seo1⋆ , Dong Un Kang1⋆ ,
Se Young Chun1,2†
1

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 INMC & IPAI
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{gwang.kim, khy5630, seohoiki3215, qkrtnskfk23, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

S1

More Details on Our Proposed Method

S1.1

Instance-Aware Hierarchical Enlargement

Instance-aware hierarchical enlargement takes a low-resolution image and enlarges
it in stages. First, it upsamples the image, then injects high-frequency details using
our proposed high frequency-injected forward diffusion. Subsequently, our adaptive
joint diffusion enables to generate a higher resolution image using adaptive
conditioning and adaptive stride. Here, we provide more detailed procedures with
the algorithms for deeper understanding.

High frequency-injected forward diffusion BeyondScene proposes a novel
adaptive pixel perturbation method that leverages edge information for generating
fine-detailed and sharp images. The blurred edge map is generated with a Canny
edge map and subsequent Gaussian smoothing. This blurred edge map is then
normalized and conditioned to create a probability map (C) that guides the
perturbation process. We strategically perturb pixels in an interpolated image
Ip based on C, selecting replacement pixels from the original image to preserve
high-frequency details. The perturbed image Ip is encoded with the variational
autoencoder (VAE) to yield z0 , and then added noise of timestep Tb with forward
process results in zTb . The complete algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. I
denotes the image from previous stage which has the height of H and width of W ,
Ip refers to the interpolated image which has the dimension of Rαinterp H×αinterp W ,
dr denotes the maximum distance of pixel to replace, σ is the standard deviation
of the Gaussian kernel for smoothing, αinterp is the ratio of image expansion,
pmax denotes the maximum and pbase means the minimum probability of the
probability map C.
⋆

Authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

