Supplemental:
GroundUp: Rapid Sketch-Based 3D City Massing
Gizem Esra Ünlü1
1

Mohamed Sayed2

University College London

S1

Synthetic data

S1.1

Data generation

2

Niantic

Yulia Gryaditskaya3
3

Gabriel Brostow1

PAI and CVSSP, University of Surrey

To train our networks, we use the UrbanScene3D dataset [4] which contains largescale 3D models of six real-world cities. We selected New York and Chicago for
training and validation respectively, and San Francisco for testing. Our training set contains 40K samples, our validation set contains 2K samples, and our
test set comprises 1K samples. For training samples, we perform random augmentation on the heights of individual buildings by scaling each building along
the vertical axis to increase the diversity of our scenes. We generate synthetic
sketches of buildings in perspective views and their ground-truth depth and segmentation maps, using Blender Freestyle [1].

S1.2

View Selection in 3D cities

As we mentioned in Sec. S1.1 of the main paper, we generate synthetic sketches of
buildings in perspective views and their ground-truth depth and segmentation
maps, using Blender Freestyle [1]. We place two cameras for each scene: one
top-down orthographic Camt and one aerial perspective Camp . We start by
sampling Camp ’s location in the scene and consequently set Camt in the positive
look-at direction of the former at the midpoint between near and far planes. To
avoid placing Camp within building geometry, we pre-process each city and label
traversable regions on the ground plane. Moreover, each camera sits at a predetermined height above the ground, selected so that most of the buildings are
observed from above. This implies that since our system was trained with fixed
settings for top-down St and perspective Sp sketches, it expects that the inputs
should adhere to these rendering settings. We recognize that this limits the choice
of viewpoints, and in full-featured applications, the urban designer may want to
choose a different viewpoint, such as a street-level sketch, or use an axonometric
projection. However, we believe that robustness to such representation changes
is only a matter of training on a dataset that includes a wider range of rendering
settings.

