Shedding More Light on Robust Classifiers
Under the Lens of Energy-Based Models
Mujtaba Hussain Mirza1(B) , Maria Rosaria Briglia1 , Senad Beadini2 ,
and Iacopo Masi1
1

OmnAI Lab, CS Department, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
{mirza,briglia,masi}@di.uniroma1.it
2
Eustema S.p.A., Rome, Italy
s.beadini@eustema.it
Abstract. By reinterpreting a robust discriminative classiﬁer as Energybased Model (EBM), we oﬀer a new take on the dynamics of adversarial training (AT). Our analysis of the energy landscape during AT
reveals that untargeted attacks generate adversarial images much more indistribution (lower energy) than the original data from the point of view
of the model. Conversely, we observe the opposite for targeted attacks.
On the ground of our thorough analysis, we present new theoretical and
practical results that show how interpreting AT energy dynamics unlocks
a better understanding: (1) AT dynamic is governed by three phases
and robust overﬁtting occurs in the third phase with a drastic divergence between natural and adversarial energies (2) by rewriting TRADES
loss in terms of energies, we show that TRADES implicitly alleviates
overﬁtting by means of aligning the natural energy with the adversarial one (3) we empirically show that all recent state-of-the-art robust
classiﬁers are smoothing the energy landscape and we reconcile a variety of studies about understanding AT and weighting the loss function
under the umbrella of EBMs. Motivated by rigorous evidence, we propose
Weighted Energy Adversarial Training (WEAT), a novel sample weighting scheme that yields robust accuracy matching the state-of-the-art on
multiple benchmarks such as CIFAR-10 and SVHN and going beyond
in CIFAR-100 and Tiny-ImageNet. We further show that robust classiﬁers vary in the intensity and quality of their generative capabilities,
and oﬀer a simple method to push this capability, reaching a remarkable
Inception Score (IS) and FID using a robust classiﬁer without training
for generative modeling. The code to reproduce our results is available at
github.com/OmnAI-Lab/Robust-Classiﬁers-under-the-lens-of-EBM.
Keywords: robustness · adversarial training · energy-based models

1

Introduction

Ten years ago the seminal paper by Szegedy et al . [50] was released arguing about
“intriguing properties of neural networks”. Those properties revealed that deep
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_26.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 451–468, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_26

