Follow the Rules: Reasoning for VAD with LLMs

A

Appendix

A.1

Limitations and Potential Negative Social Impact

19

Limitations. Similar to most existing LLM-based studies, AnomalyRuler assumes that the employed LLM backbones have decent capabilities. Sub-optimal
LLMs may hinder the eﬀectiveness of the methods. Exploring this limitation
further could be an interesting future investigation.
Potential Negative Social Impact. The proposed method may enable malicious actors to more easily adapt VLMs/LLMs for illegal surveillance. To mitigate
this risk, computer security mechanisms could be integrated.
A.2

Examples of Input Prompts and Outputs Results

Induction. This stage starts from n randomly chosen normal reference frames
Fnormal = {fnormal1 , . . . , fnormaln } and outputs a set of robust rules Rrobust . To
simplify the illustration, we show one frame fnormali 2 Fnormal as an example in
the visual perception and rule generation steps.
• Visual Perception
– Input fnormali and prompt pv :
pv = How many people are in the image and what is each
of them doing ? What are in the image other than
people ? Think step by step .

– Outputs: Frame description dnormali = V LM (fnormali , pv )
dnormali = There are four people in the image . Starting from the left , the
first person is walking on the path . The second person is walking
on the bridge . The third person is also walking on the bridge .
The fourth person is also walking on the bridge . Other than people
, there are trees , a railing , a path , and a bridge visible in the
image .

• Rule Generation
– Input prompt pg :
pg = [
{ ‘ ‘ role ’ ’: ‘‘ system ’ ’ ,
‘‘ content ’ ’: As a surveillance monitor for urban safety using the
ShanghaiTech dataset , my job is to derive rules for detecting
abnormal human activities or environmental objects .} ,
{ ‘ ‘ role ’ ’: ‘‘ user ’ ’ ,
‘‘ content ’ ’: Based on the assumption that the given frame
descriptions are normal , Please derive rules for normal ,
start from an abstract concept , and then generalize to
concrete activities or objects .} ,
{ ‘ ‘ role ’ ’: ‘‘ assistant ’ ’ ,
‘‘ content ’ ’:
** Rules for Normal Human Activities :
1.
** Rules for Normal Environmental Objects :
1.
},
{ ‘ ‘ role ’ ’: ‘‘ user ’ ’ ,

