3DPeople: Modeling the Geometry of Dressed Humans
J. Sanchez1 G. P. T. Choi2 A. Sanfeliu1 F. Moreno-Noguer1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC
2
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University

arXiv:1904.04571v1 [cs.CV] 9 Apr 2019

A. Pumarola1

Figure 1: 3DPeople Dataset. We present a synthetic dataset with 2.5 Million frames of 80 subjects (40 female/40 male) performing
70 different actions. The dataset contains a large range of distinct body shapes, skin tones and clothing outfits, and provides 640 × 480
RGB images under different viewpoints, 3D geometry of the body and clothing, 3D skeletons, depth maps, optical flow and semantic
information (body parts and cloth labels). In this paper we use the 3DPeople dataset to model the geometry of dressed humans.

Abstract

ages. To build these images we propose a novel spherical area-preserving parameterization algorithm based on
the optimal mass transportation method. We show this approach to improve existing spherical maps which tend to
shrink the elongated parts of the full body models such as
the arms and legs, making the geometry images incomplete.
Finally, we design a multi-resolution deep generative
network that, given an input image of a dressed human,
predicts his/her geometry image (and thus the clothed body
shape) in an end-to-end manner. We obtain very promising
results in jointly capturing body pose and clothing shape,
both for synthetic validation and on the wild images.

Recent advances in 3D human shape estimation build
upon parametric representations that model very well the
shape of the naked body, but are not appropriate to represent the clothing geometry. In this paper, we present an
approach to model dressed humans and predict their geometry from single images. We contribute in three fundamental aspects of the problem, namely, a new dataset, a novel
shape parameterization algorithm and an end-to-end deep
generative network for predicting shape.
First, we present 3DPeople, a large-scale synthetic
dataset with 2.5 Million photo-realistic images of 80 subjects performing 70 activities and wearing diverse outfits.
Besides providing textured 3D meshes for clothes and body,
we annotate the dataset with segmentation masks, skeletons, depth, normal maps and optical flow. All this together
makes 3DPeople suitable for a plethora of tasks.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning, the problem of predicting the geometry of the human body from single images has experienced a tremendous boost. The combination of Convolutional Neural Networks with large Mo-

We then represent the 3D shapes using 2D geometry im1

