Contourlet Residual for Prompt Learning
Enhanced Infrared Image
Super-Resolution
Xingyuan Li1 , Jinyuan Liu1(B) , Zhixin Chen2 , Yang Zou3 , Long Ma1 ,
Xin Fan1 , and Risheng Liu1
1

School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
atlantis918@hotmail.com
2
Graduate School of Information, Production, and Systems, Waseda University,
Shinjuku, Japan
3
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia

Abstract. Image super-resolution (SR) is a critical technique for
enhancing image quality, playing a vital role in image enhancement.
While recent advancements, notably transformer-based methods, have
advanced the ﬁeld, infrared image SR remains a formidable challenge.
Due to the inherent characteristics of infrared sensors, such as limited
resolution, temperature sensitivity, high noise levels, and environmental
impacts, existing deep learning methods result in suboptimal enhancement outcomes when applied to infrared images. To address these challenges, we propose a specialized Contourlet residual framework tailored
for infrared images to restore and enhance the critical details from the
multi-scale and multi-directional infrared spectra decomposition. It precisely captures and ampliﬁes the high-pass subbands of infrared images,
such as edge details and texture nuances, which are vital for achieving
superior reconstruction quality. Moreover, recognizing the limitations of
traditional learning techniques in capturing the inherent characteristics
of infrared images, we incorporate a prompt-based learning paradigm.
This approach facilitates a more nuanced understanding and targeted
optimization process for infrared images by leveraging the semantic comprehension oﬀered by the visual language model. Our approach not
only addresses the common pitfalls associated with infrared imaging but
also sets a new paradigm for infrared image SR. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach obtains superior results, attaining stateof-the-art performance. Project page: https://github.com/hey-it-s-me/
CoRPLE.
Keywords: Infrared Image Super-Resolution · Contourlet Residual ·
Prompt Learning
This work was partially supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
(2023M730741), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62302078
and No. 61936002).
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 270–288, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_16

