Adversarially Robust Distillation
by Reducing the Student-Teacher
Variance Gap
Junhao Dong1,2 , Piotr Koniusz3,4(B) , Junxi Chen5 ,
and Yew-Soon Ong1,2(B)
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
{junhao003,asysong}@ntu.edu.sg
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research, IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore
3
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
4
Data61 CSIRO, Canberra, Australia
piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au
5
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
chenjx353@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract. Adversarial robustness generally relies on large-scale architectures and datasets, hindering resource-eﬃcient deployment. For scalable solutions, adversarially robust knowledge distillation has emerged as
a principle strategy, facilitating the transfer of robustness from a largescale teacher model to a lightweight student model. However, existing
works focus solely on sample-to-sample alignment of features or predictions between the teacher and student models, overlooking the vital role
of their statistical alignment. Thus, we propose a novel adversarially
robust knowledge distillation method that integrates the alignment of
feature distributions between the teacher and student backbones under
adversarial and clean sample sets. To motivate our idea, for an adversarially trained model (e.g., student or teacher), we show that the robust
accuracy (evaluated on testing adversarial samples under an increasing
perturbation radius) correlates negatively with the gap between the feature variance evaluated on testing adversarial samples and testing clean
samples. Such a negative correlation exhibits a strong linear trend, suggesting that aligning the feature covariance of the student model toward
the feature covariance of the teacher model should improve the adversarial robustness of the student model by reducing the variance gap. A
similar trend is observed by reducing the variance gap between the gram
matrices of the student and teacher models. Extensive evaluations highlight the state-of-the-art adversarial robustness and natural performance
of our method across diverse datasets and distillation scenarios.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5 6.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 92–111, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_6

