UNIC: Universal Classification Models
via Multi-teacher Distillation
Mert Bülent Sarıyıldız(B) , Philippe Weinzaepfel, Thomas Lucas, Diane Larlus,
and Yannis Kalantidis
NAVER LABS Europe, Meylan, France
bulent.sariyildiz@naverlabs.com
https://europe.naverlabs.com/unic
Abstract. Pretrained models have become a commodity and oﬀer
strong results on a broad range of tasks. In this work, we focus on classiﬁcation and seek to learn a unique encoder able to take from several
complementary pretrained models. We aim at even stronger generalization across a variety of classiﬁcation tasks. We propose to learn such
an encoder via multi-teacher distillation. We ﬁrst thoroughly analyze
standard distillation when driven by multiple strong teachers with complementary strengths. Guided by this analysis, we gradually propose
improvements to the basic distillation setup. Among those, we enrich
the architecture of the encoder with a ladder of expendable projectors,
which increases the impact of intermediate features during distillation,
and we introduce teacher dropping, a regularization mechanism that better balances the teachers’ inﬂuence. Our ﬁnal distillation strategy leads
to student models of the same capacity as any of the teachers, while
retaining or improving upon the performance of the best teacher for
each task.
Keywords: Multi-Teacher Distillation · Classiﬁcation · Generalization

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rise of many pretrained models [6,55,75]. They
often share the same architecture and sometimes even the same training data.
They generalize to a broad range of tasks, but may particularly excel at speciﬁc
visual recognition scenarios depending on the selected learning strategy. Selfsupervised learning models [6–8] shine in transfer learning, i.e. generalization to
novel classes, while models trained with masked modeling techniques [16,75] are
often better suited to patch-level tasks. Meanwhile, supervised learning [12,27]
is still best for speciﬁc classiﬁcation tasks when labeled data is available during
pretraining.
In this paper, our goal is to learn a universal encoder capable of strong generalization across a broad spectrum of classiﬁcation tasks. More speciﬁcally, besides
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5 20.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 353–371, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_20

