UniCal: Unified Neural Sensor Calibration
Supplementary Material
Ze Yang1,2⋆ , George Chen1,3⋆† , Haowei Zhang1 , Kevin Ta1 , Ioan Andrei
Bârsan1,2 , Daniel Murphy1 , Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 , and Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Waabi 2 University of Toronto 3 University of Waterloo
{zyang,gchen,hzhang,kta,abarsan,dmurphy,siva,urtasun}@waabi.ai

Abstract. In the supplementary material, we provide information about
the implementation details of our method, along with details about the
baselines, experimental settings, additional results and the discussion of
limitations and potential negative social impact of our method. We first
describe the implementation details of our approach in Appendix A1.
Then in Appendix A2 we present additional details on the baseline model
implementations and their adaptation to our setting. Next, we explain in
more detail our experimental setting and datasets in Appendix A3. After that, we showcase additional experiments, including comaparison to
additional learning-based (CalibNet [8], LCCNet [15]) and NeRF-based
(MOISST [7]) calibration methods, additional results and visualizations
in Appendix A4. Finally, we analyze the limitations of our model and
discuss the future works and potential negative social impact in Appendix A5. Please visit https://waabi.ai/unical for an overview of
our methodology and video results for multi-sensor calibration.

A1

UniCal Details

Scene Representation Model: Our scene representation model is based on a multiresolution feature grid and MLP network. Following [16], we employ a spatial hash
function to map each feature grid to a fixed number of features, with the hash
table size set to 221 . To obtain the signed distance value s and appearance feature
f from the interpolated feature (Eq. 1 in main paper), the MLP network consists
of two layers, with a hidden size of 64. For distant regions outside the scene
volume, we adopt an inverted sphere parameterization similar to NeRF++ [27].
Camera and LiDAR Intensity Decoder: The camera RGB decoder Dcam (Eq. 3
in main paper) and the LiDAR intensity decoder Dlidar (Eq. 5 in main paper)
are both three layer MLPs. They take the queried appearance feature f and view
direction encoding d as input and output the RGB color and LiDAR intensity.
To account for variations in exposure and color tone across different sensors,
we learn a per-sensor linear mapping over the intensity channel. We found this
simple model to be effective in capturing these variations in practice.
⋆

Indicates equal contribution. † Work done while an intern at Waabi.

