Diffusion for Out-of-Distribution Detection
on Road Scenes and Beyond - Appendix
Silvio Galesso∗

Philipp Schröppel∗
∗

Hssan Driss

Thomas Brox

Equal contribution

University of Freiburg, Germany
{galessos,schroepp}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

A

Additional Information on the ADE-OoD Benchmark

In this section, we provide additional information on the ADE-OoD benchmark.
We provide details on the construction process and show samples from the benchmark alongside predictions from segmentation models. We analyze the predictions regarding the challenges of the benchmark.
A.1

Construction Details

Image Selection. As described in Sec. 5 of the main paper, the images for
the benchmark were selected from the ADE20k [11] validation set and from
OpenImages [6] according to the following criteria:
1. Presence of clear and unambiguous in- and out-of-distribution entities only.
2. Presence of diverse in- and out-of-distribution categories, as well as varying
indoor and outdoor settings.
3. Adequate scene complexity to match the original ADE20k training data.
4. Adequate number of samples for statistically significant results.
More specifically, we selected images by (1.) automatically selecting ADE20k
images with large unlabeled regions, or manually selecting images from OpenImages (via the OpenImages web visualizer) that contain semantic classes that
are not labeled in ADE20k, (2.) manually discarding images that do not fit to
the described criteria (e.g. images that contain ambiguous entities), (3.) validating the selected images by applying SOTA ADE20k segmentation models and
manually inspecting their outputs.
In total we selected 84 images from OpenImages, and 27 from ADE20k. The
complete benchmark data is provided on https://ade-ood.github.io and the
source of each image is indicated by its filename.
Annotation Process. For the 27 images selected from ADE20k, we used the
available ground truth segmentation annotations, using the “unlabelled” class
mask as OoD (after checking for problematic cases as described above).
The annotation process for the 84 images selected from OpenImages was
carried out in a semi-automatic fashion using the Segment Anything Model

