A Data-Eﬃcient Generalist for Dense Visual Prediction in the Wild

1

Chameleon: A Data-Eﬃcient Generalist for Dense
Visual Prediction in the Wild
Supplementary Material
This document provides our implementation details and additional results
that could not be accommodated in the main paper due to space limitations.

A

Meta-Training Details and More Results

This section describes details of meta-training. We first describe the dataset
details and then describe the implementation details.
A.1

Datasets

We use six existing datasets to construct our unified meta-training dataset. We
summarize the statistics of each dataset in Table A.4.
1. Taskonomy: The Taskonomy dataset [68] comprises an indoor scene dataset
annotated with various vision task labels. We utilize a small subset consisting
of ⇠380K images collected from 35 buildings with various camera properties, such as camera pitch, roll, or FoV. Following Kim et al. [24], we select
10 dense prediction tasks, including semantic segmentation, surface normal,
Euclidean distance, Z-buﬀer depth, texture edge, occlusion edge, 2d keypoints, 3d keypoints, reshading, and principal curvature. Note that the 2d
and 3d keypoint labels in the Taskonomy dataset are obtained by descriptorbased algorithms [6, 53] and diﬀer from the joint keypoints we describe in
the following datasets. Additionally, three single-channel tasks (texture edge,
occlusion edge, and Euclidean distance) are pre-processed to multi-channel
labels. Since labels of the texture edge task can be generated by a deterministic edge detection algorithm [23], we include the unsupervised task in
all the following sub-datasets along with two additional tasks (autoencoding
and denoising).
2. COCO: The COCO dataset [30] consists of ⇠120K images of everyday objects, which contains semantic/instance segmentation annotations of various
object categories and human keypoint annotations of 17 keypoint classes.
With three unsupervised tasks included in the Taskonomy dataset, we include five types of tasks: semantic segmentation, panoptic segmentation,
interactive segmentation, joint-specific human keypoint detection, and jointagnostic human keypoint detection. For semantic segmentation and panoptic
segmentation, we use 80 object categories from COCO 2017 split and five
selected categories (tree, wall-concrete, sky-other, building-other, and grass)

