Self-Supervised Video Desmoking for
Laparoscopic Surgery
(Supplementary Material)
Renlong Wu1 , Zhilu Zhang1( ) , Shuohao Zhang1 , Longfei Gou2 ,
Haobin Chen2 , Lei Zhang3 , Hao Chen2( ) , and Wangmeng Zuo1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, China
Southern Medical University, China
3
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China
hirenlongwu@gmail.com,cszlzhang@outlook.com,
yhyzshrby@163.com,Calvin_smu@163.com,HaoBin_Chen@outlook.com,
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk,chenhao.05@163.com,wmzuo@hit.edu.cn
2

The content of the supplementary material involves:
– Results on synthetic dataset in Sec. A.
– Networks details in Sec. B.
– Visualization of mask in Sec. C.
– Effect of regularization term in Sec. D.
– Examples from LSVD dataset in Sec. E.
– More result comparisons in Sec. F.
– Practical deployment in surgery in Sec. G.
– Limitation and social impact in Sec. H.

A

Results on Synthetic Dataset

We also conduct experiments in a synthetic video dataset. We evaluate the compared methods with paired clean videos that are spatially aligned with the smoky
videos. We collect 380 clean video clips from public Cholec80 dataset [17], where
280 clips are used for training and the remaining 100 ones are used for evaluation.
We follow the surgery smoke simulation manner [9] and add synthetic smoke in
the clean video clips, except the first frame (regarded as PS frame). The results
are shown in Tab. A. As the PS frame in the synthetic dataset is clean, we do not
perform experiments with SelfSVD∗ and SelfSVD∗ -S. Our results get the best
PSNR scores, indicating the effectiveness of the proposed method. Moreover, the
visual comparisons in Figs. A and B show that our results produce few visual
artifacts, remove more clean smoke and are more consistent with the GT.

B

Network Details

We design the video desmoking network based on the unidirectional recurrent
network [20]. It includes five modules, i.e., feature encoder, masked-ref generator, alignment, fusion, and reconstruction module. When processing the i-th

