SignAvatars: A Large-scale 3D Sign Language
Holistic Motion Dataset and Benchmark
Zhengdi Yu1,2†
1

A

, Shaoli Huang2⋆

, Yongkang Cheng2 , and Tolga Birdal1

Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China

Additional Visualizations of SignAvatars Dataset

In this section, we present more samples and visualizations of our SignAvatars
dataset for each of the subsets categorized by the annotation type: spoken language (sentence-level), HamNoSys, and word-level prompt annotation.
A.1

Qualitative Analysis of SignAvatars Dataset

We provide further details of our SignAvatars dataset and present more visualization of our data in Fig. 1, Figs. 2 and 3. Being the first large-scale multi-prompt
3D sign language (SL) motion dataset with accurate holistic mesh representations, our dataset enables various tasks such as 3D sign language recognition
(SLR) and the novel 3D SL production (SLP) from diverse inputs like text
scripts, individual words, and HamNoSys notation. We also provide a demo video
in the supplementary materials and our project page: https://signavatars.github.io/.
A.2

More generation samples from SignVAE

We now share snapshot examples produced from our SignVAE, demonstrating
the application potential for 3D sign language production in our demo video on
project page.

B

Analysis of annotation pipeline

In this section, we provide further analysis of our annotation pipeline. Since there
is not yet an existing benchmark for SL reconstruction while our method is not
limited to SL video, we provide more in-the-wild examples with our annotation
methods in Fig. 6 to demonstrate the reconstruction ability of our annotation
pipeline. Moreover, Fig. 5 illustrates more qualitative comparison with state-ofthe-art methods on EHF dataset [23], where we can observe that our method
provides significantly better quality regarding pixel alignment, especially with
more natural and plausible hand poses. Subsequently, the biomechanical constraints can serve as a prior for eliminating the implausible poses, which happens
frequently in complex interacting-hands scenarios for other monocular capture
methods, as shown in Fig. 7.
†
⋆

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author.

