Method
Oracle
Our Method
Piecewise Baseline

Linear Residual
12.9 N ± 1.6N
18.0 N ± 2.5N
3630N ± 3220N

Marker RMS
1.5cm ± 0.1cm
2.4cm ± 0.5cm
7.7cm ± 6.2cm

Table 1: The results of an ablation study (see Section 1.1) to evaluate the importance of our proposed improvements for initializing center of mass trajectory
when there is hidden ground reaction force data. Higher numbers are worse,
and indicate a less accurate fit of the data.

1

Supplementary Materials

1.1

Ablation Study

To evaluate the impact of our improvements to initialization, we ran an ablation
study. We started with a long continuous 50 second trial with fully observed
ground reaction forces, so ground truth was available. We then artificially hid
the ground reaction force data for every 3rd step on the right foot, to simulate
stepping off of the force plates. We compared our method (which could see
all force data) as the “oracle”, our proposed method with hidden data “our
method”, and finally the ablated method of running the “classic” AddBiomechanics [1] Stage 4.4 (Fig 4) independently on each sub-segment with observed
ground reaction forces “piecewise baseline”.
The results in Table 1 make it clear that enforcing kinematic smoothness
in the initialization is crucial. The non-convex optimizer (Stage 4.5 in Fig 4)
does an extremely poor job with the non-smooth initialization it receives from
stitching together a number of independent initializations using the “classic” AddBiomechanics. The accelerations implied by those large discontinuous position
jumps lead to impossibly enormous implied forces. In the process of removing
those peaks the optimizer often destroys much of the information content of
the initialization, and then is trapped in a poor local optimum and unable to
recover. See Figure 1 for example torque profiles over time to get a qualitative
sense for results.

1.2

Noisy Derivatives of Motion

The standard approach to get second derivatives of motion is to use central
differencing on our noisy input pose estimates q̃t ’s:
˜t = q̃t−1 − 2q̃t + q̃t+1
q̈
∆t2

(1)

The problem with simply relying on central differencing to get q̈t is that the
signal-to-noise ratio gets approximately 4 orders of magnitude worse when we
have data at 100fps. To see this, consider that our estimates for center of mass
over time have some sort of constant noise offset q̃t = qt + t , where t is some
1

