Supplementary Material of Pathformer3D: A 3D
Scanpath Transformer for 360° Images
Rong Quan1 , Yantao Lai1,2 , Mengyu Qiu2 , and Dong Liang2,3 ( )
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, the Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry
of Education, Nanjing, 211106, China
rongquan0806@gmail.com, yantaolai@nuaa.edu.cn
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, College of
Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{qmengyu,liangdong}@nuaa.edu.cn
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Shenzhen, China
1

In this document, we provide additional experiments, visualizations, details
and insights regarding our Pathformer3D model. The specific sections of this
document are listed below.
– We discuss a few detail about the components of Pathformer3D(Sec. 1).
– We discuss the coordinate discontinuity issue of 2D equirectangular projection(Sec. 2).
– We show more images of qualitative compare(Sec. 3).
– We provide more information about ablation experiments(Sec. 4).
– We report the ablation results on another two datasets(Sec. 5).
– We report the qualitative performance results of the ablation experiments(Sec. 6).
– We provide a study of the characteristics of center offset(Sec. 7).
– We provide a study of the characteristics of time saliency(Sec. 8).

1

Additional Architecture Details

Here, we provide additional details regarding the model architecture that were
not mentioned in the main text due to space constraints.
1.1

3D Contextual Visual Feature Representation

3D feature extraction In our model, we attempted to use a network model
called SphereNet [3] to extract features from 360° images. The SphereNet architecture employs a convolution method called SphereConv, which projects the
360° image onto a sphere and then performs convolution operations. After each
SphereConv operation, BatchNorm and LeakyReLU operations are applied, with
the LeakyReLU’s negative slope set to -0.2. We used a total of 3 SphereConv
operations, and the resulting feature maps of different dimensions were upsampled and concatenated to obtain the final feature map. To illustrate this point,
we show the architecture of the SphereNet we used in Fig. 1.

