1

1

Datasets and Tasks

In our experiments, many different datasets and tasks are involved. In training,
we used a two-stage training strategy. In the first stage, we use CC3M [2] to align
the vision features to the text input space. In the second stage, we train the model
on four different tasks and corresponding datasets: generic segmentation(COCO
Panoptic Segmentation [13]), referring segmentation(RefCOCO/+/g [18, 24]),
interactive segmentation(COCO-Interactive) and the vision-language instruction
task (LLaVA1.5 training data [15]). Note that COCO-Interactive is our in-house
dataset, as there is no well-established public dataset that supports all four
interaction types (point, scribble, box, and mask); we released this dataset, and
its construction details are given in the Sec. 4.
The evaluation tasks are classified into in-domain tasks and out-of-domain
tasks, according to if the evaluation task appears in the training. Specifically,
we use three out-of-domain tasks in this work: generalized referring expression
segmentation(gRefCOCO [14]), open-vocabulary segmentation (ADE20K [25],
Cityscapes [4], Pascal Context [17], and Pascal VOC [6]) and video object segmentation (DAVIS-2017 [20]).
We list the details of the datasets used below:
COCO-Panoptic. The COCO-Panoptic dataset is an extension of the COCO
dataset, specifically designed for panoptic segmentation tasks. It consists of over
200,000 images with detailed annotations that cover 80 object categories for
instance segmentation and additional categories for semantic segmentation.
RefCOCO. RefCOCO is a dataset designed for the task of referring expression
comprehension and segmentation. It consists of images from the COCO dataset
that are annotated with referring expressions, where each expression uniquely
identifies a particular object within the image. It includes three splits: RefCOCO,
RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg, each with different characteristics and annotation
styles.
LVIS. The LVIS dataset is a benchmark for instance segmentation with a large
vocabulary of object categories. It features high-quality instance annotations
for over 1,000 object categories across a diverse set of images. LVIS is particularly known for its long-tail distribution of categories, which presents a unique
challenge for segmentation models.
ADE20K. ADE20K is a widely used dataset as an open-vocabulary segmentation benchmark, it contains both things and stuffs annotations and thus can
evaluate panoptic segmentation. It encompasses a diverse collection of images
from various indoor and outdoor scenes. It is part of the MIT Scene Parsing
Benchmark and provides dense pixel-wise annotations for 150 object categories,
facilitating research in scene understanding and segmentation.
Cityscapes. Cityscape is a dataset focused on urban street scenes. The dataset
contains a large number of high-quality video sequences and pixel-accurate annotations from 30 categories in 50 different urban street scenes. With its detailed
instance-level annotations, Cityscapes is pivotal to advancing semantic and instance segmentation research, especially in autonomous driving and urban scene
perception.

