ByteEdit: Boost, Comply and Accelerate
Generative Image Editing
Yuxi Ren, Jie Wu(B) , Yanzuo Lu, Huafeng Kuang, Xin Xia, Xionghui Wang,
Qianqian Wang, Yixing Zhu, Pan Xie, Shiyin Wang, Xuefeng Xiao,
Yitong Wang, Min Zheng, and Lean Fu
ByteDance, Beijing, China
wujie10558@gmail.com
Abstract. Recent advancements in diﬀusion-based generative image
editing have sparked a profound revolution, reshaping the landscape of
image outpainting and inpainting tasks. Despite these strides, the ﬁeld
grapples with inherent challenges, including: i) inferior quality; ii) poor
consistency; iii) insuﬃcient instrcution adherence; iv) suboptimal generation eﬃciency. To address these obstacles, we present ByteEdit, an
innovative feedback learning framework meticulously designed to Boost,
Comply , and Accelerate Generative Image Editing tasks. ByteEdit
seamlessly integrates image reward models dedicated to enhancing aesthetics and image-text alignment, while also introducing a dense, pixellevel reward model tailored to foster coherence in the output. Furthermore, we propose a pioneering adversarial and progressive feedback learning strategy to expedite the model’s inference speed. Through
extensive large-scale user evaluations, we demonstrate that ByteEdit
surpasses leading generative image editing products, including Adobe,
Canva, and MeiTu, in both generation quality and consistency. ByteEditOutpainting exhibits a remarkable enhancement of 388% and 135%
in quality and consistency, respectively, when compared to the baseline
model. Experiments also verﬁed that our acceleration models maintains
excellent performance results in terms of quality and consistency.
Keywords: Outpainting · Intpainting · Feedback Learning

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of generative image editing has experienced remarkable advancements
in recent years [5,6,20,21,23,34,37,38,42,44,45], propelled by the development
of diﬀusion models [12,25,27,28,47]. This progress has led to the emergence
of inﬂuential products that have reshaped the landscape of image editing. A
notable example is Adobe Fireﬂy [1], which has revolutionized the creative process by enabling users to seamlessly incorporate, extend, or remove content
from images through simple text prompts, thereby transcending the traditional
Y. Ren, J. Wu and Y. Lu—Equal contribution.
ByteDance Project Page: https://byte-edit.github.io.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 184–200, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_11

