Supplementary Material for
WAVE: Warping DDIM Inversion Features for
Zero-shot Text-to-Video Editing
Yutang Feng1∗ , Sicheng Gao1,3∗ , Yuxiang Bao1∗ , Xiaodi Wang2 , Shumin
Han1,2† , Juan Zhang1† , Baochang Zhang1,4 , and Angela Yao3
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Baidu VIS
3
National University of Singapore
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{yutangfeng,zhang_juan}@buaa.edu.cn, hanshumin@baidu.com

In this supplementary material, we first provide details of our evaluation
dataset (Sec. A). Afterward, we present details of our User study (Sec. B). Sec. C
provides a visual comparison of our edited videos with those edited using stateof-the-art methods. Videos corresponding to Sec. B and Sec. C are available in
the project page. Finally, we discuss the social impact (Sec. D) and limitation
(Sec. E).

A

Dataset Details

Following [4], we select 42 videos from the DAVIS dataset [2], covering a range
of categories including animals, vehicles, and humans. We list the selected video
items in Table A and employ GPT-4 to generate two valid text prompts for each
video. Each video has a spatial resolution of 384 × 672 and takes the first 24
frames to compute metrics.

B

User Study

We conduct a user study involving 10 videos selected from the DAVIS dataset and
additional content from TV shows and TikTok, each associated with a manually
selected text prompt generated by GPT-4. The primary objective is to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach compared to three established baselines:
Tune-A-Video [4], FateZero [3], and TokenFlow [1]. We invite 30 participants,
predominantly comprised of students and colleagues from the university, to assess each edited prompt. The evaluation involves a comparison of four videos
generated by four different methods (presented in random order). Participants
in the evaluation are assigned the role of rating the edited videos with a score
from 1 to 5 and a higher score indicating a higher preference. The user study
focuses on two key aspects: frame consistency and textual alignment. They are
guided by two specific questions:
∗
†

Equal contribution. Work done when Y. Feng was an intern at Baidu.
Corresponding authors.

