18

A

R. Min et al.

Implementation Details

In this section, we provide additional implementation details of our experiments.
We implement our method based on the official code of the Stable Diffusion1 and
the ImageNet diffusion model2 .
A.1

Details of Pre-training Watermark Decoders

To generate the training set for pre-training, we randomly select 5000 images
from the training set of MS-COCO 2014 and resize the image size to 512 ×
512 for the Stable Diffusion model; while for the ImageNet diffusion model, we
randomly select 5000 images from the training set of ImageNet and resize the
image size to 256 × 256 for training. For both cases, we set γ to 20 and the
epoch number to 300. To enhance the robustness of our watermark decoder,
similar to the Stable Signature, we apply several data augmentations to the
watermarked outputs before feeding them into the watermark decoder. These
data augmentations include image blurring, color jitter, Gaussian noise, as well
as JPEG compression. Notably, in our pre-training stage, our primary goal is
not to guarantee good image quality for our watermark encoder, but rather
to achieve a powerful watermark extraction capability within the watermark
decoder. This is reasonable since, we discard the watermark encoder during the
fine-tuning process, indicating that it does not affect the image quality of our
watermarking framework.
A.2

Details of Baseline Methods

In this section, we introduce the implementation details for our baseline methods
including the DwtDct, StegaStamp, and Tree-Ring.
– DwtDct is a traditional post-hoc watermarking method that embeds fingerprinting information into the frequency domain. In our experiments, we
follow a widely used implementation3 and embed a 48-bit binary string to
the image.
– StegaStamp is a deep-learning-based post-hoc watermarking strategy used
in our pre-training stage. Similar to the training procedure in our pre-training
stage, we adopt a 48-bit binary string as the watermarking message and
slightly modify the hyperparameters by setting γ to 15 and the number of
epochs to 100 for both cases. Besides, to enhance the quality of watermarked
images, we employ the perceptual loss instead of the original MSE loss,
which improves the visual quality of images generated by the watermark
encoder. Specifically, we simply utilize the first 23 layers of a pre-trained
VGG-16 provided by PyTorch as our backbone for feature extraction and
then calculate the MSE loss between the latent features of watermarked and
original images as our perceptual loss.
https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion
https://github.com/openai/guided-diffusion
3
https://github.com/ShieldMnt/invisible-watermark
1
2

