Supplementary Materials for
Phase Concentration and Shortcut Suppression
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Hoyong Kwon , Jaeseok Jeong , Sung-Hoon Yoon , and Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
{kwonhoyong3,jason.jeong,yoon307,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

The supplementary materials contain the following content: Sec. A. Training
Details on MS COCO, Sec. B. Discussions regarding FSPM, Sec. C. Importance
of Image Pair in MPC, and Sec. D. Visualization Results.

A

Training Details: MS COCO

Setting for CAMs Our framework was trained on the MS COCO dataset for
13 epochs using the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 5e-4 and a
batch size of 64. Similar to the procedure on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset,
the same data augmentation techniques as MCTformer [7] were applied, with
the image resize scale set to (0.6-1.2). The loss balance hyperparameters λ1
and λ2 were both set to 0.4. For the COCO dataset, the classification accuracy
in the initial epochs is considerably lower in contrast to the PASCAL dataset.
Therefore, the CAM-level losses of MPC and FSS are applied after the accuracy
reaches a certain level (after 3 epochs). The Frequency Shortcut Potential Map
(FSPM) was updated every three epochs as in the PASCAL dataset.
Setting for Semantic Segmentation For a fair comparison with the prior
WSSS works [3–5] and SoTA ViT-based WSSS approach [6], we trained the
DeepLab-V2 with the ResNet101 backbone using our high-quality pseudo labels.
The training was conducted using an SGD optimizer with a momentum of 0.9,
an initial learning rate of 5e-5, and a batch size of 10.

B

Discussions regarding FSPM

B.1

Obtaining FSPM

For the Frequency Shortcut Suppression (FSS) in our framework, it is necessary
to generate the Frequency Shortcut Potential Map (FSPM) as shown in Fig. A1.
The Frequency Influence Measurement (FIM) for creating the FSPM continuously assesses the impact of each frequency component on the classification accuracy by masking them. As for the masking process, since frequency components
in similar locations in the frequency domain tend to have similar periods and
directions of progression, we measured them by masking on a patch basis. When

