BAM-DETR: Boundary-Aligned Moment
Detection Transformer for Temporal
Sentence Grounding in Videos
Pilhyeon Lee1(B)
1

and Hyeran Byun2

Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Inha University, Incheon, South Korea
pilhyeon.lee@inha.ac.kr
2
Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea

Abstract. Temporal sentence grounding aims to localize moments relevant to a language description. Recently, DETR-like approaches achieved
notable progress by predicting the center and length of a target moment.
However, they suﬀer from the issue of center misalignment raised by
the inherent ambiguity of moment centers, leading to inaccurate predictions. To remedy this problem, we propose a novel boundary-oriented
moment formulation. In our paradigm, the model no longer needs to
ﬁnd the precise center but instead suﬃces to predict any anchor point
within the interval, from which the boundaries are directly estimated.
Based on this idea, we design a boundary-aligned moment detection
transformer, equipped with a dual-pathway decoding process. Speciﬁcally, it reﬁnes the anchor and boundaries within parallel pathways using
global and boundary-focused attention, respectively. This separate design
allows the model to focus on desirable regions, enabling precise reﬁnement of moment predictions. Further, we propose a quality-based ranking
method, ensuring that proposals with high localization qualities are prioritized over incomplete ones. Experiments on three benchmarks validate
the eﬀectiveness of the proposed methods. The code is available here.
Keywords: Temporal sentence grounding · Detection transformer

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a notable surge in the popularity of short-form video
content on social media platforms like TikTok, YouTube Shorts, and Instagram
Reels. As such, users prefer to selectively engage with short moments of interest
rather than passively watch an entire long video. This trend highlights the importance of localizing desired moments. As a result, moment localization tasks have
emerged as pivotal research topics in video understanding, including temporal
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 13.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 220–238, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_13

