Images are Achilles’ Heel of Alignment:
Exploiting Visual Vulnerabilities for Jailbreaking
Multimodal Large Language Models
Yifan Li1,3,⋆ , Hangyu Guo1,3,⋆ , Kun Zhou2,3,⋆ ,
Wayne Xin Zhao1,3,† , and Ji-Rong Wen1,2,3
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{liyifan0925,hyguo0220,batmanfly}@gmail.com

1

Defending HADES with Contrastive Harmlessness
LoRA

In this section, we conduct a preliminary exploration of improving the harmlessness alignment of MLLMs. Specifically, we collect both harmful and harmless
instructions related to OCR and captioning tasks, then utilize these instructions
to finetune LLaVA-1.5 with LoRA. The evaluation results on HADES show that
our approach can greatly reduce the harmfulness of the model’s responses, while
still maintaining the model’s general multimodal capabilities.
1.1

Experimental Setting

The experimental results of HADES reveal that existing MLLMs lack defenses
against images containing harmful textual or visual information. The former
challenge is related to the OCR abilities of MLLMs, while the latter concerns
their captioning abilities. We argue that existing MLLMs struggle to resist
HADES attacks because they lack corresponding alignment data in their training
data for these two tasks. Therefore, we propose to mitigate such misalignment
issues by collecting instructions consisting of both harmful and harmless data to
finetune MLLMs.
We define each instruction as a triplet I = {t, i, r}, consisting of a textual instruction t, an image i, and an expected response r. For OCR tasks, we
collect negative instructions Ineg from the +Text-to-image pointer setting in
HADES, with tneg and ineg as the original instruction and image, respectively.
The response rneg is crafted to guide the model to refuse to answer harmful
instructions while maintaining OCR capability, which is designed as: “The object/concept/behavior in the image is {}. But I can not answer harmful questions.” Each Ineg is paired with a positive instruction Ipos . Initially, we utilize
the same image, ineg , for ipos . Subsequently, we transform the harmful keywords
or phrases in tneg into a benign instruction, tpos , using ChatGPT. We then generate a harmless response ,rpos , also employing ChatGPT. For captioning tasks,

