Supplementary Material for FreestyleRet:
Retrieving Images from Style-Diversified Queries
Hao Li1,2∗ , Yanhao Jia3,4∗ , Peng Jin1,2 , Zesen Cheng1 , Kehan Li1 , Jialu
Sui5 , Chang Liu6 , and Li Yuan1,2†
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
4
Deep NeuroCognition Lab, I2R and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore
5
School of Science and Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong
6
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

1

Further Discussions for Related Works

1.1

Our Setting VS Domain Adaptation

The domain adaptation task and the multi-task learning (our setting) all belong
to the field of Transfer Learning. Both domain adaptation and multi-task learning (our setting) aim to improve the performance from one task to another task.
Thus, with all these similarities, it is vital to point out the difference between
domain adaptation and multi-task learning (our setting). Here we first analyse
from the data aspect:
– In the domain adaptation setting, labeled data are available only in the
source domain. For the target domain, there are only a few labeled data or
no labeled data.
– In the multi-task learning (our setting), labeled data are available in both
the source task and the target tasks. For our style-diversified QBIR setting,
we collect 10,000 images for each style modality, which is available for CLIP
fine-tuning.
From the methodology aspect, prompt learning methods, including CoOP [29],
CoCoOP [28], MaPLe [10], are commonly used in both domain adaptation and
multi-task learning. Thus, we compare the performance of our FreestyleRet and
these baselines and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework.
1.2

Our Setting VS Other Retrieval Settings

Our FreestyleRet proposes a novel retrieval setting: Image Retrieval with StyleDiversified Queries. However, during our survey of related works, we have identified several closely related retrieval tasks, including Composed Image Retrieval [22],
User Generalized Image Retrieval [14], Fashion Retrieval [7], Synthesis Image Retrieval [22], and Sketch Retrieval [24]. Consequently, we summarize these tasks
and highlight the differences and contributions of our novel task: Style-Diversified
Image Retrieval Task in comparison to them.

