Camera Height Doesn’t Change:
Unsupervised Training for Metric Monocular
Road-Scene Depth Estimation
Supplementary Material
Genki Kinoshita

and Ko Nishino

Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
gkinoshita@vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, kon@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

A

Details of Training on the Mixed Datasets

A.1

Dataset Preparation

We use the images from the front camera in Argoverse2 [21], Lyft [12], A2D2 [9],
and DDAD [11] for training. As mentioned in Sec. 6.1 since the focal lengths
are essential for metric MDE, we resize the image and align the focal lengths
to 1000 px. In order to facilitate the training process, we crop the images to
832×512 resolution. These resizing and cropping are also done for evaluation on
the KITTI Eigen split [7].
To make the training easier and more efficient, we eliminate frames where
the camera is stationary since training with these frames greatly degrades the
inference performance [10]. We achieve this elimination by looking at pairs of
successive frames and simply checking the number of pixels with large differences
in normalized intensities. Images with a small number of pixels with large intensity changes are deemed stationary and discarded from the training dataset.
Since Argoverse2 is captured at a higher frame rate than the other datasets, we
treat every other frame as successive frames.
For optimization during training, FUMET requires a sufficient number of
images captured with the same camera height. We select such sequences with at
least 2,500 frames. At the end of each training epoch, we optimize each camera
height individually. In total, we use 235,341 images for training.
A.2

Training Settings

We train Monodepth2 [10] with ResNet50 on FUMET with the same batch size
and initial learning rate as used during training on the KITTI dataset (Sec. 6.1).
Considering the gap of training samples between KITTI and the mixed dataset,
we set τmid = 4 and train for 8 epochs while reducing the learning rate by half
every 3 epochs. For training on the mixed dataset and KITTI, we train for 8
epochs with τmid = 3 and reduce the learning rate by half every 2 epochs.

