IBA: Towards Irreversible Backdoor Attacks in
Federated Learning

Dung Thuy Nguyen1,2∗, Tuan Nguyen2,3 , Tuan Anh Tran4 , Khoa D Doan2,3 , Kok-Seng Wong2,3
1
Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37212, USA
2
VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam
3
College of Engineering & Computer Science, VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam
4
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
dung.t.nguyen@Vanderbilt.Edu, tuan.nm@vinuni.edu.vn,
v.anhtt152@vinai.io, khoa.dd@vinuni.edu.vn, wong.ks@vinuni.edu.vn

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning approach that enables machine
learning models to be trained on decentralized data without compromising end
devices’ personal, potentially sensitive data. However, the distributed nature and
uninvestigated data intuitively introduce new security vulnerabilities, including
backdoor attacks. In this scenario, an adversary implants backdoor functionality
into the global model during training, which can be activated to cause the desired
misbehaviors for any input with a specific adversarial pattern. Despite having
remarkable success in triggering and distorting model behavior, prior backdoor
attacks in FL often hold impractical assumptions, limited imperceptibility, and
durability. Specifically, the adversary needs to control a sufficiently large fraction
of clients or know the data distribution of other honest clients. In many cases, the
trigger inserted is often visually apparent, and the backdoor effect is quickly diluted
if the adversary is removed from the training process. To address these limitations,
we propose a novel backdoor attack framework in FL, the Irreversible Backdoor
Attack (IBA), that jointly learns the optimal and visually stealthy trigger and then
gradually implants the backdoor into a global model. This approach allows the
adversary to execute a backdoor attack that can evade both human and machine
inspections. Additionally, we enhance the efficiency and durability of the proposed
attack by selectively poisoning the model’s parameters that are least likely updated
by the main task’s learning process and constraining the poisoned model update to
the vicinity of the global model. Finally, we evaluate the proposed attack framework
on several benchmark datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR-10, and Tiny ImageNet,
and achieved high success rates while simultaneously bypassing existing backdoor
defenses and achieving a more durable backdoor effect compared to other backdoor
attacks. Overall, IBA2 offers a more effective, stealthy, and durable approach to
backdoor attacks in FL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [13] is a novel distributed learning paradigm that enables multiple parties to
train machine learning models collaboratively without centralized data sharing. Specifically, each
participant trains a local model on their private data, and only the model updates are exchanged with
a central server for aggregation. However, FL also introduces new security and privacy challenges
∗
2

Work done while DTN was at VinUniversity.
Code for this paper is published at https://github.com/sail-research/iba.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

