AddressCLIP: Empowering Vision-Language
Models for City-wide Image Address Localization
– Supplementary Material –
Shixiong Xu1,3∗† , Chenghao Zhang2∗ , Lubin Fan2‡ , Gaofeng Meng1,3,4‡ ,
Shiming Xiang1,3 , and Jieping Ye2
1

MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Alibaba Cloud
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
CAIR, HK Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

1

Dataset Details

We provide more details of the dataset construction and statistical results.
1.1

Return Information of Google Maps API

For a querying pair of GPS coordinates (latitude, longitude), the reverse Geocoding API of Google Maps will return a list of address results, which are sorted
by the distance between the address and query GPS coordinates. The information contained in each returned result is shown in Fig. 1. We also provide some
examples of formatted addresses in returned results of the same query in Fig. 2.
Apart from the formatted address information, for each result, location type
information is also provided to mark what kind of address is returned. Specifically, "ROOFTOP" means the address is an accurate location (usually a building). "RANGE_INTERPOLATED" means the result is an approximate position
(usually on the road). "GEOMETRIC_CENTER" means the result is the geometric center of a multi-segment line (such as a street) or a polygon (such as an
area). "APPROXIMATE" indicates that the returned result is an approximate
location. We only use the formatted address and location type for address annotation. More details can be found in the official documentation of the Geocoding
API of Google Maps.
1.2

Details of Address Annotation

We annotate administrative address information from coarse to fine for images
with GPS coordinates in image geo-localization datasets by reverse geocoding,
address extraction, and semantic address partition. An detailed illustration is
shown in Fig. 3.
†

This work was done when Shixiong Xu was an intern at Alibaba Cloud.
Equal contributions
‡
Corresponding authors
∗

