Watch Your Steps

19

Watch Your Steps: Local Image and Scene
Editing by Text Instructions
Supplementary Material
A

Mask threshold eﬀect

Figure 12 provides a quantitative comparison of our image editing method with
diﬀerent mask thresholds against IP2P [6]. Our method produces outputs that
closely reflect the desired edits (x-axis), while remaining consistent with the
inputs (y-axis) by confining the edits in the relevant region. However, while
increasing the mask threshold results in higher fidelity to the input, overly increasing it can prevent the model from editing the parts that actually matter:
the lines in Figure 12 cover a smaller text-image direction similarity region as
the mask threshold, ⌧ , is increased. Based on this experiment, we set ⌧ within
[0.4, 0.5] throughout the paper.
We further provide a qualitative example to showcase the eﬀect of the mask
threshold on the generation of the edited image (Figure 13). Setting the mask
threshold, ⌧ , to 0 results in every pixel being masked. As a result, our model
with ⌧ = 0 is equivalent to IP2P [6]. For each ⌧ , we provide results with diﬀerent
image guidance scales, SI . As evident in the results, in IP2P, simply increasing
the image guidance scale is not enough to localize the edits; with SI = 1.0, the
background and the clothes are drastically changed. When setting SI = 3.0 in
IP2P, the woman’s collar and the man’s shirt are still changed to yellow, while
the faces no longer look like Simpsons characters; increasing SI has an adverse
eﬀect on the text-image similarity, which is consistent with our quantitative
findings in Figures 6 (main paper) and 12. Alternatively, changing ⌧ provides a
diﬀerent guidance knob to the user, and allows them to control the region to be
edited, with minimal damage to the regions that actually need to be modified.

B

Additional qualitative comparisons

In Figure 14, we provide additional examples to compare our localized image
editing method with IP2P. In all of these examples, SI is between [0.8, 1.0],
and ST is always 7.5. Mask thresholds are either 0.4 or 0.5. For each of the
examples, we further provide the relevance map predicted by our method. Our
results are more consistent with the input image by only locally changing the
inputs in the regions with high relevance values. Meanwhile, our method follows
the instructions closely, and yields images with similar or better edit qualities
compared to IP2P.

C

Sample relevance field renderings

In Figure 15, we visualize sample relevance fields trained on diﬀerent scenes and
diﬀerent edit instructions. Each relevance field is trained via 2D supervision from

