3DEgo: 3D Editing on the Go! (Supplementary
Material)
Umar Khalid1,∗ , Hasan Iqbal2,∗ , Azib Farooq3 , Jing Hua2 , and Chen
Chen1
1

University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Miami University,
Oxford, OH, USA
2

A

Overview

The supplementary material has been organized into the following sections:
– Section B: Implementation Details
– Section C: Additional Results
– Section D: User Study
– Section E: Autoregressive Editing with Diffusion Models
– Section F: Broader Impact
– Rendered videos of the edited scenes are provided together with the PDF
document. Due to the file size limitation imposed by ECCV, we had to
compress some of the video samples extensively, which may have impacted
their quality.

B

Implementation Details

In the development of our method, we leverage PyTorch [12] with a specific
focus on 3D Gaussian splatting techniques. The process of determining the key
editing areas (KEAs) utilizes GPT-3.5 Turbo [3] to pinpoint the relevant editing
attributes. SAM [10] is deployed for mask generation, aiming at isolating the
KEAs. For the task of zero-shot point tracking, our approach incorporates a
point-tracker as delineated in [13]. Editing operations are executed with the
aid of the Instruct Pix2Pix [2] 2D diffusion model, which applies the generated
masks to confine edits within the designated KEAs. For instance, given an editing
prompt, "Make bulldozer red and give cones yellow color". GPT [3] should output
"bulldozer" and "cones" as the editing attributes and SAM [10] should generate
masks for these objects.
For 3D reconstruction, we adhere to the optimization parameters and configurations established in 3DGS [8], except where noted. We synchronize the addition
of new frames with point densification intervals to ensure the scene’s progressive expansion. Camera poses are refined using quaternion rotation q ∈ so(3)
⋆

Equal Contribution

