WHAC: World-grounded Humans and Cameras
– Supplementary Material –
Wanqi Yin⋆,1,2 , Zhongang Cai∗,1,3 , Ruisi Wang1 , Fanzhou Wang1 ,
Chen Wei1 , Haiyi Mei1 , Weiye Xiao1 , Zhitao Yang1 , Qingping Sun1 ,
Atsushi Yamashita2 , Ziwei Liu3 , Lei Yang1
1

A

SenseTime Research, 2 The University of Tokyo,
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Overview

Given the space constraints in the main paper, we provide additional information and details in this supplementary material: more results visualization on
the EMDB dataset and WHAC-A-Mole dataset in Sec. B; further elaboration on
the MotionVelocimeter in Sec. C; the average inference speed in Sec. D; detailed
training procedures in Sec. E, explanations of the adaptations applied to camera
space EHPS methods during evaluations in Sec. F, the step-by-step comprehensive formulations for trajectory transformations in Sec. G and implementations
of camera movements for WHAC-A-Mole in Sec. H.

B

Results Visualization

In Fig. 1, we visualize the camera and human trajectories of two sequences
from EMDB2 dataset. The sequences consist of 2.7k frames for and 1.1k frames
respectively. Notably, WHAC demonstrates its capability to accurately recover
trajectory and scale in the world space, even for lengthy sequences. Moreover, in
Fig. 1b1) and Fig. 1b2), WHAC effectively captures the downward trajectory as
the depicted human descends stairs. In Fig. 2, we visualize the human pose and
human trajectory in hard cases from EMDB2 [3] and EgoBody [11] including
rare walking poses, floating poses, pivoting on one foot, climbing stairs and
truncation.
Besides human and camera trajectory estimation in the world space, we
present the visualization of the camera space results in Fig. 3. This visualization includes various scenarios such as severe occlusions, close interactions, body
contact between subjects, and challenging dancing poses, which serve as representative cases for the WHAC-A-Mole dataset. Even without specific training
or finetuning on WHAC-A-Mole dataset, WHAC demonstrates strong abilities
in handling pose estimation and depth recovery in camera space for various scenarios. However, challenges persist in the recovery of multi-human interactions
and contact between body parts in the world space.
⋆

Equal contributions.

