Chat-Edit-3D: Interactive 3D Scene Editing via Text Prompts

19

Supplementary Materials
6

Additional Implementation Details

6.1

Training for Hash-Atlas Network

In the Hash-Atlas network structure showcased in Fig. 4 in the main manuscript,
we establish Fm as an eight-layer MLP with a width of 256, along with ReLU
activations. For Fh , we set the base resolution, number of levels, per-level scale,
hash table size, and feature dimensions to 16, 16, 1.5, 215 , and 2 respectively.
The MLP, followed by the hash tables, has two hidden layers with a width of 64,
The activation function is ReLU for each hidden layer and tanh for the output
layer of color. The generated atlases’ resolution stands at 1000 × 1000 pixels. We
implement our method using the PyTorch framework and AdamW Optimizer.
The initial learning rates for Fm and Fh are 1e-3 and 1e-2, respectively. We run
100,000 steps with a batch size of 10,000 pixel points. The Lpos loss is utilized
solely for the initial 1,000 iterations, after which the Lα loss is trained only for
the first 30,000 iterations.
6.2

Prompts for CE3D

Prompt for Sensitivity to Scene Names. We present this prompt in Table 3.
The scene name is associated with relevant scene files, encompassing various
original view images of the scene, camera poses, foreground masks, atlases, and
intermediate files produced during the editing process. Upon perceiving the scene
name, ChatGPT triggers the actual file orchestration executed by Frontend or
Backend, as discussed in Sec 3.3 of our main text.
Table 3: Example prompts for sensitivity to scene names.

As a language model, Chat-Edit-3D can not directly read scenes,
but it has a list of tools to finish different visual tasks. Each scene
will have a file name formed as “xxx.scn”, and the file name has no
meaning. When talking about scenes, Chat-Edit-3D is very strict
with the file name and never fabricates nonexistent files. ChatEdit-3D can invoke different tools to indirectly understand and
edit scenes. Chat-Edit-3D is able to use tools in a sequence and is
loyal to the tool observation outputs rather than faking the scene
content and file name. It will remember to provide the file name
from the last tool observation.

