Supplementary File of
InternVideo2: Scaling Foundation Models for
Multimodal Video Understanding
Yi Wang∗1 , Kunchang Li∗3,1 , Xinhao Li∗2,1 Jiashuo Yu∗3 , Yinan He∗1 ,
Guo Chen2,1 , Baoqi Pei1 , Rongkun Zheng1 , Zun Wang1 , Yansong Shi1 ,
Tianxiang Jiang1 , Songze Li1 , Jilan Xu1 , Hongjie Zhang1 , Yifei Huang1 ,
Yu Qiao†1 , Yali Wang†3,1 , and Limin Wang†2,1
1

OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
2
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, Shenzhen, China
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/InternVideo/tree/main/InternVideo2

In this supplementary file, we first discuss limitations and potential negative
impact of our work, then we present more details about 1) the used video encoder
architecture; 2) pretraining data and annotations; and 3) additional experiments.

1

Limitations, Bias, and Potential Impact

Limitations and Discussions. InternVideo2 does not introduce brand new training
methods or architectural advances. Instead, it utilizes known learning techniques
for scheme exploration and focuses on improving data processing for enhanced
spatiotemporal perception, alignment to semantics, and basic knowledge embedding. Like the previous studies [16, 30], it still faces challenges due to the limited
information bandwidth imposed by fixed input resolutions, sampling rates, and
highly compressed tokens. These limitations can restrict the model’s ability to
express rich video information and capture fine-grained details.
While InternVideo2 has achieved leading results in long video understanding
and reasoning benchmarks, it cannot guarantee an implicit world model that
ensures consistency in visual reasoning. The inherent limitations of fixed input
representations and the complexity of visual reasoning tasks can create challenges
in achieving a comprehensive and consistent understanding of the visual world.
Potential Biases. We investigate the potential biases here. We focused on age,
gender, and race distributions, as these are commonly recognized areas where
bias can occur. We count keywords related to these categories in the used
captions. Note that these synthetic captions may not fully reflect the truth of
the corresponding videos, thereby creating a gap between our analysis and the
actual reality. Here are the results of our analysis: Age: The majority were about
adults (86.99%), followed by children (12.87%) and barely any mentions of senior
citizens (0.04%). Gender: 62.04% pertained to men and 37.96% pertained to
women. Race: 56.19% are Asians, 23.04% are Black people, 14.55% are White
people, 3.78% are Middle Eastern people, and 2.43% are Latin American people.

