(Supplementary Material)
Domain Reduction Strategy
for Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
In this supplementary material, we first provide additional discussion and
comparison with FFT-based methods in Section A. Then, we provide additional
details of the proposed method in Section B, additional comparisons with more
baseline methods in Section D, reconstruction time of our method in Section C,
and additional evaluations and analysis in Section E.

A

Comparison with FFT-based Methods

A.1

FFT-based Methods and Optimization

We would like to demonstrate that the goal of our work is not to achieve the
fastest reconstruction speed. Instead, this work aims to identify efficiency bottlenecks inherent in previous optimization-based methods, particularly stemming
from computations related to empty regions. Consequently, our domain reduction achieves substantial efficiency improvement (see Table 2 of the main paper),
while inheriting the general applicability of the optimization framework.
While FFT-based methods benefit from computational efficiency based on
the convolutional theorem or Stolt’s method, several assumptions have to be
made to achieve this, e.g. dense scanning points, planar relay walls, or ignoring surface normals. Some approximations could relax certain assumptions, but
at the cost of sacrificing performance. In contrast, optimization-based methods
are more generally applicable to various scenarios, with the potential for continuous modeling, joint optimization of noise parameters, arbitrary BRDF [8],
and sparse samplings [5, 9]. Our domain reduction effectively addresses computational burdens of optimization frameworks, paving the way to unleash their
full potential.
A.2

Analysis on Sparse Sampling

Reconstructing high-resolution volumes from undersampled sparse measurements
is an ill-posed problem. Previous FFT-based methods require measurements to
have the same resolution with the target volumes. One may apply interpolation
techniques to upsample the measurements to the desired resolution, as commented by R3. However, this inevitably introduces approximation errors between
upsampled and actual measurements. Therefore, solutions of all methods exhibit
approximation errors, which become larger as scanning patterns become sparser.
Optimization-based methods are capable of finding solutions with minimal errors through iterative minimization procedures. This is further demonstrated in
the following paragraphs.

