Supplementary Material of Training-free
Composite Scene Generation for Layout-to-Image
Synthesis
Jiaqi Liu1 , Tao Huang1 , and Chang Xu1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
{jliu6979,thua7590}@uni.sydney.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

1

Experiment implementation

The specifics of hyperparameter settings are discussed in previous sections. This
section, however, concentrates on the rationale behind the experimental setup.
Initially, we decided to omit any classes from the COCO 2014 dataset that
consist of more than one word. This decision was made because many of these
multi-word classes describe attributes rather than objects, such as "hot dog"
and "potted plant." Our method is not designed to handle attribute association,
hence we exclude these terms. The choice to utilize all classes for object detection
with YOLOv7 stems from the observation that certain concepts within the class
set bear similarities. For instance, attempting to generate an image of a "remote"
might inadvertently produce an image of a "cell phone," a category we opted to
exclude. Although this approach might compromise the method’s performance
in evaluations, it institutes a more rigorous assessment framework that more
accurately reflects the method’s capabilities.

2

Analysis of inference time

Inference time is evaluated against various baselines, and an ablation study
demonstrates the impact of TD and TR on generation quality. The inference time
is specifically measured for generating three objects. Although CSG lags behind
other baselines in terms of speed, except for BoxDiff, this is because other methods either use a forward strategy or impose limited constraints during backward
guidance.
Table 1: Inference time on datasets with 3 objects.
Methods

SD

Layout

BoxDiff

MultiDiff

CSG (Ours)

Time (s)

2.89

10.91

25.38

4.59

17.73

However, as shown by out quantitative results, despite their faster inference
speeds, MultiDiff and Layout-control exhibit limited performance. Our method

