Track Everything Everywhere Fast
and Robustly
Yunzhou Song1 , Jiahui Lei1(B) , Ziyun Wang1 , Lingjie Liu1 ,
and Kostas Daniilidis1,2
1

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
{timsong,leijh,ziyunw,lingjie.liu,kostas}@cis.upenn.edu
2
Archimedes, Athena RC, Marousi, Greece
https://timsong412.github.io/FastOmniTrack/

Abstract. We propose a novel test-time optimization approach for eﬃciently and robustly tracking any pixel at any time in a video. The latest state-of-the-art optimization-based tracking technique, OmniMotion,
requires a prohibitively long optimization time, rendering it impractical for downstream applications. OmniMotion is sensitive to the choice
of random seeds, leading to unstable convergence. To improve eﬃciency
and robustness, we introduce a novel invertible deformation network,
CaDeX++, which factorizes the function representation into a local
spatial-temporal feature grid and enhances the expressivity of the coupling blocks with non-linear functions. While CaDeX++ incorporates
a stronger geometric bias within its architectural design, it also takes
advantage of the inductive bias provided by the vision foundation models. Our system utilizes monocular depth estimation to represent scene
geometry and enhances the objective by incorporating DINOv2 longterm semantics to regulate the optimization process. Our experiments
demonstrate a substantial improvement in training speed (more than
10 times faster), robustness, and accuracy in tracking over the SoTA
optimization-based method OmniMotion.

1

Introduction

The association of visual information from continuous observations across long
time horizons lays the foundation for modern spatial intelligence. In computer
vision, one of the key tasks that provides this association is the long-term tracking of pixels, which serves as the backbone for a wide spectrum of tasks, from
3D reconstruction to video recognition (Fig. 1).
Previously, methods for estimating the correspondence can be divided into
two categories based on their track representations. Feature-based methods represent points as local descriptors [1,20,28], which can be matched over a long
Y. Song, J. Lei—Contributed equally to this work.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 20.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 343–359, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_20

