1

1

Supplementary Results

The anonymous homepage for our project can be found here.
1.1

Supplementary results of diffusion-based data amplifier

Style5

Style4

As illustrated in Fig. 2, the diffusion-based data amplifier can learn five distinct
makeup styles, each with its characteristic LoRA. It can apply makeup styles
with stable and high quality to non-makeup images while retaining the facial
features of the original portrait.

Source

GT

BeautyGAN

PSGAN

SCGAN

EleGANt

BeautyREC

Ours

Fig. 1: Visual comparison of TineBeauty and competing methods on the
FFHQ [4] image, in Style4 and Style5.

1.2

Supplementary facial makeup results on the FFHQ dataset

Results from our lightweight makeup model and competing methods for Style4
and Style5 on the FFHQ [4] dataset are displayed in Fig. 1. Our method exhibits notable advantages over prior approaches along three primary dimensions.
Firstly, makeup around the eye region is applied with heightened precision by
our TinyBeauty. Secondly, TinyBeauty possesses the capability to color and define eyebrow regions realistically. Thirdly, delicate cosmetic effects such as blush
and contouring are delineated with accurate localization.
1.3

Supplementary facial makeup results on the MT dataset

While our model training utilized solely the FFHQ dataset due to the constrained size of the MT dataset, we performed supplementary testing of our
FFHQ-trained model on the MT dataset, as depicted in Fig. 7, to conduct a
fairer comparative assessment of TinyBeauty against preceding techniques. Observation of the results indicates that regardless of the exclusion of the MT
dataset from training, the generated makeup outputs produced by our approach
still surpass those of previous methods in visual quality. This suggests that the
representation of facial attributes learned from FFHQ enabled our solution to
more precisely depict makeup allocation, demonstrating its ability to generalize
to other face image domains beyond the dataset it was exclusively trained on.

