EgoPoser: Robust Real-Time Egocentric
Pose Estimation from Sparse
and Intermittent Observations
Everywhere
Jiaxi Jiang(B) , Paul Streli, Manuel Meier, and Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
{jiaxi.jang,paul.streli,manuel.meier,christian.holz}@inf.ethz.ch
https://github.com/eth-siplab/EgoPoser

Abstract. Full-body egocentric pose estimation from head and hand
poses alone has become an active area of research to power articulate avatar representations on headset-based platforms. However, existing methods over-rely on the indoor motion-capture spaces in which
datasets were recorded, while simultaneously assuming continuous joint
motion capture and uniform body dimensions. We propose EgoPoser to
overcome these limitations with four main contributions. 1) EgoPoser
robustly models body pose from intermittent hand position and orientation tracking only when inside a headset’s ﬁeld of view. 2) We rethink
input representations for headset-based ego-pose estimation and introduce a novel global motion decomposition method that predicts full-body
pose independent of global positions. 3) We enhance pose estimation by
capturing longer motion time series through an eﬃcient SlowFast module
design that maintains computational eﬃciency. 4) EgoPoser generalizes
across various body shapes for diﬀerent users. We experimentally evaluate our method and show that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods
both qualitatively and quantitatively while maintaining a high inference
speed of over 600 fps. EgoPoser establishes a robust baseline for future
work where full-body pose estimation no longer needs to rely on outsidein capture and can scale to large-scale and unseen environments.
Keywords: Human Pose Estimation · Egocentric Vision · Mixed
Reality

1

Introduction

Current Mixed Reality (MR) systems such as Microsoft HoloLens, Meta Quest,
and Apple Vision Pro derive tracking cues and user input mainly from a headworn platform. The cameras inside these devices observe the environment as
well as the user’s hand motions when inside the ﬁeld of view (FoV) [17,18]. This
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 277–294, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_16

