Improving Adversarial Transferability via
Model Alignment
Avery Ma1,2 , Amir-massoud Farahmand1,2 , Yangchen Pan3 ,
Philip Torr3 , and Jindong Gu3
1

A

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
ama@cs.toronto.edu
2
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Summary of the Supplementary Material

The supplementary material is organized as follows. In Appendix B, we first
describe the implementation details, including the exact optimization schedule,
model architectures, data augmentations, attack algorithms, and methods for
alignment in the embedding space. In Appendix C, we discuss additional empirical studies on understanding the model alignment process. Finally, additional
experiment results and discussions are included in Appendix D.

B

Implementation Details

For all models considered in our paper, we adhere to the optimization configurations as detailed in the official PyTorch repository4 .
CNN-based models: All CNN-based models are trained using the same configurations. Those models include ResNet18 (Res18), ResNet50 (Res50), ResNet101
(Res101), VGG19, DenseNet121 (DN121), and Inception-v3 (IncV3). They are
trained for 90 epochs using SGD with an initial learning rate of 0.1 and a momentum coefficient of 0.9. We start training with a 5-epoch learning rate warmup,
followed by a cosine decay schedule. The batch size is set at 256.
ViT-based models: The ViT-based models include ViT-T/16, ViT-S/16, ViTB/16, and Swin Transformers (SWIN). They are all trained for 300 epochs using
AdamW. The initial learning rates are set at 0.003 for ViT models and 0.001
for SWIN. For the ViT’s, training begins with a 30-epoch learning rate warmup,
followed by a cosine decay schedule, whereas for SWIN, the warmup is 20 epochs.
The batch size is set at 1024. We use label smoothing during training. To ensure
training stability, the global gradient norm is clipped at 1.
Data augmentations: For the training of all CNN-based models, augmentation
techniques are random resizing, cropping, and flipping. For the training of all
ViT-based models, we further incorporate Mixup [20] and Cutmix [19]. Only
random resizing, cropping and flipping are used during the alignment process.
4

https://github.com/pytorch/vision/tree/main/references/classification

