DreamDrone: Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
are Zero-shot Perpetual View Generators
— Supplement Material —
Hanyang Kong1 , Dongze Lian1 , Michael Bi Mi2 , and Xinchao Wang1⋆
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
Huawei International Pte. Ltd., Singapore
hanyang.k@u.nus.edu, dzlianx@gmail.com, xinchao@nus.edu.sg
2

In this supplementary material, we provide more comprehensive ablation
studies, comparisons of visual results with text-to-video methods, and additional
visual results of our method. Finally, we discuss the limitations and social impact
of this approach.

1

Implementation details

We take Stable Diffusion [7] with the pre-trained weights from version 2.13 as the
basic text-to-image diffusion and MiDas [6] with weights dpt_beit_large_5124 .
The overall diffusion timesteps is 1000. We warp the latent code at timestep
t1 =21 and add more degrees of noise to timestep t2 =441. The threshold σ for
high-pass filter is 20 and the hyper-parameter λ for feature-correspondence guidance is 300. We conducted the experiments on Titan-RTX GPU. The generated
speed is roughly 15 seconds per image.

2

Ablation studies

In this section, we first provide additional ablation results for Fig. 1 as referenced
from Fig. 3 in the main text. To enhance the robustness of our ablations, we
include one example for each experimental setup. The comprehensive results of
the ablation study for each component are illustrated in Fig. 1. For quantitative
results, please refer to Tab. 1 in the main text. The simplest method for tasks
involving infinite scene generation is frame-by-frame image warping. However,
this approach is impractical, as is the direct warping of the latent code. Warping
images results in non-integer pixel coordinates, which leads to interpolationinduced blurring and distortion. Furthermore, these errors accumulate with each
generated frame, causing a significant degradation in quality, with the images
becoming progressively blurred, as shown in warp image and warp latent in
Fig. 1.
⋆

Corresponding author.
https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-base
4
https://github.com/isl-org/MiDaS
3

