–Supplementary Material–
UniMD: Towards Unifying Moment Retrieval and
Temporal Action Detection
Yingsen Zeng, Yujie Zhong , Chengjian Feng, and Lin Ma
Meituan Inc.

1

Appendix

In the appendix, we describe (1) more details about three paired datasets (Section A), (2) details about implementation (Section B), (3) additional ablation
experiments (Section C), and (4) qualitative results (Section D). For sections,
figures, tables, and equations, we use numbers (e.g. Sec. 1) to refer to the main
paper and capital letters (e.g. Sec. A) to refer to this appendix.

A

Details About Datasets

Statistical analysis of three paired datasets. (1) Ego4D [3] is a large-scale
first-person video dataset that consists of ∼3000 hours of egocentric videos. The
TAD task of Ego4D includes 110 action categories. Specifically, the TAD task
has an average of 9.2 instances per video across 2k videos, while the MR task
has an average of 10.2 instances per video across 1.3k videos. (2) Charades
and Charades-STA. Charades [7] is a large-scale dataset that consists of 9.8k
videos, with an average duration of 30 seconds. The dataset includes a total of
157 action categories that are densely labeled in the videos. Charades-STA [2],
an extension of Charades, introduces natural language descriptions as annotations. Charades-STA consists of 6.6k videos, with the same average duration as
Charades. (3) ANet and ANet-Caption. ActivityNet (ANet) [1] contains 200
action categories and ∼20,000 videos. Additionally, ActivityNet-Caption (ANetCaption) [5] is built upon ANet, including descriptions of events and their corresponding timestamps. ANet-Caption also comprises ∼20,000 videos, having the
same average duration of 118 seconds as ANet.
However, the proportion of overlapping videos between the TAD
and MR tasks varies across datasets, as shown in Table A. In Ego4D,
there is a minimal overlap of only ∼2%. Conversely, ANet exhibits a substantial
overlap, with more than 99% of the videos being shared. In the Charades, all
of the videos from Charades-STA are included, while Charades-STA covers 67%
of the videos in Charades. Since each pair of datasets shares the same video
source, the duration of the videos in TAD is approximately identical to that in
MR. In addition, there are notable differences in the number of instances and
average instance duration. In Ego4D, despite having similar average instance

