DeViSE: A Deep Visual-Semantic Embedding Model

Andrea Frome*, Greg S. Corrado*, Jonathon Shlens*, Samy Bengio
Jeffrey Dean, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Tomas Mikolov
* These authors contributed equally.
{afrome, gcorrado, shlens, bengio, jeff, ranzato†, tmikolov}@google.com

Google, Inc.
Mountain View, CA, USA

Abstract
Modern visual recognition systems are often limited in their ability to scale to
large numbers of object categories. This limitation is in part due to the increasing
difficulty of acquiring sufficient training data in the form of labeled images as the
number of object categories grows. One remedy is to leverage data from other
sources – such as text data – both to train visual models and to constrain their predictions. In this paper we present a new deep visual-semantic embedding model
trained to identify visual objects using both labeled image data as well as semantic information gleaned from unannotated text. We demonstrate that this model
matches state-of-the-art performance on the 1000-class ImageNet object recognition challenge while making more semantically reasonable errors, and also show
that the semantic information can be exploited to make predictions about tens
of thousands of image labels not observed during training. Semantic knowledge
improves such zero-shot predictions achieving hit rates of up to 18% across thousands of novel labels never seen by the visual model.

1

Introduction

The visual world is populated with a vast number of objects, the most appropriate labeling of which
is often ambiguous, task specific, or admits multiple equally correct answers. Yet state-of-theart vision systems attempt to solve recognition tasks by artificially assigning images to a small
number of rigidly defined classes. This has led to building labeled image data sets according to
these artificial categories and in turn to building visual recognition systems based on N-way discrete
classifiers. While growing the number of labels and labeled images has improved the utility of
visual recognition systems [7], scaling such systems beyond a limited number of discrete categories
remains an unsolved problem. This problem is exacerbated by the fact that N-way discrete classifiers
treat all labels as disconnected and unrelated, resulting in visual recognition systems that cannot
transfer semantic information about learned labels to unseen words or phrases. One way of dealing
with this issue is to respect the natural continuity of visual space instead of artificially partitioning
it into disjoint categories [20].
We propose an approach that addresses these shortcomings by training a visual recognition model
with both labeled images and a comparatively large and independent dataset – semantic information
from unannotated text data. This deep visual-semantic embedding model (DeViSE) leverages textual
data to learn semantic relationships between labels, and explicitly maps images into a rich semantic
embedding space. We show that this model performs comparably to state-of-the-art visual object
classifiers when trained and evaluated on flat 1-of-N metrics, while simultaneously making fewer
semantically unreasonable mistakes along the way. Furthermore, we show that the model leverages
†

Current affiliation: Facebook, Inc.

1

