1

A

Experimental settings

A.1

IID and non-IID Datasets

Following previous work [4, 5], in different datasets for classification tasks, if
there are C classes, we construct C groups. The probability of a training sample
1−q
with label k assigned to group k is q > 0 and to other group is C−1
. Each client
randomly chooses one group and samples a certain number of samples uniformly
from this group for its local dataset. The probability q controls the degree of
non-IID. If q = C1 , the dataset for each client is IID. For the root dataset, we
randomly sample a certain number of samples from the training dataset with a
bias probability p whose meaning is similar to q and then split the rest for each
client in the way mentioned above.
We use Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 dataset [7] as the evaluation datasets, which have been widely used in prior FL studies. The FashionMNIST dataset consists of a 60K image samples training set and a 10K samples
test set, where each image is associated with a label from 10 classes. The CIFAR10 dataset composes 50K training images and 10K test images in 10 classes.
They are colorful with three channels, and have varying object scales. Similar
to CIFAR-10, the CIFAR-100 dataset comprises 100 classes with 600 images in
each class, totaling 500 training images and 100 testing images per class. For all
three datasets, we use q = 0.5 to conduct the non-IID experiments as [5]. By
setting q = 0.1, we also conduct the IID experiments in §B.1 as [13].
A.2

Details for baseline attacks

The experiments cover untargeted and targeted attacks, including the following
baselines:
– Fang attack [5]: Fang attack maximizes the deviation of the global model
towards the opposite direction of the unattacked global model update. By
using Trim and Krum as the aggregation algorithm in the attack, we obtain
two different attacks: Fang-Trim and Fang-Krum.
– Label-flipped (LF) [14]: Following the same setting as Fang [5], we flip
label k to C−k−1 for each sample on malicious clients, where k ∈ {0, . . . , C−
1} and C denotes the total number of dataset classes.
– AGR-agnostic [13], i.e., Aggregation algorithm agnostic attack, aims to
limit the range of malicious updates and maximize the perturbation. It has
two variants: Min-Max attack restricts the range based on the maximum
value of the L-2 distance between any pair of benign model updates. MinSum attack is based on the minimum value of the sum of squares of the
distances between any benign model update and all other benign model
updates.
– Scaling attack [1]: Scaling attack is a targeted backdoor attack. It poisons
the local dataset with trigger-embedded samples and scales up the model
updates before sending them to the server. We use the same pattern trigger
in LIE [2] and follow the same data augmentation scheme as FLTrust [4].

