CAT-SAM: Conditional Tuning for Few-Shot
Adaptation of Segment Anything Model
(Appendix)
Aoran Xiao1∗ , Weihao Xuan2,3∗ , Heli Qi4 , Yun Xing1 , Ruijie Ren5 ,
Xiaoqin Zhang6 , Ling Shao7 , and Shijian Lu1†
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
The University of Tokyo, Japan
3
RIKEN AIP, Japan
4
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
5
Waseda University, Japan
6
Zhejiang University of Technology, China
7
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, UCAS, China

1

Implementation Details

We provide supplementary training details beyond Section 4 of the submitted
manuscript. Across all experiments, we employ the AdamW optimizer. The learning rate and weight decay are set at 1 × 10−3 and 1 × 10−4 , respectively. We
implement the cosine annealing strategy as the scheduler, with a minimum learning rate of 1 × 10−5 . Our experiments are conducted using NVIDIA RTX A6000
GPU with 48GB of memory, where a single GPU is utilized for 1-shot adaptation and 4 GPUs for 16-shot and full-shot adaptation. In addition, for the
extremely fine-grained experiments conducted on HQ-Seg44k, we adopted the
same settings as in [3] for fair comparisons.
For segmentation experiments over WHU, Kvasir, SBU-Shadow, MA. Roads
and HRSID, we train 1000 epochs with a batch size of 1 for 1-shot adaptation, 200 epochs with a batch size of 4 for 16-shot adaptation, and 30 epochs
for the full-shot adaptation with a batch size of 4. Table 4 at the end of this
appendix lists the names of the used few-shot training samples. We apply random vertical/horizontal flipping and random cropping on each dataset for data
augmentation. For input geometrical prompts, we employ the same strategy as
HQ-SAM [3] by randomly assigning a point, box, or coarse mask for each object.
We adopted the same training epochs and batch sizes for segmentation experiments on FLS and JSRT, except that we trained 500 epochs on 16-shot
adaptation for FLS. For data augmentation, we adopted horizontal flipping only
due to the unique geometric structures of the two datasets.

2

Mask Decoder Details

As depicted in Fig. 1, we freeze the entire decoder of SAM and introduce a
learnable CAT-token (1 × 256). This token is concatenated with the output

