UPose3D: Uncertainty-Aware 3D Human Pose
Estimation with Cross-View and Temporal Cues
Vandad Davoodnia1,2 , Saeed Ghorbani2 , Marc-André Carbonneau2 ,
Alexandre Messier2 , and Ali Etemad1
1

Queen’s University, Canada
Ubisoft LaForge, Canada
{vandad.davoodnia,ali.etemad}@queensu.ca
{saeed.ghorbani,marc-andre.carbonneau2,alexandre.messier}@ubisoft.com
2

1

Additional Details

1.1

Details on Training and Multi-view Data Synthesis

Let r ∈ RT ×3 , Θ ∈ RT ×55×3×3 , and β ∈ R16 be root position, body joint rotation
matrices in a temporal window of length T , and shape parameters from human
motion capture data. We begin our multi-view data generation by augmenting
the shape parameters with Gaussian noise with a standard deviation equal to
the standard deviation of all shape parameters within the datasets. Next, we
apply mediolateral mirroring with a 50% chance and randomly rotate the motion sequence around its center. We pass the augmented {r, Θ, β} parameters
to the forward-kinematic layer of the SMPL body model to obtain 3D vertices.
Lastly, we use a dataset-specific joint regressor on the vertices to extract the 3D
keypoints used in the next steps of our pipeline.
Next, we simulate a multi-camera recording setup by randomly positioning
several cameras in cylindrical space. As depicted in Fig. 1-a, we randomly choose
a recording volume size that encircles the space occupied by the human body. To
ensure that the subject appears in most cameras, we select the tilt, pitch, and
yaw so that they look at a random point in the center of the recording volume
while maintaining the correct up direction. Additionally, we limit the camera
height to mimic typical multi-view video recording setups.
After obtaining the camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters, we project
the 3D body keypoints onto each camera view (see Fig. 1-b). We use these 2D
keypoints as ground truths µg to train our pose compiler (see Fig. 1-c). We
then add 2D point corruptions to the 2D keypoints, including Gaussian noise
with varying standard deviations, simulated occlusions with varying sizes and
probabilities, mediolateral flipping, and occasional truncation effects (see Fig. 1d). Next, we obtain the cross-view projected keypoints (see Fig. 1-e) via the
algorithm described in Sec. 3.2 in the main paper. Finally, we train our pose
compiler using the ground-truth keypoints and point clouds containing noisy 2D
data, as depicted in Fig. 2.

