Supplementary Material for Cascade-Zero123:
One Image to Highly Consistent 3D with
Self-Prompted Nearby Views
Yabo Chen1* , Jiemin Fang2*† , Yuyang Huang1 , Taoran Yi3 , Xiaopeng
Zhang2B , Lingxi Xie2 , Xinggang Wang3 , Wenrui Dai1B , Hongkai Xiong1 , and
Qi Tian2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Huawei Inc., Shenzhen, China
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{chenyabo, huangyuyang, daiwenrui, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
jaminfong@gmail.com, {taoranyi, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn
zxphistory@gmail.com, 198808xc@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

1

Appendix

1.1

Ablation Studies

As shown in Table 1, in the ablation study, we provide a detailed explanation
for the effectiveness of our method, Cascade-Zero123, based on the following aspects. Firstly we will study whether nearby views perform better than randomly
selected views or larger rotated views. Then we will study the impact of having
larger rotated prompted condition views. We will also explore the effects of not
using the Exponential Moving Average (EMA) and coarse target views. All the
experiments presented below were conducted using the same model, pretraining
for 12k iterations on 800K samples from the Objaverse dataset. We experiment
with the same testing protocol on the Objaverse testset.
Effects of Self-Prompted Structre First, we will validate the difference between
incorporating prompted views as inputs to the second-stage model compared
to using only the fully trained first-stage model. This analysis will measure the
gain achieved by the design of Cascade-Zero123 over the standalone Zero123-XL
model. We will then explore various ablations of self-prompted views, including completely random prompted views, denoted as "prompted random views";
inputting images from surrounding viewpoints, specifically inputting images generated by the Base-0123 at [90◦ , 180◦ , 270◦ ] angles as the condition images for
the second stage, denoted as "prompted larger views"; and the effects of having more prompted views on the second-stage model. In practice, we selected
the azimuth angles of [−135◦ , −90◦ , −45◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ , 135◦ ] and elevation angles of
*

Equal contribution. † Project lead.
Correspondence to Xiaopeng Zhang and Wenrui Dai.

B

