Supplementary Materials for
Beyond the Contact: Discovering Comprehensive
Affordance for 3D Objects from Pre-trained 2D
Diffusion Models
Hyeonwoo Kim1∗ , Sookwan Han1∗ , Patrick Kwon2 , and Hanbyul Joo1
1

A

Seoul National University
2
Naver Webtoon AI

Implementation Details

We provide further details on the implementations of our pipeline (Sec. 3.1∼3.2)
and the formulation of ComA (Sec. 3.3) in our main paper.
A.1

Rendering Object from Multi-Viewpoints

For static type objects, we install 8 weak perspective cameras around the object
with 45◦ azimuth intervals. For dynamic type objects, we install 4 weak perspective cameras with 90◦ azimuth intervals. The elevation is set constant within [0◦ ,
30◦ ] range, where the values differ by category. For dynamic objects, we perturb
the object with random rotations and translations. Specifically, we uniformly
sample the rotation in the form of euler angle, where yaw, pitch, and roll are
uniformly sampled from a predefined range. Random translations are sampled
in a similar way, where each component of 3D displacement is sampled from a
predefined range. Note that we set weak perspective camera scale and additional
z-direction displacement of camera as hyperparameters. We repeat the rendering
procedures 10 times with different perturbations, resulting in 40 distinct views.
A.2

Inpainting Mask Selection

Via thorough experiments, while the inpainting pipeline is quite robust to initial
masks, we found that initial mask selection is beneficial for avoiding failure cases
as shown in Fig. S.1. Specifically, we build strategies for selecting appropriate
positions and sizes of masks to prevent generating: (1) hallucinated objects,
which typically occurs when initial mask do not overlap with the rendered object;
(2) ambiguous interactions, when inpainting masks are too small compared to
the object, generating humans ignoring the relative scale with respect to object.
The strategy starts by rendering the inpainting masks while rendering the
object, using the same camera parameters. For each camera, we place an upright
*

Indicates equal contribution

