Improved Deep Metric Learning with
Multi-class N-pair Loss Objective

Kihyuk Sohn
NEC Laboratories America, Inc.
ksohn@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Deep metric learning has gained much popularity in recent years, following the
success of deep learning. However, existing frameworks of deep metric learning
based on contrastive loss and triplet loss often suffer from slow convergence, partially because they employ only one negative example while not interacting with
the other negative classes in each update. In this paper, we propose to address
this problem with a new metric learning objective called multi-class N -pair loss.
The proposed objective function firstly generalizes triplet loss by allowing joint
comparison among more than one negative examples – more specifically, N -1
negative examples – and secondly reduces the computational burden of evaluating
deep embedding vectors via an efficient batch construction strategy using only N
pairs of examples, instead of (N +1)×N . We demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed loss to the triplet loss as well as other competing loss functions for a
variety of tasks on several visual recognition benchmark, including fine-grained
object recognition and verification, image clustering and retrieval, and face verification and identification.

1

Introduction

Distance metric learning aims to learn an embedding representation of the data that preserves
the distance between similar data points close and dissimilar data points far on the embedding
space [15, 30]. With success of deep learning [13, 20, 23, 5], deep metric learning has received
a lot of attention. Compared to standard distance metric learning, it learns a nonlinear embedding
of the data using deep neural networks, and it has shown a significant benefit by learning deep
representation using contrastive loss [3, 7] or triplet loss [27, 2] for applications such as face recognition [24, 22, 19] and image retrieval [26]. Although yielding promising progress, such frameworks often suffer from slow convergence and poor local optima, partially due to that the loss function employs only one negative example while not interacting with the other negative classes per
each update. Hard negative data mining could alleviate the problem, but it is expensive to evaluate
embedding vectors in deep learning framework during hard negative example search. As to experimental results, only a few has reported strong empirical performance using these loss functions
alone [19, 26], but many have combined with softmax loss to train deep networks [22, 31, 18, 14, 32].
To address this problem, we propose an (N +1)-tuplet loss that optimizes to identify a positive example from N -1 negative examples. Our proposed loss extends triplet loss by allowing joint comparison among more than one negative examples; when N =2, it is equivalent to triplet loss. One
immediate concern with (N +1)-tuplet loss is that it quickly becomes intractable when scaling up
since the number of examples to evaluate in each batch grows in quadratic to the number of tuplets
and their length N . To overcome this, we propose an efficient batch construction method that only
requires 2N examples instead of (N +1)N to build N tuplets of length N +1. We unify the (N +1)tuplet loss with our proposed batch construction method to form a novel, scalable and effective deep
metric learning objective, called multi-class N -pair loss (N -pair-mc loss). Since the N -pair-mc
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

