Contrastive Learning with Synthetic Positives

A

Appendix

A.1

Alternative Positive Generation Methods

19

cluster head
semantic
embedding

SSL
Encoder

anchor

SSL
Encoder

anchor

pre-trained

pre-trained

Conditional DDPM

Conditional DDPM

noise

…

clusters

noise

(a)

(b)

Fig. A.1: Alternative positive generation methods. (a) RCG, using a pre-trained SSL
encoder to generate semantic embedding of the anchor image as the condition to guide
diffusion sampling. (b) RCG-cluster, using an unsupervised cluster head to cluster the
embeddings in RCG and then using the cluster output as the condition.

In this section, we discuss two alternative positive generation methods using
the diffusion model and compare them with our proposed CLSP. (1) Similar to
the idea in [33], we use an image encoder (pre-trained by any SSL method) to
transfer the raw image distribution to a low-dimensional semantic embedding.
Subsequently, we train a conditional diffusion model to map a noise distribution to the image distribution conditioned on the semantic embedding. This
approach, termed RCG, is illustrated in Fig. A.1(a). Due to the influence of
semantic embedding on the diffusion sampling process, the resulting synthetic
images typically contain similar semantic content to that of the anchor image
and can be used as additional positives. However, one of the key drawbacks of
RCG is that the synthetic positives often closely resemble the anchor image, potentially diminishing the benefits of learning these "easy" positives compared to
CLSP. As can be seen in Fig. A.2, RCG-generated images exhibit a higher visual
similarity to the anchor images, with less variation in semantic content. (2) To
mitigate the aforementioned limitation in RCG, we can use a cluster head (e.g.,
MLP) to cluster the semantic embeddings generated in RCG to distinct clusters
and then use these clusters as the conditional to guide diffusion sampling. We
name this method RCG-cluster (Fig. A.1(b)). The idea is inspired by the class
conditional diffusion model [24], where a pre-trained model can generate diverse
images belonging to a specific class given its label. In RCG-cluster, the cluster
head is trained using unsupervised learning techniques such as k-means, and the
resulting clusters serve as conditions similar to those in the class conditional
diffusion model. RCG-cluster has the potential to generate even more diverse
positives than CLSP because the generated images are not explicitly correlated
with the semantic embedding of the anchor image. However, it may introduce
an increased risk of false positives when the anchor image is not mapped into
the right cluster (Fig. A.2).

