MotionChain: Conversational Motion Controllers via
Multimodal Prompts
Biao Jiang1,2 * , Xin Chen2† , Chi Zhang2 , Fukun Yin1 , Zhuoyuan Li1 ,
Gang Yu2 , and Jiayuan Fan1‡
1

Fudan University
2
Tencent

This appendix provides several additional experiments (Sec. A), more qualitative
results (Sec. B), model implementation details (Sec. C), evaluations of inference time
(Sec. D), protocol for the motion conversation evaluation (Sec. E), details of motion
representations (Sec. F), metric definitions (Sec. G).

A

Additional Experiments

We conducted a comprehensive series of experiments to evaluate the efficacy of the proposed MotionChain models further. Specifically, we evaluate each specific comparison
on text-to-motion (Sec. A.1), motion-to-text (Sec. A.2), and motion prediction (Sec. A.3)
on the HumnaML3D [6] dataset. Additionally, we present an ablation study focusing on
the effectiveness of our motion tokenizer (Sec. A.5) and the integration of motion tokens
within the language model (Sec. A.6).
A.1

Comparisons on Text-to-Motion

The text-to-motion task showcases our MotionGPT model’s capability in generating
human-like movements based on textual inputs. Evaluations were performed on MotionChain against current state-of-the-art methods [6, 7, 10, 32, 34, 36], on the HumanML3D [6] dataset according to established metrics [6]. The evaluation results,
featuring a 95% confidence interval from 20 runs, largely draw from data reported
in the cited works. The comparative outcomes, summarized in Tab. 5, demonstrating
MotionChain’s competitive performance across numerous metrics.
A.2

Comparisons on Motion-to-Text

In the motion-to-text task, the goal is to generate descriptive text based on sequences of
human motion. We evaluate the proposed MotionChain, contrasting it with TM2T [7] and
MotionGPT [10] on the HumanML3D dataset and adhering to the evaluation metrics used
in [7, 10]. Following [10], we leverages the original ground truth texts for evaluation,
ensuring a more comprehensive assessment . Assessments in Tab. 6 demonstrate that
MotionChain outperforms the recent methods in generating text descriptions of human
motions on most benchmarks.
* Work done while Biao Jiang was a Research Intern with Tencent.
†
‡

Project lead.
Corresponding author.

