Supplemental Material for
NeRF-XL: NeRF at Any Scale with Multi-GPU
Ruilong Li1,2 , Sanja Fidler1 , Angjoo Kanazawa2 , and Francis Williams1
1
2

1

NVIDIA
UC Berkeley

Implementation Details

In this section, we elaborate on the implementation intricacies of our multiGPU NeRF representation, multi-GPU volume rendering and distortion loss, as
well as the spatial partitioning strategy we employed. Additionally, we outline
detailed differences between the baseline approaches and our method from the
implementation perspective.
1.1

NeRF Representation

Our experiments are all conducted with the hash-grid based NeRF representation
introduced in Instant-NGP [3]. In single GPU experiments, we adhere to the
original configuration of Instant-NGP. This entails predicting sample density
through hash encoding followed by a one-layer MLP, and predicting sample color
through another two-layer MLP. The latter is conditioned on the view direction
and, optionally, an appearance embedding.
In the multi-GPU joint training scenario, we assign each GPU a NeRF with
its own independent hash encoding and density MLP. However, for the color
MLP, we adopt a different approach. As the sample color is conditioned on
the view direction and optionally an appearance embedding, which can be out
of training distribution during novel-view rendering, independent color MLPs
will lead to inconsistent color prediction given the same input. Thus we adopt
parameter sharing across all GPUs for the color MLP utilizing Distributed Data
Parallel (DDP), to ensure consistent interpretation of novel view direction and
appearance embedding among all GPUs. Notably, when enabled during training,
an appearance embedding of zero is utilized for rendering novel-view images.
Similarly, when camera optimization is enabled, the camera pose embedding of
each camera is also shared across GPUs.
While our experiments specifically focus on the Instant-NGP representation,
we believe our approach can be generalized to many other NeRF representations. The Instant-NGP representation combines grid-based and MLP elements,
suggesting that our multi-GPU distribution strategy is applicable to both gridbased and MLP-based NeRFs, as long as each NeRF is confined within a nonoverlapping bounding box for proper integration. In essence, regardless of which

