Supplementary Material
Revising Densification in Gaussian Splatting
Samuel Rota Bulò

, Lorenzo Porzi

, and Peter Kontschieder

Meta Reality Labs Zurich

Abstract. This document provides the following supplementary contributions to our main ECCV 2024 submission:
– finer-grained analysis of the MipNeRF360 results
– failure case of standard Gaussian splatting even with 10M primitives
– ablation with a different densification guiding error
– additional experimental results on NeRF-synthetic
– discussion about metrics and perceived quality.

1

Finer-grained analysis of the MipNeRF360 results

In this section, we provide quantitative results on the MipNeRF360 dataset
broken down into per-scene scores. We report PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS scores
averaged over 5 runs with standard deviations. In Tab. 1, we compare the performance of our method against standard Gaussian splatting, while in Tab. 2 we
compare the respective Mip variants. For a fair comparison, we fix the maximum
number of primitives for our method to the median number of primitives of the
5 runs of the baseline.
As we can read from both tables, our method outperforms the baselines on
all scenes and all metrics, expecting 3 cases: PSNR on flowers and PSNR+SSIM
on treehill. In particular, we observe significant gains in terms of LPIPS, which
better correlates with the perceptual similarity. Indeed, in the two scenes (flowers
and treehill) where PSNR is worse but LPIPS is better than the baseline, our
renderings look visually better (see e.g. Fig.1 in the main paper).
In Fig. 1 we provide additional qualitative results with highligths on some
scenes from the Tanks and Temples and MipNeRF360 datasets.

2

Failure of standard Gaussian Splatting even with 10M
splats.

We test the hypothesis that the standard Gaussian Splatting (GS) densification
logic fails to densify the MipNeRF360-Flowers scene even with 10M primitives.
In order to enable GS to reach the desired number of primitives, we bypass
the thresholding mechanism and use instead our proposed growing strategy. In
Fig. 2, we report the qualitative results on a particularly difficult validation view
for GS. On the left, we see the outcome by using the standard GS algorithm,

