CarFormer

1

CarFormer: Self-Driving with Learned
Object-Centric Representations
Supplementary Material
Abstract. In this Supplementary, we first provide the details about
the architecture (Section 1) and training (Section 2) for reproducibility.
We then provide additional quantitative results in Section 3 on ablating our decision to use a lighter architecture in slot extraction and on
the effect of enlarging slots and block attention in terms of forecasting
performance. We also report the inference time and the number of
parameters of our model at the end of Section 3. We visually compare slot reconstructions between different versions of SAVi as well as
forecasting results by our model to ground truth and SAVi in Section 4.
Finally, we provide a road map for future work to autoregressively generate rollouts with block attention in Section 5. Please also see the video
in the zip for a visualization of our model’s driving performance.

1

Architectural Details

Slot Extraction: To extract slots, we build on SAVi [32] based on its implementation in [51]. Additionally, we process the input BEV representations by
assigning a different color to each vehicle, which we found to help in slot extraction. To color the vehicles, we sample a random color per vehicle from a set of
14 colors and fix this color by the vehicle ID. To use enlargement, we enlarge
any vehicles that are less than 4.9m × 2.12m to 4.9m × 2.12m. In the absence
of privileged information, we detect vehicles in BEV space by finding connected
components in the BEV occupancy grid. Then, to enlarge vehicles, we continuously dilate the connected component until we surpass an area threshold. We
experimentally set this area threshold to 8m2 , corresponding to 200 pixels in
our 5 pixels per meter setting. To randomly color objects, we similarly assign
a random color per connected component. To maintain color per vehicle across
time steps, we compare the current BEV to the previous time step and reuse the
color of the previous connected component if the previous connected component
covers over 50% of the area of the current connected component.
We provide the hyper-parameters for different versions of the model in Table 8. Due to computational requirements increasing with the number of slots, we
proposed a lighter version of the base SAVi model we start with. In the light version, we reduced the number of parameters in the decoder and the encoder MLP.
Using the lighter version, we train SAVi with up to 30 slots in our experiments.
We highlight the differences between the versions in bold in Table 8.
Quantization: We quantize the traffic light status, speed, waypoints, and target points using k-means to assign them to the cluster index. For waypoints

