Supplementary Material for
Learning Unsigned Distance Functions from
Multi-view Images with Volume Rendering Priors
Wenyuan Zhang1 , Kanle Shi2 , Yu-Shen Liu1(

)

, and Zhizhong Han3

1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zhangwen21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Kuaishou Technology
shikanle@kuaishou.com
3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
h312h@wayne.edu

1

Overview

This supplementary material consists of additional results and implementation
details. Section 2 provides implementation details, including metrics, network
structures, progressive learning strategy and data preparation. Section 3 provides
additional experimental results. Section 4 discusses the limitations and future
works.

2

Implementation Details

2.1

Metrics

For DTU dataset and DF3D dataset, we use Chamfer Distance (CD) as the metric. For Replica dataset, we report CD, Normal Consistency (N.C.) and F1-score
following previous works [2,15]. We use the algorithm introduced in MeshUDF [3]
to extract surfaces from unsigned distance fields. To evaluate the reconstructed
meshes in Replica dataset, we use the ground truth trajectory of the ground
truth depth maps to detect the vertices which are visible by at least one camera.
Triangles which have no visible vertices, either due to not being in any of the
view frustum or due to being occluded by other surfaces, are culled. The point
cloud to be evaluated is sampled on the culled mesh with a density of 1 point
per square centimetre. The definitions of the metrics are the same as in [15].
2.2

Network Structures

We implement our volume rendering priors network fw as a 6-layer MLP with
256 hidden units and skip connections. We set both learning rate and weight
decay to 1 × 10−4 for fw and train the network for 100k iterations with a batch
size of 512. Similar to previous work [8,14], we model the UDF function fu as an
8-layer MLP with 256 hidden units and skip connections, and the color function

