Supplementary material: AFF-ttention!
Affordances and Attention models for Short-Term
Object Interaction Anticipation
Lorenzo Mur-Labadia1 , Ruben Martinez-Cantin1 , Jose J.Guerrero1 , Giovanni
Maria Farinella2 , and Antonino Furnari2
1

University of Zaragoza, Spain
{lmur, rmcantin, jguerrer}@unizar.es
2
University of Catania, Italy
{giovanni.farinella, antonino.furnari}@unict.it

1

Datasets

We validate our method on Ego4D [4] and EPIC-Kitchens [1], two large-scale
datasets of egocentric videos with high diversity and long-tail distributions of
verbs and nouns classes.
Ego4D We consider both the first and second versions of Ego4D STA annotations. Version 1 (v1) of the Ego4D STA split is composed of 27,801 training
17,217 validation and 19,870 test instances with 87 noun and 74 verb categories.
Version 2 (v2) extends v1 with additional videos and annotations, for a total of
98,276 training, 47,385 validation and 19,870 test videos, with a taxonomy of
128 nouns and 81 verb classes. Ego4D STA contains a single test split which is
compatible with v1 and v2, hence models trained on either versions can be compared on the same test split, with methods trained on v2 generally performing
better thanks to the extended annotations.
EPIC-Kitchens Since Ego4D is the only dataset containing STA annotations
to date, we contribute a second benchmark by extending over action and object
annotations available in the popular EPIC-Kitchens dataset [1]. The extended
annotations are obtained by post-processing and filtering existing active object
and action segment annotations available in the EPIC-KITCHENS dataset. STA
annotations are obtained in four stages. In the first stage, we process active object
bounding box annotations to form object tracks. This is done by merging in the
same track neighbouring annotations related to the same object class. Since
annotators have been instructed to label all instances of the active object (e.g.,
all instances of “plate“), we removed all tracks containing frames with more than
one labeled bounding box for the same object class. In the second stage, each
object track is matched to one of the annotated action segments. Specifically,
if an action segment including the same noun as the object track is found, this
is matched to the object track. In the third stage, we truncate object tracks so
that they do not include the action. This is done because we are interested in

