PointLLM: Empowering Large Language Models to Understand
Point Clouds
Supplementary Material
Table 1. Statistics of our point-text instruction following data.

Appendix

Statistics

A. Data Collection

1

B. Benchmarks and Evaluation
B.1. Discussions about Close-Set Classification .
B.2. GPT Evaluation Prompts . . . . . . . . . . .
B.3. Human Verification of GPT Evaluation . . .
B.4. Human Scoring Criteria . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
2
2
2

C. Implementation and Training

3

D. Win Rate Comparison

3

E. Qualitative Results

3

B. Benchmarks and Evaluation

F. Text-to-3D Generation

4

B.1. Discussions about Close-Set Classification

Number of all samples
- brief-description type
- detailed-description type
- single-round type
- multi-round type
- multi-round responses
Avg. len. of all instruction/responses (in words)
- brief-description type
- detailed-description type
- single-round type
- multi-round type

731851
661577
15055
40122
15097
45287
11/17
11/15
9/82
10/15
10/21

Initially, we consider formatting the close-set zero-shot
classification task on ModelNet40[20] as a multiple-choice
problem, including indexed candidate category names in
the prompt, and prompting our model to select one of the
40 categories given the point cloud as input. However,
since our model is not designed for multiple-choice problems but for real-world usage where it can generate any
word or phrase as output, we cannot directly parse its response for evaluation. Therefore, we use ChatGPT as a
post-processor to select one of the ModelNet40 categories
based on the model’s answer. In the meantime, we find that
including category names in the prompt results in meaningless responses from InstructBLIP[2], which is the model we
compare with, making meaningful comparisons challenging. Consequently, we opt for a more generalized prompt,
without including the candidate lists in the prompt. This
allows us to make balanced comparisons.
Including candidate lists in the prompt, we also tried
to calculate the conditional probability of different options
given the model’s output following [19], but this method did
not work well for our model. As our instruction-following
training data lacks such scenarios where it’s needed to
choose from a fixed set of options, our model always produces very low probabilities on these options with biased
results. For example, among the options “00” to “39”,
our model predicts very low probabilities and among these
low probabilities, “00” and “39” are the highest most of
the time, which leads to biased predictions. Therefore, we
choose to use general prompts and utilize ChatGPT for post-

A. Data Collection
Instruction lists. The 30 pre-defined instructions used to
prompt the model to briefly and elaborately describe the
objects are shown in Tab. 2 and Tab. 3 respectively. These
prompts are generated with the assistance of GPT-4 and are
coupled with captions to form our description-type data.
Data generation with GPT-4. In Tab. 4 we show an example of using GPT-4 for data generation as well as the
system prompt of GPT-4. The input is one human-written
caption provided by Cap3D[14] and the outputs are one expanded detailed caption, three single-round conversations,
and one multi-round conversation. The system prompt is
used for all samples, which guides the model to analyze
existing captions based on the general knowledge of 3D
objects and generate detailed captions, diverse Q&As, and
logically connected multi-round conversations.
Dataset distribution. The comprehensive statistics of our
newly compiled point-text instruction following dataset are
detailed in Tab. 1. The dataset encompasses approximately
730K samples, designed for effective training. Fig. 1 illustrates the length distributions of instructions and responses
across various data types. In Fig. 2, we present word clouds
(after removing generic words like “model”, “object”, etc.)
and verb-noun pair distributions following [18] from our instruction following dataset, highlighting its extensive coverage of diverse topics such as color, shape, usage, material,
and more.
1

