Pose-Aware SSL

1

Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we provide details omitted in the main text
including:
– Section A: Comparison with similar datasets from previous work;
– Section B: Implementation and results of the mid-layer representation compression, where we compress representations with minimal performance drop;
– Section C: Empirical study on the similarity between mid-layer features and
patch embedding;
– Section D: Ablation study on the trajectory loss, non-equidistance pose of
image triplets and the backbone architecture;
– Section E: Additional results on a large-scale dataset Objaverse [19].

A

Dataset Comparison

Our benchmark proposes a dataset generation/rendering configuration that 1)
adheres to the self-supervised learning (SSL) setting where neither semantic nor
geometric labels are used for training; 2) allows evaluation on out-of-domain data
with the introduction of the relative pose. We demonstrate the configuration on
the ShapeNet dataset [8] as an example. There exist similar datasets derived from
ShapeNet, such as 3DIEBench [26] and 3DIdent [59]. Although such datasets are
designed for or suitable for benchmarking SSL geometric representations, we still
provide comparisons in Table 4 given they are also derived from ShapeNet.
Table 4: Comparison with other datasets consisting of rendered images of objects from
ShapeNet [8]. Our dataset 1) does not use pose labels for training and adheres to SSL
geometric representation evaluation setting; 2) enables evaluation on out-of-domain
data; 2) has complete and even pose coverage for rendered images.
Our dataset 3DIEBench 3DIdent
Out-of-domain evaluation Yes
No
No
Pose coverage
(−π, π)
(−π/2, π/2) (−π/2, π/2)
Pose sampling method
even
uneven
uneven
Numer of images
1.5M
2.5M
275k

B

Compressing Mid-Layer Representations

Motivations and Methods. While mid-layer representations in networks like
ResNet18 offer improved pose estimation accuracy, their large dimensions lead to
inefficiencies. For instance, the “conv3” layer’s dimension is twice that of “conv4”
and 32 times larger than the pooled “feature” layer, resulting in inefficiency
due to high dimensionality. To address this, we propose compressing mid-layer

