Supplementary materials for Ex2Eg-MAE
Minh Tran1 , Yelin Kim2 , Che-Chun Su2 , Cheng-Hao Kuo2 , Min Sun2,3 , and
Mohammad Soleymani1
1

A

University of Southern California, Playa Vista, CA, USA
2
Amazon Lab 126, USA
3
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan

Datasets

Ego4D. Ego4D [3] is an extensive dataset of egocentric videos, boasting over
3600 hours of content capturing various daily life activities across diverse settings — households, outdoor environments, workplaces, and more. The dataset
includes recordings from 931 distinct camera wearers across 74 locations. A subset of around 100 hours (with unblurred faces) is dedicated to social interactions,
showcasing natural scenarios like dining, shopping, and board games involving
multiple individuals. Given its real-world setting, the videos exhibit substantial
egomotions and limited face quality. The dataset accommodates 14 challenges
spanning 5 benchmarks. Among these, Look-at-me and Talk-to-me constitute the
social understanding benchmark, designed with the aim of fostering the development of more capable virtual assistants and social robots. The dataset provides
tracked face bounding boxes for all visible faces in each frame for the social
interactions subset.
Talk-to-me: The goal of the talk-to-me task is to identify if a visible face
is talking to the camera wearer, given a corresponding video and audio segment. The talk-to-me’s annotations come from the vocal activity annotation for
the Audio-Visual Diarization (AVD) benchmark, followed by the classification
of whether the speech segment is directed towards the camera wearer. Detailed
statistics of TTM labels are available in the original Ego4D paper [3]. In summary, the training set of TTM contains around 1.2M frames, with around 75%
of them labeled as TTM.
Look-at-me: The goal of the look-at-me task is to identify if a visible face
is looking at the camera wearer, given a corresponding video (and no audio).
The look-at-me’s annotations come from the segment-level annotation of when
an individual is looking at the camera wearer. Detailed statistics of LAM labels
are available in the original Ego4D paper [3]. In summary, the training set of
LAM contains around 7.1M frames (with 7.5% labeled as positive).
For both challenges, a fixed set of 389 clips (32.4 hours) are selected for training, 50 clips (4.2 hours) are selected for validation, and 133 clips (11.1 hours) are
selected for testing. The test set results must be submitted to an independent
server for evaluation purposes45 .
4
5

https://eval.ai/web/challenges/challenge-page/1624/overview
https://eval.ai/web/challenges/challenge-page/1625/overview

