Supplementary Material for
Six-Point Method for Multi-Camera Systems
with Reduced Solution Space
Banglei Guan1⋆ , Ji Zhao2⋆( ) , and Laurent Kneip3
1

College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University
of Defense Technology, China. guanbanglei12@nudt.edu.cn
2
Independent Researcher. Beijing, China. zhaoji84@gmail.com
3
Mobile Perception Lab, ShanghaiTech University, China.
lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Appendix
A

Related Work

Given that each affine correspondence yields three geometric constraints, a minimal solver using two affine correspondences was proposed to estimate the 6DOF
relative pose [3], which is related to our method in this paper. Although both
methods use the classical hidden variable technique to decouple rotation and
the other variables, and use Gröbner basis technique to find algebraic solutions, we clarify that there are three significant differences as follows: (1) Different parametrizations of the relative pose problem are used, which leads to
different polynomial equation systems. A further fundamental difference lies in
the geometric constraints derived from point or affine correspondences. Even if
the highest-degree monomial is the same, the polynomial equation systems are
still different. (2) Finding practical solvers for the six-point problem using the
rotation-translation parametrization is certainly non-trivial and there are no offthe-shelf solvers. This requires instantiating random problems in a finite prime
field while preserving all geometric side constraints. (3) Two contributions are
newly proposed. The ray bundle constraints are proven and exploited for solution
space reduction. The ray bundle shares a common origin and propagates in different directions, which is different from the implicit geometric constraints in [3].
Moreover, all configurations of minimal six-point problems for multi-camera systems are first enumerated using the Pólya enumeration theorem.

B

Proof of a Common Factor

In Section 3.3 of the paper, we say that a factor qx2 + qy2 + qz2 + 1 can be factored
out in Eqs. (14) and (15) of the paper. The existence of a common factor can be
proven through formula derivation [16]. In this paper, we show that this property
can be also proven by symbolic computation using Matlab. The Matlab code is
listed in Listing 1.1.
⋆ Equal contribution.

Corresponding author.

