Supplementary for FutureDepth: Learning to
Predict the Future Improves Video Depth
Estimation
Rajeev Yasarla , Manish Kumar Singh , Hong Cai , Yunxiao Shi , Jisoo
Jeong , Yinhao Zhu , Shizhong Han , Risheek Garrepalli , Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research⋆
{ryasarla, masi, hongcai, yunxshi, jisojeon, yinhaoz, shizhan, rgarrepa,
fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

A

Additional Ablation Studies

Sampling Techniques. We perform experiment to ablate different sampling
techniques used in reconstruction network (R-Net) on KITTI dataset. In Table 1, we can see that the proposed adaptive sampling technique benefits the
R-Net in learning better spatial and temporal representation of the feature volume V̂1,T for given sequence of frames I1,T . In Fig. ?? of the main paper, we
can see adaptive sampling generates masks that preserve representations of important object information and exclude unnecessary back ground information,
thus benefiting FutureDepth depth estimation performance. Note that in this
experiment we do not use F-Net and refinement network in FutureDepth, i.e.,
we perform experiments using Baseline (MF) + R-Net to understand the effect
of sampling techniques more clearly.
Table 1: Using different masking techniques on KITTI (Eigen split) dataset. We perform this experiment using Swin-L for FutureDepth encoder. Here we set T = 4.

Masking Method Abs Rel↓ Sq Rel↓ RMSE↓ RMSElog ↓ δ < 1.25 ↑
Random
0.051
0.148 2.040
0.077
0.976
Tube
0.050
0.146 2.035
0.077
0.977
0.048
0.136 1.999
0.073
0.980
Adaptive (ours)

Number of iteration (L) in F-Net. We perform experiment on KITTI dataset
to ablate on the number of iterations (L) in the future prediction network (FNet), which shows the impact of Qmotion,1,T motion queries on FutureDepth performance. As shown in Table 2, as the iterations in F-Net increases, F-Net can
predict the current motion and future of objects over the time frames from 1 to
L + T and generate beneficial Qmotion,1,T queries that provide temporal information to FutureDepth decoder and benefits FutureDepth performance. Note,
here we didn’t use the refinement network in FutureDepth for this experiment.
⋆

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

