NeRF-MAE: Masked AutoEncoders for Self Supervised
3D Representation Learning for Neural Radiance Fields
— Supplementary Material —
Muhammad Zubair Irshad1 ,2 , Sergey Zakharov1 , Vitor Guizilini1 ,
Adrien Gaidon1 , Zsolt Kira2 , and Rares Ambrus1
1

Toyota Research Institute {first.last}@tri.global
2
Georgia Tech {zkira}@gatech.edu

This supplementary material is divided into 5 sections. First, we provide details
regarding network architecture and number of parameters in Section A. Second, we
provide an overview of implementation details in Section B. This is followed by a discussion on additional experimental analysis in Section C. We provide an overview of
pretraining datasets in Section D and discuss compute resources required to pretrain our
representation in Section E. Lastly, we discuss limitations and future work in Section F.

A

Network Architecture Details

In this section, we provide more details about our architectural design. We use PyTorch [10] for implementation and training our approach. We described in detail the
encoder-decoder U-Net style architecture for pretraining in Section 3.4 (in the main
paper). We use a constant W, D, H dimension of 160 for all of our datasets, a patch
size p = 4, and mask out randomly 75% of the patches. We use 4 Swin Transformer
blocks and the spatial feature size of the last block is 5 × 5 × 5 with the channel dimension being 768. Consequently, we upsample features with skip connection decoders
and use 4 decoders and a final convolution block to restore the original dimension i.e.
B × 4 × 160 × 160 × 160. Below we specify the specifications and architectures of our
task-specific decoders.
A.1

Task-specific Downstream 3D Heads

Our task-specific downstream heads are attached to the Swin-Transformer encoder. The
goal of task-specific heads is to output dedicated meaningful outputs to regress the useful 3D information such as 3D OBBs and semantic labels for each voxel.
3D OBB Prediction: Our 3D OBB prediction head is similar to NeRF-RPN [6] except that for all of our transfer learning experiments and comparisons, we start with
warm-started encoder weights via our large-scale self-supervised pretraining, whereas
NeRF-RPN weights are started from scratch. Starting from scratch here denotes that
the network weights were not pretrained on any other dataset but rather NeRF-RPN initializes the weights of linear layers with truncated normal distribution with a standard
deviation of 0.02. We use the author’s [6] official implementation for all the comparisons. Specifically, we utilize an anchor-free RPN head from [6] which is based on

