DiffCD: A Symmetric Differentiable Chamfer
Distance for Neural Implicit Surface Fitting
– Supplemental Material –
Linus Härenstam-Nielsen
Lu Sang
Abhishek Saroha
Nikita Araslanov
Daniel Cremers
TU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

This appendix provides additional material related to our proposed surface reconstruction method, DiffCD, and the experiments. In Appendix A, we expand
on the implementation details of DiffCD and our reimplementation of the baseline methods. In Appendix B, we provide the full proof of Theorem 1. In Appendix C, we analyze the impact of α on the sample approximation L̂α
SSA . In
Appendix D, we provide a toy example where the minimizer of the SIREN [27]
loss has a closed-form solution. In Appendix E, we provide additional experiments, demonstrating that increasing the eikonal weight results in smoother
surfaces. We also provide additional results showing that all methods – NeuralPull, IGR, SIREN and our DiffCD –– benefit from the choice of the parameters
used in Sec. 6. Finally, Appendix F expands on the comparison between our
method and Neural-Pull with a 2D example.

A

Additional implementation details

Network architecture and training. We use the same coordinate MLP
f (θ, · ) for all loss functions, consisting of 8 fully connected layers with 256dimensional features and softplus activations, using geometric initialization as
introduced by Gropp et al. [14]. We also use a skip connection from the input
to the 4th layer. We train each method for 40K iterations of Adam [35] with
a learning rate of 10−3 for the “No Noise” and “Medium Noise” settings, and
5×10−5 for the “Max Noise” setting. We use cosine annealing and a linear warmup spanning the first 1000 iterations.
Batch sampling. Each training batch consists of 5K points x̃i sampled uniformly from the input point cloud P. These points are used to compute the
points-to-surface loss. For DiffCD, we sample an additional 5K surface points
xi (θ) from Sθ following our sampling scheme (cf . Sec. 4). For the eikonal loss,
we use a mixed sampling scheme similar to Gropp et al. [14]. Specifically, we
sample 625 “global” points uniformly from Ω, along with 5K “local” points obtained from a normal distribution centered at each x̃i . The standard deviation
of each normal distribution is determined by the distance from x̃i to its 50th
nearest neighbor in P. Inspired by the implementation of Baorui et al. [4], we
scale each standard deviation by a factor of 0.2, as we find that it tends to improve surface detail. For Neural-Pull [4], we only use the 5K local sample points

