MASATO TAMURA: RAND. WORD DATA AUG. FOR ZERO-SHOT ANOMALY DETECTION 1

Random Word Data Augmentation with CLIP
for Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection
Masato Tamura
masato.tamura@ieee.org

Big Data Analytics Solutions Lab
Hitachi America, Ltd.
2535 Augustine Dr 3rd Floor, Santa
Clara, California USA

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method that leverages a visual-language model, CLIP, as
a data source for zero-shot anomaly detection. Tremendous efforts have been put towards
developing anomaly detectors due to their potential industrial applications. Considering
the difficulty in acquiring various anomalous samples for training, most existing methods
train models with only normal samples and measure discrepancies from the distribution
of normal samples during inference, which requires training a model for each object category. The problem of this inefficient training requirement has been tackled by designing
a CLIP-based anomaly detector that applies prompt-guided classification to each part of
an image in a sliding window manner. However, the method still suffers from the labor of
careful prompt ensembling with known object categories. To overcome the issues above,
we propose leveraging CLIP as a data source for training. Our method generates text
embeddings with the text encoder in CLIP with typical prompts that include words of
normal and anomaly. In addition to these words, we insert several randomly generated
words into prompts, which enables the encoder to generate a diverse set of normal and
anomalous samples. Using the generated embeddings as training data, a feed-forward
neural network learns to extract features of normal and anomaly from CLIP’s embeddings, and as a result, a category-agnostic anomaly detector can be obtained without any
training images. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance without laborious prompt ensembling in zero-shot setups.

1

Introduction

Visual anomaly detection (AD) is the task of classifying images as normal or anomaly, where
anomalous images typically capture damaged, broken, or defective objects. AD differs from
object classification in that anomalous samples are defined as those different from normal
samples and thus are not restricted to specific categories. Due to the diverse appearances
of anomalous samples, AD remains a challenging problem and thus has been tackled by
numerous works [1–5, 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, 19–23, 26, 29, 31–34] for real-world applications.
Considering the fact that a diverse set of anomalous samples is difficult to obtain, most
existing methods [2, 3, 7, 8, 15, 19, 21–23, 26, 29, 31–34] train models with normal samples
and then test on both normal and anomalous samples. The distribution of normal samples is
modeled via various methods such as one-class classification [22, 32], reconstruction [8, 29],
© 2023. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.

