1

1

Comparison of Sampling Method

Fig. 1: Results of different sampling strategies are presented in terms of R Precision
(top 3) and FID. The x-axis represents the number of steps α for 3D denoising. The
red dashed line represents denoising a 3D noise only in the 3D domain, which is the
standard sampling method. The green dashed line represents the results of MDM.

In Section 3.4 of the paper, we discuss how our model can denoise and reconstruct 3D movements from both 3D and 2D noise. To investigate if incorporating
more 2D data can improve generation performance, we evaluate different sampling methods. For this experiment, we train our model using 50% 3D motion
and all available 2D motion, and diffuse 1k steps in all methods. The parameter
α indicates the time-step at which the motion representation switches from 2D
to 3D. The red dashed line represents the standard sampling method.
The results, as shown in Figure 1, reveal that α = 500 achieves the lowest
FID score, indicating that our model can effectively use abundant 2D motion to
enhance 3D generation performance. However, the standard sampling method
scores high on R-Precision, as the generation is more precise. Additional results
are provided in the supplementary material.

2

Effect of Root-decoupled Diffusion

To address the uncertainty of camera movement for in-the-wild videos, we decouple the root information r3D/2D and generate it based on other pose features.
To achieve this, we employ a L3 -layer transformer encoder to encode the root
information, which is then decoded with a L4 -layer transformer decoder conditioned on the last L4 layer 3D/2D decoder outputs. L3 and L4 are set to 2 in
experiments.
The comparison of generating with and without this technique is illustrated
in Figure 2. Without root-decoupled diffusion, the generated motion exhibits
random foot sliding while performing pulling-ups, as it learns from 2D motion
data. However, since 2D motion sequences captured from videos may not accurately capture the root position, generating global movement based on body
pose can lead to more precise results.

