PartGLEE: A Foundation Model for Recognizing
and Parsing Any Objects
Supplementary Material
Junyi Li1∗ , Junfeng Wu1∗ , Weizhi Zhao1 , Song Bai2 , and Xiang Bai1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
ByteDance Inc.

In this supplementary material, we first present additional evaluation results
of our model in Sec. 1 and then provide more detailed information on data
unification as well as training strategies in Sec. 2 and Sec. 3 respectively. More
quantitative ablation study results are provided in Sec. 4. We further showcase
the results for hierarchical segmentation, demonstrating the process of parsing
any object into its semantic parts in Sec. 5. Finally, in Sec. 6, we explore the
benefits of fine-grained prompts in images for mLLMs.

1

Additional Evaluation results

To illustrate the versatility and effectiveness of our model, we further compare
the performance of our model with recent specialist and generalist models on
object-level tasks, shown in Tab. 1. It turns out that our model achieves stateof-the-art performance on part-level tasks, while maintaining competitive performance on object-level tasks. This indicates that our model is capable of obtaining
outstanding performance across tasks at different hierarchies, making it a foundation model that unifies both object-level and part-level tasks while acquiring
multi-granularity recognition capabilities simultaneously.
We also evaluate our model on the Segmentation in the Wild (SeginW) [41]
benchmark to further examine its zero-shot transferability. This dataset consists of 25 diverse segmentation datasets. Notably, during the inference process,
we consider the House-Parts, Airplane-Parts, and Bottles datasets in Seginw as
collections with part-level concepts. Hence, we conduct evaluation using hierarchical predictions for objects and parts. As for other datasets, we only utilize
object-level predictions for testing. The results are shown in Tab. 2.

2

Datasets Unification

In this section, we first present the datasets that are used during our jointtraining process, as shown in Tab. 5.
To facilitate the training process of the Q-Former, we augment the original
part-level datasets with object-level annotations to establish hierarchical correspondences. Specifically, we add object-level annotations to Pascal Part [2],
PartImageNet [6], Pascal-Part-116 [26], ADE-Part-234 [26], in order to establish the hierarchical correspondence between objects and parts. It is necessary

