TCLC-GS: Tightly Coupled LiDAR-Camera
Gaussian Splatting for Autonomous Driving:
Supplementary Materials
Cheng Zhao1⋆ , Su Sun2⋆ , Ruoyu Wang1 , Yuliang Guo1 , Jun-Jun Wan3 ,
Zhou Huang3 , Xinyu Huang1 , Yingjie Victor Chen2 , and Liu Ren1
1

Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{cheng.zhao, ruoyu.wang, yuliang.guo, xingyu.huang, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com
2
3
Purdue University
XC Cross Domain Computing, Bosch
{sun931, victorchen}@purdue.edu {jun-jun.wan, zhou.huang}@bosch.com

In this Appendix, we firstly provide more details of our TCLC-GS implementation, including network architecture, and hyper-parameters of octree feature
grid and 3D Gaussians in Appendix 1. Secondly, more comparison visualizations
with the baseline are presented in Appendix 2. Lastly, three video demos are
attached in Appendix 3.

1

Implementation Details

Network Architecture: Figure 1 illustrates the network architecture of the
SDF and RGB decoders in octree training, and feature encoder for Gaussian
splatting. For building the hierarchical octree feature and colorized 3D mesh,
the SDF and RGB decoders employ a shallow multilayer perceptron (MLP)
consisting of three fully connected layers. Each of these layers is followed by a
ReLU activation, except for the final prediction layer. A Sigmoid layer is inserted
after the final layer in the RGB decoder. In terms of the optimization of 3D
Gaussians, the feature encoder adopts a shared two layers MLP following a dualbrunch fully connected layer. Each of MLP is followed by a ReLU activation,
except for the final prediction layer. A Sigmoid layer is inserted after the final
layer in the opacity prediction.
Octree Feature Grid Hyper-parameters: We construct the octree with
a height of 12, storing the latent features in the last three layers. The leaf voxel
resolution in our configuration is set to 0.2m, and the latent code assigned to
each corner of the octree node is set to 8 dimension.
3D Gaussian Hyper-parameters: We set the position learning rate to
vary from 1.6e-5 to 1.6e-6, set opacity learning rate as 0.05, scale learning rate
as 0.01, feature learning rate a 2.5e-3, and rotation learning rate as 0.001. We
configure the interval of densification and opacity reset as 500 and 3000 respectively. We set the densify grad threshold as 2e-4. Additionally, the Spherical
Harmonics (SH) degree for each 3D Gaussian is established at 3.
⋆

Equally contributed as co-first author.

