FuseTeacher: Modality-fused Encoders are
Strong Vision Supervisors
Chen-Wei Xie1 , Siyang Sun1 , Liming Zhao1 ,
Pandeng Li2 , Shuailei Ma3 , and Yun Zheng1
1

Alibaba Group
{eniac.xcw,siyang.ssy,lingchen.zlm}@alibaba-inc.com
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Northeastern University

Appendix
This appendix is structured as follows.
– Sec. A provides the implementation details of the fusion encoder.
– Sec. B describes the collection process for the Union23M/Union65M datasets.
– Sec. C presents additional ablation experiments.
– Sec. D offers further analysis to substantiate the superior discriminative
power of the fusion representation compared to the image representation.
– Sec. E applies the FuseTeacher to video tasks.
– Sec. F discusses the training efficiency of the proposed FuseTeacher model.
– Sec. G provides an overview of the downstream datasets we used.
– Sec. H discusses the relationship between the FuseTeacher and previous
method RA-CLIP [35].

A

Fusion Encoder

The architecture of the fusion encoder is built upon transformer blocks that
incorporate cross-attention mechanisms. Fig. 1 illustrates two different ways to
implement the fusion encoder. The standard implementation in Fig. 1 (a) is
similar to the multi-modal encoder used in previous works, such as ALBEF [21]
and BLIP [20]. It begins with a self-attention operation, then uses the resulting
output as a query, along with the embeddings of the corresponding text tokens
as key and value, to perform cross-attention. The goal of the cross-attention is
to enhance the image embeddings with the text embeddings. Finally, a standard
multi-layer perceptron is used, and the embedding for the image [CLS] token is
extracted as the fused representation.
Furthermore, to reduce computation for the fusion encoder, we also introduce
a fast implementation. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), it takes a single image [CLS] embedding as the query and performs cross-attention with image patch embeddings
and text tokens embeddings. Because the query for the two cross-attentions and
the input for the multi-layer perception are single embeddings, it is extremely
fast.

