arXiv:1910.02190v2 [cs.CV] 9 Oct 2019

Kornia: an Open Source Differentiable Computer Vision Library for PyTorch
Edgar Riba
Computer Vision Center
OSVF-OpenCV.org

Dmytro Mishkin
VRG, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague

edgar.riba@gmail.com

ducha.aiki@gmail.com

Daniel Ponsa
Computer Vision Center
daniel@cvc.uab.es

Ethan Rublee
Arraiy, Inc.

Gary Bradski
OSVF-OpenCV.org

ethan.rublee@gmail.com

garybradski@gmail.com

Abstract

Color

Filtering

Geometry

This work presents Kornia – an open source computer
vision library which consists of a set of differentiable routines and modules to solve generic computer vision problems. The package uses PyTorch as its main backend both
for efficiency and to take advantage of the reverse-mode
auto-differentiation to define and compute the gradient of
complex functions. Inspired by OpenCV, Kornia is composed of a set of modules containing operators that can be
inserted inside neural networks to train models to perform
image transformations, camera calibration, epipolar geometry, and low level image processing techniques, such as
filtering and edge detection that operate directly on high
dimensional tensor representations. Examples of classical
vision problems implemented using our framework are provided including a benchmark comparing to existing vision
libraries.

1. Introduction
Computer vision has driven a lot of advances in modern
society for different industries such as self driving cars, industrial robotics, visual effects, image search, etc resulting
in a wide field of applications. One of the key components
of this achievement has been due to the open-source software and the community that helped to make all this possible by providing open-source implementations of the main
computer vision algorithms.
There exist several open-source libraries widely used by
the computer vision community designed and optimized
to process images using Central Processing Units (CPUs).
However, many of the best performing computer vision algorithms are now based on deep learning, processing images in parallel using Graphical Processing Units (GPUs).
Within that context, a framework that is gaining popularity
is Pytorch [41] due to its reverse-mode automatic differen-

Figure 1: The library implements routines for low level image processing tasks using native PyTorch operators and
their custom optimization. The purpose of the library is
to be used for large-scale vision projects, data augmentation, or for creating computer vision layers inside of neural
network layers that allow for backprogating error through
them. The above results are obtained from a given batch of
images using data parallelism in the GPU.

tiation mechanism, dynamic computation graph, distributed
learning and eager/script execution modes. PyTorch and
its ecosystem provide a few packages to work with images such as it’s most popular toolkit, torchvision, which
is mainly designed to perform data augmentation, read popular datasets and implementations of state-of-the-art models

