VQ-HPS

1

VQ-HPS: Human Pose and Shape Estimation
in a Vector-Quantized Latent Space
Supplementary material
A

Implementation details

In this section, we provide the details of the implementation of Mesh-VQ-VAE
and VQ-HPS. More information on these models can be found in the main paper
(see Sec. 4.1 and Fig. 2).
Mesh-VQ-VAE. The Mesh-VQ-VAE architecture (see Fig. 2) is adapted from
the fully convolutional mesh autoencoder of [13]. This model encodes a mesh to
a latent representation z ∈ RN ×L with N = 54 and L = 9. The quantization
step is performed with a dictionary of size S = 512.
Feature extractors. Our CNN backbones are ResNet-50 [4] pre-trained on ImageNet [9] to provide a fair comparison with previous methods. For the canonical mesh prediction, we remove the last fully connected layer to obtain features
Xmesh ∈ RH×W ×C with H = W = 7, C = 2048. For the rotation and camera
prediction, we keep the full Resnet-50 to obtain features Xrot ∈ RC .
Rotation and camera predictors. Inspired by [5], the network for predicting
the rotation and the mesh consists of a multilayer perceptron (MLP) regression
module composed of two fully connected layers with 1024 neurons following
the CNN backbone (see Fig. 2). The image feature Xrot ∈ RC is concatenated
with the flattened pose p ∈ R17∗3 before being fed to the MLP. The rotation
is predicted in the 6d-rotation format [12], and p is initialized with the SMPL
T-pose.
Latent canonical mesh regressor. The Transformer follows the original Transformer architecture [11]. Its hidden dimension is D = 512, and all MLPs in the
encoder and decoder have a hidden size of 1024. It has 5.3 million parameters
(7.6 million for the version used in the COCO [7] and large-scale training). We
use sinusoidal positional encoding for the input tokens.

B

Additional qualitative results

Additional comparisons with other methods trained on little data are provided
in Fig. 6 to complement the results of Fig. 4.
We also provide some qualitative results obtained with VQ-HPS using an
HRNet backbone as evaluated in Tab. 2) are shown in Fig. 7.

C

Visualization of predictions during training

We visualize validation samples when training on the EMDB dataset (see Sec. 5.3)
in Fig. 8. The meshes are smooth from the first epoch and become anthropomorphic in about 5 epochs. As discussed in the paper, we believe this is due

