18

J. Ren et al.

A

Additional Experiments

A.1

Further Verification of Memorization’s Reliance on the
Embeddings of Trigger Tokens

In this subsection, we provide the experiment in Fig. 8a to further verify that the
memorization relies on the existence of trigger token embeddings. While Sec. 4
compares the behavior of the attention score with/without memorization, in
Fig. 8a, we add a mask to the attention scores to partially the trigger embeddings
and examine the memorization.
To be specific, we first generate images by a group of memorized prompts
of SD v1.4 and a group of non-memorized prompts and save the random seed
of this generation. Then we use the same prompts and seed to generate more
rounds. For each round, we remove non-<begin> token embeddings one by one
from small attention scores to large attention scores, by masking out the logits
of tokens. Note that this does not influence the embeddings in ec and V (ec ), and
only changes whether the embedding of a token is used or not.
Since memorization relies on trigger token embeddings and trigger tokens
always hold large attention scores, it is expected that the generated images will
not change much when only tokens with small attention are removed. This conjecture aligns with our experimental results: In Fig. 8a, we depict the similarity
score between the generation with removed tokens and the first-round generation. When the removal ratio increases, the similarity score of non-memorization
reduces much faster in the beginning, while memorized prompts have almost
no reduction when even 60% of the tokens with small attentions are removed.
Instead, when the removal ratio is lager than 90%, the similarity score of memorization reduces much faster than non-memorization, it means more trigger
tokens are removed at this stage. Thus, we further confirm our observation that
the memorization relies on the existence of trigger token embeddings.
Remark. The reduction of similarity does not mean the reduction of generation quality. It only indicates the same seed can produce dissimilar images
from the same prompt. In Fig. 8b, we show that FID of memorization samples
is even improved. This is similar to the reason we mentioned in Sec. 6.3 that
when memorization eﬀect is mitigated, the generated images can become more
diverse, which brings a reduced FID.
A.2

Validation of Findings on SD v2.0

In this subsection, we implement the experiments to valid the generalization of
our findings on SD v2.0.
Finding 1. We plot the entropy of all the diﬀusion steps of SD v2.0 in Fig. 9. It
is shown that, for memorization samples, the entropy is much higher than nonmemorization, which is consistent with our Finding 1 that the trigger tokens
will divert the attention from the beginning tokens, resulting in a more diverse
attention distribution. Compared with SD v1.4, SD v2.0 has higher entropy even

