Align Before Collaborate: Mitigating
Feature Misalignment for Robust
Multi-agent Perception
Kun Yang1 , Dingkang Yang1 , Ke Li3 , Dongling Xiao3 , Zedian Shao4 ,
Peng Sun2 , and Liang Song1(B)
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{kunyang20,dkyang20,songl}@fudan.edu.cn
2
Duke Kunshan University, Suzhou, China
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
Duke University, Durham, USA

Abstract. Collaborative perception has received widespread attention
recently since it enhances the perception ability of autonomous vehicles
via inter-agent information sharing. However, the performance of existing
systems is hindered by the unavoidable collaboration noises, which induce
feature-level spatial misalignment over the collaborator-shared information. In this paper, we propose a model-agnostic and lightweight plugin
to mitigate the feature-level misalignment issue, called dynamic feature
alignment (NEAT). The merits of the NEAT plugin are threefold. First,
we introduce an importance-guided query proposal to predict potential
foreground regions with space-channel semantics and exclude environmental redundancies. On this basis, a deformable feature alignment is
presented to explicitly align the collaborator-shared features through
query-aware spatial associations, aggregating multi-grained visual clues
with corrective mismatch properties. Ultimately, we perform a region
cross-attention reinforcement to facilitate aligned representation diﬀusion and achieve global feature semantic enhancement. NEAT can be
readily inserted into existing collaborative perception procedures and
signiﬁcantly improves the robustness of vanilla baselines against pose
errors and transmission delay. Extensive experiments on four collaborative 3D object detection datasets under noisy settings conﬁrm that
NEAT provides consistent gains for most methods with distinct structures.
Keywords: Collaborative perception · Deformable feature alignment

1

Introduction

Perception is a fundamental capability of autonomous vehicles (AVs) to guarantee road safety in sophisticated driving scenarios [22]. Previous single-agent perception has been extensively explored in vision-oriented vehicular applications,
K. Yang and D. Yang—Equal contribution.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 282–299, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_16

