High-Resolution and Few-Shot View
Synthesis from Asymmetric
Dual-Lens Inputs
Ruikang Xu1 , Mingde Yao2 , Yue Li1 , Yueyi Zhang1 , and Zhiwei Xiong1(B)
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
xurk@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
Abstract. Novel view synthesis has achieved remarkable quality and eﬃciency by the paradigm of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS), but still faces
two challenges: 1) signiﬁcant performance degradation when trained with
only few-shot samples due to a lack of geometry constraint, and 2) incapability of rendering at a higher resolution that is beyond the input resolution of training samples. In this paper, we propose Dual-Lens 3D-GS
(DL-GS) to achieve high-resolution (HR) and few-shot view synthesis, by
leveraging the characteristics of the asymmetric dual-lens system commonly equipped on mobile devices. This kind of system captures the same
scene with diﬀerent focal lengths (i.e., wide-angle and telephoto) under an
asymmetric stereo conﬁguration, which naturally provides geometric hints
for few-shot training and HR guidance for resolution improvement. Nevertheless, there remain two major technical problems to achieving this goal.
First, how to eﬀectively exploit the geometry information from the asymmetric stereo conﬁguration? To this end, we propose a consistency-aware
training strategy, which integrates a dual-lens-consistent loss to regularize
the 3D-GS optimization. Second, how to make the best use of the dual-lens
training samples to eﬀectively improve the resolution of newly synthesized
views? To this end, we design a multi-reference-guided reﬁnement module to select proper telephoto and wide-angle guided images from training
samples based on the camera pose distances, and then exploit their information for high-frequency detail enhancement. Extensive experiments on
simulated and real-captured datasets validate the distinct superiority of
our DL-GS over various competitors on the task of HR and few-shot view
synthesis. The implementation code is available at https://github.com/
XrKang/DL-GS.
Keywords: Novel View Synthesis · 3D Gaussian Splatting ·
Asymmetric Dual-lens System · Few-shot Training · Super-resolution

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_13.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 218–235, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_13

