Supplementary Material for Self-Cooperation
Knowledge Distillation for Novel Class Discovery
Yuzheng Wang, Zhaoyu Chen, Dingkang Yang, and Yunquan Sun,
and Lizhe Qi†
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Academy for Engineering &
Technology, Fudan University

In this supplementary material, we provide more details of our method, organized as follows:
– In Section 1, we further discuss related but different tasks of NCD, mainly
in terms of training goals and training & testing processes, including OSR
and GCD tasks.
– In Section 2, we show the hyperparameter experiment, corresponding to
Section 4.1 of the main body.
– In Section 3, we compare the performance of various NCD methods when
facing the cross-domain dataset to measure the effectiveness of information
transfer between known and novel classes.
– In Section 4, we reassess the model’s performance on three fine-grained
datasets without the pre-trained model.
– In Section 5, we evaluate the trade-offs between the two parts of the proposed
Self-Cooperation Knowledge Distillation losses and provide readers with a
reference for setting parameters according to actual needs.
– In Section 6, we discuss the differences between our and other NCD methods.
– In Section 7, we provide insights about future works.
– In Section 8, we discuss the limitations of the proposed method.

1

Discussion of Related but Distinct Tasks

Open-Set Recognition (OSR) [9] aims to detect test-time images which do
not belong to one of the classes in the labeled set, but does not require any
further classification amongst these detected images. Therefore, the model only
needs to maintain a high degree of confidence in the known class, and does not
consider the model’s scalability for the novel class.
Novel Class Discovery (NCD) [4, 5] not only considers the review of known
classes, but also considers the discovery of unknown classes to expand the scope
of application of the model. More detailed settings and definitions are shown in
the main body.
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [10] is similar to NCD. In the
training process, GCD and NCD contains the same dependencies, i.e., a labeled
set of known classes and an unlabeled set of unknown classes. The difference is
that GCD makes no assumptions about the test set. Test samples can come from
the known or novel classes.

