What Does Rotation Prediction Tell Us about Classifier Accuracy
under Varying Testing Environments?

Weijian Deng 1 Stephen Gould 1 Liang Zheng 1

Abstract
Understanding classifier decision under novel environments is central to the community, and a
common practice is evaluating it on labeled test
sets. However, in real-world testing, image annotations are difficult and expensive to obtain,
especially when the test environment is changing.
A natural question then arises: given a trained
classifier, can we evaluate its accuracy on varying
unlabeled test sets? In this work, we train semantic classification and rotation prediction in a
multi-task way. On a series of datasets, we report
an interesting finding, i.e., the semantic classification accuracy exhibits a strong linear relationship
with the accuracy of the rotation prediction task
(Pearson’s Correlation r > 0.88). This finding
allows us to utilize linear regression to estimate
classifier performance from the accuracy of rotation prediction which can be obtained on the test
set through the freely generated rotation labels.

1. Introduction
Knowing the generalization ability of a classifier is important for its applications in fields like autonomous driving,
medical diagnosis and product recommendation. Many wellestablished benchmarks in the community, e.g., ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) and CIFAR (Krizhevsky et al., 2009),
provide held-out labeled test sets that allow empirical results
to be computed. However, when applying the classifier in
real-world scenarios, we often encounter novel distributions
and unknown cases, and empirical results calculated from
existing benchmarks do not accurately reflect its generalization ability during deployment. To evaluate classifier
performance under novel environments, the standard way is
to collect new labeled test sets. However, it is prohibitively
expensive to label sufficient images in every novel scenario.
1
College of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. Correspondence
to: Liang Zheng <liang.zheng@anu.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

This work investigates an interesting problem: how to estimate classifier accuracy on unlabeled test sets? Some
existing research studies classifier generalization on fixed
test sets by developing complexity measurements on model
parameters (Arora et al., 2018; Corneanu et al., 2020; Jiang
et al., 2018). In this work, we focus on varying test domains.
In the absence of test labels, we aim to find an unsupervised evaluation criterion that can reflect classifier accuracy.
A self-supervised task produces ground truths from data
without human annotations. Thus, we can always calculate
its accuracy on an unlabeled test set. As such we raise a
question: given a network that is good at a self-supervised
task on an unlabeled test set, can it also address object
recognition task well under the same environment? If such a
relationship exists, we can infer classifier performance on an
unlabeled test set from the accuracy of the self-supervised
task. In light of this question, we study the statistical correlation between semantic classification and rotation prediction
under varying environments.
In the community, self-supervised tasks are usually used
to learn effective representations for downstream tasks (He
et al., 2020; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Gidaris et al., 2018).
Different from them, we explore the feasibility of using selfsupervision to predict classifier accuracy on novel test sets.
We pay particular attention to the pretext task of rotation
prediction, where we classify the rotation angle of an image
into {0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , 270◦ }. Specifically, we train a network
jointly for the main classification task and pretext task. To
study the accuracy correlation between the two tasks, we
construct different setups, including CIFAR-10, MNIST,
Tiny-ImageNet, and COCO. Each setup contains many labeled test sets for calculating network performance on the
two tasks. By plotting classification accuracy against rotation prediction accuracy, we consistently observe a strong
correlation between them (Pearson’s Correlation r > 0.88)
across the four setups. This shows that if the network can
solve the rotation prediction task well, it is likely to achieve
good classification accuracy, and vice versa.
Based on this, we learn a linear regression model to predict
classification accuracy on unseen test sets. Given an unlabeled test set, we obtain rotation ground truths by manually
rotating the images. Then, we use the multi-task network

