Learning the Unlearned: Mitigating Feature
Suppression in Contrastive Learning
Supplementary Material
Jihai Zhang∗,1 , Xiang Lan∗,2 , Xiaoye Qu3 , Yu Cheng1 ,
Mengling Feng2,† , Bryan Hooi2,†
1

2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
National University of Singapore 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory

In this supplementary material, we provide further details and additional
experimental results that complement the main text. The contents include:
Section 1 . Implementation details of feature-aware negative sampling.
Section 2 . Learned features hinder the model from acquiring new features.
Section 3 . Train SimCLR using MCL on ImageNet.
Section 4 . Ensemble CLIP models trained using MCL with Model Soup.
Section 5 . The computational cost of MCL.
Section 6 . Ablation study for the number of trainable blocks when training
ViT CLIP models using MCL.
Section 7 . Analysis of the clustering results across different stages of MCL.
Codes are available at https://github.com/MajorDavidZhang/MCL.git.

1

Details of Feature-Aware Negative Sampling

The feature-aware negative sampling strategy necessitates that an anchor and
its negative samples belong to the same cluster, as determined in the previous
stages. To effectively organize training samples according to their pseudo labels
obtained between stages, we utilize a custom batch sampler. The implementation
details of the batch sampler are shown in Algorithm 1.

2

Learned Features Hinder the Learning Process

We conduct experiments to demonstrate that the learned features can impede the
model’s ability to acquire new features. Specifically, at each stage, we initialize the
model with parameters from the previous stage instead of training from scratch.
We train SimCLR with ResNet18 as the encoder on the Trifeature dataset. We
use the τ = 0.5 setting as described in Section 5.6 in the main paper. As shown
in Tab. 1, this model makes almost no progress from Stage 1 to Stage 2, and its
final performance (0.42/0.97/1.00) is markedly inferior to that of our proposed
* Equal Contribution † Correspondence to: Mengling Feng <ephfm@nus.edu.sg>,
Bryan Hooi <bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg>. Xiang Lan and Mengling Feng are affiliated
with Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health and Institute of Data Science, NUS. Part
of this work was done during Jihai Zhang’s internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

