Reliability in Semantic Segmentation:
Can We Use Synthetic Data?
— Supplementary Material —
Thibaut Loiseau2 †, Tuan-Hung Vu1 , Mickael Chen1 , Patrick Pérez3 , and
Matthieu Cord1,4
valeo.ai, Paris, France
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallee, France
3
kyutai, Paris, France
4
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
1

2

In this document, we provide technical details for covariate shifts generation
and OOD object inpainting (Appendix A), additional calibration details and
results (Appendix B), analysis on direct real-vs.-synthetic data correlation (Appendix C) and class-wise PCC scores (Appendix D). Appendix E discusses the
limitations and Appendix F showcases more qualitative examples.

A

Technical Details

A.1

Covariate Shifts Training

We train a ControlNet on top of a frozen Stable Diffusion 1.5 for 2100 steps. The
ControlNet used here is a trainable copy of the Stable Diffusion encoder only, as
in the original paper [9]. We use a batch size of 8 with 32 gradient accumulation
steps, which makes an effective batch size of 256, and a learning rate of 10−5 . We
use the training set of Cityscapes, and do a random horizontal crop of the images
to get square images, and then resize them to 512 × 512, convenient of Stable
Diffusion 1.5. All other training hyperparameters are the per default settings on
the official ControlNet repository. The objective is to reconstruct the original
images of Cityscapes using its semantic masks as input to the ControlNet, and
the captions extracted with CLIP-interrogator as input to Stable Diffusion.
Similarly for SDXL, we train a ControlNet for 27500 steps and use a batch
size of 8 with 4 gradient accumulation steps, which makes an effective batch size
of 32. The learning rate is 10−5 . The images are square cropped to get 1024 ×
1024 images, convenient for SDXL, and there is no need to resize them.
A.2

Covariate Shifts Generation

To generate images with new styles with SD 1.5, we take a semantic mask
from the validation set of Cityscapes, crop and resize it as explained in the
previous part. We use nearest neighbor interpolation to keep good values for
† Work done during an internship at valeo.ai

