Siamese Masked Autoencoders
Agrim Gupta1∗ Jiajun Wu1 Jia Deng2 Li Fei-Fei1
1
Stanford University, 2 Princeton University

Abstract
Establishing correspondence between images or scenes is a significant challenge
in computer vision, especially given occlusions, viewpoint changes, and varying
object appearances. In this paper, we present Siamese Masked Autoencoders
(SiamMAE), a simple extension of Masked Autoencoders (MAE) for learning
visual correspondence from videos. SiamMAE operates on pairs of randomly sampled video frames and asymmetrically masks them. These frames are processed
independently by an encoder network, and a decoder composed of a sequence of
cross-attention layers is tasked with predicting the missing patches in the future
frame. By masking a large fraction (95%) of patches in the future frame while
leaving the past frame unchanged, SiamMAE encourages the network to focus on
object motion and learn object-centric representations. Despite its conceptual simplicity, features learned via SiamMAE outperform state-of-the-art self-supervised
methods on video object segmentation, pose keypoint propagation, and semantic
part propagation tasks. SiamMAE achieves competitive results without relying on
data augmentation, handcrafted tracking-based pretext tasks, or other techniques to
prevent representational collapse.

1

Introduction

“The distinction between the past, present, and future is only a stubbornly persistent illusion.”
—Albert Einstein
Time is a special dimension in the context of visual learning, providing the structure within which
sequential events are perceived, cause-effect relationships are learned, objects are tracked as they
move through space, and future events are predicted. Central to all of these capabilities is the ability to
establish visual correspondence over time. Our visual system is adept at establishing correspondence
between scenes despite occlusions, viewpoint changes, and object transformations. This capability is
unsupervised, critical to human visual perception, and remains a significant challenge in computer
vision. Equipping machines with such a capability enables a wide range of applications such as object
segmentation and tracking in videos, depth and optical flow estimation, and 3D reconstruction [1–8].
A powerful self-supervised learning paradigm is predictive learning, i.e., predicting any unobserved
or hidden part of the signal from any observed or unhidden part of the signal [9]. Notably, this form
of predictive learning has been used for learning correspondences [10–12] by predicting the colors of
grayscale future frame by observing a (colorful) past reference frame. However, the performance
of these methods has trailed behind contrastive self-supervised learning [13] approaches. State-ofthe-art methods [14–17] for learning correspondence primarily employ some form of contrastive
learning [13]. Intuitively, contrastive learning-based approaches are well-suited for the task of
learning correspondence, as they utilize extensive data augmentation to learn features invariant to
changes in pose, lighting, viewpoint, and other factors. However, a major criticism of contrastive
approaches is their reliance on careful selection of augmentations to learn useful invariances [18],
along with a suite of additional components [19, 20, 17, 21] to prevent representational collapse.
∗

Correspondence to agrim@stanford.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

