IDOL: Unified Dual-Modal Latent Diffusion for
Human-Centric Joint Video-Depth Generation
— Supplementary Material —
Yuanhao Zhai?1 , Kevin Lin2 , Linjie Li2 , Chung-Ching Lin2 , Jianfeng
Wang2 , Zhengyuan Yang2 , David Doermann1 , Junsong Yuan1 , Zicheng
Liu3 , and Lijuan Wang2
1

1

State University of New York at Buffalo
2
Microsoft
3
Advanced Micro Devices
https://yhzhai.github.io/idol/

Additional experiments

Qualitative results. Please refer to the accompanying video for the qualitative
comparison. In the video demonstration, we stitch each generated video snippets
together to form a long video, which may lead to unnatural transitions between
each snippet. We make the following observations. (1) Compared with DisCo [13],
LDM3D [12], and MM-Diffusion [10], our generated videos and depth sequences
exhibit more natural and smoother transitions, demonstrating the effectiveness
of our method. A notable observation on the NTU120 dataset [6, 11] is LDM3D’s
limitation in generating diverse frames after fine-tuning the autoencoder, often
resulting in repetitive “stuck” video sequences. This issue may stem from the
subtle motions and predominant static content in NTU120 videos, suggesting that
fine-tuning the autoencoder might necessitate a larger and more varied training
dataset. (2) Our IDOL is able to composite different foreground and background,
while simultaneously generating video and depth. This feature distinguishes it
from concurrent methods [2, 4, 14], offering a unique capability in the area of
video-depth synthesis. (3) Our method is able to generalize to different pose
conditions, such as OpenPose [1] and DWPose [15].
Cross-attention map consistency. To enhance video-depth alignment in IDOL,
we propose a cross-attention map consistency loss Lxattn . This loss function
encourages alignment of the video and depth cross-attention maps. We also
explore alternate ways to align the cross-attention maps. One straightforward
approach is to use a shared cross-attention map for both branches. We test
two variations: replacing individual cross-attention maps with their average,
and using the video stream’s cross-attention map as a substitute for both. Our
results in Tab. 1 reveal that sharing a cross-attention map significantly reduces
performance, particularly impacting depth L2 accuracy (as seen in rows 2 and
3). These findings highlight the need for each stream to maintain diverse crossattention maps to produce high-quality outputs. Our implementation of Lxattn
?

Work done during an internship at Microsoft.

