Appendix for Rethinking Image-to-Video
Adaptation: An Object-centric Perspective
Rui Qian1 , Shuangrui Ding1 , and Dahua Lin1,2,3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII), Hong Kong, China
{qr021,ds023,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
2

A

More Experimental Results

Number of Object Tokens. We explore different number of object tokens N
in terms of the performance on action recognition as well as object discovery. For
more intuitive comparison, we also exhibit the total number of tokens for temporal modeling, computation cost and the number of tunable parameters. The
results are presented in Table 1. We use the frozen CLIP ViT-B/16 as Φenc , and
report the results with T = 8 frames per clip. Note that in the first row, using
only N = 1 object token means our method degenerates into spatially average
pooling the frame-wise feature maps into vectors of size RT ×D to do temporal
reasoning. And in the last row, ‘None’ means we keep the original features of
size RT ×HW ×D for temporal modeling. These two settings do not require the
slot attention module for object decomposition, thus resulting in fewer tunable
parameters. The total number of the tokens used for temporal reasoning equals
to T ×N . From the comparison, we have three observations. (1) Our method significantly outperforms the average pooling baseline with negligible computation
overhead. (2) More object tokens lead to more fine-grained object decomposition, i.e., higher results on DAVIS. And the action recognition performance
maintains stable when N ≥ 8. Hence, we take N = 8 object tokens in default
as a good choice for the trade-off between performance and efficiency. (3) Despite that our method requires much fewer computation GFLOPs than keeping
the original feature for temporal modeling, we still achieve significantly superior performance on action recognition benchmarks. This is because the original
video features contain much redundant information, which results in meaningless
noise for state change modeling. In contrast, we compress the videos into meaningful object tokens, providing more intuitive and interpretable cues to identify
temporal dynamics.
Temporal Modeling Strategy. We also explore how different time intervals δ
in the temporal state change modeling influences the performance in Table 2. The
comparisons are based on CLIP ViT-B/16 with an input of T = 8 frames. We
present different δ value with its corresponding number of state change vectors
per object, denoted as T ′ = T − δ. Note that in the last row, ‘All’ means we
traverse all different δ = {1, 2, ..., T − 1} and combine the state change vectors

