Supplementary Material – PhysGen: Rigid-Body
Physics-Grounded Image-to-Video Generation
Shaowei Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Saurabh Gupta*, and Shenlong Wang*
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

https://stevenlsw.github.io/physgen/

Abstract. The supplementary material provides implementations, additional analysis and experiments, as well as discussion of limitations in
detail. In summary, we include
– Appendix A. More implementation details of each module in our
pipeline.
– Appendix B. More experiment details in the main paper.
– Appendix C. More experiments on key components in our framework.
– Appendix D. Additional qualitative comparisons and controllable
generation results.
– Appendix E. Generation limitation analysis of our current approach.

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Perception

Segmentation. We use GPT-4V to recognize all objects in the given image
and determine if they are movable. Movable objects are treated as foreground
objects, while non-movable objects are treated as background objects. The query
prompt is shown in Fig. 1. The outputs from GPT-4V are sent to GroundedSAM [6] for instance segmentation. We also enable non-maximum suppression
(NMS) to prevent overlapping segmentation. For foreground objects, we check if
the segmentation is fully connected within its mask. If not, we rerun GroundedSAM to further separate any poor segmentation from the first round.
Boundary extraction. To extract boundaries from non-movable background
objects, we utilize depth and normal information estimated from GeoWizard [2].
We first order the background objects according to relative depth estimation
and select only those whose depth range falls within that of the foreground
objects. For candidate objects, we extract their segmentation boundaries within
the foreground object’s depth range and use corresponding normal to determine
if they are planes. If so, we fit horizontal or vertical edges to the boundaries and
use it as the physical boundary of the scene.
* Equal advising

