Optimizing Diffusion Models for Joint Trajectory
Prediction and Controllable Generation
Yixiao Wang1 , Chen Tang1,2 , Lingfeng Sun1 , Simone Rossi3 , Yichen Xie1 ,
Chensheng Peng1 , Thomas Hannagan3 , Stefano Sabatini3 , Nicola Poerio4 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka1 , and Wei Zhan1
1
2

University of California, Berkeley, USA
The University of Texas at Austin, USA
3
Stellantis, France
4
Stellantis, Italy
{yixiao_wang, wzhan}@berkeley.edu

Abstract. Diffusion models are promising for joint trajectory prediction
and controllable generation in autonomous driving, but they face challenges of inefficient inference steps and high computational demands. To
tackle these challenges, we introduce Optimal Gaussian Diffusion (OGD)
and Estimated Clean Manifold (ECM) Guidance. OGD optimizes the
prior distribution for a small diffusion time T and starts the reverse diffusion process from it. ECM directly injects guidance gradients to the
estimated clean manifold, eliminating extensive gradient backpropagation throughout the network. Our methodology streamlines the generative process, enabling practical applications with reduced computational
overhead. Experimental validation on the large-scale Argoverse 2 dataset
demonstrates our approach’s superior performance, offering a viable solution for computationally efficient, high-quality joint trajectory prediction and controllable generation for autonomous driving. Our project
webpage is at https://yixiaowang7.github.io/OptTrajDiff_Page/
Keywords: Diffusion model · Autonomous driving · Trajectory Prediction · Controllable Trajectory Generation

1

Introduction

The diffusion model is a class of generative models capable of representing
high-dimensional data distributions. In particular, it has demonstrated strong
performance in trajectory prediction and generation for autonomous driving [10,
11,16,28,49]. In contrast to traditional trajectory prediction [18,50] and generative models [41,45], the unique advantage of diffusion models lies in their ability
to deform the generated trajectory distribution to comply with additional requirements at inference stage via gradient-based guided sampling. Notably, it
is achieved without extra model training costs. This ability to perform controllable trajectory generation enables various useful applications, such as enforcing
additional realism constraints on predicted trajectories, generating directed and
user-specified simulation scenarios.

