SmartControl: Enhancing ControlNet for
Handling Rough Visual Conditions
(Supplementary Material)

Xiaoyu Liu1 , Yuxiang Wei1 , Ming Liu1( ) , Xianhui Lin,
Peiran Ren, Xuansong Xie, and Wangmeng Zuo1,2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Pazhou Lab Huangpu, Guangzhou, China
{liuxiaoyu1104,yuxiang.wei.cs}@gmail.com, csmliu@outlook.com,
{xhlin129,renpeiran,xiexuansong}@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

The content of this supplementary material is organized as follows:
– Improved Self-similarity in Sec. S1.
– Details of the prompt for GPT-4V in Sec. S2.
– Analysis of generalization ability in Sec. S3.
– Ablation of different control scale in Sec. S4.
– Visualization of h + hcond , h, and α in Sec. S5.
– Limitations and social impacts in Sec. S6.
– Visualization of mask in Sec. S7.
– Details of classes to evaluate in Sec. S8.
– Additional qualitative results in Sec. S9.

S1

Improved Self-similarity

Self-similarity refers to the structural similarity between two images within the
feature space of the DINO-ViT model [2]. Following [5], we calculate the Selfsimilarity between a generated image and a source image (i.e., the image that
provides rough structure condition). In our scenario, where structure condition
and text prompt are inconsistent, it is not desirable for the structure of the generated images to be strictly the same as the original images. Hence, a lower Selfsimilarity with the original images does not always indicate better performance.
We further provide an improved Self-similarity metric, which is calculated between the generated images and pseudo ground-truth images. Specifically, we
first follow the pipeline of data construction in the main paper, and iterate
different control scales α of ControlNet [6] to generate a series of images. Subsequently, we manually filter out the proper images as pseudo ground-truths.
Such a pseudo ground-truth could provide more accurate structure information
for given text prompts and rough visual conditions. As shown in Table S1, our
method achieves better structure similarity with pseudo ground-truths, demonstrating its effectiveness.

