1

Supplementary Material for iNeMo: Incremental Neural
Mesh Models for Robust Class-Incremental Learning
In the following, we provide further details and ablation studies for our paper. In
the first section we define the conventions. We then provide the non-incremental
performance of both considered representations (R50 and NeMo) as a reference.
Afterwards, we show the advantage of considering uncertainty for the classification in Section C and then give a conclusive ablation study over all components
of our method in Section D. Since NeMo is trained with additional pose labels
that were not available to baselines, we provide an additional study in Section F
where we show that pose labels do not improve the baselines. Finally, we conclude with additional details on the background model and pose estimation, as
well as all the considered hyperparameters in our method.

A

Conventions

In the tables of the main paper, we followed previous work [5, 6, 8] and reported
the average of the testing accuracies over all tasks T i with Φi , which we denoted
as acc(1 : i) . In the supplemental material, we deviate from this setting and
report the final accuracy with ΦNtask on the whole test dataset after
integrating all tasks, as it determines the final performance loss that is usually
most significant. We denote the final accuracy on all seen classes after training
on the final task T Ntask as acc(1 : Ntask ).

B

Non-Incremental Upper Bounds

To determine an upper bound for the performance of ResNet50 and NeMo approaches, we train on all classes jointly and provide the results in Table 1. While
both approaches are able to achieve similar performance for classification on
P3D, NeMo significantly outperforms the RestNet50 on O3D. We suspect that
the reason for this is that O3D contains a large number of occluded and truncated objects. NeMo generally outperforms the ResNet50 for pose estimation
implemented following [15].

C

Considering Uncertainty in Classification

We proposed an extension to the classification strategy introduced by Jesslen et
al. [4] in Equation 14 of the main paper which was motivated by the observation
that classes sharing visually similar features were confused more often when
training the model in an incremental setting. We believe that when training on
all classes jointly, the contrastive loss between all features of different classes
is sufficient to ensure that all parts of different objects have distinct feature
representations. However, such disentanglement is significantly more challenging
in an incremental setting. The results from Table 2 show that our proposed
strategy to exclude pixels that ambiguously relate to meshes of multiple possible
classes (i.e. uncertain pixels) brings a significant improvement.

