Simple Unsupervised Knowledge
Distillation With Space Similarity
Aditya Singh(B)

and Haohan Wang

School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL, USA
aditya.91.singh@gmail.com, haohanw@illinois.edu

Abstract. As per recent studies, Self-supervised learning (SSL) does
not readily extend to smaller architectures. One direction to mitigate this
shortcoming while simultaneously training a smaller network without
labels is to adopt unsupervised knowledge distillation (UKD). Existing
UKD approaches handcraft preservation worthy inter/intra sample relationships between the teacher and its student. However, this may overlook/ignore other key relationships present in the mapping of a teacher.
In this paper, instead of heuristically constructing preservation worthy
relationships between samples, we directly motivate the student to model
the teacher’s embedding manifold. If the mapped manifold is similar, all
inter/intra sample relationships are indirectly conserved. We ﬁrst demonstrate that prior methods cannot preserve teacher’s latent manifold due
to their sole reliance on L2 normalised embedding features. Subsequently,
we propose a simple objective to capture the lost information due to
normalisation. Our proposed loss component, termed space similarity,
motivates each dimension of a student’s feature space to be similar to
the corresponding dimension of its teacher. We perform extensive experiments demonstrating strong performance of our proposed approach on
various benchmarks.
Keywords: Unsupervised · Knowledge Distillation · Space Similarity

1

Introduction

In recent years, the development of self-supervised learning (SSL) has allowed
networks to be trained on larger datasets without labels, leading to generic representations that are task agnostic and achieve superior downstream performances
once ﬁne-tuned [14,32,41]. As a result, SSL is an active area of reasearch. For
real-time inference, such as in the domain of autonomous driving, industrial
automation etc. often small sized networks are deployed. However, these networks do not readily beneﬁt from SSL due to their smaller number of parameters,
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 9.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 147–164, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_9

