Towards Unbounded Machine Unlearning

Meghdad Kurmanji∗
University of Warwick

Peter Triantafillou
University of Warwick

Jamie Hayes
Google DeepMind

Eleni Triantafillou
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Deep machine unlearning is the problem of ‘removing’ from a trained neural
network a subset of its training set. This problem is very timely and has many
applications, including the key tasks of removing biases (RB), resolving confusion
(RC) (caused by mislabelled data in trained models), as well as allowing users to
exercise their ‘right to be forgotten’ to protect User Privacy (UP). This paper is
the first, to our knowledge, to study unlearning for different applications (RB, RC,
UP), with the view that each has its own desiderata, definitions for ‘forgetting’ and
associated metrics for forget quality. For UP, we propose a novel adaptation of
a strong Membership Inference Attack for unlearning. We also propose SCRUB,
a novel unlearning algorithm, which is the only method that is consistently a top
performer for forget quality across the different application-dependent metrics for
RB, RC, and UP. At the same time, SCRUB is also consistently a top performer
on metrics that measure model utility (i.e. accuracy on retained data and generalization), and is more efficient than previous work. The above are substantiated
through a comprehensive empirical evaluation against previous state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Can we make a deep learning model ‘forget’ a subset of its training data? Aside from being
scientifically interesting, achieving this goal of deep machine unlearning is increasingly important
and relevant from a practical perspective and this research direction is enjoying significant attention
recently [Triantafillou et al., 2023]. Regulations such as EU’s General Data Protection Regulation
[Mantelero, 2013] stipulate that individuals can request to have their data ‘deleted’ (the ‘right to be
forgotten’). Nowadays, given the ubiquity of deep learning systems in a wide range of applications,
including computer vision, natural language processing, speech recognition and healthcare, allowing
individuals to exercise this right necessitates new technology. Unlearning aims to fill this need.
However, unlearning has several additional important applications where privacy with respect to
a subset of individual training examples isn’t necessarily a consideration: removing out-of-date
examples, outliers, poisoned samples [Jagielski et al., 2018], noisy labels [Northcutt et al., 2021], or
data that may carry harmful biases [Fabbrizzi et al., 2022]. In fact, we are the first to argue that the
definition of ‘forgetting’ is application-dependent, and unlearning comes with different desiderata
and priorities in different scenarios. For instance, for a privacy application, ‘forgetting’ the data
of users who requested deletion is the primary objective and we may be willing to sacrifice model
performance to some degree, in exchange for reliably defending Membership Inference Attacks
(MIAs). In other cases, for instance, when deleting outdated data to keep a model current, maintaining
the model’s performance throughout such ‘cleanup’ operations may be the primary consideration,
and guaranteeing that no trace of the old data is left behind may be irrelevant. While previous work
does not establish such distinctions, we study three scenarios and propose a method that is the most
consistent top-performer across applications and metrics.
∗

Correspondence to Meghdad.Kurmanji@warwick.ac.uk.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

