GRACE: Graph-Based Contextual Debiasing for
Fair Visual Question Answering
(Supplementary Materials)
Yifeng Zhang , Ming Jiang , and Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN 55455, USA
{zhan6987, mjiang}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

1

Introduction

In our main paper, we have presented GRACE, a novel approach addressing
biases in knowledge-based VQA. It surpasses current debiasing methods, which
primarily tackle dataset biases but fall short in handling biases within the incontext learning paradigm. GRACE introduces two novel techniques for mitigating biases in VQA models under in-context learning: fairness-aware context
graph learning and graph-based in-context example retrieval. These techniques
aim to establish balanced and fair contexts, retrieving diverse in-context examples for more accurate and unbiased reasoning with LLMs. Experimental results
across various datasets demonstrate GRACE’s effectiveness in handling out-ofdistribution scenarios and mitigating biases. The supplementary material provides additional experimental results and implementation details of our proposed
work:
1. Sec. 2 provides additional ablation analyses of the model components and
hyperparameters used in the in-context example retrieval.
2. Sec. 3 compares the demographic parity of GRACE and the state-of-the-art
approaches over different sensitive groups.
3. Sec. 4 presents implementation details of applying debiasing approaches (i.e.,
LMH [5] and CSS [2]) to the graph-to-caption model [3].
4. Sec. 5 presents a prompt example used to instruct the LLM reasoner.

2

Additional Ablation Study

To optimize the model performance, we conduct an ablation study with different
model components and hyperparameters (i.e., values ϵ, λ, and the number of incontext examples). We evaluate model performance on OK-VQA, VQA-CPv2,
and GQA-OOD datasets.
Model Components. To assess the generalizability of GRACE, we conducted ablation studies on both GPT-3 and GPT-4 across VQA-CP and GQAOOD datasets (results in Table 1). Here, we explore the impact of individual
components within the model:

