Geo-PIFu: Geometry and Pixel Aligned Implicit
Functions for Single-view Human Reconstruction

1

Tong He1 , John Collomosse2,3 , Hailin Jin2 , Stefano Soatto1
UCLA. Creative Intelligence Lab, Adobe Research. 3 CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK.
2

{simpleig,soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

{collomos,hljin}@adobe.com

Abstract
We propose Geo-PIFu, a method to recover a 3D mesh from a monocular color
image of a clothed person. Our method is based on a deep implicit function-based
representation to learn latent voxel features using a structure-aware 3D U-Net, to
constrain the model in two ways: first, to resolve feature ambiguities in query
point encoding, second, to serve as a coarse human shape proxy to regularize
the high-resolution mesh and encourage global shape regularity. We show that,
by both encoding query points and constraining global shape using latent voxel
features, the reconstruction we obtain for clothed human meshes exhibits less
shape distortion and improved surface details compared to competing methods.
We evaluate Geo-PIFu on a recent human mesh public dataset that is 10× larger
than the private commercial dataset used in PIFu and previous derivative work.
On average, we exceed the state of the art by 42.7% reduction in Chamfer and
Point-to-Surface Distances, and 19.4% reduction in normal estimation errors.

1

Introduction

Image based modeling is enabling new forms of immersive content production, particularly through
realistic capture of human performance. Recently, deep implicit modeling techniques delivered a
step change in 3D reconstruction of clothed human meshes from monocular images. These implicit
methods train deep neural networks to estimate dense, continuous occupancy fields from which
meshes may be reconstructed e.g. via Marching Cubes [20].
Reconstruction from a single view is an inherently under-constrained problem. The resulting ambiguities are resolved by introducing assumptions into the design of the implicit surface function; the
learned function responsible for querying a 3D point’s occupancy by leveraging feature evidence from
the input image. Prior work extracts either a global image feature [21, 23, 3, 18], or pixel-aligned
features (PIFu [29]) to drive this estimation. Neither approach takes into account fine-grain local
shape patterns, nor seek to enforce global consistency to encourage physically plausible shapes
and poses in the reconstructed mesh. This can lead to unnatural body shapes or poses, and loss of
high-frequency surface details within the reconstructed mesh.
This paper contributes Geo-PIFU: an extension of pixel-aligned features to include three dimensional
information estimated via a latent voxel representation that enriches the feature representation and
regularizes the global shape of the estimated occupancy field. We augment the pixel-aligned features
with geometry-aligned shape features extracted from a latent voxel feature representation obtained by
lifting the input image features to 3D. These voxel features naturally align with the human mesh in 3D
space and thus can be trilinearly interpolated to obtain a query point’s encoding. The uniform coarse
occupancy volume losses and the structure-aware 3D U-Nets architecture used to supervise and
generate the latent voxel features, respectively, both help to inject global shape topology robustness
/ regularities into the voxel features. Essentially, the latent voxel features serve as a coarse human
shape proxy to constrain the reconstruction. Figure 1 summarises our proposed adaptation (see upper
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

