IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED MARCH, 2024

1

iSLAM: Imperative SLAM

arXiv:2306.07894v5 [cs.RO] 22 Mar 2024

Taimeng Fu1 , Shaoshu Su1 , Yiren Lu1 , and Chen Wang1

Abstract—Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
stands as one of the critical challenges in robot navigation. A
SLAM system often consists of a front-end component for motion
estimation and a back-end system for eliminating estimation
drifts. Recent advancements suggest that data-driven methods
are highly effective for front-end tasks, while geometry-based
methods continue to be essential in the back-end processes.
However, such a decoupled paradigm between the data-driven
front-end and geometry-based back-end can lead to sub-optimal
performance, consequently reducing the system’s capabilities and
generalization potential. To solve this problem, we proposed
a novel self-supervised imperative learning framework, named
imperative SLAM (iSLAM), which fosters reciprocal correction
between the front-end and back-end, thus enhancing performance
without necessitating any external supervision. Specifically, we
formulate the SLAM problem as a bilevel optimization so that
the front-end and back-end are bidirectionally connected. As a
result, the front-end model can learn global geometric knowledge
obtained through pose graph optimization by back-propagating
the residuals from the back-end component. We showcase the
effectiveness of this new framework through an application of
stereo-inertial SLAM. The experiments show that the iSLAM
training strategy achieves an accuracy improvement of 22% on
average over a baseline model. To the best of our knowledge,
iSLAM is the first SLAM system showing that the front-end
and back-end components can mutually correct each other in a
self-supervised manner.
Index Terms—SLAM, Deep Learning Methods.

I. I NTRODUCTION
IMULTANEOUS Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is
the task of tracking the trajectory of a robot while simultaneously building a map of the surroundings. It is a key
capability for autonomous robots to navigate and operate in
unknown environments [1]. The significance and intricacies
of SLAM have motivated considerable research in the field,
leading to a variety of innovative solutions [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
The design of contemporary SLAM systems generally adheres
to a front-end and back-end architecture. In this structure, the
front-end is typically responsible for interpreting sensor data
and generating an initial estimate of the robot’s trajectory and
the map of the environment, while the back-end refines these
initial estimates to improve overall accuracy [7].
The recent technological advancements in the field have
indicated that supervised learning-based methods can exhibit
impressive performance in front-end motion estimation [8],

S

Manuscript received: December 06, 2023; Revised February 15, 2024;
Accepted March 11, 2024.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Javier Civera upon
evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments.
1 Taimeng Fu, Shaoshu Su, Yiren Lu, and Chen Wang are with Spatial AI
& Robotics (SAIR) Lab, Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, NY
14260, USA. https://sairlab.org
Digital Object Identifier (DOI): see top of this page.

[9]. These methods utilize machine learning algorithms that
require external supervision, typically in the form of a labeled
dataset, to train the model, which then performs the task without requiring explicit programming. Meanwhile, geometrybased techniques persist as an essential element for the backend of the system, primarily responsible for minimizing frontend drift [10], [11]. These methods use geometrical optimization, e.g., pose graph optimization [12], to ensure the global
consistency of the estimated trajectory. However, the frontend and back-end components of the existing SLAM systems
are connected in only one direction and operate independently.
This means that the front-end data-driven model cannot receive
feedback from the back-end system for joint error correction. As a result, such a decoupled paradigm may lead to
sub-optimal performance, subsequently impeding the overall
performance of the existing SLAM systems [13].
In response to this problem, we introduce a novel selfsupervised learning framework, imperative SLAM (iSLAM).
This method promotes mutual correction between the frontend and back-end of a SLAM system, thereby improving the
system’s overall performance. For the first time, we formulate
the SLAM problem as a bilevel optimization [14], [15], in
which the front-end data-driven odometry model is learned
through an optimization procedure in the back-end, such
as pose graph optimization (PGO). This results in a selfsupervised bilevel learning framework. Specifically, at the lowlevel optimization (back-end), the robot’s path is adjusted in
PGO to ensure geometric consistency, whereas, at the high
level (front-end), the model parameters are updated to incorporate the knowledge derived from the back-end. This novel
formulation seamlessly integrates the front-end and back-end
into a unified optimization problem, facilitating reciprocal
enhancement between the two components.
A challenge in our formulation lies in back-propagating the
back-end residuals into the front-end model, which involves
differentiating the gradient through the PGO. A widely used
solution is to back-propagate the gradient through the unrolled
PGO iterations [16], [9]. However, this is inefficient and
resource-intensive as the gradients of intermediate variables in
all iterations are involved. To solve this issue, we introduced
a “one-step” strategy using the property of stationary points
to bypass the PGO loops and back-propagate the gradient to
the network in one step. In the experiment, we show that this
“one-step” strategy is numerically equivalent to the unrolling
approach [16], [9] and achieves a 1.5× faster execution speed.
To the best of our knowledge, iSLAM is the first SLAM
system showing that the front-end and back-end can mutually
correct each other in a self-supervised manner. Fig. 1 shows a
demo of real-time tracking and reconstruction using iSLAM.
Through this work, we hope to pave a new learning scheme

