1

Harnessing Text-to-Image Diffusion Models for CategoryAgnostic Pose Estimators (Supplementary)

1

Effect of learning pseudo prompts.

Considering the image keypoints are often difficult to describe textually, we propose to learn pseudo prompts to more appropriately represent the semantics of
keypoints. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our prompt learning, we assess
the following two variants: (1) We crop the keypoint regions from few-shot examples, input them into an off-the-shelf image caption model [2] to obtain textual
descriptions of keypoints, and finally use these descriptions to locate the corresponding keypoints for test images; (2) We crop keypoint regions and send them
into the off-the-shelf CLIP’s vision encoder [4] to map image regions into textual
embeddings, and finally use these embeddings to find keypoints for test images.
Both variants aim to directly describe keypoints using off-the-shelf image-text
models, with the only difference being that: the first variant describes keypoints
in texts, while the second describes keypoints in textual embeddings. We handle
experiments on this two variants using various crop sizes and choose the optimal
size for them. As shown in Tab. 1, we can see that our approach, which learns
pseudo prompts for keypoints, is much more effective than variants that directly
describe keypoints. This is because the semantics of keypoints are often intricate to convey accurately through direct descriptions, while our prompt-learning
method allows for a more precise alignment between the learned prompts and
the visual keypoints.
Table 1: Ablation on learning pseudo prompts.
Method
Keypoint Caption
CLIP Encoding
Ours (prompt learning)

2

Cross Super-Cate. Cross Sub-Cate. Cross Sub-Cate.
(1-shot)
(1-shot)
(5-shot)
22.61
20.52
70.06

26.13
27.56
87.54

27.07
28.25
92.58

Extensibility of our approach on other diffusion models.

As mentioned in our main paper, the proposed PPM is based on the crossattention mechanism to learn pseudo prompts which serve as bridges to build
correspondences for CAPE. Given that the cross-attention mechanism is generally used in text-to-image diffusion models for text-visual interaction, our

