Open Vocabulary 3D Scene Understanding via
Geometry Guided Self-Distillation
- Supplementary Material Pengfei Wang1,2 , Yuxi Wang2 , Shuai Li1 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4(
Lei1,2,3,4 , and Lei Zhang1( )

)

, Zhen

1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
pengfei.wang@connect.polyu.hk, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn,
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2

The following contents are provided in this supplementary material:
– Section A: Detailed implementations of GGSD.
– Section B: More qualitative results.

A

Implementation Details

More Details of Feature Fusion. OpenScene can be considered as our baseline model, and we strictly follow its approach for multi-view fusion of pixel
embeddings. Specifically, on the nuScenes dataset, we perform fusion using all
the images from each scene. However, on the ScanNet dataset, we sample one
image out of every 20 video frames. For indoor datasets, we conduct occlusion
tests. For each surface point, we first find its corresponding pixel in the image
and calculate the distance between that pixel and the 3D point. Only when
the difference between the distance and the depth value of that pixel is smaller
than a threshold σ, do we pair the 3D point and the pixel. The threshold σ is
proportional to the depth value D. Due to the high noise in depth values, we
use σ = 0.2D for ScanNet and σ = 0.02D for Matterport. We do not project
the features of pixels in the “invalid” regions of the depth map onto 3D points.
For the nuScenes LiDAR point cloud, since no depth images are provided, we
do not perform occlusion tests. We only use the synchronized images and the
corresponding LiDAR points at the last timestamp of a 0.5-second segment.
More Details of Superpoint Generation. We employ VCCS [1] to generate superpoints for indoor datasets. VCCS starts with a set of seed points
uniformly distributed on a voxel grid with a resolution of Rseed , and gradually
expands the superpoints. Initially, we divide the input point cloud into voxel
grids of size 2 × 2 × 2 cm. Then, a set of seed points is uniformly distributed
within the voxelized point cloud, with a spacing of 50 cm between seed points.
For each seed point, within a sphere of radius 50 cm, we set the seed point as
the initial center and search for its 27 neighboring points. The distance between

