Supplementary Material for
"Rethinking Few-shot Class-incremental
Learning: Learning from Yourself"
Yu-Ming Tang, Yi-Xing Peng, Jingke Meng, and Wei-Shi Zheng

A1

Detailed Information of The Corner Cases

In Sec 3. of the main paper, we analyze the necessity of the proposed generalized
accuracy (gAcc) metric. In Fig. 2 of the main paper, we analyze some possible
corner cases of the FSCIL setting on the proposed gAcc metric. Detailed information on these cases is shown below. An extension of Fig. 2 of the main paper
is shown in Fig. A1.
Lazy. To analyze the situation of an algorithm that totally ignores the novel
tasks and only retrains the first-task (base) performance, we design this corner
case called ‘Lazy’ to show its performance under existing metrics and our proposed gAcc. The detailed accuracies of each task are shown in Table A1. We set
the base class performance as 85% after training on the first task, i.e. A11 = 85%.
We set the model completely ignoring the novel task and base task performance
remains unchanged during incremental tasks, i.e. ∀j ≥ i > 1, Aji = 0, A1i = A11 .
In Fig. A1 (c), the accuracy (aAcc) of ‘Lazy’ is very close to those of recent
SOTAs. This is not satisfying since the primary goal of continual learning is to
learn new knowledge. In comparison, the proposed gAcc correctly distinguishes
this situation and presents a more balanced evaluation, which gives a low AUC
to ‘Lazy’ and shows the margin of this case and other methods (see Fig. A1 (b)).
In conclusion, the aAcc alone fails to reflect the performance of FSCIL methods
properly and our gAcc can provide a more balanced perspective.
Greedy and Greedy-NF. We also show two other extreme examples. The
‘Greedy’ situation is that an algorithm only focuses on the novel classes and
does not care about the previous forgetting problem, i.e. for all novel tasks,
Aji = 100%, when i = j else 0. The A11 is set to 85%. See Table A2 for the
detailed performance. It is clear that, under the metric of gAcc and aAcc, the
’greedy’ performs far worse than other methods/cases. Furthermore, we also
show the non-forget version of the ‘Greedy’ as ‘Greedy-NF’. For ’Greedy-NF’,
we set Aji to 100% for ∀j > 1, j < i. See Table A3 for the detailed performance at
each task. From Fig. A1, we can see that, after removing the forgetting problem
of the ‘Greedy’, the performance under gAcc is boosted significantly. It should
be clarified that even though the ’Greedy-NF’ performs well on the novel classes,
their lame performance on the base classes affects the final gAcc. These results
show that the gAcc will not over-emphasize the novel class performance and
provide more balanced perspectives of base-novel performance.
Vit baseline. We further show our vit baseline in the Fig. A1. This baseline is
conducted by employing a pure vit trained on the first task to extract features for

