Deep Equilibrium Models

Shaojie Bai
Carnegie Mellon University

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
We present a new approach to modeling sequential data: the deep equilibrium
model (DEQ). Motivated by an observation that the hidden layers of many existing
deep sequence models converge towards some fixed point, we propose the DEQ
approach that directly finds these equilibrium points via root-finding. Such a
method is equivalent to running an infinite depth (weight-tied) feedforward network,
but has the notable advantage that we can analytically backpropagate through the
equilibrium point using implicit differentiation. Using this approach, training
and prediction in these networks require only constant memory, regardless of the
effective “depth” of the network. We demonstrate how DEQs can be applied to
two state-of-the-art deep sequence models: self-attention transformers and trellis
networks. On large-scale language modeling tasks, such as the WikiText-103
benchmark, we show that DEQs 1) often improve performance over these stateof-the-art models (for similar parameter counts); 2) have similar computational
requirements to existing models; and 3) vastly reduce memory consumption (often
the bottleneck for training large sequence models), demonstrating an up-to 88%
memory reduction in our experiments. The code is available at ❤tt♣s✿✴✴❣✐t❤✉❜✳
❝♦♠✴❧♦❝✉s❧❛❜✴❞❡q.

1

Introduction

Most modern feedforward deep networks are built on the core concept of layers. In the forward pass,
each network consists of a stack of some L transformations, where L is the depth of the network. To
update these networks, the backward passes rely on backpropagating through the same L layers via the
chain rule, which typically necessitates that we store the intermediate values of these layers. The value
for L is usually a hyperparameter and is picked by model designers (e.g., ResNet-101 [25]). Among
the many applications of deep networks, sequence modeling has witnessed continuous advances in
model architectures. Specifically, while recurrent networks have long been the dominant model for
sequences [21, 26, 14, 34], deep feedforward architectures based on temporal convolutions [49, 47, 7]
and self-attention [48, 16, 13] have (re-)emerged to claim superior performance on a variety of
sequence prediction tasks.
In very general terms, a deep feedforward sequence model can be written as the following iteration:

[i+1]
[i] [i]
z1:T = fθ z1:T ; x1:T
for i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , L − 1
(1)
[i]

where i is the layer index; z1:T is the hidden sequence of length T at layer i; x1:T is the input
sequence (i.e., we are choosing to explicitly model skip connections, for reasons we explain later);
[i]
and fθ is some nonlinear transformation which typically enforces causality (i.e., future time points
cannot influence past ones). Our paper derives its motivation from surprising recent works that
[i]
employ the same transformation in each layer (known as weight tying, with fθ = fθ , ∀i) and still
achieve results competitive with the state-of-the-art [18, 8, 15]. This raises an interesting question: If
the same transformation is applied at each layer of a deep network, what is the limit of this process,
and how do we model it?
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

