Towards Real-World Adverse Weather Image
Restoration: Enhancing Clearness and Semantics
with Vision-Language Models
Supplementary Material
Jiaqi Xu1 , Mengyang Wu1 , Xiaowei Hu2,⋆ ,
Chi-Wing Fu1 , Qi Dou1 , and Pheng-Ann Heng1
2

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

The supplementary material is structured into three main sections. First, it
expands on the details of the methodology in Appendix A. Second, Appendix B
delves into additional details regarding the datasets and the implementations. Finally, Appendix C presents supplementary experimental results, including more
quantitative and qualitative analyses, and additional ablation studies.

A

Network and Training Details

A.1

Network Structure

Our semi-supervised learning framework has compatibility with a variety of
image restoration networks. We adopt MSBDN [17] as our backbone due to
its balanced performance and rapid inference speed in our main study. MSBDN is originally an image dehazing network based on U-Net [34] architecture, which shows effectiveness in all-in-one adverse weather image restoration [5]. Three components comprise MSBDN, with an encoder, decoder, and
in-between feature restoration module. The intermediate feature maps are of
strides 1/1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16 regarding the input image, with downsampling
operations in the encoder and upsampling operations in the decoder. Several
boosting and fusion techniques are proposed to enhance the image restoration
capability. Please refer to MSBDN [17] for more details. Moreover, our proposed
framework is also compatible with more advanced image restoration networks,
e.g., Restormer [51] and NAFNet [3]. We provide additional evidence for improving Restormer to restore real adverse weather images in Appendix C.10.
A.2

Description-Assisted Semantic Enhancement

In our approach, we employ vision-language models (VLMs) to provide a natural language description of the adverse weather image, encompassing rich semantic information about the scene and adverse weather conditions. Negative
⋆

Corresponding author (huxiaowei@pjlab.org.cn)

