Supplementary Material for
Efficient Depth-Guided Urban View Synthesis
Sheng Miao1∗ , Jiaxin Huang1∗ , Dongfeng Bai2 , Weichao Qiu2 , Bingbing Liu2 ,
Andreas Geiger3,4 , and Yiyi Liao1B
1

Zhejiang University

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Tübingen AI Center

3

University of Tübingen

Abstract. In this supplementary document, we initially present an
in-depth overview of our network architecture in Sec. A. Subsequently,
we elaborate on our implementation details in Sec. B, encompassing the
random masking strategy, the sampling strategy, and the point cloud
accumulation configurations. Following this, we introduce the baselines
for comparison in Sec. C, and discuss the datasets utilized in our experiments in Sec. D. Finally, we present additional experimental results in
Sec. E. Besides, the supplementary video showcases our feed-forward
and fine-tuned results across various scenes, along with novel view renderings compared against multiple baselines.

A

Network Architecture

A.1

Modulation-based CNN

Our 3D Spatially-Adaptive Normalization convolutional neural network (SPADE
CNN) modulates the feature volume generation at multiple resolutions. It takes
a single voxelized point cloud with dimension 64 × 128 × 256 as input. The
appearance information of the input point cloud is injected into the feature
volume at each resolution. Fig. 1 presents the detailed network architecture.
A.2

Foreground Network Architecture

The feature volume generated by the 3D SPADE CNN provides both geometric
priors and appearance information for foreground contents. Based on a feature
3D
vector ffg
∈ R16 extracted from this feature volume, our density decoder gθ
predicts the density value. In order to capture high-frequency appearance during
3D
feedforward inference, the color decoder hθ combines the 3D feature ffg
∈ R16
2D
and 2D features queried from nearest views ffg
∈ R9 for color prediction. In
addition, the color decoder further takes the positional encoding of x as input,
setting the number of frequencies to 10 following [5]. Furthermore, we inject
viewing direction d ∈ R3 and a per-frame appearance embedding w ∈ R32 . We
present the detailed network architecture in Tab. 1.
⋆

Equally contributed. B Corresponding author.

