WAS: Dataset and Methods for Artistic Text
Segmentation
# Supplementary File #
Xudong Xie1 , Yuzhe Li1 , Yang Liu1 , Zhifei Zhang2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Wei
Xiong2 , and Xiang Bai1( )
1

1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{xdxie,yzli12,yangliu1213,xbai}@hust.edu.cn
2
Adobe, USA
{zzhang,zhawang}@adobe.com, wxiongur@gmail.com

More Details on Synthetic Dataset Construction

As stated in the paper, we first construct the training pipeline for a text image
generation model, learning to generate text images spatially aligned with text
masks. Then we construct an inference pipeline to input new masks and prompts
into the trained generation model, generating new text images. Here we add the
details of prompt generation in the training and inference pipelines.
1.1

Training Pipeline

To train the text image generation model such as ControlNet [5], it is necessary to obtain training data of <caption, text mask, text image> triplets. Text
masks and text images are from our proposed real dataset. Captions should be
detailed descriptions of the text images. To this end, we utilize a large multimodal model, Monkey [2], to caption the images. Monkey is an open-source
model and can handle vision-language tasks with high-resolution input and detailed scene understanding. It performs well on Image Captioning and various
Visual Question Answering (VQA) tasks. Therefore, we feed a text image and a
prompt “generate the detailed caption in English” to Monkey and let it output a
detailed description. The examples of the generated captions are shown in Fig. 1.
We found that, in many cases, Monkey is able to recognize and describe the text
in images. To ensure the accuracy of the descriptions and to highlight the importance of the text, we add a sentence after each caption: This image contains
the text “text in the image”.
1.2

Inference Pipeline

During the inference phase, we first need to produce new binary masks of text
through the Mask Render introduced in the paper. Moreover, it is crucial to
Corresponding author

