DVLO: Deep Visual-LiDAR Odometry with
Local-to-Global Feature Fusion and
Bi-Directional Structure Alignment
(Supplementary Materials)
Jiuming Liu1 , Dong Zhuo1 , Zhiheng Feng1 , Siting Zhu1
Chensheng Peng2 , Zhe Liu3 , and Hesheng Wang1 ⋆
1

Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of California, Berkeley
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liujiuming, paryi555, wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn

In this supplementary material, we provide additional details about our network and show more experimental results of the proposed methods. In Sec. 1,
we illustrate more implementation details of our network, including the feature
extraction pyramid and our Local-to-Global Fusion (LoGo Fusion) module. In
Sec. 2, we give the details about data augmentation, coordinate transformation,
and fusion mask. In Sec. 3, we provide a graphical demonstration of our LoGo
Fusion. In Sec. 4, we compare our method with other deep visual odometry
methods on the KITTI odometry dataset [1]. In Sec. 5, we show more trajectory
visualization results on KITTI 00-10 sequences.

1

Network Settings

As illustrated in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, more implementation details of our network
are shown. Tab. 1 includes settings of our point and image feature extraction
pyramid in each layer. For our Local-to-Global fusion (LoGo Fusion), we retain
the feature channels of extracted point features FP ∈ RD and image features
FI ∈ RC to be the same (C = D). The extracted features are then fed into our
LoGo Fusion module. Therefore, the "input dim" of our Local and Global Fuser
should be the same as the channels of extracted features as shown in Tab. 2.

2

Data Preprocessing

Data Augmentation. Far points at the edge of point cloud frames are commonly considered outliers, which undermine the final accuracy. Thus, we filter
these outliers and maintain points within a 30m × 30m square space before the
point feature extraction. For the robustness of the network, we also augment
the training dataset with a matrix Taug , which is generated by random rotation
⋆

Corresponding author. The first two authors contribute equally.

