Im2Text: Describing Images Using 1 Million
Captioned Photographs

Vicente Ordonez

Girish Kulkarni

Tamara L Berg

Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
{vordonezroma or tlberg}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We develop and demonstrate automatic image description methods using a large
captioned photo collection. One contribution is our technique for the automatic
collection of this new dataset – performing a huge number of Flickr queries and
then filtering the noisy results down to 1 million images with associated visually
relevant captions. Such a collection allows us to approach the extremely challenging problem of description generation using relatively simple non-parametric
methods and produces surprisingly effective results. We also develop methods incorporating many state of the art, but fairly noisy, estimates of image content to
produce even more pleasing results. Finally we introduce a new objective performance measure for image captioning.

1

Introduction

Producing a relevant and accurate caption for an arbitrary image is an extremely challenging problem, perhaps nearly as difficult as the underlying general image understanding task. However, there
are already many images with relevant associated descriptive text available in the noisy vastness of
the web. The key is to find the right images and make use of them in the right way! In this paper,
we present a method to effectively skim the top of the image understanding problem to caption photographs by collecting and utilizing the large body of images on the internet with associated visually
descriptive text. We follow in the footsteps of past work on internet vision that has demonstrated
that big data can often make big problems – e.g. image localization [13], retrieving photos with
specific content [27], or image parsing [26] – much more bite size and amenable to very simple nonparametric matching methods. In our case, with a large captioned photo collection we can create an
image description surprisingly well even with basic global image representations for retrieval and
caption transfer. In addition, we show that it is possible to make use of large numbers of state of the
art, but fairly noisy estimates of image content to produce more pleasing and relevant results.
People communicate through language, whether written or spoken. They often use this language to
describe the visual world around them. Studying collections of existing natural image descriptions
and how to compose descriptions for novel queries will help advance progress toward more complex human recognition goals, such as how to tell the story behind an image. These goals include
determining what content people judge to be most important in images and what factors they use
to construct natural language to describe imagery. For example, when given a picture like that on
the top row, middle column of figure 1, the user describes the girl, the dog, and their location, but
selectively chooses not to describe the surrounding foliage and hut.
This link between visual importance and descriptions leads naturally to the problem of text summarization in natural language processing (NLP). In text summarization, the goal is to select or
generate a summary for a document. Some of the most common and effective methods proposed for
summarization rely on extractive summarization [25, 22, 28, 19, 23]. where the most important or
1

