PoseEmbroider: Towards a 3D, Visual,
Semantic-aware Human Pose Representation



Supplementary Material

Ginger Delmas

1,2

2

, Philippe Weinzaepfel

1

2

Francesc Moreno-Noguer , and Grégory Rogez
1

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2

NAVER LABS Europe

https://europe.naverlabs.com/research/PoseEmbroider/

In this supplementary material, we present examples of tri-modal data samples from BEDLAM-Script and BEDLAM-Fix (Section A), and complete the
explanations given in the main paper about these augmentations of BEDLAM

e.g . image selection criteria). We provide additional qualitative results and anal-

(

ysis (including limitations) of our models in Section B. The original annotations
associated to the queries presented in the main paper are available in Section C.
Finally, we give implementation details in Section D and discuss responsibility
to human subjects (Section E).

A

More about BEDLAM-Script and BEDLAM-Fix

Dataset examples. Figure A1 shows some examples of tri-modal samples from

BEDLAM-Script. Figure A2 does the same for BEDLAM-Fix.
Additional details about data selection. To select samples from BEDLAM,

we begin by a ltering of the images based on joint visibility, then proceed with
the farthest pose sampling algorithm described in the main text of this paper.
Here is the list of criteria used to select people images:

• At least 16 of the main body joints had to be within the image boundaries
(although they could be subject to occlusion).

• The person was required to be at the forefront (i.e ., positioned closest to the
front compared to other individuals in the same image). However, we relaxed
this condition slightly by also considering individuals positioned further in
the background, provided that at least 70% of their bounding box did not
overlap with the bounding box of someone positioned closer to the front.

• At least one side of the human bounding box (upscaled by a factor 1.1) had
to be more than 224 pixels.
Paired elements (poses, images) in BEDLAM-Fix are part of BEDLAM-Script.

