C-Instructor

1

Controllable Navigation Instruction Generation
with Chain of Thought Prompting
Supplementary Material
This document provides more details, extra experimental results, and further
discussion of C-Instructor. The document is organized as follows:
– §A provides detailed prompts for several datasets.
– §B presents extra ablation results on different selection strategies and values
of β in landmark selection.
– §C further analyzes the effect of STMT through the training process.
– §D shows more qualitative results of instruction generation and analyzes
some failure cases.
– §E discusses the social impact and limitations of our work, and suggests
potential future work.

A

Detailed Prompts

In this section, we provide detailed prompts for different navigation datasets.
Note that all the given prompts are then formatted by prompt templates in [2].
– promptλ for R2R [1]: You are given a sequence of views of a path. Please
extract critical landmarks in the path.
– promptw for R2R [1]: You are given a sequence of views of a path in an indoor
environment. Please describe the path according to the given landmarks in
detail for an intelligent agent to follow. Landmarks: <landmarks>.
– promptλ for REVERIE [4]: You are given a sequence of views of a path in
an indoor environment. Please extract several critical landmarks in the path
for generating a brief high-level target-oriented instruction.
– promptw for REVERIE [4]: You are given a sequence of views of a path in
an indoor environment and critical landmarks for a brief high-level targetoriented instruction. Please generate the indicated high-level target-oriented
instruction briefly for an intelligent agent to follow. Landmarks: <landmarks>.
– promptλ for RxR [3]: You are given a sequence of views of a path in an
indoor environment. Please extract critical landmarks describing the starting
position and the path.
– promptw for RxR [3]: You are given a sequence of views of a path in an indoor
environment. Please describe the starting position and the path according to
the given landmarks in detail for an intelligent agent to follow. Landmarks:
<landmarks>.
– prompta : You are an intelligent embodied agent that navigates in an indoor
environment. Your task is to move among the static viewpoints (positions)
of a pre-defined graph of the environment. You are given several candidate
views. You are also given a sequence of panoramic views showing previous

