ViPer: Visual Personalization of Generative
Models via Individual Preference Learning
Supplementary Material
Sogand Salehi , Mahdi Shafiei , Teresa Yeo
Roman Bachmann , and Amir Zamir
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL)
https://viper.epfl.ch

A

Outline

We provide further discussions, details, and evaluations as outlined below:
– In Appendix B, we provide detailed information about our experimental
setup. This includes the generated images for individuals to comment on in
Appendix B.1, the visual attributes used to train our agents in Appendix B.3,
and an explanation of some of our design choices in Appendix B.4.
– In Appendix C, we demonstrate the alignment of our proxy M with human
users through a detailed test study.
– We present additional experiments in Appendix D. We conduct a larger-scale
automated evaluation in Appendix D.1. We explore the effect of the number
of comments and images on the level of personalization in Appendix D.2 and
Appendix D.7. Additionally, we provide details on Prompt Personalization
and fine-tuning Stable Diffusion and their shortcomings in Appendix D.3 and
Appendix D.8. We further check the consistency of ViPer with input prompts
and compare the results with other baselines in Appendix D.4. The effect of
visual attributes is presented in Appendix D.5, and concerns regarding the
diversity of results are addressed in Appendix D.6.
– We discuss the broader impact of our method in Appendix E.
– We address concerns regarding our use of human data in this paper in Appendix F.

B

Experimental Setup

B.1

Visuals of Generated Images Used for Comments

We employ Stable Diffusion XL [11] to generate around 50 images spanning
diverse art styles and concepts. To ensure diversity, we first generated approximately 2000 visual attributes using the same method we used for creating our
agents’ visual preferences. Next, we used multiple language models, such as
Llama 3 [1] and GPT-4 [10], to generate 50 concepts. We then concatenated
the visual attributes with these concepts and selected the top 50 unique images

