Large Motion Model for Unified Multi-Modal
Motion Generation
– Supplementary Material –

A

MotionVerse

In this section, we offer additional details about the construction of MotionVerse benchmark.
A.1

Dataset Preprocess

Based on the characteristics of each dataset, we employ different preprocessing
methods. To avoid overlap between the training and test sets of different datasets,
we excluded sequences from the training set of each benchmark that intersect
with any test set motion sequences. Below, we provide detailed explanations of
the processing methods for each dataset. After aligning each dataset to SMPL-X
joints and processing them into TOMATO format using the same set of scripts,
they are decomposed into 10 body parts. Therefore, our main focus will be on
how each dataset is aligned to SMPL-X 3D joints and which body parts are
included in each dataset.
HumanML3D. The HumanML3D dataset is annotated from two sources: AMASS
data and HumanAct12. The former provides native SMPL-X annotations, while
the latter offers 22 keypoint annotations based on the SMPL format. Additionally, the MotionX dataset provides facial motion data corresponding to each
action sequence in HumanML3D. Therefore, there are two overall annotation
formats. For data from AMASS, it includes all 10 body parts and does not require keypoint mapping. We use SMPL-X model to convert the SMPL-X beta
parameters and theta parameters into 3D coordinates. For data from HumanAct12, it includes 7 body parts (excluding face, left hand, and right hand).
KIT-ML. We located the AMASS data corresponding to KIT-ML and utilized
this portion of the AMASS data to generate the motion sequences for KIT-ML.
Since there is no additional face motion data available, it comprises a total of 9
body parts.
Motion-X. Motion-X provides key points based on the SMPL-X format and
facial expressions based on FLAME. Here, we don’t need to perform additional
key point conversion, and it includes all 10 body parts.
BABEL. BABEL is also annotated based on AMASS. Since there is no face
motion available, we only consider its 9 body parts.
UESTC. For the UESTC dataset, we follow the processing method used in
ACTOR. We use the SMPL parameters estimated from VIBE as the raw data.
We use default betas parameters to obtain the 3D coordinates of each joint. Since

