CriSP: Cross-Domain Shoe Retrieval
from Crime-scene Shoeprints
Samia Shafique1
3

Shu Kong2,3,4

⋆

⋆

Charless Fowlkes1

1
2
University of California, Irvine
University of Macau
4
Institute of Collaborative Innovation
Texas A&M University
sshafiqu@uci.edu skong@um.edu.mo fowlkes@ics.uci.edu

code and dataset at https://github.com/Samia067/CriSp

Appendix

Outline
Our aim is to identify shoe models resembling crime-scene impressions by comparing them to a comprehensive shoe database. Leveraging tread images from
online retailers, we construct our reference database, prioritizing tread depth
maps over RGB tread images for their greater relevance and informativeness [5].
As there is no dataset of crime-scene shoeprints paired with ground-truth tread
depth maps, we propose learning from tread depth maps and clean shoeprints
predicted from RGB tread images instead. We utilize a data augmentation module Aug to bridge the domain gap between clean and crime-scene prints, and a
spatial feature masking strategy (using spatial encoder Enc and masking module M ) to match shoeprint patterns with corresponding locations on tread depth
maps. CriSp achieves significantly better retrieval results than prior methods.
In this supplementary document, we discuss the following topics:
– Section 1 presents visualizations of retrievals by CriSp and also compares
them with those of prior methods.
– Section 2 provides a detailed quantitative comparison to state-of-the-art
methods. We study generalization to unseen shoe models in Sec. 2.1 and
further detail the performance of methods on each unique shoe tread pattern in Sec. 2.2.
– Section 3 elaborates on the training process of prior methods. We investigate
the performance of fine-tuning these methods using masks to simulate partial
prints in Sec. 3.1 and compare the performance of MCNCC [2] when using
a reference database of shoeprints vs. tread depth maps in Sec. 3.2.
– Section 4 defines the mean average precision at K, which serves as a metric
for evaluating and comparing methods.
⋆

Authors share senior authorship.

