1

A

Introduction

In the supplementary section, we will show more examples and results to demonstrate the rationality and effectiveness of our proposed method - PUDE. Here is
the list of the supportive materials contained in this document:
– In Supplementary Section Appendix B, we provide additional examples of
the observations O1 and O2 of DPT on underwater images described in
Sec. 3. Specifically, we demonstrate that the DPT model tends to overestimate depth in distant regions and struggles with detecting clear background
edges. Additionally, we include similar observations from other in-air models,
including the latest model, Depth-Anything [5].
– In Suppl. Appendix C, we will feature a qualitative comparison of the results
listed in Tab. 1. This comparison utilizes images from the Sea-thru [1] and
SQUID [2] datasets.
– We will present more comparisons of the zero-shot estimation qualitative results between DPT and PUDE on underwater images in Suppl. Appendix D.
This comparison aims to highlight the improvements PUDE offers over DPT.

B

Additional observation examples

As described in the observations O1 and O2 in Sec. 3, we found the DPT tends
to overestimate the depth in the distant regions. The estimated inverse depth,
1
denoted by dD
i , and the inverse of the groundtruth zi deviates from a linear
relationship and presents curve tendency. DPT struggles with accurately detecting the outlines of the background, resulting in the edges appearing foggy.
Additional examples of this phenomenon are shown in Fig. 1. These examples
also demonstrate our observations. DPT exhibits difficulties in processing the
outlines of the background and in representing the depth details. In the examples in Fig. 1, blue arrows are used to identify the background edges that DPT
fails to detect clearly. Additionally, the relationship between the estimated in1
verse relative depth dD
i and the inverse of the ground truth zi demonstrates a
non-linearity, particularly noticeable when dD
i is small.
The above phenomena are widely observed when applying in-air models with
different structures and training data to in-water scenarios. Besides DPT and
MiDaS discussed in this paper, we also present the curve tendency behavior
of other in-air models, including MegaDepth, Omnidata(v1) [3], and the latest
Depth-Anything [5], as shown in Fig. 2.
PUDE is a general transfer framework designed for in-air models with these
properties. Using the same training pipeline, we derived PUDE(A) from DepthAnything. Results in Tab. 1 support our claims.

C

Visualize results from Tables

To demonstrate the comparisons between different methods listed in Tab. 1 more
intuitively, we show the qualitative comparison using some image examples from

