1

ManiGaussian: Dynamic Gaussian Splatting for
Multi-task Robotic Manipulation
Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we provide additional details and experiments not included in the main paper due to limitations in space.
– Appendix A: Details of the RLBench dataset and the training pipeline used
in our experiments.
– Appendix B: Additional implementation details of our ManiGaussian.
– Appendix C: Supplementary quantitative analysis.
– Appendix D: Supplementary qualitative analysis.

A

Details of RLBench

RLBench Dataset. In this section, we provide a concise overview of the RLBench [4] dataset and our training pipeline. Table 1 is an overview of the 10
selected tasks we use in the experiments. Our task variations include randomly
sampled colors, sizes, counts, placements, and categories of objects. We have a
color palette of 20 shades, including red, maroon, lime, green, blue, navy, yellow,
cyan, magenta, silver, gray, orange, olive, purple, teal, azure, violet, rose, black,
and white. The size of the objects is categorized into two types: short and tall.
The number of objects can be either 1, 2, or 3. Other properties vary depending
on the specific task. Furthermore, objects are randomly arranged on the tabletop
within a certain range, adding to the diversity of the tasks. In the ablation study,
we adopt the task classification from [3] to group the RLBench tasks of Table 1
into 6 categories according to their key challenges. The task groups include:
– The Planning group contains tasks with multiple subtasks. The included
tasks are: meat off grill and push buttons.
– The Long group includes long-term tasks that requires more than 10 keyframes.
The included tasks are: put in drawer and stack blocks.
– The Tools group requires the agent to grasp an object to interact with the
target object. The included tasks are: slide block, drag stick and sweep
to dustpan.
– The Motion group requires precise control, which often causes failures due
to the predefined motion planner. The included task is: turn tap.
– The Screw group requires gripper rotation to screw an object. The included
task is: close jar.
– The Occlusion group involves tasks with severe occlusion problems from
certain views. The included task is: open drawer.
Training Pipeline. To learn the policy, we uniformly sample a group of expert
episodes from all the task variations, and then randomly choose an input-action
pair for each of the tasks to form a batch. Other sampling strategies (e.g., Autoλ [6]) are also available. To simplify the tasks, the agent is assumed to access a

