1

A

Data Generation Process via SCM

A.1

Assumptions on SCM

We summarize the detailed assumption our proposed SCM in Assumption 1.
Assumption 1 (a) The domain variable U is the root node and does not directly
link to Y or X. (b) Zi is generated by either Y or U for any i. (c) The CMB
set of Y does not include U , and Y does not directly link to X. (d) Zi is the
parent of X, and X is the leaf node in the graph. (e) The causal graph over
{X, Y, Z, U } forms DAG.
A.2

Generality of the Proposed SCM

We illustrate the distinct SCMs employed by prior causal representation learning methods in Figure 1. Figure 1(a), (b), and (d) share certain characteristics:
1) the input X can be generated through latent high-level factors Z; 2) Distribution shifts arise from the domain-specific variable U . U induces changes in
the distribution of input X by influencing the distribution of partial high-level
latent variables Z. In practical scenarios, the high-level latent factors Z are often unobservable, and only their transformation X is observable. Consequently,
Invariant Causal Prediction (ICP) [8], which seeks parent variables Zp from the
observed set of Z, may falter when applied to X. [7] propose a general SCM setting in Figure 1(b). However, they categorize latent factors into two main types:
causal factors (parent variables of Y ) Zp and non-causal factors (a collection of
various latent variables except for parent variables) Znc . While leveraging causal
factors for out-of-distribution (OOD) prediction, they neglect factors that are
also invariant and predictive of Y . To enhance prediction performance, we further specify Znc into different types of factors with respect to Y , as illustrated in
Figure 1(c), i.e., Znc = {Zo , Zc , Zs }. If we combine (Zs , Zc ) or (Zo , Zc ) in our
proposed SCM, as shown in Figure 1(d), our proposed SCM is equivalent to the
SCM employed by [7]. We hence contend that our SCM is as general as SCMs
employed by existing methods. The only additional assumption we make is that

𝑈

𝑈

𝒁!'

⋯ 𝒁!(

𝑌

𝑈

𝒁𝒏"' ⋯ 𝒁*"+

𝒁!'

⋯ 𝒁!(

𝑌

𝑈
𝒁# 𝒁*"
𝒁 𝒁"
$

𝒁!

𝑌

𝒁"

(a) The SCM of Peters et al., 2015

𝑿
(b) The SCM of Lu et al., 2022

𝑿
(c) The specification of SCM in (b).

𝒁$
𝒁!

𝑿

𝒁#
𝒁"%&

𝑌
𝒁"

(d) Our proposed SCM

Fig. 1: Comparison between different SCMs.

the domain variable U is not within the CMB of Y , implying no direct causal
links between U and child variables Zc . The crucial question is whether there

