ReMatching: Low-Resolution Representations for
Scalable Shape Correspondence
Supplementary Material
Filippo Maggioli1 , Daniele Baieri2 , Emanuele Rodolà2 , and Simone
Melzi1
1
2

University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Sapienza – University of Rome, Rome, Italy

1

Proofs

1.1

Proof of Theorem 2

Theorem 2. Let (M, dM ) be a 2-dimensional metric space. If a general VD
{Pi }si=1 of M satisfies the FUP, it also satisfies the closed ball property.
Proof. The first condition of the closed ball property trivially holds.
By contradiction, suppose Pi ∩ Pj is not empty, but it is not a closed 1ball. Since Pi ∪ Pj is topologically flat, if their boundary is formed by two or
more connected components, none of these can be a closed loop. But if the
boundary between Pi and Pj is formed by two or more topological segments,
then Pi ∪ Pj must contain a hole, which contradicts the second condition of the
flat union property. Conversely, if their boundary is formed by a single connected
component which is not a topological segment, then the boundary must form a
loop inside Pi ∪ Pj . Such loop would either contain Pi or Pj , forming a hole in
the other texel and violating the first condition of the flat union property.
By contradiction, suppose Pi ∩ Pj ∩ Pk is not empty, but it is not a closed
0-ball. Every connected component of this intersection cannot be more than
zero dimensional, so Pi , Pj , and Pk must meet at more than one point. Since
we proved that Pi ∩ Pj is a closed 1-ball, then Pi ∩ Pj ∩ Pk must be formed by
two points which are also the endpoints of Pi ∩ Pj . A similar argument can be
made for Pj ∩ Pk and Pk ∩ Pi . Since Pi ∪ Pj ∪ Pk is a closed 2-ball that contains
three curves incident on the same two points, then two of these curves must
form a closed loop containing the other one. Without loss of generality, suppose
Pi ∩ Pj and Pi ∩ Pk form a closed loop. Since Pi is a closed 2-ball, then the region
enclosed by this loop must be Pi . But this region also contains the boundary
between Pj and Pk , which contradicts the fact that Pi , Pj , and Pk are Voronoi
texels. Hence, Pi ∩ Pj ∩ Pk must be a closed 0-ball.
1.2

Proof of Proposition 1

Proposition 2. Let M = (V, E, F ) be a manifold polygonal mesh, then M is a
closed 2-ball if and only if its Euler characteristic χ = |V | − |E| + |F | is 1.

