Prompting Language-Informed Distribution for
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
(Supplementary Material)
Wentao Bao1 , Lichang Chen2 , Heng Huang2 , and Yu Kong1
1

A

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
{baowenta,yukong}@msu.edu, {bobchen,heng}@umd.edu

Broader Impact and Limitations

Broader Impact. The method in is work can be broadly extended to more other
multi-modality applications, such as general zero-shot learning, cross-modality
compositional retrieval and generation, etc. Besides, the central idea of LLMbased modality alignment is not limited to text and image, but any modality
that could reveal the semantic categories in practice is promising to explore in
the future. The potential negative societal impact is that, the developers should
be cautious by carefully examining the societal biases indicated by the generated
class descriptions, though the LLMs we used are publicly accessible.
Limitations. One limitation is that the primitive decomposition could be difficult
to learn when the states are non-visual concepts like smelly, hot, etc., even by the
pre-trained CLIP model. Another limitation is that the generated descriptions by
LLMs are not grounded to the image such that some distraction from generated
descriptions could be introduced.

B

Generating Compositional Class Descriptions

In this work, we choose T5-base, OPT-1.3B, GPT-3.5, and Mistral-7B models as
the LLMs for compositional class description generation. For the T5 model, we
follow the same setting as [1] that uses the T5-base model for word-to-sentence
generation. The T5-base model was pre-trained on the Colossal Clean Crawled
Corpus dataset [6] and finetuned on the CommonGen dataset [2]. Take the
painted ceiling as an example, the results from T5-base model are:
- A very old but beautifully decorated ceiling.
- A remodeled interior with a painted ceiling.
- A painted ceiling at a restaurant.
- Stained glass windows and a carved pattern on the ceiling.
- Painted ceilings and a fireplace.
- This apartment has a painted ceiling.
- A painted ceiling was a huge hit.
- A chandelier is painted in the middle of the ceiling.

