Appendix of LayerDiff: Exploring Text-guided
Multi-layered Composable Image Synthesis via
Layer-Collaborative Diffusion Model
1

Implementation Details

We initialize our model parameters by utilizing the pre-trained Stable Diffusion.
We randomly initialize the inter-layer attention module and the layer-specific
prompt enhancer. The text-guided intra-layer attention module is initialized by
the original cross-attention layer in Stable Diffusion. To ensure the effectiveness
of the parameters initialized from Stable Diffusion, we zero-initialize the weight
of the last linear layer of each module in the layer-collaborative attention block
and layer-specific prompt enhancer. Additionally, we initialize the input convolutional layer and output convolutional layer for the layer mask using the weights
from the stable diffusion for images. We employ a learnable zero-initialized scalar
parameter to control the mask information injection into the layer image after
the input convolutional layer.
During the Self-Mask Guidance sampling process, we set the kernel size and
sigma of the Gaussian blur to 31 and 3, respectively.

2

Data Construction Details

To mitigate the issue that the detector generates unwanted bounding boxes for
background elements, we first filter the bounding box with the score lower than
0.1 and then conduct a comparison between the SAM-generated masks and the
foreground mask predicted by the saliency detector, ICON [5]. Only masks with
an overlap rate exceeding 10% are retained. Additionally, we eliminate masks
that are encompassed by larger ones to prevent overlap. We preserve masks
whose areas range from 1% to 80% of the total image size.
For the global prompts generation, we input the entire image and employ
the instruction of “Please provide a comprehensive description of the image,
including the color, shapes, and any actions taking place.”. For the generation
of layer prompts, we use the instruction of “Briefly describe the main subject of
the image.” and input the cropped foreground images based on the foreground
masks.
During the Stable Diffusion inpainting process, we employ an empty-text
condition as the prompt. Concurrently, terms related to foreground objects are
used as negative prompts to refine the output.

3

Dataset Details

Our MLCID is a long-tailed dataset comprising 1.7M two-layer images, 0.3M
three-layer images, and 0.08M four-layer images. The lack of sufficiently extensive

