TriNeRFLet: A Wavelet Based Triplane NeRF
Representation
Supplementary Materials
Rajaei Khatib

and Raja Giryes

Tel Aviv University
rajaeikhatib@mail.tau.ac.il and raja@tauex.tau.ac.il

1

Ablation

Wavelet type. For all the experiments we conducted in the paper, we applied
the Biorthogonal 6.8 (Bior6.8) wavelet. We present here an ablation experiment
that checks the impact of other wavelet filters. We compare the reconstruction
performance of 4 scenes from the Blender dataset. The setups we tested are
vanilla Triplane (no wavelet), Haar, Biorthogonal 2.2 (Bior2.2), Biorthogonal 2.6
(Bior2.6), Biorthogonal 4.4 (Bior4.4) and Biorthogonal 6.8 (Bior6.8). The results
are presented in Figure 1. We use the TriNeRFLet Base Light setting. Vanilla
Triplane has the same size and structure as this setting. Note that all wavelets
achieve a significant performance advantage over vanilla Triplane (as shown also
in the paper). Generally, higher order wavelets provide a better representation of
smooth functions [3]. Thus, it is not surprising that Bior6.8, Bior4.4 and Bior 2.6
achieve better performance than Bior 2.2 and Haar. Note though that in terms
of training time, training with Haar wavelet is faster by up to 30% compared to
the other wavelets as Haar complexity is O(N ) and the complexity of applying
the other wavelets is O(N log(N )).
Coarse To Fine. As mentioned in the paper, coarse to fine (c2f) accelerates
TriNeRFLet framework and is presented as a mitigation for the wavelet inverse
transform overhead. To further check the additional contributions of c2f, we
conduct the Blender reconstruction experiment (Base Light version) but without c2f. Results are presented in Table 2, and as noticed, c2f indeed brings a
contribution in the reconstruction quality, alongside the contribution in training
time.
Wavelet Regularization. To check the importance of the wavelet regularization loss, we extend the c2f experiment above to be without wavelet regularization. The results in Table 2 illustrate the important contribution of wavelet
regularization and that it is an essential component of TriNeRFLet performance.

2

Technical Details

3D Reconstruction. Table 1 contains the parameters for the reconstruction
versions.

