1

A

Additional Ablations

A.1

Camera Motion

We also test the extent to which direct image comparison enables our results.
To evaluate this, we retrained our model on the RC-V dataset, but with the
camera in each frame rotated about the center of the assembly by ±0.1 radians,
and translated by ±10 LDU in X, Y and Z. This means that when comparing
the current simulator image with the top image of the construction stack, they
will be viewed from slightly different viewpoints, and will not be aligned pixelby-pixel. For reference, we also report numbers for the original model that was
trained without camera motion evaluated on data with camera motion. The
results of this experiment is shown in Table 2. Clearly these shifts in viewpoint
negatively impact performance in a substantial way even when retrained on
this data (see row Motion(T)), though the model is still able to achieve some
success. We hypothesize that this decrease in performance is due to the difficulty
of accurately comparing small offsets at low resolution. The problem becomes
much worse when evaluating the model that was not trained with camera motion
on data that contains camera motion (see row Motion(Unt)). In this case the
model completely fails given that it was only ever trained on neatly aligned
images.

RC-V

F 1b ↑ F 1e ↑ F 1a ↑ AED ↓

No Camera Motion
Camera Motion (Trained)
Camera Motion (Untrained)

0.59 0.51 0.53 46.36
0.45 0.29 0.33 56.37
0.00 0.00 0.00 78.75

Table 1: The default training approach (No Motion) compared against a model trained
under small camera motion (Motion(Trained)) and the model trained on no motion,
but evaluated under camera motion (Motion (Untrained)).

A.2

Expert Instruction Images

Given that our model only requires the current simulator image, the top image
of the instruction stack and the current phase, we also explore the success of
the model in a setting where we use the expert to generate the instruction stack
during the break phase, but then do assembly with a learned agent using the
expert’s instruction stack as input. Note that the models used here are not retrained, but use the same checkpoints from our main results. The improvement
in performance when using the expert instructions aligns with the fact that the
model sometimes fails to complete the Break phase on its own. Having access
to the expert instructions and starting each episode in the Make phase removes
these failure cases. Unsurprising the gap shrinks for smaller models where the
overall performance is higher. While it is theoretically possible that the distribution of expert instructions differs from that which is typically produced by the

