Supplementary Material for ’MVDiffusion++: A
Dense High-resolution Multi-view Diffusion Model
for Single or Sparse-view 3D Object
Reconstruction’
Shitao Tang1∗ , Jiacheng Chen1∗ , Dilin Wang2∗ , Chengzhou Tang2 ,
Fuyang Zhang1 , Yuchen Fan2 , Vikas Chandra2 ,
Yasutaka Furukawa1† , and Rakesh Ranjan2†
1

Simon Fraser University
{shitaot, jca348, fuyangz, furukawa}@sfu.ca
2
Meta Reality Labs
{wdilin, chengzhout, ycfan, vchandra, rakeshr}@meta.com

This supplementary document provides 1) Training details and 2) an Ablation
study on the number of generated views. We also provide additional resources
in the same folder as this document: 1) a short video (./demo.mp4) for quickly
demonstrating the performance of MVDiffHD and 2) a local web page (./page)
that contains many qualitative examples for single or sparse-view 3D object
reconstruction. Please open the file “./page/index.html” with a browser to view
our web page.

1

Training details

After initializing the UNet model weights by a pre-trained latent diffusion inpainting model, we train the proposed system in three stages. First, we train as
an ϵ-prediction model only with single-view conditioning cases, because our pretrained model was trained as ϵ-prediction. Second, we fine-tune as a v-prediction
model [3] still with single-view conditioning cases. Third, we fine-tune as a vprediction model with both single and sparse-view conditioning cases. Half the
samples are single-view conditioning, and the other half are sparse-view conditioning, where the number of condition images is uniformly sampled between 2
and 10. We employ an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 7e-5 and use
a cosine learning rate scheduler similar to Zero123++. We also incorporate the
Zero-SNR fix [2] commonly adopted in video generation models.

2

Ablation study on the number of generated views

Figure 1 varies the number of generated images. The 32 views are divided into
four elevation-based groups with the order 30◦ , 0◦ , -30◦ , 60◦ . The 8-view setting
only generates the first group, and the 16-view setting generates the first two
groups, and so on. The results suggest that fewer views cannot cover the entire
object, leading to worse reconstruction quality. While the metric scores are almost

