Supplementary Material:
Learning by Aligning 2D Skeleton Sequences and
Multi-Modality Fusion
Quoc-Huy Tran∗ , Muhammad Ahmed∗ , Murad Popattia , M. Hassan Ahmed ,
Andrey Konin , and M. Zeeshan Zia
Retrocausal, Inc.
Redmond, WA
www.retrocausal.ai

In this supplementary material, we first provide the details of our implementation in
Sec. 1. Next, the ablation results of different augmentations are included in Sec. 2, while
our multi-modality model architecture and our complete multi-modality fusion results
on all metrics and datasets are presented in Sec. 3. We then report the ablation results
of different method parts in Sec. 4, while the ablation results of different 2D poses are
included in Sec. 5. Lastly, we show some qualitative results in Sec. 6 and discuss the
limitations and societal impacts of our work in Sec. 7.

1

Implementation Details

Hyperparameter Settings. Tab. 1 includes a summary of our hyperparameter settings.
We follow the same hyperparameter settings used in CASA [4], e.g., frames per second, batch size, temperature, learning rate, and weight decay. We keep the augmentation
probability the same as CASA [4]. However, we adjust the noise standard deviation to
0.1 radian for orientation augmentation and 1 heatmap pixel for position augmentation, since our augmentation techniques are conducted on 2D skeletons/heatmaps. For
CASA [4], the input vector length increases linearly with the number of keypoints and
the number of objects (i.e., humans, hands) involved in each dataset. In contrast, our
approach relies on the same heatmap spatial dimension of 30 × 30 for all datasets,
demonstrating better scalability. In addition, for our self-attention module, we follow
the same hyperparameter settings used in ViViT [1], except that we reduce the patch
size to 10 × 10 and the transformer output dimension to 192 since our heatmap spatial
dimension is small (i.e., 30 × 30).
Computing Resources. All of our experiments are performed with a single Nvidia
A100 SXM4 GPU on Lambda Cloud.

2

Effects of Different Augmentations

Tab. 2 provides the ablation results on various data augmentation techniques. It can be
seen from Tab. 2 that utilizing all augmentations simultaneously yields the best performance across all metrics, whereas eliminating all augmentations leads to a significant
∗

indicates joint first author. {huy,ahmed,murad,hassan,andrey,zeeshan}@retrocausal.ai.

