MONTRAGE Supplementary Material
Jonathan Brokman*1,2 , Omer Hofman*2 , Roman Vainshtein2 , Amit Giloni2,4 ,
Toshiya Shimizu3 , Inderjeet Singh2 , Oren Rachmil2 , Alon Zolfi4 , Asaf
Shabtai4 , Yuki Unno3 , and Hisashi Kojima3
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2
Fujitsu Research of Europe
3
Fujitsu Limited
4
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we provide additional information relevant to reproducibility, experimental settings, and experimental results. This document is presented as follows:
– Reproducibility and Code – links to our code project and various model weights used in our research, as well as additional details
regarding the implementation of MONTRAGE in our evaluation procedure.
– Complementary Experiments and Explanations – Experiments
justifying MONTRAGE’s architecture and hyper-parameters in the
monitoring and attribution model components and additional comparisons to state-of-the-art methods.
– Experimental Results Additional Information – An extended
analysis of the main experimental results from the main manuscript.

A

Reproducibility and Code

To ensure reproducibility, we provide all hyper parameters as well as our code.
Code. The implementation of MONTRAGE, as well as example model weights
and data, is available at the following link:
Link to the implementation of MONTRAGE.
Hardware and Programs. All of the experiments were conducted on the
Ubuntu 20.04 Linux operating system, equipped with a Standard NC48ads A100
v4 configuration, featuring 4 virtual GPUs and 440 GB of memory. The experimental code base was developed in Python 3.8.2, utilizing PyTorch 2.1.2 and
the NumPy 1.26.3 package for computational tasks.
Monitoring Prompts. The prompts used for monitoring were image caption
templates that can take any concept or style from the datasets (CustomConcept101, and Artchive respectively), ensuring a unified case. The versatility of
the generations was taken into account while maintaining the prominence of the
concepts and conciseness of the prompts. We instructed ChatGPT for all of the
above, resulting in the following. For CustomConept101:
1. Enchanted {concept} in a dream forest.
2. {concept} essence in abstract art.

