Supplementary Material
∗

∗

Zhihao Xu1 , Shengjie Gong1 , Jiapeng Tang2 , Lingyu Liang1 , Yining Huang1 ,
†

Haojie Li1 , and Shuangping Huang1,3
1

South China University of Technology
2
Technical University of Munich
3
Pazhou Laboratory
{eezhihaoxu,eeshengjiegong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, eehsp@scut.edu.cn

In this supplementary material, we provide more implementation details on
KMTalk (Sec. A), additional results and comparisons in Sec. B, and more discussion (Sec. C).

A

Implementation Details

Network Architecture. To enhance the reproducibility of our KMTalk approach, we provide the detailed network architecture for Linguistic-based Key
Motion Acquisition ((Sec. 3.2) and Cross-modal Motion Completion (Sec. 3.3) in
the main paper. The network architecture is presented in Table 1. Our codebase
will be released soon.
Phoneme-based Localization Method. The Phoneme-based Localization
Method is proposed in this paper to locate the position of each phoneme. The
specific procedure is as follows: First, the input speech signal is processed by
an Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) module [4, 8], which transcribes the
speech into its corresponding textual representation based on acoustic and language models. Subsequently, the Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA) § module is
employed to establish temporal alignments between the transcribed text and
the original speech signal. This module utilizes advanced algorithms to match
the corresponding phonemes (in International Phonetic Alphabet format) within
the transcribed text with their respective time locations in the speech waveform.
Finally, the frame positions corresponding to the start and end timestamps of
each phoneme are obtained, allowing for localization of the phoneme boundaries.
Details of Integration with Existing Methods We integrate pre-trained
models of existing methods with phoneme-based localization techniques to construct different implementations of linguistic-based key motion capture. To elaborate, we generate a complete motion sequence using the pre-trained model of
each existing method. Then, we extract key motions from the complete sequence
based on the temporal position from phoneme-based localization. Subsequently,
∗

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
§
Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA): https://mfa- models.readthedocs.io/en/
latest/mfa_phone_set.html
†

