1

The Devil is in the Statistics: Mitigating and
Exploiting Statistics Difference for Generalizable
Semi-supervised Medical Image Segmentation
- Supplementary Material A

Additional Implementation Details

We implement the statistics-individual and statistics-aggregated branches in
a non-intrusive manner. With just one line of code, we can replace the BN layers
in most networks with statistics-individual and aggregated branches without the
need to modify the source code defining the network, boosting efficiency while
avoiding potential pitfalls linked to modifying the original code. Specifically, our
process involves traversing and replacing BN modules. To enable the modules
to accept additional parameters indicating domain identifiers, we leveraged PyTorch’s forward hook mechanism. In Algorithm 1, we provide the pseudocode for
the consistency regularization on unlabeled data, incorporating the integration
of the statistics-individual and aggregated branches.
For the learnable mixing coefficient α in Eq. (6), we utilize the sigmoid function to ensure its range stays within 0 to 1. Additionally, we employ a learning
rate 10 times larger than other parameters with weight decay set to 0 for updating the mixing coefficient. The mixing coefficients on the Prostate, Fundus,
and M&Ms datasets are empirically initialized as 0.999, 0.5, and 0.999 respectively. The confidence threshold τ in Eq. (3) is consistently set to 0.95 across all
datasets.

B

Additional Experiments

Experiments on typical semi-supervised medical image segmentation
tasks. Since our method can also be applied to semi-supervised tasks, we experiment on the ACDC [1] dataset and compare the performance against the
state-of-the-art semi-supervised medical image segmentation methods. While
specifically designed for semi-supervised domain generalization with data from
multiple medical institutions, our method attains competitive results on typical
semi-supervised tasks.

Table 1: Comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods on the ACDC dataset.
ACDC (Dice, %)

UA-MT

SS-Net

BCP

CauSSL

Ours

3 cases (5%)
7 cases (10%)

46.04
81.65

65.83
86.78

87.59
88.84

89.66

86.72
88.67

