Energy-based Out-of-distribution Detection
Weitang Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
wel022@ucsd.edu

Xiaoyun Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616, USA
xiywang@ucdavis.edu

John D. Owens
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616, USA
jowens@ece.ucdavis.edu

Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53703, USA
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Determining whether inputs are out-of-distribution (OOD) is an essential building
block for safely deploying machine learning models in the open world. However,
previous methods relying on the softmax confidence score suffer from overconfident posterior distributions for OOD data. We propose a unified framework for
OOD detection that uses an energy score. We show that energy scores better distinguish in- and out-of-distribution samples than the traditional approach using the
softmax scores. Unlike softmax confidence scores, energy scores are theoretically
aligned with the probability density of the inputs and are less susceptible to the
overconfidence issue. Within this framework, energy can be flexibly used as a
scoring function for any pre-trained neural classifier as well as a trainable cost
function to shape the energy surface explicitly for OOD detection. On a CIFAR-10
pre-trained WideResNet, using the energy score reduces the average FPR (at TPR
95%) by 18.03% compared to the softmax confidence score. With energy-based
training, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on common benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The real world is open and full of unknowns, presenting significant challenges for machine learning
models that must reliably handle diverse inputs. Out-of-distribution (OOD) uncertainty arises when
a machine learning model sees an input that differs from its training data, and thus should not be
predicted by the model. Determining whether inputs are out-of-distribution is an essential problem
for deploying ML in safety-critical applications such as rare disease identification. A plethora of
recent research has studied the issue of out-of-distribution detection [2, 3, 13–15, 19, 22, 23, 26].
Previous approaches rely on the softmax confidence score to safeguard against OOD inputs [13].
An input with a low softmax confidence score is classified as OOD. However, neural networks can
produce arbitrarily high softmax confidence for inputs far away from the training data [29]. Such a
failure mode occurs since the softmax posterior distribution can have a label-overfitted output space,
which makes the softmax confidence score suboptimal for OOD detection.
In this paper, we propose to detect OOD inputs using an energy score, and provide both mathematical
insights and empirical evidence that the energy score is superior to both a softmax-based score and
generative-based methods. The energy-based model [20] maps each input to a single scalar that is
lower for observed data and higher for unobserved ones. We show that the energy score is desirable
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

