LiDAR-based All-weather 3D Object Detection
via Prompting and Distilling 4D Radar
–Supplementary materials–
Yujeong Chae , Hyeonseong Kim , Changgyoon Oh ,
Minseok Kim , and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST
{yujeong, brian617, changgyoon, alstjrx1x1, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

1

Additional Implementation Details

RTNH [9] and RTNH* (baseline) employ the same network architecture, but
differ in their input domains (4D radar / LiDAR). Their embedding layer of input
domain is composed of a 3D sparse convolution layer [2], and each voxel encoder
contains three 3D sparse convolution layers followed by batch normalization [3]
and ReLU activation. The BEV encoder for each voxel layer’s output consists
of a 3D sparse convolution layer followed by batch normalization, which handles
sparse voxels. It is then followed by a transposed 2D convolution layer with
batch normalization and ReLU activation, which is used to process the densified
voxels and adjust their size to match the BEV feature size of all layers. The
detection head comprises a classification and regression head, each composed of
one convolution block. During the training of the baseline network, we utilize a
batch size of 4 and the Adam optimizer [4] with a learning rate (lr) of 1e-3, β1 of
0.9, and β2 of 0.999. Additionally, we apply a weight decay of 0.01 and employ
the cosine annealing scheduler [8] with a minimum learning rate of 1e-4. The
baseline network is trained until convergence using the loss described in Eq. 9 of
the main paper. During the training of the teacher network, all parameters of the
baseline are frozen, and only the adaptation layers involved in prompt learning
are trained. We used the same batch size, optimizer settings, and loss terms
and trained until convergence. During the training of the student network, all
parameters of the teacher network are frozen, and only the student’s embedding,
backbone, and head are trained. The teacher and student models do not share
any parameters. We used the same batch size and optimizer settings as before
and trained until convergence with the loss described in Eq. 10 of the main paper.
We implement our framework using PyTorch and train it on an A6000 GPU. To
visualize the 4D radar data, we initially normalize along the z-axis, then apply
a logarithmic transformation with a base of 10. Finally, the transformed data is
visualized using a jet colormap.

