ProSub

1

ProSub: Probabilistic Open-Set Semi-Supervised
Learning with Subspace-Based
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Supplementary Material

6

Qualitative Analysis of Feature Separation

To further analyze the effects of the self-supervision, ℓself from (10), and the
subspace loss, ℓsub from (8), we plot t-SNE (Maaten and Hinton, 2008) reductions
of features from ID and OOD test sets for a few different training setups. These
experiments are done with CIFAR-100 as ID and CIFAR-10 as OOD. First,
we train a fully supervised model using all 50,000 training data (with labels)
from CIFAR-100. This model is never exposed to OOD data. Secondly, we train
ProSub using 10,000 labels and first train until the end of the warm-up phase.
At this stage, the model has only been trained with the labeled cross-entropy,
ℓsup from (11), and self-supervision, ℓself . Finally, we carry out a full training run
of ProSub, where ℓsemi from (9) and ℓsub are applied after the warm-up stage.
The results are shown in Fig. 5. From the top panel, we see that the fully supervised model successfully clusters the ID data in feature space. However, most
OOD data are not clustered or separated from ID, highlighting the challenge of
OOD detection when we do not receive learning signals from these data.
The next evaluated model is ProSub at the end of the warm-up. This model
is trained with fewer labeled data than the fully supervised model but is exposed
to both (unlabeled) ID and OOD through self-supervision. OOD data now begin
to form distinct clusters, visibly separated from ID data. This suggests that selfsupervision facilitates the clustering of both ID and OOD data. Visually, it seems
reasonable to believe that OOD detection in this feature space is easier than for
the fully supervised case. However, there are still regions where ID and OOD
are mixed.
Finally, we have the features from the fully trained ProSub. Now we see even
more clear and separated clusters for both ID and OOD data, indicating that
the subspace loss further contributes to forming separated clusters for ID and
OOD. An interesting observation is that OOD forms multiple clusters instead of
one, even though this is not explicitly encouraged by either the self-supervision
or the subspace loss. This indicates that the model not only learns to separate
ID from OOD but also learns to group data within OOD.

