Supplementary Materials for Auto-DAS:
Automated Proxy Discovery for Training-free
Distillation-aware Architecture Search
Haosen Sun1 , Lujun Li1 , Peijie Dong2 , Zimian Wei3 , and Shitong Shao4
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
National University of Defense Technology
4
Southeast University
hsunas@connect.ust.hk;lilujunai@gmail.com;pdong212@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn;
weizimian16@nudt.edu.cn; shaoshitong@seu.edu.cn
2

A

More Discussions

About ground truth. Ground truths (D) represent the accuracy results of
student models in full distillation training. These results are used to evaluate
the correlation between proxy predictions.
About technical novelty compared to previous works. Distillation-aware
architecture search (DAS) is important for distillation research area [5, 12–18,
20, 27, 29], with recently proposed training-free DAS as a new research track. In
contrast to DisWOT and other methods [1,4,6–8,10,19,21,33,35], our Auto-DAS
first achieves automated and general DAS by building new proxy search space
and automating the search.
About comparison with other methods. (1) We use experiment with ResNet/ViTlike and NAS-101/201 models, comparing 6 train-based NAS, 10 train-free NAS,
and 5 hand-designed methods, demonstrating our effectiveness. (2) Following this
suggestion, we compare more hand-crafted models, KD methods, and distillationunaware NAS methods for ViT, Swin, PiT, and ResNet18/50 on ImageNet.
These results show that our Auto-DAS consistently outperforms Random NAS
and other NAS methods on all models. (3) Random NAS does not always surpass
handcrafted designs because of the huge search space. Our search algorithms play
a significant contribution in solving this issue and improving final distillation accuracy. (4) Our Auto-DAS and hand-designed KD methods are fundamentally
orthogonal techniques rather than competing ones, making them unsuitable for
direct comparison.

B

Details of Experiments

B.1

Details on ViT Experiments on Tiny Datasets

Datasets. Our study includes popular image classification datasets, namely
Flowers [26] and Chaoyang [34]. These datasets offer diverse and representaCorresponding author & contributed equally to this work.

