Appendix - AMEGO: Active Memory
from long EGOcentric videos
Gabriele Goletto1
1

Tushar Nagarajan2
Dima Damen3

Politecnico di Torino, Italy

2

FAIR, Meta

Giuseppe Averta1
3

University of Bristol, UK

https://gabrielegoletto.github.io/AMEGO/

In this appendix, we report additional details on AMEGO, the Active Memories Benchmark, additional results and visualisations. In Sec. 1, we include more
visualisations of both queries and qualitative results across the complete range
of questions in Active Memories Benchmark (AMB). We further detail AMB
in Sec. 2. We then give more information on how we query AMEGO to obtain
the answers required for the set of questions in AMB (Sec. 3). Next, in Sec. 4,
we present additional ablations for AMEGO. Finally, in Sec. 5, we report the
pseudocode version of the pipeline adopted in AMEGO.

1

Qualitative results

In Fig. 1 we show additional examples of sequencing questions, with all possible
alternatives. AMEGO is able to correctly answer them, showcasing its sequencing
capabilities.
On the project webpage we include videos depicting AMEGO representation on EPIC-KITCHENS videos. Similar to Fig. 1 in the main paper each row
shows a different location spotted with our method. The white bar represents
the temporal position of the frame depicted.

2

Active Memories Benchmark

2.1

Ground Truth

We combine annotations from EPIC-KITCHENS [1], VISOR [2], and EPIC
Fields [3] to extract the ground truth used for creating our queries.
To obtain ground truths for locations, we filter out all frames with a high
optical flow norm as these correspond to segments of video where the camera
wearer is moving between locations. We then compute the intersection between
the rays tracing from the camera through 5 pixels representing a crop of the
image (four corners and centre pixel) and the mesh of the scene. For a frame size
of  480 \times 854 , we selected the following pixels : (213, 240) as central-left, (640,
240) as central-right, (427, 120) as central-top, (427, 360) as central-bottom, and
(427, 240) as the central frame. We then average the 3D points obtained, representing the locations where the subject focused for a period of time, indicating
a potential interaction. The average is employed to reduce errors arising from
noisy automatically extracted meshes.

