Vision-Language Action Knowledge Learning for
Semantic-Aware Action Quality Assessment
Supplementary Material
Huangbiao Xu1,2 , Xiao Ke1,2,B , Yuezhou Li1,2 , Rui Xu1,2 ,
Huanqi Wu1,2 , Xiaofeng Lin1,2 , and Wenzhong Guo1,2
1
2

College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350108, China
Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
{kex,guowenzhong}@fzu.edu.cn,{huangbiaoxu.chn,wuhuanqi135}@gmail.com

A

Datasets

To fully validate the improvement effect of our approach to existing AQA methods, we conduct extensive experiments on four public AQA benchmarks, including the mainstream large-scale diving scenarios FineDiving [8] (with frame-wise
annotations) and MTL-AQA [4] (without frame-wise annotations), the surgical
scenario JIGSAWS [2] (without frame-wise annotations and sub-action terminology), and the long-term figure skating Fis-V [7] (without frame-wise annotations
and sub-action terminology). Below we describe the datasets in detail.
FineDiving. FineDiving [8] is a recently proposed large-scale fine-grained diving
benchmark, which is the first to construct frame-wise annotations for action
quality assessment. It collects 3000 different diving instances from the Olympics,
World Cup, World Championships, and European Aquatic Championships from
the Internet. FineDiving offers a wider variety of diving scenarios than existing
datasets, with 52 action types, 29 sub-action types, and 23 difficulty degree types.
This dataset is further emphasized by its complex multi-grained annotations,
including fine-grained details such as action types, sub-action types, both coarseand fine-grained temporal delineations, as well as commonly used AQA scores.
We follow the criteria proposed by the FineDiving dataset, using 75% of the
samples as the training set and the other 25% as the testing set.
MTL-AQA. MTL-AQA [4] is a widely recognized and used large-scale diving dataset in AQA, consisting of 16 different diving events containing a total
of 1412 samples. Besides the AQA scores, the MTL-AQA provides additional
annotations, including detailed action types and commentary. These event commentaries are also valuable textual semantics that warrant further exploration in
the future. The dataset has a comprehensive range of data scenarios, including
both male and female athletes, both single and double diving events, and spanning both the 3m springboard and 10m platform diving categories. Following the
prescribed criteria for the MTL-AQA dataset, we use 1059 samples for training,
while 353 samples are retained for testing.
B

Corresponding Author.

