Hierarchical Separable Video Transformer for
Snapshot Compressive Imaging
–Supplementary Material–
Ping Wang1,2 , Yulun Zhang3 , Lishun Wang2 , and Xin Yuan2⋆
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{wangping,wanglishun,xyuan}@westlake.edu.cn yulun100@gmail.com
https://github.com/pwangcs/HiSViT
2

1

Model Details

As depicted in the main paper, the proposed model for video SCI reconstruction is mainly composed of 1) frame-wise feature extraction module, 2) feature
refinement module, and 3) feature-to-frame reconstruction module. Feature refinement module is built by stacked building blocks and each block is powered by
an efficient Hierarchical Separable Video Transformer (HiSViT) and Channelwise Multi-head Self-Attention (C-MSA) as demonstrated in Fig. 1. HiSViT has
been detailedly introduced in the main paper. Inspired by [2], we adopt C-MSA
into our building block to capture the global information in a computationally
efficient manner. Specifically, C-MSA squeezes the spatial-temporal information
into channels and then a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) applied to calculate
the channel maps, finally the channel maps are used to weight the input features
along channel dimension.
Previous competitive models [5–8, 11] generally apply stacked 3D convolutions followed by non-linear activations for shallow feature extraction and frameto-frame reconstruction. However, too early temporal aggregation could exaggerate artifacts owing to error accumulation during propagation [1]. To this end,
we use stacked image Swin Transformer blocks for frame-wise extraction and
reconstruction as illustrated in Fig. 2, inspired by Residual Swin Transformer
Block in (RSTB) [3], Note that convolutions and LeakyReLU in the dashed box
are only available for the feature-to-frame reconstruction module, projecting the
aggregated features into video signal. In the extraction module, the first convolution with the kernel size of 1×3×3 aims to embed the input frames in feature
maps. In the reconstruction module, it aims to fuse the shallow features and the
upsampled refined features. Two residual Swin Transformer blocks are stacked
to generate the final frames via long-range spatial aggregation.
⋆

Corresponding author.

