Appendix of “Connecting Consistency Distillation
to Score Distillation for Text-to-3D Generation”
Zongrui Li1,2 † , Minghui Hu2 † , Qian Zheng3,4

, and Xudong Jiang2

1

2

Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Nanyang Technological University
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
{ZONGRUI001, e200008, EXDJiang}@ntu.edu.sg, qianzheng@zju.edu.cn

In this appendix,
1. we provide some discussions about the limitations of our method and the
failure cases;
2. we show an example question for the user study in Sec. 8;
3. we visualize the accumulated brightness during optimization in Sec. 9;
4. we provide a detailed proof of Lemma 1 in Sec. 10 that clarifies the effectiveness of the proposed Compact Consistency (CC) loss;
5. we show more ablation studies regarding CC and Conditional Guidance (CG)
loss in Sec. 11; we also show the effect of high order ODE solver in this
section;
6. we showcase more results generated by the proposed Guided Consistency
Sampling (GCS) in Sec. 12.

7

Limitations

The proposed GCS exhibits shortcomings in addressing Janus issues, which we
attribute to the inherent inconsistencies in pre-trained models under multi-view
conditions. Also, it doesn’t perform well on compositional prompts. Moreover,
our approach necessitates extensive training in the GS model, ranging from 3000
to 5000 epochs, translating to 35-60 minutes for rendering a single object. These
limitations show a significant gap in practical application.
Failure case I: Janus Problem. Despite proposing multiple strategies to improve the overall generation quality, our method still suffers from the Janus
problem and occasionally generates multi-view inconsistent results (Fig. 7). A
solution
is to change the random seed or“Agive
a better initialization.
“A photo of a skiing penguin wearing a puffy jacket,
DSLR photo of a peacock on a surfboard.”
highly realistic DSLR photo.”

“A blue poison-dart frog sitting on a water lily.”

Fig. 7: Failure case I. The 3D asset is affected by the Janus problem.
†

Equal contribution.

Corresponding author.

