Supplementary Materials for “VITATECS: A
Diagnostic Dataset for Temporal Concept
Understanding of Video-Language Models”
Shicheng Li1 , Lei Li2 , Yi Liu1 , Shuhuai Ren1 , Yuanxin Liu1
Rundong Gao1 , Xu Sun1 , and Lu Hou3
1

A

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer
Science, Peking University
{lisc99, xusun}@pku.edu.cn
2
The University of Hong Kong
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
houlu3@huawei.com

VITATECS

Source Datasets. The videos and captions in our dataset come from two existing video-text datasets: MSR-VTT [45] and VATEX [42]. MSR-VTT is a video
description dataset with 10K web video clips, each annotated with 20 natural
sentences. Following common practice, we adopt the split introduced by Yu et
al . [47] and use 1,000 video-text pairs as the test set. VATEX is a large-scale
multilingual video description dataset with comprehensive video content and a
rich lexicon. Its public test set contains 6,000 videos, each annotated with 10
English descriptions. Both datasets are open-domain video-text datasets with
diverse video content and descriptions.
Coverage. We validate our categorization of temporal concepts by conducting a
preliminary study on the temporal information in open-domain video-language
datasets. Specifically, we randomly sample 100 video-text pairs from MSR-VTT
and 100 from VATEX, and inspect whether they fall in one of the temporal
aspects we define, contain other types of temporal information, or have no temporal information. As shown in Tab. 1, the result indicates the high coverage
of our temporal aspect categorization, which allows us to assess the ability of
VidLMs in a comprehensive and fine-grained manner.
Diversity. One of the principles of our dataset is to be as diverse as possible and include open-domain video-text pairs with comprehensive content to
simulate real-world scenarios. We verify the diversity of our dataset from two
perspectives: videos and descriptions. Since our dataset is built upon existing
open-domain video-text datasets, the diversity of videos is naturally guaranteed. Fig. 1 shows some videos from our dataset and other datasets aimed at
temporal understanding evaluation. Other datasets often use computer-rendered
scenes of simple geometric objects like CLEVRER [46], or action-centric videos of

