SparseCtrl: Adding Sparse Controls to
Text-to-Video Diffusion Models
Yuwei Guo1 , Ceyuan Yang2† , Anyi Rao4 , Maneesh Agrawala4 ,
Dahua Lin1,2,3 , and Bo Dai2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
4
Stanford University
2

This document provides supplementary details on models, parameters, evaluation procedures, and additional results. We suggest viewing the supplementary
video for a comprehensive overview and more qualitative results.

A

Implementation Details

In this section, we elaborate on the implementation details of SparseCtrl, which
were omitted in the main manuscript for clarity.
A.1

Designs of Sparse Condition Encoder

To simplify the design and ensure the generalizability of our sparse condition
encoder, we decompose the model design into two major components: an encoder backbone with identical architecture across different modalities, and a
lightweight encoder head for modality-specific adaptation to the backbone. As
discussed in the main paper, the encoder backbone comprises frame-wise 2D layers copied from the pre-trained text-to-video (T2V) model, with our proposed
temporal propagation layers inserted in between. Notably, the corresponding
noised sample input is excluded, as discussed in the method section. In experiments, we implement these temporal propagation layers as temporal attention
layers accompanied by sinusoidal position encoding. The lightweight encoder
head employs a stack of convolution layers to downsample the input condition
maps to the required shape, as done in ControlNet [9].
A.2

Condition Representation

In this paper, we adopt different representations for each modality. For depth
and sketch conditions, three-channel images normalized within [0, 1] are utilized
as condition maps. For the RGB image condition, we employ the latent encoded
by the pre-trained VAE as the conditions. We train each sparse encoder model
on WebVid-10M [1] dataset and extract the corresponding condition maps on
†

Corresponding Author

