Supplementary materials for GenView
Xiaojie Li1,2 , Yibo Yang3∗ , Xiangtai Li4 , Jianlong Wu1∗ , Yue Yu2 ,
Bernard Ghanem3 , and Min Zhang1
1

A

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
4
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Implementation Details

Method for adding noise perturbations. We use the pretrained Stable unCLIP v2-1 model to generate image variations based on CLIP image embeddings
c. An empty string serves as the text prompt to avoid any reference to image contexts or object names. The noised
p embedding with perturbation strength
√ image
l is defined as: noisy(c, l) = al c + (1 − al )ε, where ε ∼ N (0, I), and al is
the cumulative product of αi values for i ranging from 0 to l. Each αi is defined
as 1 − βi , with βi representing the noise variance introduced at step i, following the default linear schedule for β[1:l] from DDPM [37]. Higher values of the
perturbation strength l result in increased diversity in the generated images.
Method for calculating foreground proportion. We use the pretrained
CLIP ViT-H/14 backbone, which serves as the conditional image encoder in
Stable UnCLIP v2-1, for the encoder C used in determining the proportion of
foreground content before image generation. This backbone generates 256 tokens with a dimension of 1280 from a 2242 input resolution. For calculating
PCA features, 10,000 images are randomly sampled from the original dataset.
The threshold a in Eq. (7) is selected to ensure that foreground tokens account
for approximately 40% of the total tokens, providing a clear separation between
foreground and background as depicted in the Sec. 3.3.
Method for generating attention maps. We employ the pretrained CLIP
ConvNext-Base (with wide embedding dimension) backbone as the encoder E to
extract feature maps from augmented positive views. These feature maps have
a resolution of 72 based on a 2242 input resolution. We compute foreground and
background attention maps using the PCA vector computation method described
in the previous paragraph.
Hyper-parameters for view generation. We generate one augmented image
for each image in the training set of IN-1K/CF10/CF100/TinyIN, with T (the
number of denoising steps) set to 20 for efficiency. The classifier-free guidance
∗ Corresponding authors
https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-unclip
https://huggingface.co/laion/CLIP-ViT-H-14-laion2B-s32B-b79K
https://huggingface.co/laion/CLIP-convnext_base_
w-laion2B-s13B-b82K-augreg

