18

T. Huynh et al.

A

Appendix

A.1

Ethic statement

Our study significantly broadens the understanding of the potential capabilities
inherent in data poisoning backdoor attacks, particularly in the realm of model
quantization. By delving into this subject, we provide valuable insights that benefit not only the research community but also real-world AI systems. Although
we recognize the potential for adversaries to exploit our findings for stealthier
and more effective attacks on quantized models, we maintain optimism about
the positive impact of our work. We expect our research to catalyze the development of advanced backdoor defenses, enhancing the safeguarding measures
for quantized models and mitigating the risks associated with data poisoning
attacks.
A.2

Reproducibility statement

Our work is highly reproducible. All datasets used in the paper are popular and
publicly available. We include in the supplementary materials our code and pretrained models. The code and pre-trained models will also be publicly released
upon paper acceptance.
A.3

System details

Datasets We conduct our experiments on three popular datasets, which are
widely used in various previous works, in both backdoor attacks and defenses.
CIFAR-10. CIFAR-10, introduced by [23], is a labeled subset of the 80-millionstiny-images dataset, collected by Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair and Geoffrey Hinton. The dataset consists of 60,000 color images in 10 classes, with 6,000 images
per class. The image resolution is 32 × 32. CIFAR-10 is splitted into 2 subsets:
50,000 images in training set and 10,000 images in test set. It is publicly available
at https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.
Data augmentation techniques including random crop, random rotation, and
random horizontal flip are applied during training process. No augmentation is
applied during evaluation.
ImageNet-10. ImageNet [9] is a large-scale dataset that contains more than
14 million images of over 20,000 categories. The most widely used subset of this
dataset is ImageNet-1K, which consists of 1000 object classes with 1,281,167
training images and 50,000 validation images, can be found at https://imagenet.org/download.php. In this work, we randomly select 10 classes from ImageNet1K to create the ImageNet-10 dataset. Images of this dataset vary in resolution,
and we resize them to 224 × 224 in both training and testing process.
We apply random crop and random rotation to the training dataset. No augmentation is applied during evaluation.

