18

Y. Guo et al.

SUP-NeRF: A Streamlined Unification of Pose
Estimation and NeRF for Monocular 3D Object
Reconstruction
Appendix

For readers with a keen interest in extensive experiments, particularly for
the detailed interpretation of the results related to BootInv [34], we invite you
to explore Appendix A5. If you are looking for more comprehensive ablation
studies, you can find them in Appendix A6. Additionally, for further visual
comparisons with other methods and cross-view visualizations, please refer to
Appendix A9.

A1

Pose Representation

Choosing the appropriate pose representation is crucial for both object pose
estimation and NeRF’s optimization of object pose. For translation optimization,
using a 3D representation with a single step size may not suﬃce for objects
at varying distances. To address this, a relative space representation, inspired
by [21, 34], can be more eﬀective. We demonstrate in Sec. 3 that a relative
representation benefits direct regression through a neural network by allowing
predictions within a more constrained space.
In contrast, in driving scenarios where rotation is mostly simplified to 1D, the
choice of rotation representation may not be as crucial. The Axis-angle representation can be a simple and eﬀective choice to facilitate the optimization task, as
demonstrated in [37]. We also adopt this representation in our pose estimation
design.

A2

Coordinate Frame for NeRF Optimization

The success of pose optimization in a object-centric NeRF framework crucially
depends on the choice of the coordinate frame [34]. This section systematically
discusses the right choice of coordinate system to perform the NeRF optimization
for pose. Although a NeRF framework directly uses the camera pose in the object
system Pc2o for the rendering purpose, we will later show the right choice is the
object pose under camera coordinate frame Po2c .
A2.1

Definitions and problem formulation

Po2c and Pc2o are defined respectively w.r.t. the camera frame (C) and object
frame (O), as illustrated in Fig. 7. Po2c = [Ro2c |To2c ] indicates the transformation from object coordinates to camera coordinates, where Ro2c , To2c indicate the

