DALL·E 3 System Card
OpenAI
October 3, 2023

1

Introduction

DALL·E 3 is an artificial intelligence system that takes a text prompt as an input and generates
a new image as an output. DALL·E 3 builds on DALL·E 2 (Paper |System Card) by improving
caption fidelity and image quality. In this system card1 , we share the work done to prepare DALL·E 3
for deployment, including our work on external expert red teaming, evaluations of key risks, and
mitigations to reduce the risks posed by the model and reduce unwanted behaviors.
The model was trained on images and their corresponding captions. Image-caption pairs were
drawn from a combination of publicly available and licensed sources. We’re adding DALL·E 3 as an
image generation component to ChatGPT, our public-facing assistant built on top of GPT-4 ([29]).
In this context, GPT-4 will interface with the user in natural language, and will then synthesize
the prompts that are sent directly to DALL·E 3. We have specifically tuned this integration such
that when a user provides a relatively vague image request to GPT-4, GPT-4 will generate a more
detailed prompt for DALL·E 3, filling in interesting details to generate a more compelling image.2

1.1

Mitigation Stack

We have made an effort to filter the most explicit content from the training data for the DALL·E 3
model. Explicit content included graphic sexual and violent content as well as images of some hate
symbols. The data filtering applied to DALL·E 3 was an extension of the algorithms used to filter
the data on which we trained DALL·E 2 ([24]). One change made was that we lowered the threshold
on broad filters for sexual and violent imagery, opting instead to deploy more specific filters on
particularly important sub-categories, like graphic sexualization and hateful imagery. Reducing
the selectivity of these filters allowed us to increase our training dataset and reduce model bias
against generations of women, images of whom were disproportionately represented in filtered sexual
imagery. ([27]). This disproportionate over-representation of women in filtered sexual content can be
due to both publicly available image data itself containing higher amounts of sexualized imagery of
women as has been shown to be the case in some multimodal datasets [3] and due to biases that the
filtration classifier may have learnt during training.
In addition to improvements added at the model layer, the DALL·E 3 system has the following
additional mitigations:
• ChatGPT refusals: ChatGPT has existing mitigations around sensitive content and topics
that cause it to refuse to generate prompts for images in some contexts.
This document takes inspiration from the concepts of model cards and system cards.[25, 11, 24]
This methodology, in practice, can share conceptual parallels with certain existing strategies, but focuses on
iterative control through adherence to detailed prompts instead of through editing the image directly. [33, 4, 1, 18, 12]
1
2

1

