PromptCCD: Learning Gaussian Mixture
Prompt Pool for Continual Category
Discovery
Fernando Julio Cendra1 , Bingchen Zhao2 , and Kai Han1(B)
1

The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong
kaihanx@hku.hk
2
the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Abstract. We tackle the problem of Continual Category Discovery
(CCD), which aims to automatically discover novel categories in a continuous stream of unlabeled data while mitigating the challenge of catastrophic forgetting—an open problem that persists even in conventional,
fully supervised continual learning. To address this challenge, we propose PromptCCD, a simple yet eﬀective framework that utilizes a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) as a prompting method for CCD. At the
core of PromptCCD lies the Gaussian Mixture Prompting (GMP) module, which acts as a dynamic pool that updates over time to facilitate
representation learning and prevent forgetting during category discovery. Moreover, GMP enables on-the-ﬂy estimation of category numbers,
allowing PromptCCD to discover categories in unlabeled data without prior knowledge of the category numbers. We extend the standard evaluation metric for Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) to
CCD and benchmark state-of-the-art methods on diverse public datasets.
PromptCCD signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods, demonstrating
its eﬀectiveness. Project page: https://visual-ai.github.io/promptccd.
Keywords: Continual Category Discovery · Prompt Learning

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have achieved impressive performance in numerous computer vision tasks. However, the majority of these tasks have traditionally been
conducted in a closed-world setting, where the models handle known categories
and predeﬁned scenarios. The crux lies in developing systems that can eﬀectively
and eﬃciently operate in the real, open-world we inhabit.
Category discovery, initially studied as Novel Class Discovery (NCD) [17]
and subsequently extended to Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [46],
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_11.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 188–205, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_11

