ReSyncer: Rewiring Style-based Generator for
Unified Audio-Visually Synced Facial Performer
– Supplementary File –
Jiazhi Guan1,2∗ , Zhiliang Xu2∗ , Hang Zhou2† , Kaisiyuan Wang2 , Shengyi He2 ,
Zhanwang Zhang2 , Borong Liang2 , Haocheng Feng2 , Errui Ding2 , Jingtuo Liu2 ,
Jingdong Wang2 , Youjian Zhao1,3† , and Ziwei Liu4
1

3

1

BNRist, DCST, Tsinghua University 2 Baidu Inc.
Zhongguancun Laboratory 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
guanjz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhouhang09@baidu.com

More Implementation Details

We introduce more implementation details of our ReSyncer framework.
Architectures. As written in the main paper, we leverage only one Transformer
encoder block for style information encoding and one Transformer decoder block
for prediction. Stacking more layers can only slightly improve the performance,
we therefore adopt a light configuration for faster optimization and inference.
A total of 100 128-dimensional tokens are sent into the decoder during training. For audio encoding, we leverage a pretrained Wav2Vec2 [1] model and fix
the temporal convolutional layers. In the second stage of our method, we construct the generator G with a total of 14 style-convolution layers. The 3D facial
meshes M = {M1 , . . . , MT } are reconstructed using a pretrained DeepFaceReconstruction model [3]. We adapted the implementation from [3] and re-train
the model to adapt the topology of Hifi3DFace [2] with a similar performance
of DeepFaceReconstruction itself. The change in topology does not affect our
pipeline.
Reference Image. The reference image Iref in our second stage is chosen with
different strategies. 1) During training, the reference image is randomly chosen
from the 30 closest frames to the target within the same video. 2) Same-ID
evaluation. We form a reference sequence by shifting the background video
by 75 frames (3s) to avoid information leakage. 3) Cross-ID video production. There is no information leakage when audio comes from another clip. The
reference frame is selected as the target.
Generalized Optimization. The whole model is trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 . λ1 and λ2 are empirically set to 1, and
0.1, respectively. Note during the initial stages of training, the first stage may
not generate a facial mesh conducive to guiding our generator effectively. Consequently, we substitute the output of Style-SyncFormer with the reconstructed
*
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors.

