FREST: Feature RESToration for Semantic
Segmentation under Multiple Adverse Conditions
—Supplementary Material—
Sohyun Lee1 , Namyup Kim2 , Sungyeon Kim2 , and Suha Kwak1,2
1

2

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Korea
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
https://sohyun-l.github.io/frest

This supplementary material presents additional experimental details and
results that are omitted from the main paper due to the space limit. Firstly, we
include more implementation details in Sec. A. Then, Sec. B shows the algorithm of FREST and Sec. C presents a thorough analysis of FREST, covering
aspects such as the analysis on FREST via t-SNE and the impact of the adverse
condition discriminating loss. Finally, we offer an additional ablation study in
Sec. D, containing combinations of losses, patch confidence threshold, and extended quantitative and qualitative results in Sec. E and Sec. J.

A

Implementation Details

In this section, we present the implementation settings that are omitted from
the main paper. All experiments were conducted using a single A6000 GPU. We
train both the segmentation network and the condition strainer for 8 epochs
while training only the condition strainer for 2 epochs to train a stable condition strainer. Each mini-batch consists of one image for each adverse and normal
image. During training, images are cropped to 1080×1080 and flipped horizontally at random. Additionally, we utilize the exponential moving average (EMA)
model for implementing a model with a stopping gradient in our framework,
the weight parameter is set as 0.9999 to preserve the source knowledge. For
the condition strainer, we initialize up-projecting parameters with He uniform
initialization and down-projecting parameters with zero initialization. This initialization strategy aims to optimize the learning efficiency and model stability
in handling condition-specific features.

B

Algorithm of FREST

We present the training procedure of FREST in Algorithm 1.

C

Empirical Analysis

C.1

Analysis on FREST

To investigate the impact of FREST, we show that it reduces the condition gaps
between adverse and normal conditions. To this end, visualize t-SNE [7] using

