BRIEFING

EU Legislation in Progress

Artificial intelligence act
OVERVIEW
European Union lawmakers signed the artificial intelligence (AI) act in June 2024. The AI act, the first
binding worldwide horizontal regulation on AI, sets a common framework for the use and supply of
AI systems in the EU.
The new act offers a classification for AI systems with different requirements and obligations tailored
to a 'risk-based approach'. Some AI systems presenting 'unacceptable' risks are prohibited. A wide
range of 'high-risk' AI systems that can have a detrimental impact on people's health, safety or on
their fundamental rights are authorised, but subject to a set of requirements and obligations to gain
access to the EU market. AI systems posing limited risks because of their lack of transparency will
be subject to information and transparency requirements, while AI systems presenting only minimal
risk for people will not be subject to further obligations.
The regulation also lays down specific rules for general purpose AI (GPAI) models and lays down
more stringent requirements for GPAI models with 'high-impact capabilities' that could pose a
systemic risk and have a significant impact on the internal market.
The AI Act was published in the EU's Official Journal on 12 July 2024. It entered into force in August 2024.
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised
rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act) and amending certain Union legislative acts
Committees
responsible:

Shadow rapporteurs:

Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO) and
Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE)
(jointly under Rule 58)
Brando Benifei (S&D, Italy) and Dragoş Tudorache
(Renew, Romania)
Deirdre Clune, Axel Voss (EPP); Petar Vitanov (S&D);
Svenja Hahn, (Renew); Sergey Lagodinsky,
Kim Van Sparrentak (Greens/EFA); Rob Rooken,
Kosma Złotowski (ECR); Jean-Lin Lacapelle, Jaak
Madison (ID); Cornelia Ernst, Kateřina Konecna (The
Left)

Procedure
completed.

Regulation (EU) 2024/1689
OJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024

Rapporteurs:

COM(2021)206
21.4.2021
2021/0106(COD)
Ordinary legislative
procedure (COD)
(Parliament and
Council on equal
footing – formerly
'co-decision')

EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service
Author: Tambiama Madiega
Members' Research Service
PE 698.792 – September 2024

EN

