Supplementary Materials for
Towards Open-Ended Visual Recognition with
Large Language Models
Qihang Yu, Xiaohui Shen, and Liang-Chieh Chen
ByteDance

In the supplementary materials, we provide more technical details of OSM.
We also include more quantitative results and qualitative results, along with
comparisons with GPT-4V [9]. Moreover, we show that OSM can also be easily
extended with part-level and box-level datasets, further unleasing the potential
of OSM.
Instruction Template We summarize the instruction template we used
for OSM training in Tab. 1.
Dilemma between Accuracy and Generalization We also train OSM
under different seen number of masks (i.e., 1, 3, 6, 9 millions respectively), as
shown in Fig. 1. Empirically, we consider Acc as a metric to measure how well the
model can accurately recognize the object and NIV as a metric to measure the
generalization ability. We note that there exists a dilemma between the accuracy
and generalization, i.e., when the number of seen masks increases, we notice that
the model achieves higher accuracy while inevitably having a higher overfitting
to the training vocabulary, and predicts in a more conservative manner. From 6M
to 9M, the accuracy improvement majorly comes from the decrease of NIV. We
note that how to ensure an accurate object recognition while avoid overfitting
to the training vocabulary is an interesting future research problem.
Incorporating Part- and Box-level Datasets It is worth noting that
OSM seamlessly accommodates part-level and box-level datasets, further enhancing its versatility. To enhance OSM for part-level and box-level recognition
(note that OSM already shows emergent part recognition ability as illustrated
in Fig.1 of main paper, but we believe introducing such datasets could further advance its ability), we introduce PartImageNet [4], Pascal-Part [2], and
V3Det [12] datasets into the training data. For part data, we prepend the object name to part name, in case many parts sharing the same names (e.g., in
PartImageNet, many different classes may have the same part named head ).
We also remove those class names which are too vague (e.g., train left side, bus
upper side in Pascal-Part). For detection data, we consider the bounding-box
as a box-shaped binary mask and thus is easily unified into OSM. Additionally,
we augment the panoptic/instance segmentation data (e.g., COCO, LVIS) by
randomly converting each segmentation mask into its corresponding bounding
box. In cases where a bounding box serves as input, we appropriately adjust the
instruction by replacing the term “segmentation mask" with “bounding box." It’s
worth mentioning that we do not include image-level data (e.g., ImageNet) at
this stage, as the semantic label could introduce bias when there exist multiple

