Supplementary Material for CRM
Zhengyi Wang1,2 , Yikai Wang1,2 , Yifei Chen1 , Chendong Xiang1,2 , Shuo
Chen1 , Dajiang Yu1 , Chongxuan Li3 , Hang Su1 and Jun Zhu⋆1,2
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
Tsinghua University;
2
ShengShu, Beijing, China;
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China.

A

Limitations

Although our method can generate a high-fidelity textured mesh in 10 seconds,
there are still some limitations. As also a limitation in ImageDream [12], if the
input image has a large elevation or different FoV, the results are sometimes not
satisfactory. Also, it is very hard to ensure that the multi-view diffusion model
always generates fully consistent results, and inconsistent images may make the
3D results degrade. What’s more, the Flexicubes grid size is only 80 owing to
the limited computing resource, which cannot represent very detailed geometry.
Additionally, since we use rendered images surrounding the objects to train
the model (similar to previous works like LRM), it is hard to reconstruct surfaces inside the objects. One possible solution is to directly regress on the
sdf/occupancy values of the 3D meshes, which may provide supervision inside
the objects. We leave this as future work.

B

Why do we use CCM as geometry representation?

In this work, we utilize the Canonical Coordinate Map (CCM) for geometric
representation. Given that the pose is fixed to six orthographic views, each CCM
has only one valid channel, while the other two channels maintain a constant
value. This indicates that the CCM can equivalently be transformed into a depth
map. We actually don’t need the object to be canonically oriented. The choice of
CCM over the depth map is motivated by its ability to represent identical parts
of an object in the same color, which we hypothesize may aid the multi-view
diffusion model in learning correspondences between object parts.
We do not assume canonical orientation for objects in the training set. During
the training of the multi-view image diffusion model, we randomly select one of
the six orthographic images as the input and use the diffusion model to predict
the remaining five images. This approach enhances the model’s generalization
ability regarding the input pose.
⋆

The Corresponding author.

