Any Target Can be Offense: Adversarial Example
Generation via Generalized Latent Infection
(Supplementary Material)
Youheng Sun1⋆ , Shengming Yuan1⋆ , Xuanhan Wang2⋆⋆ , Lianli Gao1 ,
and Jingkuan Song1
1

Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China
youheng.sun@std.uestc.edu.cn, shengming.yuan@outlook.com,
wxuanhan@hotmail.com, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, jingkuan.song@gmail.com

A

Implement Details

During training, we consider samples with small classification loss to be excellent
target samples with more prominent features. We continue to use this estimation
during testing.
Test on Known Classes. When evaluating the target attack success rate on
known classes, since the attacker entirely constructs the training set of known
classes, we select the target sample with the smallest classification loss in the
train set as the target for that known class.
Test on Unknown Classes. When testing on unknown classes, the attacker
obviously cannot access the complete target dataset to select the best sample but
can still choose some target samples that are relatively clear and unobstructed.
To simulate this process, we select 10 images with relatively small classification
losses for each target class from the validation set of ImageNet as targets. During
testing, the target samples of unknown classes are randomly selected from these
10 images.

B

Efficiency Analysis

In this section, we analyze the efficiency of different methods. To simulate the
scenario of unknown classes, we divide the ImageNet-1k dataset into 5 parts,
with each part appearing sequentially. Unlike other generator-based methods
that require retraining for each new part, our GAKer can attack any target class
with just one training process. As shown in Tab. 1, our method only requires 1%
of the training time compared to TTP, highlighting the remarkable efficiency of
our GAKer.
⋆
⋆⋆

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author

