REVISION: Rendering Tools Enable Spatial
Fidelity in Vision-Language Models:
Supplementary Materials
Agneet Chatterjee ?1 , Yiran Luo ?1 ,
Tejas Gokhale2 , Yezhou Yang1 , and Chitta Baral1
Arizona State University
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
1

2

In this supplementary material, we present additional results on ControlNet
and GPT-4 Guided Coordinate Generation results. We also present illustrative
samples, covering successful and failure image generation as well as results on
the human evaluation experiments. Lastly, we present asset samples from the
REVISION pipeline along with outputs from the Position Diversifier.

1

Additional Quantitative Results

The ControlNet-based results are presented in Table 1. We achieve the best
trade-oﬀ between IS and VISOR for ControlNet and compared to Stable Diffusion, we achieve a higher VISOR4 score, indicating correctness over multiple
trials. Thus, we quantify that REVISION generated images have enough lowlevel information to faithfully represent spatial orientations.

2

GPT-4 Guided Co-ordinate Generation

W also experiment with generating flexible coordinates for the objects using
GPT-4. We first feed GPT-4 a designed in-context prompt that includes specific example coordinates for each possible spatial relation. We then feed in an
input prompt of two objects and one spatial relation in order to obtain the
two sets of coordinates for placing the mentioned objects. Table 2 shows results
of performing conditioning using GPT-4 as the alternative Coordinate Generator. Compared to our baseline results in, we notice an average of 10-point drop
in performance in both Object Accuracy and VISORuncond scores. These patterns develop as a result of GPT-4’s propensity to generate co-ordinates which
places the two objects in close proximity, leading to images where the objects
are indistinguishable. Hence, T2I models tend to ignore either object, which
correspondingly lead to lower VISOR scores.
? Equal contribution. Correspondence to agneet@asu.edu

