Supplementary to GiT: Towards
Generalist Vision Transformer through Universal
Language Interface
Haiyang Wang1,2∗ Hao Tang1∗ Li Jiang2 Shaoshuai Shi2
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem3 Hongsheng Li4 Bernt Schiele2 Liwei Wang1,5
1

Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
3
ETH Zurich 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, SIST, Peking University
2

In our supplementary, we provide detailed information including model design specifics in §1, dataset summaries in §2, along with in-depth training, inference and evaluation procedures in §3 and 4. Additional ablation experiments are
included in §5. §6 details specific modules used in comparative methods. Qualitative results across different datasets and tasks are in §7. Lastly, limitations,
negative societal impacts, and a comparison with Fuyu-8B are in §8.

1

Implementation details

Window Attention. Our window attention is adapted from the SAM [28] variant of ViT [18]. Following SAM, after patch embedding, images are downsampled
by a factor of 16, and windows are defined with a size of 14×14. The primary
distinction from the original lies in how we handle multi-track local observations
and responses in the parallel training stage, such as grid-wise prompts (i.e., local
image token, task identifier) and their outputs. To manage these multi-track elements, we merge them into a sequence and append them after the shared observation. Consequently, the input to window attention consists of multiple parts,
requiring a customized attention mask to ensure grid independence while enabling autoregressive prediction, as detailed in Figure 1. Within each subprocess
group (i.e., those associated with the same grid), interactions are left-to-right
unidirectional attention. Moreover, tokens belonging to different subprocesses
are isolated, preventing them from accessing each other’s information.
Global Attention. In tasks that require object- and pixel-level analysis, the
large number of local predictions creates significant memory and computational
burdens, especially in global attention layers, where processing attention across
all grid points can be unnecessary and inefficient. Therefore, for such tasks, we
have optimized the global attention layer to focus only on the shared global observations (i.e., input image and text), eliminating the need to compute targets
for each grid. Table 1 shows that this strategy slightly impacts performance but
greatly decreases computation time. However, in captioning and visual grounding with a 224 image size, which involves only one window and a single global
response, this optimization is unnecessary.

