Curved Diffusion: A Generative Model With
Optical Geometry Control.
Supplementary Materials.
A

Further Experiments, Examples, and Ablation

A.1

Attention Reweighting Analysis

To quantify the contribution of the reweighted self-attention introduced in Section 3.2, we perform the following experiment. As for the per-pixel location
conditioning, we consider the corner-squeezing deformation, the same as in Figure 5 in the main text. Now we generate two sets of images: one with the model
that reweigths the self-attention with respect to the density, and with one that
doesn’t. For the generation, we use 100 automatically generated prompts, for
each of the prompts we sample 8 images. Both models share the random seed.
Then we unwrap the generated images with respect to the per-pixel warping conditioning. It is expected that the distribution of objects located on the unwarped
image would be the same as the distribution on an image generated with the
base text-to-image model, non-conditional to spatial locations. To quantify this
alignment, we apply a pretrained saliency object segmentation model [4] over
the unwarped generated images, as illustrated in Figure 1a. We calculate the average saliency map center over the unwarped generated images with reweighting,
without reweighting, and for the images generated with the base model.
With reweight

Generated

No reweight

base model
reweight
no reweight
reweight, top-10%
no reweight, top-10%

Unwarp saliency

y-coordinate (pixels)

220

230

240

250

260
220

225

230

235

240

245

250

x-coordinate (pixels)

(a) Top row : images generated with and
without self-attention reweighting; second
row : saliency object segmentation on the unwarped image, the star indicates the saliency
center of mass.

(b) Averaged saliency map center location for
various generated images. We also depict the
saliency centers for the reweighted and nonreweighted generation where the output images are the most different from each other.

Fig. 1: Analysis of the self-attention reweighting.

