1

Appendix
In this supplementary material, we first present the templates for QAs and
prompts of pre-training and fine-tuning data (Appendix A). Then, we provide
detailed metric information for our closed-loop evaluation (Appendix B), as well
as the specific 14 scenario types defined in nuPlan challenges [3] (Appendix C).
In the end, we report additional quantitative results conducted to further substantiate the efficacy of our approach (Appendix D).

A

Data Templates

A.1

Pre-training Data

Planning-QA We assessed the capabilities of Llama2-13B [4] via a zero-shot
methodology and discovered that its extensive pre-training data provides a solid
foundation in traffic rule comprehension. However, its limited mathematical
prowess poses challenges in grasping and deducing the connections between instructions and numerical expressions. To address this, we introduced a languagebased Planning-QA dataset aimed at transitioning LLM from a general model
to a specialized model adept in autonomous driving planning. This enhancement
focuses on refining its capability in instruction interpretation and reasoning.
Concretely, we delineated the level of autonomous driving planning into three
granularities: 1) high-level instructions: formulated through velocity commands
including stop, accelerate, decelerate, maintain speed, and routing commands
including turn left, turn right, go straight, 2) control: assessing the values of velocity and acceleration, 3) and waypoint: encompassing a series of points. Six
question types were devised to articulate the transitional relationships across
the high-level instructions - control - waypoint spectrum, and each QA-pair is
adapted based on log data from nuPlan [1]. Fig. S1a illustrates the universal
systemSystem
prompt
template applicable to all questions, whereas Fig. S1b-S1g distemplet
play specific examples for each question type alongside their respective answer,
substituting <Question> and <Answer> within the system prompt.

- Input:
Role: You are now an autonomous driving driver, you need to answer questions based on the given high-level
instructions, control or waypoints information.
Coordinate: Your current coordinate is at (0,0), the positive direction of the x-axis is to the front, and the positive
direction of the y-axis is to the left. The waypoints are represented as a series of equally time-spaced points, with the
time interval between two adjacent points being 0.5 s.
Question: <Question>
Final Answer:
- Target:
<Answer>
(a) system prompt template for Planning-QA dataset

