SOS: Segment Object System for Open-World
Instance Segmentation With Object Priors
Supplementary Material
Christian Wilms1 , Tim Rolff1,2 , Maris Hillemann1 , Robert Johanson1 , and
Simone Frintrop1
1

2

1

Computer Vision Group, University of Hamburg, Germany
Human-Computer Interaction Group, University of Hamburg, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@uni-hamburg.de

Details of Object Priors

In the following, we provide implementation details of all object priors evaluated
in this paper.
Grid The object prior Grid utilizes the baseline implemented in SAM3 , however, using 64 points per side leading to a 64 × 64 grid as in the zero-shot object
proposals experiment described in [11]. Given an image of size h × w, the grid
h
w
points have a spacing of 64
in the vertical dimension and a spacing of 64
in the
h
1
horizontal dimension. All grid points are translated by 64 · 2 in the horizontal
w
dimension and 64
· 12 in the vertical dimension, to center the grid on the image. Note that we directly use the grid points as prompts, without the sampling
utilized for most other priors.
Dist For the Dist object prior, we first extract the centroid of each annotated
VOC object from the COCO train split. As the centroid, we take the average
x- and y-coordinates of all pixels belonging to the object. Subsequently, we
normalize the coordinates by the image height and width, leading to relative
coordinates. Given these relative coordinates, we aggregate all centroids across
the dataset in an array of size 64 × 64. Finally, each entry in the aggregator
represents the absolute number of objects with a centroid at this location, given
a resolution of 64 × 64. To generate the object prior per image, we resize the
aggregator to the respective image’s size, ignoring the image content.
GT To create the object prior GT, we extract the centroid of each non-VOC
object from the COCO train split and directly take these centroids as prompt.
3

https://github.com/facebookresearch/segment-anything/blob/main/segment_
anything/automatic_mask_generator.py

