ZeST : Zero-Shot Material Transfer
from a Single Image
Ta-Ying Cheng1,2 , Prafull Sharma3 , Andrew Markham1 , Niki Trigoni1 ,
and Varun Jampani2(B)
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, England
2
Stability AI, London, England
varunjampani@gmail.com
3
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract. We propose ZeST , a method for zero-shot material transfer to an object in the input image given a material exemplar image.
ZeST leverages existing diﬀusion adapters to extract implicit material
representation from the exemplar image. This representation is used to
transfer the material using pre-trained inpainting diﬀusion model on the
object in the input image using depth estimates as geometry cue and
grayscale object shading as illumination cues. The method works on real
images without any training resulting a zero-shot approach. Both qualitative and quantitative results on real and synthetic datasets demonstrate
that ZeST outputs photorealistic images with transferred materials. We
also show the application of ZeST to perform multiple edits and robust
material assignment under diﬀerent illuminations.
Project Page: https://ttchengab.github.io/zest

1

Introduction

Editing object materials in images (e.g., changing a marble statue into a steel
statue) is useful for several graphics and design applications such as game design,
e-commerce, etc. It is a highly challenging and time-consuming task even for
expert artists and graphic designers – typically requires explicit 3D geometry
and illumination estimation followed by careful tuning of the target material
properties (e.g., metallic, roughness, transparency). Previous works try to alleviate the tedious material speciﬁcation by synthesizing textures given input text
prompts [39,50]. However, they are focused on texturing 3D meshes, which overlooks some of the unique challenges for material editing in 2D images, such as
illumination. Another work [41] proposes ﬁne-grained material editing on images,
but it cannot directly transfer materials from a given exemplar.
In this work, we aim to make 2D-to-2D material editing practical by eliminating the need for any 3D objects as well as explicit speciﬁcation of material
properties. Given a single image of an object and another material exemplar
image, our goal is to transfer the material appearance from the exemplar to
the target object directly in 2D. See Fig. 1 for some sample input and material
exemplar images. We do not assume any access to the ground-truth 3D shapes,
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 370–386, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_21

