Supplementary Materials for ECCV 2024 paper
PDiscoFormer: Relaxing Part Discovery
Constraints with Vision Transformers
Ananthu Aniraj1 , Cassio F. Dantas2 , Dino Ienco2 , and Diego Marcos1
1

A

Inria, Univ. Montpellier, LIRMM, UMR TETIS, Montpellier, France
{ananthu.aniraj, diego.marcos}@inria.fr
2
Inria, Inrae, Univ. Montpellier, UMR TETIS, Montpellier, France
{cassio.fraga-dantas, dino.ienco}@inrae.fr

Training Settings

We trained all our models using the Adam optimizer [7]. The class token, position
embedding, and register token of the ViT were kept unfrozen, while all other
ViT layers were frozen during training. We used a starting learning rate of 10−6
for the ViT backbone fine-tuned tokens, 10−3 for the linear projection layer to
form the part prototypes, and 10−2 for the modulation and the final linear layer
used for classification. We used a variable batch size, with a minimum of 16, by
adjusting the learning rate using the square root scaling rule [9]. Training lasted
for a total of 28 epochs, and we employed a step learning rate schedule, reducing
the learning rate by a factor of 0.5 every 4 epochs (as in [8]). Additionally, to
regularize our training process, we applied gradient norm clipping [10] with a
constant value of 2 for all experiments. In all our experiments, the loss weight
of the background loss Lp0 was set to 2, while all other loss weights were set to
a value of 1. We used a constant part dropout value of 0.3.

B

Compute Requirements and Model Performance

Compute Requirements (Training). We trained our models on a machine
equipped with 4 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPUs. The training duration
varied depending on the dataset and batch size, as detailed in Tab. A.
Inference Speed. Taking the models trained on the CUB dataset [11] with
K = 8 as an example, the inference speed on a workstation with a single NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3090 GPU, averaged over 100 runs, is presented in Tab. B.

C

Effect of backbone

In this experiment, we investigate the impact of different deep neural network
backbones on the performance of our method. The results are summarized
in Tab. C.

