Train Till You Drop: Towards Stable and Robust
Source-free Unsupervised 3D Domain Adaptation
— Supplementary Material —
Björn Michele1,2 , Alexandre Boulch1 , Tuan-Hung Vu1 , Gilles Puy1 ,
Renaud Marlet1,3 , and Nicolas Courty2
Valeo.ai, Paris, France
CNRS, IRISA, Univ. Bretagne Sud, Vannes, France
3
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
1

2

Overview
In this document, we provide: experiments on the application of TTYD to
the image modality (Sec. A), additional implementation details (Sec. B), a
guarantee of the soundness (Sec. C), and additional ablations: on the parameters
to adapt (Sec. D), on alternative distances for the consistency validator TTYDstop
(Sec. E) and on other reference models (Sec. F). We also report the performance
of TTYDstop with other training schemes (Sec. G) and discuss the SFUDA
hypothesis for our training scheme (Sec. H). Additionally, we also provide the
per-class results and comparison to non-SF UDA approaches (Sec. I), qualitative
results (Sec. J), and more details on the datasets and class mappings (Sec. K).

A

Application to image modality

While developed for 3D SFUDA, the formulation of TTYD appears to be general
enough to be used for other modalities. To study this aspect, we conducted
experiments on image segmentation. We used the GTA5 dataset [16] as source,
and the Cityscapes (City) dataset [4] as target.
This is also an opportunity to evalTable 5: SFUDA for image modality.
uate if different models can be used as
Valid.
GTA5 →
reference models for the validation. We
Method
ref. model
City
remark, nevertheless, that it is common
practice for image semantic segmentation
Source-only
36.8
URMDA [17]
45.1
to keep the ImageNet-pretrained batchSFDA [10]
45.8
norm frozen during training on the source
SDF [24]
49.4
dataset. We cannot directly use a PTBN
HCL [6]
48.1
version of such source-only models as referDT-ST
[27]
52.1
ence for TTYDstop , in particular because
TTYD
PTBN
53.4
the ImageNet-pretrained batchnorm statisTTYD
DT-ST
53.2
tics differ too much from those we would
have obtained on the source training set. Therefore, we use a PTBN model built

