Texturing 3D Meshes with Multi-View Consistency

1

Supplementary Material
8

Details in Stage I

8.1

Multi-View Consistent Initialization

We utilize the multi-view depth-conditioned albedo diffusion model from RichDreamer [33] for the initialization. The rendered depth maps are concatenated
with the latent features to serve as input for the UNet denoiser [34]. We only
sample 8 images around the underlying 3D model instead of an overcomplete set,
and we unproject all images to get an averaged RGB UV map as initialization.
The invisible regions on the UV map are extracted by pixel detection and inpainted [47] by the region neighborhood. The inpainted UV map is then decoded
to latent space and noised to the specified diffusion step. Although the sampled
images have fewer details and are averaged in UV space, this is sufficient for
initialization [28].
8.2

Defects in Latent UV Mapping

Figure 10 illustrates why details are dropped during the aggregation step when
using latent UV map. Each pixel of the latent image represents a patch (e.g.,
8 × 8) of the original image. Latent pixels warping means patches warping on
RGB space, which inevitably leads to blurring or jagged lines after decoding.

E

D
Orignal RGB

Warping by Latent UV

Warping by RGB UV

UV

UV !"

Latent Warping Process

Fig. 10: The left image is the original RGB image. The second column is the warping
image caused by latent UV. The third column is the warping image by RGB UV. Using
RGB UV warping, everything is in good order. Using latent UV warping, the straight
horizontal line becomes a set of horizontal line segments, and the details are blurred.

9

Texture Stitching details

In this section, we provide details on the formulations of ϕf (zf ) and ϕf f ′ (zf , zf ′ ).
Formulation of ϕf (zf ). With Cf,i = {c} we denote all colors of pixels of
image Ii associated with face f . Let Cf = ∪1≤i≤k collect all the colors of the
pixels associated with the face f . We perform mean sift clustering among Cf .

