NamedCurves: Learned Image Enhancement via
Color Naming
David Serrano-Lozano1,2 , Luis Herranz3 , Michael S. Brown4 , and
Javier Vazquez-Corral1,2
1

Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
4
York University, Toronto, Canada
{dserrano,jvazquez}@cvc.uab.cat, luis.herranz@uam.es, mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca
2

Supplementary Material
The supplemental material provides additional information that could not be
incorporated into the main paper due to page limit constraints. Specifically, we
discuss (1) Adobe’s color decomposition method, (2) more information on color
naming probability maps, (3) further justifications on the color names grouping,
(4) loss function parameter α ablation study, and (5) additional results.
Adobe Color Decomposition
Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Lightroom are software tools to allow photo editors
the ability to fine-tune individual colors within an image. Our method is inspired
by these tools. In particular, the software decomposes the image into a predefined
set of colors (red, orange, yellow, green, cyan, blue, purple and pink ), enabling
users to independently manipulate the hue, saturation, and luminance of each
color. In Figure 1, we show two screenshots of the tools and examples edited using
this feature. For each example, we display the top of the input image alongside
the default parameter values for the color to fine-tune. We show the edited image
in the bottom images alongside the corresponding slider adjustments. In the left
example, we demonstrate the modification of blue, illustrating alterations in the
sky while preserving non-blue regions. In the right example, we focus on adjusting
purple, a non-primary color. This allows us to selectively modify specific purple
elements, such as the girl’s clothing, without affecting the rest of the image.
Notably, adjustments to the desired color sliders induce changes across all three
color channels, as evident in the histograms provided in the top-right corner.
Color Naming Probability Maps
As discussed in the main paper, we use the color naming method proposed
by Van de Weijer et al. [3]. This method is applied on each pixel. Given an
sRGB image, this method generates 11 probability maps, each corresponding to

