Supplementary Material for OpenIns3D: Snap
and Lookup for 3D Open-vocabulary Instance
Segmentation
Zhening Huang1 , Xiaoyang Wu2 , Xi Chen2 , Hengshuang Zhao2 , Lei
Zhu3,4 , and Joan Lasenby1
1

University of Cambridge
The University of Hong Kong
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2

Summary
In a nutshell, OpenIns3D is a new pipeline for 3D open-world scene understanding that consumes only 3D coloured point clouds as input, making it easier to
deploy in a wide range of scenarios. We also present detailed per-category results
on how OpenIns3D performs on the ScanNetv2 [4], S3DIS [1], and STPLS3D [3]
datasets for both Instance Segmentation and Object Detection, for future work
to compare with. In the development process, we tested a wide range of rendering
methods and documented their different performances, which demonstrates how
scene-level rendering stands out from other rendering methods. More detailed
implementation details and methodologies of OpenIns3D are also presented. The
section structure is listed as follows:
– Section 1: More Details on Methodologies
– Section 2: Implementation Details
– Section 3: Per-Categories Results
– Section 4: Other Attempts for Image Rendering
– Section 5: Limitation and future work
– Section 6: More Visualization

1

More Details on Methodologies

Class-agnostic mask proposal module. We modified modules that require
classification labels in Mask3D [14] to make it a class-agnostic setting. This
includes 1. removing semantic probability components in Hungarian Matching,
2. eliminating semantic classification loss, 3. discarding classification logits-based
ranking, and 4. getting rid of classification logits-based filtering. Instead, we
added the Mask Scoring and Mask Filtering module to acquire high-quality
mask proposals.
Local enforced lookup. Here, we provide a detailed explanation of the Occlusion Report module that we proposed to effectively evaluate the occlusion

