Supplement Materials for RCS-Prompt: Learning
Prompt to Rearrange Class Space for Prompt-based
Continual Learning
Longrong Yang1 , Hanbin Zhao1 , Yunlong Yu2⋆ , Xiaodong Zeng3 , and Xi Li1,4,5⋆
1
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
3
Ant Services Group 4 Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
5
Zhejiang – Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab, Hangzhou
{longrongyang, zhaohanbin, yuyunlong, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
{xiaodong.zxd}@antgroup.com
2

In our supplementary material, we provide the following details and experiments:
– Sec. 1: We summarize the potential impacts of this work on the community and
further discuss its limitation.
– Sec. 2: We clarify some basic concepts in detail and their relationships.
– Sec. 3: We provide more implementation details.
– Sec. 4: We report experimental results about additional pre-trained models and
further compare our method with recent methods on other benchmarks.
– Sec. 5: We report experimental results about the continual learning performance
trend, different technical selections, and the feature visualization.
– Sec. 6: We present a detailed algorithm of our method.

1

Potential Impacts and Limitation

In this paper, we propose RCS-Prompt, an innovative algorithm designed to enhance
prompt-based continual learning performance by actively minimizing the overlap between old and new class spaces. To facilitate a comprehensive grasp of our method, we
outline the potential impacts and limitation of RCS-Prompt as follows:
Potential impacts to continual learning. Continual learning usually faces the plasticity-stability dilemma [9], where plasticity refers to the model ability to learn new
knowledge, and stability refers to the model ability to retain old knowledge. In this
study, we unveil the expected diverse roles of prompts for different samples within
prompt-based continual learning. This insight inspires a novel approach: leveraging the
bidirectional loss to optimize prompts. In detail, decreasing classification logits of IDclean samples on old classes, so improving the model plasticity to the new session.
Altering the labels of ID-noisy samples to old classes for learning, so improving the
model stability to the old session. Thus, RCS-Prompt actually offers a novel avenue to
strike a balance between plasticity and stability.
Moreover, our work successfully establishes a correlation between continual learning and noisy label learning. The potential for deeper connections between these two
⋆

Corresponding author.

