Scaling Rectified Flow Transformers for High-Resolution Image Synthesis
Patrick Esser * Sumith Kulal Andreas Blattmann Rahim Entezari Jonas Müller Harry Saini Yam Levi
Dominik Lorenz Axel Sauer Frederic Boesel Dustin Podell Tim Dockhorn Zion English
Kyle Lacey Alex Goodwin Yannik Marek Robin Rombach *
Stability AI

Figure 1. High-resolution samples from our 8B rectified flow model, showcasing its capabilities in typography, precise prompt following
and spatial reasoning, attention to fine details, and high image quality across a wide variety of styles.

Abstract

strate the superior performance of this approach
compared to established diffusion formulations
for high-resolution text-to-image synthesis. Additionally, we present a novel transformer-based
architecture for text-to-image generation that uses
separate weights for the two modalities and enables a bidirectional flow of information between
image and text tokens, improving text comprehension, typography, and human preference ratings.
We demonstrate that this architecture follows predictable scaling trends and correlates lower validation loss to improved text-to-image synthesis as
measured by various metrics and human evaluations. Our largest models outperform state-of-theart models, and we will make our experimental
data, code, and model weights publicly available.

Diffusion models create data from noise by inverting the forward paths of data towards noise and
have emerged as a powerful generative modeling
technique for high-dimensional, perceptual data
such as images and videos. Rectified flow is a recent generative model formulation that connects
data and noise in a straight line. Despite its better
theoretical properties and conceptual simplicity, it
is not yet decisively established as standard practice. In this work, we improve existing noise sampling techniques for training rectified flow models by biasing them towards perceptually relevant
scales. Through a large-scale study, we demon*

Equal contribution . <first.last>@stability.ai.

1

