Supplementary for UCIP:
A Universal Framework for Compressed Image
Super-Resolution using Dynamic Prompt
Xin Li1

†, (B)

, Bingchen Li1 † , Yeying Jin2 , Cuiling Lan3 , Hanxin Zhu1
Yulin Ren1 , and Zhibo Chen1 (B)
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{xin.li, chenzhibo}@ustc.edu.cn, {lbc31415926, hanxinzhu,
renyulin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinyeying@u.nus.edu, culan@microsoft.com

Section 1 illustrates the distribution of offsets from different PTMMs and codecs.
Section 2 presents more qualitative results on various compression codecs and
qualities.

1

Distribution of Offsets

We investigate the learned distributions of offsets via histogram visualization
of offsets from different Prompt guided Token Mixer Modules (PTMMs). The
i and j of PTMM _i_j denotes the offsets of j th PTMM from ith PTMB. We
have the following observations: 1) As the depth increases, the learned offsets
first expand to a larger range and then shrink to a smaller range. This hints
that the model learns to extract local information for the query token at shallow
layers. In the middle layers, the model leverages the offsets to aggregate the
global-wise information to perform better token mixing. At the last layers, the
distortions contained in image features are mostly removed, therefore the model
focuses more on using local information again to refine the query tokens for
the reconstruction purpose. 2) The distribution of offsets from middle layers
differs among various codecs. We attribute this to the guidance from task-specific
prompts. Since the distortion varies among different codecs, the visualization of
learned offsets validates that our prompts are capable of providing adaptive
guidance against various distortions, thus leading to better performance in the
CSR tasks [5, 13]. 3) The offsets expand to a wider range for learning-based
codecs compared to traditional codecs. We believe this is because the distortion
introduced by learning-based codecs is more challenging to eliminate compared
to that from traditional codecs, necessitating broader ranges of offsets to extract
useful information for query tokens.
†

Equal Contribution, (B) Corresponding Authors.

