Reflective Instruction Tuning: Mitigating
Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models
(Supplementary Materials)
Jinrui Zhang1 , Teng Wang1,2 , Haigang Zhang3 , Ping Lu4 , Feng Zheng1,5

⋆

1

Southern University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Hong Kong
3
Shenzhen Polytechnic University
4
The Cloud Computing and IT Institute of ZTE Corporation
5
Research Institute of Multiple Agents and Embodied Intelligence,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

A

Prompts for Dataset Annotation

As an image-based question-answer generator, your task is to create 3 challenging questions
related to a given image, each accompanied by one correct and one misleading answer. Ensure
adherence to these guidelines:

1. Formulate questions that can be definitively answered using the image and general knowledge
2. The questions should require multi-step analysis to solve, avoiding overly simple queries
3. Draw inspiration from diverse fields such as daily life, mathematics, sciences or programming,
focusing on visual elements within the image like objects, symbols, or text.
4. Employ a diverse array of question formats, such as open-ended, multiple-choice, yes/no, and
short-answer types.
5. Provide one accurate answer and one plausible but incorrect answer for each question
6. Keep questions clear and concise
7. Present your output in JSON format, structured as follows: [{question1, correct answer1,
confusing answer1}, {question2, correct answer2, confusing answer2}, ...]. Refrain from including
extraneous content

Fig. A1: Prompt for instruction-response generation

This section presents the prompts employed for annotating the REVERIE
dataset. Fig. A1 shows the prompt for the generation of instruction and response,
we ask Gemini [13] vision model to generate instructions that require multi-step
reasoning, span diverse domains and encompass various task types. Additionally,
for each instruction, we prompt the model to generate both a positive and a
negative response. Fig. A2 and Fig A3 present the prompt for positive rationale
and negative rationale generation, respectively. We instruct the model to show
the reasoning underlying answer prediction and also include key image details
⋆

Corresponding author.

