DreamMotion: Space-Time Self-Similar Score
Distillation for Zero-Shot Video Editing
Supplementary Material
Hyeonho Jeong1 , Jinho Chang1 , Geon Yeong Park2 , and Jong Chul Ye1,2
1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, South Korea
Dept. of Bio and Brain Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{hyeonho.jeong, jinhojsk515, pky3436, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
Project page: https://hyeonho99.github.io/dreammotion
2

A

Related Work

A.1

Video Editing using Diffusion Models

Creating videos from textual descriptions necessitates ensuring realistic and temporally consistent motion, posing a unique set of challenges compared to textdriven image generative scenarios. Before the advent of publicly accessible textto-video diffusion models, Tune-A-Video [30] was at the forefront of one-shotbased video editing. They proposed to inflate the image diffusion model to the
pseudo video diffusion model by appending temporal modules to the image diffusion model [22] and reformulating spatial self-attention into spatio-temporal selfattention, facilitating inter-frame interactions. However, the inflation often falls
short of achieving consistent and complete motion, as motion preservation relies
implicitly on the attention mechanism during inference. Thus, the attention projection matrices within U-Net are often fine-tuned on the input videos [13,30,36].
Utilizing explicit visual signals to steer the video denoising process is another
common technique. Pix2Video [1] and FateZero [21], for instance, inject intermediate attention maps during the editing phase, which are derived during the
input video inversion. Others leverage pre-trained image adapter networks for
structurally consistent video generation. A notable example is ControlNet [33],
which has been modified to accommodate a series of explicit structural indicators
such as depth and edge maps. Ground-A-Video [10] takes this a step further by
adapting both ControlNet and GLIGEN [11] for video editing, utilizing spatiallycontinuous depth maps and spatially-discrete bounding boxes.
Despite the availability of open-source text-to-video (T2V) diffusion models
[2, 24, 26, 27, 32], recent endeavors frequently adopt a self-supervised strategy of
fine-tuning pre-trained video generative models on an input video, to accurately
capture intricate, real-world motion. More specifically, several studies attempt
to disentangle the appearance and motion elements of videos during the selfsupervised fine-tuning. For example, [29, 35, 37] split the fine-tuning phase into
two distinct pathways: one dedicated to integrating the subject’s appearance

