16

Singh et al.

Appendix
This appendix consists of four parts: (1) Appendix A explains how Average Precision is calculated (2) Appendix B includes implementation details of the mask
boundary refinement stage in the COCO-ReM annotation pipeline, as discussed
in Section 3.1 (3) Appendix C includes an in-depth analysis and qualitative
examples from our COCO-ReM dataset, as discussed in Section 3.2, and (4)
Appendix D contains datasheet for COCO-ReM dataset. The appendix also
contains Table 4 that lists the numeric results of all the fifty object detectors we
evaluated in Section 4 and Figure 5.

A

Average Precision

Average Precision (AP) is a widely used evaluation metric in object detection and
segmentation tasks. It combines precision and recall across diﬀerent thresholds
comprehensively to give a single value measure of performance.
P recision =
Recall =

T rue P ositives
T rue P ositives + F alse P ositives

T rue P ositives
T rue P ositives + F alse N egatives

A detection is said to match with ground truth if its Intersection over Union
(IoU) is above a certain threshold. Model outputs are ranked according to their
scores, and precision and recall are calculated above diﬀerent ranks to get points
on the Precision-Recall (PR) curve. AP is calculated as the area below the PR
curve.
AP =

Z 1

p(r)dr

0

where p(r) is precision at recall r. AP was popularized in object detection
by Everingham et al. [12] which used it with a single IoU threshold of 0.5. Lin
et al. [28] refined the metric by including multiple thresholds and reporting its
mean, called mean AP (mAP). mAP is often used as the overall metric in object
detection. Note: In this paper, AP means mAP wherever a threshold is not
explicitly mentioned.

B

Mask Boundary Refinement: Implementation Details

The first stage in our annotation pipeline – mask boundary refinement – aims
to refine the coarse boundaries of COCO-2017 masks. To achieve this, we use
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) for its high-quality mask predictions. We
performed an initial pass through the COCO-2017 masks using the publicly
available SAM checkpoint using the ViT-H [11] image encoder.

