Supplementary Material:
Zero-Shot Detection of AI-Generated Images

Davide Cozzolino1 , Giovanni Poggi1 , Matthias Nieÿner2 , and
Luisa Verdoliva1,2
University Federico II of Naples, 80125 Naples, Italy
Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany
{davide.cozzolino,poggi,verdoliv}@unina.it, niessner@tum.de
1

2

In this supplementary document, we give more details about the comparison
methods and the evaluation datasets present in the main paper. Moreover, we
report additional ablation results and experimental analysis.

1 Reference methods
In our comparative analysis, in order to ensure a fair comparison, we include only
reference techniques with code and/or pre-trained models publicly available online. Eventually, we considered the following methods, listed approximately from
less recent to most recent:
1. Wang2020 [12] it is based on a plain ResNet50 backbone and represents
a reference in the research community. Its main peculiarity is the training
phase, based on a large dataset of 360k real (LSUN) and 360k synthetic
(ProGAN) images, the latter taken from 20 dierent classes. Augmentation
based on compression and blurring is also used. The proposed dataset has
been widely adopted in subsequent papers to train new models.
2. PatchFor [2] is a fully convolutional classier on an XceptionNet backbone,
with a limited receptive eld that allow to focus on image local patches rather
than on the global structure. The patch-based predictions are also used to
visualize patterns that indicate the regions where real and fake image can be
easily detected. Finally, images are properly pre-processed to avoid learning
image formatting artifacts.
3. Liu2022 [6] tries to distinguish real images from synthetic images based on
statistical dierences observed in their learned noise patterns. To improve
performance, spatial information is then combined with information gathered
in the frequency domain.
4. Corvi2023 [3] it relies on a modied ResNet50 architecture where subsampling steps are mostly avoided to preserve forensic traces. Also resizing
is not carried out both in the training and testing phases to preserve subtle
forensic traces. It is trained on a dataset of latent diusion images, with
strong augmentation to gain higher robustness and generalization ability.

