Foster Adaptivity and Balance in Learning with
Noisy Labels
Mengmeng Sheng1 , Zeren Sun1( ) , Tao Chen1 , Shuchao Pang1 , Yucheng
Wang2 , and Yazhou Yao1( )
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{shengmengmemg, zerens, taochen, pangshuchao, yazhou.yao}@njust.edu.cn
2
Horizon Robotics, Beijing, China
yucheng.wang@horizon.cc

In this supplementary material, we provide additional evaluations of our proposed SED. We further investigate the effect of the detailed composition of the
SCS and SCR in our SED. Additional experiments are conducted and reported
according to the following themes:
– Local and Global Threshold in SCS. Considering class balance during
sample selection, our SCS adaptively adjusts the threshold in an epoch-wise
and class-wise manner to enable effective clean sample identification. Table 1
shows the results of using SCS with and without local and global thresholds.
– Truncated Normal Distribution in SCR. Considering the confidence of
the corrected label of noisy samples, we propose a dynamic truncated normal
distribution as a sample re-weighting function to mitigate the biased label
correction. Table 1 also shows results of re-weighting and non-reweighting
experimental setups.
– Comparison with existing sample selection methods. To provide a
more comprehensive visualization of the adaptive and class-balanced sample
selection process of our SED, we conducted additional experimental analyses.
Fig.1 illustrates the selection thresholds and precision of different sample
selection methods (i.e., Small-loss, GMM and ours SED) for each class on
CIFAR100N-Sym-50%.
– Effect of Hyper-parameters in EMA. To dynamically reflect the learning performance changes of the model, we use the exponential moving average (EMA) to dynamically update self-adaptive thresholds in SCS, truncated
normal distribution parameters in SCR, and the mean-teacher model (θ∗ ).
The results of the ablation experiments are presented in Table 2 and Table 3.
– Extend Experiment Results. To further verify the robustness of our
SED as the training processes, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 record the test accuracy
of the training process under different noise conditions on CIFAR100N and
CIFAR80N. Fig. 4, Fig. 5, and Fig. 6 present some sample selection results
of our SED on real-world datasets.

1

Futher Analysis

In this section, we investigate the impact of the detailed composition of the SCS
and SCR in our SED. As outlined, our proposed SED selects and re-weights

