WindPoly: Polygonal Mesh Reconstruction via
Winding Numbers Supplementary Material
Xin He , Chenlei Lv , Pengdi Huang , and Hui Huang⋆
Visual Computing Research Center, Shenzhen University
hhzhiyan@gmail.com

1

Introduction

In this part, we present supplementary material that includes additional implementation details of polygon-based winding numbers optimization and additional
results. The characteristics of the current mainstream methods in reconstruction
tasks are discussed with more details, including PolyFit [6], KSR [1], LowPoly [3],
R-LowPoly [2]. In the main context, reported reconstructed models are mixed
together without elaborate explanations. We provide a detailed comparison by
different reconstruct solutions on various CAD models and architectural point
clouds to illustrate advantages of our method.

2

Additional Implementation Details

In this part, we describe the additional implementation details of the polygonbased winding numbers optimization strategy. As described in the section 4.3,
we firstly collect a set of candidate faces and initialize the normal set. Next,
we define a judgement energy Edir and determine whether a polyhedron should
be removed by optimizing Edir , which is implemented by a max-flow algorithm.
After removing polyhedrons, the normal of the candidate faces located at the
boundary can be determined and such faces are used to calculate Edir in the
next iteration. The iteration ends until all polyhedrons are determined.
For raw point clouds, non-manifold structures may appear due to original
topology and noises. To keep the structure with manifold property, we add a
constraint during the iteration. The polyhedrons that should be removed determined by the max-flow algorithm are added to the set {CP }d in each iteration.
We traverse the polyhedrons in {CP }d , and detect whether the shape composed
of the remaining polyhedrons after removing the currently traversed polyhedron
is manifold. If the structure satisfies the manifold property and the traversed
polyhedron locates at the boundary, the traversed polyhedron is required to be
removed. Otherwise, it is preserved. Such processing trades off some internal
planes for the manifold property, as shown in Figure 1.
We use some hyperparameters during polygonal plane detection. In Eq. (2),
the parameters ωf , ωs , and ωc are positive weights used to balance three related
⋆

Corresponding author

