20

V. Somers et al.

Keypoint Promptable Re-Identification: Supplementary
Materials
In the upcoming sections, we present additional details regarding the novel
Occluded PoseTrack-ReID dataset and our KPRTrack pose tracking method.
Furthermore, we oﬀer supplementary qualitative and quantitative results to
provide a more comprehensive perspective on our research. Our code, annotations, and proposed dataset are available at https://github.com/VlSomers/
keypoint_promptable_reidentification. Our codebase was forked from the
Torchreid10 framework and BPBreID11 [34]. Pose-tracking results were obtained using the Tracklab framework for multi-object tracking [16].
Study on the Robustness to Multi-Person Occlusions
In Figure 7, we present a performance comparison between KPR and its nonpromptable version under various occlusion levels on Occ-PTrack. To quantify
the Multi-Person Occlusion Level (MPOL) of a query sample i in the query set
Q, we compute the diﬀerence between the number of negative keypoints Ni and
the number of positive keypoints Pi , and then normalize this value over the set
Q to obtain a percentage as follows:
(Ni
MPOLi =

max(Nj
j2Q

Pi )
Pj )

min(Nj
j2Q

Pj )

min(Nj
j2Q

Pj )

.

(3)

As shown in the plots, the utilization of prompts leads to at least 10% performance enhancement in scenarios with heavy multi-person occlusions. Consequently, these experiments demonstrate the eﬃcacy of keypoints prompts to disambiguate the intended ReID target among multiple pedestrians. Furthermore,
keypoint prompts contribute to better part-based feature extraction, which explains the performance boost in scenarios with low occlusion scores.
Occluded PoseTrack-ReID Dataset Details
As introduced in Section 5, Occluded PoseTrack-ReID (or simply Occ-PTrack), is
a new ReID dataset we built out of the annotation available with PoseTrack21 [6].
PoseTrack21 is a popular video benchmark for multi-person pose tracking, that
features keypoints and cross-video identity annotations. We provide a train/test
split of Occluded PoseTrack-ReID that is based on the original train/validation
split of PoseTrack21. Important numbers about each split are summarized in
Table 4. Similar to the original dataset, the train and test splits do not have
overlapping video scenes and therefore do not share identities. In order to build
the Occ-PTrack dataset, we randomly sample 1000 identities from the PoseTrack21 train set and keep all 1411 identities from the test set, and uniformly
10
11

https://github.com/KaiyangZhou/deep-person-reid
https://github.com/VlSomers/bpbreid

