Supplementary Material for “BEAF:
Observing BEfore-AFter Changes to Evaluate
Hallucination in Vision-language Models”
Moon Ye-Bin1∗

Nam Hyeon-Woo1∗

Wonseok Choi2

Tae-Hyun Oh1,2,3

1

3

2
Dept. of EE, POSTECH, Korea
Grad. School of AI, POSTECH, Korea
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei
University, Korea.
{ybmoon, hyeonw.nam, wonseok.c, taehyun}@postech.ac.kr
https://beafbench.github.io/

In this supplementary material, we include additional discussion about our
metric, the filtering criteria used during stage 2 in the image manipulation
pipeline, along with additional results, which are not included in the main paper.

A

Comparison of TU and Accuracy

We propose four new change-aware metrics in Sec. 3.2 in the main paper. True
Understanding (TU) measures whether the models correctly change their answers about manipulated objects. IGnorance (IG) measures the extent to which
models lack knowledge about specific scene information. StuBbornness (SB)
measures the extent to which models adhere to their initial answers. InDecision
(ID) measures whether the models change their answers about unmanipulated
objects. The evaluation results in Sec. 4 in the main paper demonstrate that by
tracking the changes in answers along the vision axis (original and manipulated
images), we can evaluate hallucination in VLMs more accurately.
More complex scenes make VLMs more confused like humans. In this
section, we compare TU and accuracy (ACC) in terms of image complexity
to demonstrate that our proposed TU is better calibrated than the traditional
metric of accuracy. Motivation of this analysis comes from our postulation that
the more complex the scene is, the easier it is for VLMs to be confused like
humans; humans tend to be likely confused to miss some objects if there are
many objects in the scene. In Fig. S1, we measure our TU and ACC along
the image complexity. We represent image complexity in two ways: (1) image
feature distance and (2) the number of objects in a scene. The image features are
extracted from DINOv2 [5], and we measure the distances between global (class
token) and the rest of the features. We measure the standard deviation of the
distances and use it as the image complexity value. The high standard deviation
means that many local features (local token) are far from the global feature
(class token); thus the image contains diverse features, i.e., a complex scene.
To count the number of objects in an original image scene, we use Recognize
Anything Model (RAM) [8].
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.

