Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable
Multimodal Models
Gemini Team, Google1

This report introduces a new family of multimodal models, Gemini, that exhibit remarkable capabilities
across image, audio, video, and text understanding. The Gemini family consists of Ultra, Pro, and Nano
sizes, suitable for applications ranging from complex reasoning tasks to on-device memory-constrained
use-cases. Evaluation on a broad range of benchmarks shows that our most-capable Gemini Ultra model
advances the state of the art in 30 of 32 of these benchmarks — notably being the first model to achieve
human-expert performance on the well-studied exam benchmark MMLU, and improving the state of the
art in every one of the 20 multimodal benchmarks we examined. We believe that the new capabilities of
the Gemini family in cross-modal reasoning and language understanding will enable a wide variety of
use cases. We discuss our approach toward post-training and deploying Gemini models responsibly to
users through services including Gemini, Gemini Advanced, Google AI Studio, and Cloud Vertex AI.

1. Introduction
We present Gemini, a family of highly capable multimodal models developed at Google. We trained
Gemini models jointly across image, audio, video, and text data for the purpose of building a model
with both strong generalist capabilities across modalities alongside cutting-edge understanding and
reasoning performance in each respective domain.
Gemini 1.0, our first version, comes in three sizes: Ultra for highly-complex tasks, Pro for enhanced
performance and deployability at scale, and Nano for on-device applications. Each size is specifically
tailored to address different computational limitations and application requirements.
After large-scale pre-training, we post-train our models to improve overall quality, enhance target
capabilities, and ensure alignment and safety criteria are met. Due to the varied requirements of
our downstream applications, we have produced two post-trained Gemini model family variants.
Chat-focused variants, referred to as Gemini Apps models, are optimized for Gemini and Gemini
Advanced, our conversational AI service formerly known as Bard. Developer-focused variants, referred
to as Gemini API models, are optimized for a range of products and are accessible through Google AI
Studio and Cloud Vertex AI.
We evaluate the performance of pre- and post-trained Gemini models on a comprehensive suite
of internal and external benchmarks covering a wide range of language, coding, reasoning, and
multimodal tasks.
The Gemini family advances state-of-the-art in large-scale language modeling (Anil et al., 2023;
Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023a; Radford et al.,
2019; Rae et al., 2021), image understanding (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023b; Reed et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022a), audio processing (Radford et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023), and video understanding (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). It
also builds on the work on sequence models (Sutskever et al., 2014), a long history of work in deep
learning based on neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015), and machine learning distributed systems
1 See Contributions and Acknowledgments section for full author list. Please send correspondence to gemini-1report@google.com

© 2025 Google. All rights reserved

