SMFANet: A Lightweight Self-Modulation
Feature Aggregation Network for
Efficient Image Super-Resolution
- Supplemental Material Mingjun Zheng⋆ , Long Sun⋆ , Jiangxin Dong, and Jinshan Pan†
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{mingjunzheng, cs.longsun, jxdong, jspan}@njust.edu.cn

Overview
In this document, we further implement ablations to demonstrate more analysis
on the SMFANet in Section 1, and present the effect of channel number and
FMB number in Section 2. Next, we further compare the performance and efficiency metrics with recent state-of-the-art approaches on ×4 SR in Section 3,
and show present more comparisons of the LAM visualization in Section 4. To
fully demonstrate the non-local modeling capability, we additionally show the
comparison results of the effective receptive fields in Section 5. We show more
spectral density visualizations of the output features from the EASA and LDE
branches in Section 6. Finally, we provide more visual comparison results between our SMFANet series and CNN- or ViT-based methods in Section 7, and
give a user study in Section 8.

1

Further Ablation and Analysis

In this section, we first conduct experiments to demonstrate the effect of input
projection. As we project the input feature Fin into feature X and Y for feature
modulation, one may wonder whether using a single projected feature directly
would generate better results or not. To answer this question, we replace the
channel splitting operation with feature duplication in the proposed network
and train it using the same settings as ours for fairness. Table 1 shows that
using a single projected feature does not generate better results, indicating that
using separate inputs drives the proposed EASA and LDE to learn better feature
representations. We then investigate the effect of fusing Xl and Yd with channel
concatenation. Table 1 shows that the performance of using channel concatenation is almost unchanged compared to the baseline model that uses addition
for feature fusion. Thus, we use addition to feature Xl and Yd with less model
complexity.
⋆
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author.

