Supplementary Material for LaWa: Using Latent
Space for In-Generation Image Watermarking

A

Additional Experiments

A.1

Robustness Under Different Attacks

In addition to the results in the main body of the paper, Tab. 1 provides a
comprehensive list of different attacks and the robustness of LaWa and other
post- and in-generation methods on the AI-Generated dataset. LaWa outperforms other methods in the majority of attacks and has comparable robustness
for the other attacks. Furthermore, Tab. 2 presents more detailed performance
results of LaWa (48-bit version) in different generative tasks under different attack parameters. It is evident that LaWa has great robustness to common image
transformation attacks for all generative tasks.
A.2

General Image Watermarking

In the main body of the paper, the results of LaWa for general image watermarking are reported using CLIC dataset. We also use DIV2K [3] dataset, which has
larger variety of scenes compared to CLIC dataset to evaluate the performance
of LaWa against baselines. All the 900 images in the training and validation
set of Div2K are used in the experiments. For all images, while maintaining the
aspect ratio, larger dimension of each image is resized to 1024 to avoid memory
limitation issue for some of the baselines. The quality and the robustness for
LaWa as well as the baselines are shown in Tab. 3. LaWa outperforms baseline
methods in the majority of the attacks. For image quality, it has comparable perceptual quality to the baseline methods. In particular, for 48-bit scenario, FNNS
has higher PSNR, but it suffers from significantly high computational complexity as well as low robustness against many attacks such as blur, contrast, and
brightness.
A.3

Ablation Studies

In this section, more ablation analysis over different components of the proposed
method is provided.
Different Loss Terms. We study the effect of different loss terms on the
perceptual quality of generated images in the main body of the paper and show
that using LM SE , LLP IP S , and LCritic together achieves the best performance.
In Fig. 1, the effect of each of these loss terms on the watermarked images is
qualitatively illustrated. When LCritic is not used, visual artifacts are present in
the image. Adding LCritic improves the quality of the image. Furthermore, using

