SHIC: Shape-Image Correspondences with
no Keypoint Supervision
Aleksandar Shtedritski, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{suny, chrisr, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
robots.ox.ac.uk/vgg/research/shic/

Appendix
In this Appendix, we first discuss the limitations of our approach (Sec. 1).
Then we discuss implementation details (Sec. 2) and provide additional ablations
(Sec. 3). Finally, we show more qualitative examples (Sec. 4) and show a failure
mode we observe (Sec. 5).

1

Limitations

Our method has several limitations. First, it relies on having a few hundred
images per category, which might not always be possible for low-resource classes.
However, this is still a significant step forward from prior works, which need
much more data and/or human annotations.
Next, the symmetry equivariance loss we propose assumes the shape is symmetric. While this is true for all shapes we consider, there could be several
instances where this assumption does not hold: (i) if the shape is not symmetric
by design, e.g., it an animal that misses a leg; (ii) if the shape is articulated and
thus not symmetric. In that instance, the loss Leq should not be used, which
would lead to a small drop in performance.
Finally, our model only predicts image-to-vertex matching, whereas prior
methods such as CSE [1] also predict segmentation masks. However, prior methods
do not evaluate segmentation performance, as they are not competitive, and
this is not the main point of the methods. Furthermore, they use masks as an
additional form of supervision, as the model is additionally trained to predict
masks, whereas we only use masks to sample points used during training (as not
to try matching background points to the shape).

2

Additional implementation details

2.1

Symmetry equivariance loss

We automatically discover the plane of symmetry of the shape. We assume the
shape’s plane of symmetry is either one of the (x, y, z) planes. In practice, this is
most often true. We test each of the (x, y, z) planes as follows. First, we center

