Exploring Conditional Multi-Modal Prompts for
Zero-shot HOI Detection
Ting Lei1 , Shaofeng Yin1 , Yuxin Peng

1

, and Yang Liu

1,2 ⋆

1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{ting_lei,pengyuxin,yangliu}@pku.edu.cn yin_shaofeng@stu.pku.edu.cn
2

This supplementary material provides additional experiments as well as additional details. We begin by providing a comprehensive list of previous methods
for performance evaluation and conducting additional ablation study in Appendix A. Then we provide more implementation details including the detailed
experiment settings, the pre-process pipeline, and the procedure for deriving the
global spatial pattern in Appendix B.

A

More Experiment and Ablation Study

A.1

Comparison with Other Methods

In the main text, we only compare our method with prior approaches that either
serve as representative examples or can be fairly compared with ours due to the
limited space. In this section, we further offer a comprehensive list of previous
methods for performance evaluation on the challenging Unseen Verb setting
in Tab. 1. We find that compared to our CMMP, both HCVC [16] and UniHOI [2]
leverage various or heavier large foundation models [4, 7], achieving superior
performance on seen classes. However, they still exhibit inferior performance
on unseen classes compared to our CMMP. Our CMMP demonstrates the best
performance across all splits and the harmonic mean among methods that only
utilize CLIP as LFD, highlighting its excellent generalizability. Additionally, the
scaled-up version of CMMP with ViT-L/14 achieves the best results across all
splits, showcasing the significant extensibility of our method.
A.2

Ablation Study

Further Analysis on the Usage of Conditional Vision Prompt. As indicated in Tab. 2, we investigate two tuning paradigms: prompting [6] and
adapters. The prompting method, despite its computational efficiency, shows
inferior performance on the HOI task due to its constrained flexibility. To effectively transition the visual encoder from interpreting image-level and first-order
semantics to comprehending instance-level and second-order semantic information, we adopt a more adaptable approach: adapters. Experimental results indicate a substantial performance improvement across both seen and unseen splits
when employing adapters.
⋆

Corresponding author

