Supplementary Material: Label-free Neural
Semantic Image Synthesis
Jiayi Wang1 , Kevin Alexander Laube1 , Yumeng Li1,2 , Jan Hendrik Metzen1 ,
Shin-I Cheng1 , Julio Borges1 , and Anna Khoreva1
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
{jiayi.wang2, kevinalexander.laube, yumeng.li, janhendrik.metzen,
shin-i.cheng, julio.borges, anna.khoreva}@de.bosch.com
2
University of Mannheim

S.1

Experimental Details:

In this section, we provide additional experimental details omitted from the main
paper for brevity.

S.1.1

Diffusion Network

We used the Diffusers [18] library (version 0.24.0) to implement ControlNet [29]
training and sampling for both LUMEN and all other baselines.
Training: We used the same setting for training ControlNet in all experiments.
The AdamW [15] optimizer was used with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, λ2 = 1e−2 ,
ϵ = 1e−8 and a learning rate of 1e−5 . Each network is trained for 100, 000
iterations using a batch size of 16. Following Zhang et al. [29], we randomly
replace the text prompt with an empty string with probability p to encourage
the network to use image conditioning as replacement for the prompt. For our
experiments, we used p = 0.1.
Inference: At inference, we use UniPC [31] to sample from the diffusion model.
All images are generated using 20 sampling steps, 7.5 guidance scale and 1.0
condition scale. Although LUMEN requires the use of a large Foundation model
to extract neural layouts, this does not significantly impact inference speed as the
same neural layout is reused for all sampling steps. On a single NVIDIA A100,
LUMEN with 20 PCA components takes 7.9 seconds on average to generate a
batch of images while ControlNet with Sem. Seg. conditioning takes 7.7 seconds.
In terms of GPU memory, LUMEN occupies comparable or less memory
than other baselines. This is because LUMEN uses the frozen Stable Diffusion
copy within ControlNet to extract the features, while other conditioning types
may require a separate dedicated network. Aside from this, the only difference
in architecture is the number of channels in the first conv. layer of ControlNet
(3 for Sem. Seg., up to 20 for LUMEN, and 1 for all others).

