Self-supervised Shape Completion via Involution
and Implicit Correspondences
Supplementary Document
Mengya Liu1 , Ajad Chhatkuli1,3 , Janis Postels1 ,
Luc Van Gool1,3 , and Federico Tombari2
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
2
Google, TU Munich
3
INSAIT, Sofia University

{mengya.liu, ajad.chhatkuli, jpostels, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, tombari@google.com

I

Overview

In this supplementary document, we provide additional details on the experiments, and network architectures as well as additional visualizations and dataset
evaluations. We first provide additional experimental details in Section II including the training details and the hyper-parameters setup. Next, we detail the mesh
completion process at inference time. We describe concretely the pre-processing
steps for creating our PartialUDF dataset in Section III. Next, we provide more
experimental results, and the correspondences analysis in Section II. Finally, we
analyze the limitations of our method in Section V.

II

Experimental Details

II.1

Architecture details and hyper-parameters

Our network architecture has two modules, the completion module and the
template-based INR module (T ). The template-based INR module is composed
of the warp function D and the INR decoder T , whereas the completion module
includes the completion function G and the upsampler U.
Template-based INR module. The warp function D has 10 layers of
rnvp+lstm architecture [8, 16], with the hidden size of 128, and the decoder T is
parameterized with 4 MLP layers with the hidden size of 256, the last layer is a
combination of abs and tanh functions to output the UDF values within [0, 1].
Moreover, similar to DeepSDF [10] that focuses more on the near-surface area,
we also clamp the predicted UDF values d to [0, 0.1].
Completion module. The completion function G [13] has two sub-networks,
the encoder E and the decoder G. The encoder E is used to extract a 256-dim
shape code c′ , with a pointnet++ [11] based set abstractions to extract a global
feature, together with a transformer [15] to encode the local context. The decoder
G takes as input the extracted feature c′ and outputs 128 points Y , describing
the missing part. Specifically, it first extracts the sparse point features, followed

