Supplementary Material for
Representation Enhancement-Stabilization:
Reducing Bias-Variance of Domain Generalization
Wei Huang1 , Yilei Shi1 , Zhitong Xiong1 , and Xiao Xiang Zhu1,2
1. Technical University of Munich, Arcisstraße 21, 80333 München, Germany
2. Munich Center for Machine Learning, 80333 Munich
{w2wei.huang, yilei.shi, zhitong.xiong, xiaoxiang.zhu}@tum.de

Abstract. In the supplementary document, we first compare the effects
of data augmentation on model generalization from two perspectives: (1)
image-level vs. feature-level frequency augmentation, and (2) normal feature augmentation vs. feature frequency augmentation. The comparison
results demonstrate the superiority of our feature frequency augmentation in the Representation Enhancement (RE) module. Then we provide the detailed domain-wise train-validation results of the proposed
Representation Enhancement-Stabilization (RES) on five used domain
datasets.

1

Supplementary Experiments

1.1

Image-level vs. Feature-level Frequency Augmentation

Frequency domain-based data augmentation for DG usually operates at image
level [2,3]. Different from them, the proposed RE module conducts the frequency
data augmentation at the feature level. We compare their performance using the
same augmentation strategies, including \protect \texttt  {random noise} (ns), \protect \texttt  {random dropout}
(dp), and \protect \texttt  {mixup} (mix), on the phase spectrum extracted from an RGB-channel
image or a multi-layer feature map. The experimental results of image-level feature augmentation, denoted as REI , and feature-level frequency augmentation,
denoted as RE, are provided in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.
Frequency data augmentations at both levels contribute to improvements
over the baseline Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) method. However, our
feature-level frequency augmentation exhibits a higher increase, boosting performance by 3.3 percentage points from 85.5% to 88.8% (REns +REdp +REmix ).
In contrast, image-level frequency augmentation yields a smaller gain of 1.5 percentage points, elevating performance from 85.5% to 87.0% (REdp
I ). Besides, our
feature-level frequency augmentation has a smoother training process with a
standard deviation of 0.6, which is smaller than that of image-level counterpart.
The comparison results highlight the superior performance of our method. This
advantage is likely due to the phase spectrum of an image remaining constant,
whereas the phase spectrum of the corresponding feature map changes at different training stages. Consequently, frequency augmentation at the feature level

