LayeredFlow: A Real-World Benchmark
for Non-Lambertian Multi-layer Optical
Flow
Hongyu Wen(B) , Erich Liang , and Jia Deng
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, USA
{hongyu.wen,erliang,jiadeng}@princeton.edu
Abstract. Achieving 3D understanding of non-Lambertian objects is an
important task with many useful applications, but most existing algorithms struggle to deal with such objects. One major obstacle towards
progress in this ﬁeld is the lack of holistic non-Lambertian benchmarks—
most benchmarks have low scene and object diversity, and none provide multi-layer 3D annotations for objects occluded by transparent surfaces. In this paper, we introduce LayeredFlow, a real world benchmark
containing multi-layer ground truth annotation for optical ﬂow of nonLambertian objects. Compared to previous benchmarks, our benchmark
exhibits greater scene and object diversity, with 150k high quality optical ﬂow and stereo pairs taken over 185 indoor and outdoor scenes and
360 unique objects. Using LayeredFlow as evaluation data, we propose
a new task called multi-layer optical ﬂow. To provide training data for
this task, we introduce a large-scale densely-annotated synthetic dataset
containing 60k images within 30 scenes tailored for non-Lambertian
objects. Training on our synthetic dataset enables model to predict multilayer optical ﬂow, while ﬁne-tuning existing optical ﬂow methods on the
dataset notably boosts their performance on non-Lambertian objects
without compromising the performance on diﬀuse objects.
Keywords: Non-Lambertian Object · Optical Flow · Benchmark ·
Dataset

1

Introduction

Achieving 3D understanding of non-Lambertian objects is an important task
because they appear in many real world applications. In autonomous navigation,
correct 3D geometry of glass walls and reﬂective road patches is crucial for path
planning. In robotics, accurate depth information for plastic and metal materials
is necessary for precise and dexterous manipulation of common household items.
However, many techniques which perform well on diﬀuse surfaces struggle
to capture accurate information about non-Lambertian surfaces. Conventional
depth measurement methods, like lighting [41] and time-of-ﬂight techniques [14,
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 27.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 477–495, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_27

