ProDepth: Boosting Self-supervised
Multi-frame Monocular Depth
with Probabilistic Fusion
Sungmin Woo(B) , Wonjoon Lee, Woo Jin Kim, Dogyoon Lee,
and Sangyoun Lee
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
smw3250@yonsei.ac.kr
https://sungmin-woo.github.io/prodepth/
Abstract. Self-supervised multi-frame monocular depth estimation
relies on the geometric consistency between successive frames under the
assumption of a static scene. However, the presence of moving objects
in dynamic scenes introduces inevitable inconsistencies, causing misaligned multi-frame feature matching and misleading self-supervision
during training. In this paper, we propose a novel framework called
ProDepth, which eﬀectively addresses the mismatch problem caused by
dynamic objects using a probabilistic approach. We initially deduce the
uncertainty associated with static scene assumption by adopting an auxiliary decoder. This decoder analyzes inconsistencies embedded in the
cost volume, inferring the probability of areas being dynamic. We then
directly rectify the erroneous cost volume for dynamic areas through a
Probabilistic Cost Volume Modulation (PCVM) module. Speciﬁcally, we
derive probability distributions of depth candidates from both singleframe and multi-frame cues, modulating the cost volume by adaptively
fusing those distributions based on the inferred uncertainty. Additionally, we present a self-supervision loss reweighting strategy that not only
masks out incorrect supervision with high uncertainty but also mitigates
the risks in remaining possible dynamic areas in accordance with the
probability. Our proposed method excels over state-of-the-art approaches
in all metrics on both Cityscapes and KITTI datasets, and demonstrates
superior generalization ability on the Waymo Open dataset.
Keywords: Multi-frame monocular depth estimation · Self-supervised
learning · Probabilistic modeling

1

Introduction

Accurate depth information is essential across various domains, including
autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality. The deployment of precise
S. Woo and W. Lee—Co-ﬁrst authors.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 12.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 201–217, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_12

