BenchLMM: Benchmarking Cross-style Visual
Capability of
Large Multimodal Models (Appendix)
Rizhao Cai†1 , Zirui Song†2 , Dayan Guan 3 Zhenhao Chen4 ,
Yaohang Li2 , Xing Luo5 , Chenyu Yi1 , and Alex Kot1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
University of Technology Sydney, Australia; Northeastern University, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
5
Zhejiang University, China
2

† Equal Contribution Corresponding author (guandayan@hit.edu.cn)

A

More details of the Benchmark construction

A.1

Format Constraint of Answer

To better compare the output answers of LMMs with ground-truth answers, we
set a format constraint of answer by giving a constraint prompt “Answer the
question using a single word or phrase.” This format constraint prompt acts as a
suffix for each question. In this paper, for clarity and simplicity, we leave out this
suffix. In experiments involving Domestic Robots and Open Game, the questions
tend to be more open-ended. Without a guiding suffix, models might generate
lengthy sentences to explain actions for the robot agent. To circumvent this,
we included options within the prompt, where each option outlines a potential
action for the agent. This enables a model to provide a straightforward option
as a response, ensuring a consistent format with the ground-truth answers
A.2

More Examples in BenchLMM

In Figure 2 of the main manuscript, we present an overview of the samples,
images, and questions, of different artistic styles, sensor styles, and application
styles. In this appendix, we provide more samples for reference. In detail, Figure 1 shows image samples and the corresponding questions of the different
artistic styles. Figure 2 shows image samples and the corresponding questions of
the different sensor data. Figure 3 shows image samples and the corresponding
questions of the different application data.
A.3

Dataset summary

In total, there are 2167 images and Q&A pairs, which significantly surpass some
representative benchmarks (e.g., 30 images in LLaVA-Bench [1] and 200 images

