Minimalist Vision with Freeform Pixels:
Supplemental Material
Jeremy Klotz and Shree K. Nayar
Computer Science Department, Columbia University, New York NY, USA
{jklotz,nayar}@cs.columbia.edu

1

Importance of the Sensor Model

Here we examine the effect of training freeform pixels without including the
sensor model in the network. Once trained, we evaluate the freeform pixels in
a simulated minimalist camera that includes the optical effects and detector
characteristics of the sensor model.
Using the synthetic dataset for counting patches described in Sec. 4 of the
main paper, we generated 4 freeform pixels by training a minimalist camera
without the sensor model. We then froze the learned masks and retrained the
inference network with the sensor model included in the network. The parameters of the sensor model were chosen to be similar to that of our hardware
prototype. After retraining the inference network, the 4 freeform pixels achieved
2.28 root-mean-square (RMS) error in the number of patches. By comparison,
4 freeform pixels that were trained for counting patches with the same sensor
model incorporated in the network during training achieved 0.93 RMS error in
the number of patches. This performance gap between the two minimalist cameras demonstrates that including the sensor model in the network during the
training process is critical to generate performant freeform pixels.

2

Camera Architecture Details

Table 1 lists the components used in our prototype minimalist camera. Each detector is connected to a transimpedance amplifier with a gain of 107 V/A. In the
lightweight vision experiments, we used a National Instruments USB-6363 data
acquisition unit to simultaneously read out the freeform pixel measurements and
trigger the training camera. Since the detectors and training camera are sensitive to near-infrared wavelengths, we mounted a filter in front of the minimalist
camera to block near-infrared light.
The sensor model parameters corresponding to the hardware prototype were
either empirically measured or extracted from component datasheets. First, the
detector datasheet [1] specifies the active area to be 0.88 × 0.88 mm2 and publishes the directional response. We use σr = 400 µV as the standard deviation
of the read noise. Quantization noise and sensor saturation are based on a 16bit detector that saturates at 3.2 V. Finally, our process of printing masks on a
transparency can only fabricate masks with transmittance values in the range

