Supplementary of "COHO: Context-Sensitive
City-Scale Hierarchical Urban Layout
Generation"
Liu He , Daniel Aliaga
Purdue University, USA
{he425,aliaga}@purdue.edu

Overview
Below is a summary of the contents in each section of this supplemental
material:
• Sec. 1: Details of our dataset collection method.
• Sec. 2: Details of building layout quantization, including graph-based Blocklevel Variational AutoEncoder (BVAE), and different quantization approaches.
We also provide additional evaluation in real units (e.g. m, m2 ).
• Sec. 3: City-scale controllable generation examples for 17 cities. And some
complementary comments on other alternative approaches.
• Sec. 4: Semantic manipulations between different building layout styles.
• Sec. 5: GMAE-based Socio-Economic Metric Prediction
• Sec. 6: Estimation of running time and model parameter sizes.

1

Dataset Collection

Data Resources. We selected all US cities with more than 100K population
(i.e., 330 cities) as our building layout dataset. The city list is based on [2].
For each city, we define a rectangular bounding box containing most of the
metropolitan area. This geo-registered bounding box is used to extract data from
OpenStreetMap (OSM) [11], Microsoft Building Footprints (MSF) [7], and Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing (TIGER) dataset [4].
The TIGER dataset provides the city block contour and corresponding social
economic metrics (e.g. population, income level, etc.).
MSF and OSM provide the building layout polygons with corresponding
height values. We define heuristics to composite both data resources. Specifically, MSF is the result of deep-learning-based building segmentation from highresolution satellite images ( 0.5m). However, fine details and closely located
buildings are challenging for that methodology. Such a situation is very common
in big cities like New York (i.e., a big city block appears to have one large building but in reality there are many adjacent buildings). In contrast, the building
layouts from OSM are manually crafted or adopted from governmental/opensource datasets. Buildings are vector-based polygons regardless of adjacency.
Unfortunately, the data coverage of OSM, especially for building height values,
varies significnantly, while satellite-resourced MSF overcomes this shortage. We
merge the information from the two sources as described in the following section.

