Supplementary Materials
TransCAD: A Hierarchical Transformer for CAD
Sequence Inference from Point Clouds
Elona Dupont1 , Kseniya Cherenkova1,2 , Dimitrios Mallis1 , Gleb Gusev2 , Anis
Kacem1 , and Djamila Aouada1
1

A

SnT, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
2
Artec 3D, Luxembourg

Formulation

Fig. 1 shows an example of the construction process of a CAD model as well
as the corresponding loop-extrusion sequences. The loop-extrusion sequence is
made of three types of tokens (loop, extrusion and end of sequence). The CAD
sequence combines the high level loop-extrusion sequence tokens and their corresponding parameters. Note for the loop parameters, the coordinates of the start
point of a primitive is always the same as the coordinates of the end point of
the previous primitive as in [7].

B

Duplicates in the DeepCAD Dataset

As mentioned in Section 6.1 of the main paper, one of the main limitations of the
DeepCAD dataset [7] is that it contains many duplicates across the train and
test sets. While the works in [8] proposed a strategy to identify duplicates that
have exactly the same CAD sequence (i.e. sequence duplicates), we observe that
the dataset also contains models that have almost identical geometry but different CAD sequences (i.e. geometrical duplicates). Moreover some CAD models
in the DeepCAD train set are almost identical to some models in the Fusion360
dataset [6], with often just the amount of extrusion varying slightly. Fig. 2 shows
examples of the different types of duplicates from the DeepCAD [7] and Fusion360 [6] datasets. We define a geometrical duplicate as a test set CAD model
for which it exists a CAD model in the train set with a chamfer distance less
than the uncertainty in the chamfer distance measurement (±3×10−4 when 4096
points are sampled). From this definition and using the train set of the DeepCAD dataset [7], we observe that about 14% of the DeepCAD test set is made
of geometrical duplicates and about 12% in the Fusion360 test set. We observe
that current datasets that contain both CAD models and their corresponding
CAD sequences are limited by either by the number of samples (Fusion360 [6])
or by the lack of diversity they present (DeepCAD [7]).

