Lost in Translation: Latent Concept
Misalignment in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Appendix
Juntu Zhao1 , Junyu Deng3* , Yixin Ye1* , Chongxuan Li4 ,
Zhijie Deng1† , and Dequan Wang1,2†
1

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Fudan University
4
Renmin University of China

Appendix
In our appendix, we first present the details of human experts guiding GPT-3.5
in discovering LC-Mis concept pairs, with a focus on the instruction prompts
used by human experts. Next, we provide the implementation details of binary
search in our method, MoCE.Finally, we present statistical experimental results,
ablation analysis examples, and some visualization results.

A

Interaction Details in Interactive LLMs Guidance
System

In this section, we describe the detailed process of interaction between human researchers and GPT-3.5 within our workflow. Utilizing block diagrams for clarity,
we model the engagement between human experts and GPT-3.5. To illustrate
the variation in data volume within the Interactive LLMs Guidance System,
we present several diagrams, in Figure 1. In these diagrams, pairs of spheres
along the same axis denote concept pairs associated with a particular pattern,
distinguishable by their color.
Phase 1: Identifying Initial Concept Pairs as Seeds After developing
an initial set of 50 concept pairs and categorizing them into 8 unique patterns
(among them, 4 patterns match our LC-Mis issue), human researchers direct
GPT-3.5 to generate additional concept pairs. We specify both the researcherprovided prompt and the GPT-3.5 response. The format of the patterns deducting concept pairs are depicted in Table 1.
Midjourney text-to-image generation, in conjunction with human researcher
validation, then confirms a total of 50 concept pairs. Throughout the evaluation
conducted by human experts, 5 impartial human experts are tasked to identify
the generated images. If minor differences, a majority opinion will be adopted.
⋆

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

