1

Supplementary Material
Sequential Contrastive Audio-Visual Encoder and Beam Selection
As mentioned in the main paper, we use a sequential contrastive audio-visual
(SCAV) [3] encoder for the beam selection in the subjective experiments. We
here overview the architecture and training procedure of SCAV. Once SCAV
is trained, we use it to perform post-sampling selection over a set of B samples, where B is the beam size, based on their proximity in this common learnt
contrastive space. Our usage of the SCAV encoder in this paper corresponds
to an application to the generative domain of a submodule derived from our
non-overlapping concurrent work on audio-visual retrieval [3].
Fig. 1 depicts the modules that compose the training and inference arrangement of blocks in our SCAV. On the visual side, we use the CLIP image encoder,
∈ R3×h×w and yields a semantic embedwhich processes each video frame vRGB
t
clip
512
ding vt ∈ R . Considering a video with F frames in total, we concatenate
these CLIP embeddings to form a tensor Vclip ∈ RF ×512 . This is projected
through an MLP to a d-dimensional hidden space and injected into a Transformer that acts as a visual sequence encoder model. This yields the multi-modal
scav-v
feature sequence Ē
∈ RF ×Hscav , where Hscav is the Transformer hidden size.
On the audio side, we use the pre-trained BEATs encoder [1]. This model processed a 128-dimensional mel-filter bank as a patchified 2D representation. We
project these patch embeddings through a learnable MLP into d-dimensions, and
then continue through a Transformer encoder that yields the feature sequence
Escav-a ∈ RN ×8×Hscav . Once trained, our SCAV yields audio and/or visual features in a common space between CLIP and BEATs sequences.

Length Adapter

Visual
Transformer

MLP

MLP
BEATs

CLIP
v1
v1

v2
v2

Audio
Transformer

v3
v3

Audio Waveform

RGB frames

Fig. 1: Contrastive audio-visual semantic-alignment encoders. On the left, the visual
branch is built upon pre-trained CLIP features. On the right, the audio branch is built
upon pre-trained BEATs features.

