SMooDi: Stylized Motion Diﬀusion Model
Lei Zhong1 , Yiming Xie1 , Varun Jampani2 , Deqing Sun3 ,
and Huaizu Jiang1(B)
1

Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{le.zhong,xie.yim,h.jiang}@northeastern.edu
2
Stability AI, London, UK
3
Google Research, Mountain View, USA
deqingsun@google.com

Abstract. We introduce a novel Stylized Motion Diﬀusion model,
dubbed SMooDi, to generate stylized motion driven by content texts
and style motion sequences. Unlike existing methods that either generate motion of various content or transfer style from one sequence to
another, SMooDi can rapidly generate motion across a broad range of
content and diverse styles. To this end, we tailor a pre-trained textto-motion model for stylization. Speciﬁcally, we propose style guidance to ensure that the generated motion closely matches the reference style, alongside a lightweight style adaptor that directs the motion
towards the desired style while ensuring realism. Experiments across
various applications demonstrate that our proposed framework outperforms existing methods in stylized motion generation. Project Page:
https://neu-vi.github.io/SMooDi/
Keywords: Motion synthesis · Diﬀusion model · Stylized motion

1

Introduction

We address the problem of generating stylized motion from a content text and
a style motion sequence, as shown in Fig. 1. Human motion can typically be
characterized by two components: content and style. Motion content represents
the nature of a movement, such as walking and waving, and motion style reﬂects
individual characteristics, such as personality traits (e.g., old, childlike) and
emotions (e.g., happy, angry). Traditional pipelines create stylized motions via
motion capture from actors, and are both labor-intensive and time-consuming.
Therefore, decades of research have focused on developing automatic methods
to assist stylized motion creation [1,11,19].
Motion style transfer [1,45] is a practical and popular approach for the creation of stylized motion. It transfers the style from an existing style motion
sequence to another existing content motion sequence. However, when a broad
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4 23.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 405–421, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_23

