1

Supplementary: Missing Modality Prediction
for Unpaired Multimodal Learning
via Joint Embedding of Unimodal Models
A

Implementation Details

We conduct overall experiments using a single RTX 3090 GPU. Similar to [4],
we employ DeiT III [7] as an image encoder and SimCSE [3] as a text encoder
throughout the overall experiment, which model parameters are initialized using
the pretrained weights. The structure of the feature predictor is modified from [2],
which consists of two fully-connected layers with layer normalization layer [1] and
activation function, and a third linear layer. The dimensions of all three layers
are set to equal to the output dimension of the encoders. The length of learnable
read-only prompts for feature prediction is set to 6 in MM-IMDb, 20 in UPMC
Food-101, and 2 in Hateful Memes in both training settings. We conduct all
experiments with batch size 12 of 20 epochs, using the AdamW [6] optimizer
with a weight decay of 5 × 10−2 . We initiate the warm-up steps for the learning
rate at 0, with a base learning rate set to 1 × 10−2 . The warm-up phase linearly
progresses from 0 for the first 10% of the total training steps before decay. The
variance, invariance, and covariance coefficients λ, µ and ν for VICReg loss are
set to 50, 50, and 1.
For the ablation study on section ??, we add 36 learnable tokens to the input
data specifically for the target task in prefix tuning, separate from utilizing
read-only prompts for feature prediction. For adapter tuning, the adapter is
inserted before each layer normalization layer in transformer-based pretrained
models. It consists of a weight matrix that downsamples the input, followed
by an activation function, and another weight matrix that restores the input
to its original dimension. Finally, it includes a residual connection. We set the
reduction factor to 4. For a fair comparison that considers trainable parameters,
adding an adapter is applied to the first and last layers, and separately to all
layers for further analysis.

