Towards More Practical Group Activity
Detection: A New Benchmark and Model
Supplementary Material
Dongkeun Kim

Youngkil Song

Minsu Cho

Suha Kwak

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{kdk1563,songyk,mscho,suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr
https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/CAFE

This supplementary material presents contents omitted in the main paper
due to the page limit. Sec. A presents more details of our proposed Café dataset.
In Sec. B, we provide a detailed explanation of the statistics used for comparison with other group activity detection datasets in Sec. 3.3 of the main paper.
Further analysis and more experiments are given in Sec. C.

A

More Detailed Information of Café

A.1

Data Acquisition

To construct practical group activity detection (GAD) dataset, we recruit participants, direct their actions, and record using cameras, with the assistance
from Deeping Source (https://www.deepingsource.io/). We take videos at
six different cafes, installing cameras at four different locations within each cafe
to capture the same scene from four distinct viewpoints. Videos of Café are
recorded with RGB cameras at 1920 × 1080 resolution, then are cut into clips at
6-seconds intervals. Members of each group and clothes of participants change
periodically to prevent monotonous grouping patterns. Note that we obtain informed consent of participants to release the dataset publicly.
In each video clip, actors are divided into multiple groups and outliers. Members of each group are asked to perform one of predefined group activities: queueing, ordering, eating, working, fighting, and taking selfie. On the other hand,
outliers who do not belong to any group, perform arbitrary action (e.g. look at
a smart phone or work on a laptop). Note that actors who are close together
but do not interact with any group members are also considered as outliers.
Therefore, localizing group members necessitates understanding the properties
of individual actors and their relationship as well as their spatial proximity.
Fig. S1 provides qualitative examples of videos from Café, showing each location along with annotations that include bounding boxes of humans, group configurations, and group activity labels. Each place of Café exhibits different characteristics such as varying camera viewpoints, group configurations, and light
conditions. Notably, one of six places in Café includes outdoor scenes (Fig. S1
(B)), which diversify the scene variety of Café. All video frames and annotations
is available at https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/CAFE.

