Separating Style and Content

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
jbtGpsyche.mit.edu

William T. Freeman
MERL, Mitsubishi Electric Res. Lab.
201 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
freemanOmerl.com

Abstract
We seek to analyze and manipulate two factors, which we call style
and content, underlying a set of observations. We fit training data
with bilinear models which explicitly represent the two-factor structure. These models can adapt easily during testing to new styles or
content, allowing us to solve three general tasks: extrapolation of a
new style to unobserved content; classification of content observed
in a new style; and translation of new content observed in a new
style. For classification, we embed bilinear models in a probabilistic
framework, Separable Mixture Models (SMMsj, which generalizes
earlier work on factorial mixture models [7, 3]. Significant performance improvement on a benchmark speech dataset shows the
benefits of our approach.

1

Introduction

In many pattern analysis or synthesis tasks, the observed data are generated from
the interaction of two underlying factors which we will generically call "style" and
"content." For example, in a character recognition task, we might observe different
letters in different fonts (see Fig. 1); with handwriting, different words in different
writing styles; with speech, different phonemes in different accents; with visual
images, the faces of different people under different lighting conditions.
Such data raises a number of learning problems. Extracting a hidden two-factor
structure given only the raw observations has received significant attention [7, 3],
but unsupervised factorial learning of this kind has yet to prove tractable for our
focus: real-world data with subtly interacting factors. We work in a more supervised
setting, where labels for style or content may be available during training or testing.
Figure 1 shows three problems we want to solve. Given a labelled training set of
observations in multiple styles, we want to extrapolate a new style to unobserved
content classes (Fig. la), classify content observed in a new style (Fig. Ib), and
translate new content observed in a new style (Fig. lc).
This paper treats these problems in a common framework, by fitting the training
data with a separable model that can easily adapt during testing to new styles or
content classes. We write an observation vector in style s and content class c as
y3C. We seek to fit these observations with some model
y3C = f(a 3 , bC; W),
(1)
where a particular functional form of f is assumed. We must estimate parameter
vectors a 3 and b C describing style s and content c, respectively, and W, parameters

