Supplementary Material for COIN-Matting:
Confounder Intervention for Image Matting
Zhaohe Liao1 , Jiangtong Li2 , Jun Lan3 , Huijia Zhu3 , Weiqiang Wang3 , Li
Niu⋆1,4 , and Liqing Zhang∗1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhaoheliao, ustcnewly, zhang-lq}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
Tongji University
jiangtongli@tongji.edu.cn
3
Ant Group
{yelan.lj, huijia.zhj, weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com
4
miguo.ai

In this document, we provide additional background and details to support the main submission. In Appendix A, we provide additional background
on the causal graph and causal inference. In Appendix B, we give more detailed
derivations and explanations for the equations presented in the main submission.
In Appendix C, we elaborate on the implementation details of our COIN matting
framework. In Appendix D, we present additional qualitative comparisons to illustrate the effectiveness of our COIN matting framework. In Appendix E, we
discuss the existence of the biases in real-world matting datasets. In Appendix F,
we discuss the limitations of our framework and the directions for future work.

A

Causal Graph and Intervention

In this section, we introduce the fundamental concepts of causal graphs and
causal interventions, which serve as the main tools used in our paper.
A.1

Causal Graph and Elemental Structures

Causal graph [3, 4] is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) whose edges indicate the
relationship among variables. Formally, a causal graph is a DAG G = {N , E},
where the node set N denotes the variables, and the edge set E denotes the
causal relationships among variables. An edge from node X to node Y (denoted as e = X → Y) signifies that variable X is a direct cause of variable Y. It
is worth noting that such directed edges differ from those in Bayesian networks,
as they possess strong causal semantics, whereas the latter may lack specific
meaning and can even be antitemporal. For instance, while the graph X → Y
is equivalent to Y → X in terms of probability graphs, their interpretations can
be entirely different in causal graphs [1].
As shown in Fig. 1, there are three elemental structures in the causal graph.
⋆

The corresponding authors.

