Supplementary Material:
Concise Plane Arrangements for Low-Poly
Surface and Volume Modelling
Raphael Sulzer and Florent Lafarge
Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

In this supplementary document, we first discuss the limitations of our method
in Section 1. In Section 2, we provide implementation details about the evaluation metrics, our algorithm and the baseline methods. Finally, we provide an
additional comparison with Points2Poly [3], additional applications and experimental results in Section 3.

1

Limitations

No Optimality Guarantee Our algorithm does not offer the guarantee to
return the optimal solution in terms of minimal number of cells or splitting
operations. Reaching optimality is very challenging here, because global optimization techniques are typically not designed to operate on the configuration
space of tree data structures built sequentially via costly geometric operations.
Monte Carlo Tree Search can support the exploration of a BSP-tree space, but in
practice it increases processing time by at least two orders of magnitude without
guaranteeing optimality or better arrangements than ours.
Dependency on Planar Shape Detection. Our modelling pipeline depends
on the quality of the detected planar shapes from point clouds. The detection
of planar shapes is robust to noise, outliers and point density, but only weakly
to missing data. Planar shapes cannot be detected for unseen parts of objects
or scenes during the acquisition, e.g. due to occlusion. One possible solution
is to generate artificial planar shapes to complete missing data. However, such
a completion strategy relies upon the insertion of strong shape priors, e.g. the
generation of orthogonal planar shapes on borders of input points [2], which
reduces the flexibility and applicability of the method. Another solution is to
rely on point consolidation or neural surface reconstruction methods for preprocessing the input to recover parts of missing data.
Fully Convex Objects. The perfomance of the construction algorithm is reduced when reconstructing fully convex objects such as a sphere (see Fig. 1) or
cylinder. This is because sorting condition (ii) is never valid if all input planar
shapes lie on the convex hull of the object. However, very few real-world objects exhibit a fully convex shape. Moreover, the best reconstruction technique
to apply to fully convex shapes is a simple computation of the convex hull.

