Supplementary material for
FreeZe: Training-free zero-shot 6D pose estimation
with geometric and vision foundation models
Andrea Caraffa1 , Davide Boscaini1 , Amir Hamza1,2 , and Fabio Poiesi1
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
{acaraffa,dboscaini,ahamza,poiesi}@fbk.eu
2
University of Trento, Italy

1

Introduction

We present the supplementary material in support of our main paper. The content
is organized as follows:
– In Sec. 2, we evaluate the effectiveness of entangling geometric and visual
features compared to using the two components independently.
– In Sec. 3, we highlight the role of our proposed Symmetry-Aware Refinement (SAR) in resolving ambiguous poses of geometrically symmetric objects.
– In Sec. 4, we investigate how object occlusions affect pose estimation accuracy.
– In Sec. 5, we provide an analysis of the computational time.
– In Sec. 6, we provide additional qualitative results on the seven core datasets
of the BOP Benchmark [10].

2

Effectiveness of geometric and visual feature
entanglement

We present qualitative results to illustrate the contribution of geometric and
visual features within FreeZe. Fig. 1 showcases examples of poses predicted using
exclusively geometric features (second row), exclusively visual features (third
row), and their fusion (fourth row). In column (a), geometric features alone fail
to accurately estimate the pose of the red cracker box, while visual features
succeed in doing so. Conversely, in column (b), visual features alone struggle,
while geometric features accurately predict the pose of the yellow banana. Finally,
in column (c), both geometric and visual features fail to correctly estimate the
pose of the red bowl when used individually. Through feature fusion, FreeZe
capitalizes on the strengths of both feature types, enabling precise pose predictions
for both (a) and (b). Remarkably, FreeZe achieves accurate pose estimation even
when both feature types independently falter, as illustrated in column (c).
Our experimental observations indicate that geometric features extracted
from objects with geometric symmetries, such as boxes and cylinders, can lead to
two types of pose estimation errors. In the first case, the predicted pose might be
inaccurate, as depicted in column (a). In the second case, although the object is

