ZipLoRA: Any Subject in Any Style
by Eﬀectively Merging LoRAs
Viraj Shah1,2 , Nataniel Ruiz1 , Forrester Cole1 , Erika Lu1 , Svetlana Lazebnik2 ,
Yuanzhen Li1 , and Varun Jampani1(B)
1
Google Research, Boston, USA
vjshah3@illinois.edu, varunjampani@gmail.com
2
UIUC, Champaign, USA

Abstract. Methods for ﬁnetuning generative models for concept-driven
personalization generally achieve strong results for subject-driven or
style-driven generation. Recently, low-rank adaptations (LoRA) have
been proposed as a parameter-eﬃcient way of achieving concept-driven
personalization. While recent work explores the combination of separate LoRAs to achieve joint generation of learned styles and subjects,
existing techniques do not reliably address the problem, so that either
subject ﬁdelity or style ﬁdelity are compromised. We propose ZipLoRA,
a method to cheaply and eﬀectively merge independently trained style
and subject LoRAs in order to achieve generation of any user-provided
subject in any user-provided style. Experiments on a wide range of
subject and style combinations show that ZipLoRA can generate compelling results with meaningful improvements over baselines in subject
and style ﬁdelity while preserving the ability to recontextualize.
Keywords: Image Stylization · Diﬀusion Models · LoRA Models

1

Introduction

Recently, diﬀusion models [13,30,36] have allowed for impressive image generation quality with their excellent understanding of diverse artistic concepts and
enhanced controllability due to multi-modal conditioning support (with text being
the most popular mode). The usability and ﬂexibility of generative models has further progressed with a wide variety of personalization approaches, such as DreamBooth [31] and StyleDrop [35]. These approaches ﬁne-tune a base diﬀusion model
on the images of a speciﬁc concept to produce novel renditions in various contexts.
Such concepts can be a speciﬁc object, person, or artistic style.
While personalization methods have been used for subjects and styles independently, a key unsolved problem is to generate a speciﬁc user-provided subject
in a speciﬁc user-provided style. For example, an artist may wish to render a speciﬁc person in their personal style, learned through examples of their own work.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4 24.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 422–438, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_24

