T OWARDS F EDERATED L EARNING AT S CALE : S YSTEM D ESIGN
Keith Bonawitz 1 Hubert Eichner 1 Wolfgang Grieskamp 1 Dzmitry Huba 1 Alex Ingerman 1 Vladimir Ivanov 1
Chloé Kiddon 1 Jakub Konečný 1 Stefano Mazzocchi 1 H. Brendan McMahan 1 Timon Van Overveldt 1
David Petrou 1 Daniel Ramage 1 Jason Roselander 1

A BSTRACT
Federated Learning is a distributed machine learning approach which enables model training on a large corpus of
decentralized data. We have built a scalable production system for Federated Learning in the domain of mobile
devices, based on TensorFlow. In this paper, we describe the resulting high-level design, sketch some of the
challenges and their solutions, and touch upon the open problems and future directions.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed machine learning approach which enables training
on a large corpus of decentralized data residing on devices
like mobile phones. FL is one instance of the more general
approach of “bringing the code to the data, instead of the
data to the code” and addresses the fundamental problems
of privacy, ownership, and locality of data. The general
description of FL has been given by McMahan & Ramage
(2017), and its theory has been explored in Konečný et al.
(2016a); McMahan et al. (2017; 2018).
A basic design decision for a Federated Learning infrastructure is whether to focus on asynchronous or synchronous
training algorithms. While much successful work on deep
learning has used asynchronous training, e.g., Dean et al.
(2012), recently there has been a consistent trend towards
synchronous large batch training, even in the data center
(Goyal et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2018). The Federated Averaging algorithm of McMahan et al. (2017) takes a similar
approach. Further, several approaches to enhancing privacy
guarantees for FL, including differential privacy (McMahan et al., 2018) and Secure Aggregation (Bonawitz et al.,
2017), essentially require some notion of synchronization on
a fixed set of devices, so that the server side of the learning
algorithm only consumes a simple aggregate of the updates
from many users. For all these reasons, we chose to focus on support for synchronous rounds, while mitigating
potential synchronization overhead via several techniques
we describe subsequently. Our system is thus amenable to
running large-batch SGD-style algorithms as well as Feder1

Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Wolfgang Grieskamp <wgg@google.com>, Vladimir
Ivanov <vlivan@google.com>, Brendan McMahan <mcmahan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 2 nd SysML Conference, Palo Alto, CA, USA,
2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s).

ated Averaging, the primary algorithm we run in production;
pseudo-code is given in Appendix B for completeness.
In this paper, we report on a system design for such algorithms in the domain of mobile phones (Android). This work
is still in an early stage, and we do not have all problems
solved, nor are we able to give a comprehensive discussion
of all required components. Rather, we attempt to sketch the
major components of the system, describe the challenges,
and identify the open issues, in the hope that this will be
useful to spark further systems research.
Our system enables one to train a deep neural network, using
TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), on data stored on the phone
which will never leave the device. The weights are combined
in the cloud with Federated Averaging, constructing a global
model which is pushed back to phones for inference. An
implementation of Secure Aggregation (Bonawitz et al.,
2017) ensures that on a global level individual updates from
phones are uninspectable. The system has been applied in
large scale applications, for instance in the realm of a phone
keyboard.
Our work addresses numerous practical issues: device availability that correlates with the local data distribution in
complex ways (e.g., time zone dependency); unreliable device connectivity and interrupted execution; orchestration of
lock-step execution across devices with varying availability;
and limited device storage and compute resources. These
issues are addressed at the communication protocol, device, and server levels. We have reached a state of maturity
sufficient to deploy the system in production and solve applied learning problems over tens of millions of real-world
devices; we anticipate uses where the number of devices
reaches billions.

