UniIR: Universal Multimodal Information Retrievers

1

Supplementary Material - UniIR : Training and Benchmarking
Universal Multimodal Information Retrievers

7

Visualization of Retrieval Results

We present example retrieval results for all 10 datasets in the M-BEIR benchmark, shown in Figures 9 through 18. For each dataset, we show one example query and the top 5 candidates retrieved from M-BEIR (5.6 M) by UniIR
(CLIPSF ), UniIR (BLIPFF ), and Multi-task fine-tuned baseline retrievers Multitask (CLIPSF ) and Multi-task (BLIPFF ). Our visualization further demonstrates
the findings that we have discussed in Section 4.
Instruction-tuning improves retrieval on M-BEIR. For most of the tasks, the
multi-task baselines retrieved candidates from undesired modalities. As demonstrated in Figures 9, 10, 11 and 12, the multi-task baselines only retrieved text
candidates that had a similar meaning to the query and failed to understand
the intent of the task. For instance, in the VisualNews example 9, the multi-task
baselines are distracted by text that contains the entity names “Obama" and
“Gates". Similarly, in the WebQA example 13, baseline models are distracted by
text that contains “Saint Peter". On the other hand, UniIR models were able to
accurately fetch candidates in the desired modalities.
Single-modality retrieval task. Even without instructions, the baseline models
can perform well in single-modality retrieval tasks, such as similar image retrieval
in Figure 14. This is consistent with the results presented in Section 4, as these
tasks do not require a model to understand intent.
Vision and language composed image retrieval task. In Table 2, it is evident that
UniIR (BLIPFF ) outperforms UniIR (CLIPSF ) in the composed image retrieval
task (task 7). The composed image retrieval task generally involves modifying
a reference image according to a textual description. Our hypothesis is that the
“cross-attention" layer in (BLIPFF ) can effectively merge the image and text
embeddings, making it better suited for this task. Our presented examples 15
and 16 indicate that models based on BLIPFF can accurately retrieve the target
candidate.
InfoSeek and OVEN tasks. InfoSeek task is more challenging as compared to
the OVEN task, which mainly focuses on visual entity recognition. Infoseek
queries require details from Wikipedia articles. As illustrated in Example 18,
only UniIR (BLIPFF ) successfully retrieved the target candidate in the top five
results. Although UniIR (CLIPSF ) retrieved 5 related candidates that correctly
identified the lake in the query image, none of them contained the desired answer.

