1

Appendix
In this appendix, we first present implementation details in Appendix A. Next,
we discuss the baselines implementations in Appendix B. Finally, we provide
additional qualitative and quantitative results in Appendix C.

A

Implementation Details

In this section, we begin by describing how we obtain the initial mesh required
for training (Appendix A.1). We then provide a detailed explanation of our
network architecture (Appendix A.2) and our implementation details of training
(Appendix A.3), rendering (Appendix A.4) and anti-aliasing (Appendix A.5).
A.1

Inital Mesh

NeRF Synthetic Dataset [10]: The NeRF Synthetic dataset consists of 100
training images and 200 testing images. Following the first stage of NeRF2Mesh [13],
we adopt a grid-based representation to extract our initial mesh. We refer to the
first stage of NeRF2Mesh as “NeRF2Mesh-S1” in the following.
Shiny Blender Dataset [14]: Similarly, the Shiny Blender dataset consists of
100 training images and 200 testing images. Nonetheless, the mesh extracted by
NeRF2Mesh-S1 often results in low surface quality in areas that involve intricate view-dependent effects, as elaborated in Appendix C.1. Therefore, we use
the initial mesh extracted using Ref-Neus [2] as it is able to provide a faithful
geometry reconstruction of glossy objects.
Real Captured Dataset [14]: The Real Captured dataset includes three outdoor open scenes: gardenspheres, toycar, and sedan. In line with previous research, we select every eighth image from the input dataset as our test set.
Similar to the Shiny Blender dataset, NeRF2Mesh-S1 performs poorly in modeling scenes with complex view-dependent appearances. Consequently, we employ Neuralangelo [8] to extract the initial mesh for the Real Captured scenes.
However, due to the poor reconstruction quality of Neuralangelo [8] on the gardenspheres scene (as detailed in Appendix C.1), we still use the inaccurate mesh
extracted by NeRF2Mesh-S1 as our geometric prior in gardenspheres scene.
A.2

Network Architecture

Geometry Learner: The geometry learner module includes gθv and gθn . Both
networks are composed of multi-resolution hash tables [11] and a small MLP. The
hash table structures of both networks are identical. For object-centric datasets,
we adopt hash tables with 16 layers, a maximum table length of 219 , a minimum
resolution of 16, and a maximum resolution of 512. For the unbounded Real Captured dataset, we increase the maximum resolution and use a maximum table
length of 220 .

