MediaPipe: A Framework for Perceiving and Processing Reality
Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris McClanahan, Esha Uboweja, Michael Hays,
Fan Zhang, Chuo-Ling Chang, Ming Guang Yong, Juhyun Lee, Wan-Teh Chang, Wei Hua,
Manfred Georg and Matthias Grundmann
Google Research
mediapipe@google.com

Abstract
Building an application that processes perceptual inputs involves more than running an ML model. Developers have to harness the capabilities of a wide range
of devices; balance resource usage and quality of results;
run multiple operations in parallel and with pipelining;
and ensure that time-series data is properly synchronized.
The MediaPipe framework addresses these challenges. A
developer can use MediaPipe to easily and rapidly combine existing and new perception components into prototypes and advance them to polished cross-platform applications. The developer can configure an application built
with MediaPipe to manage resources efficiently (both CPU
and GPU) for low latency performance, to handle synchronization of time-series data such as audio and video
frames and to measure performance and resource consumption. We show that these features enable a developer to focus on the algorithm or model development, and use MediaPipe as an environment for iteratively improving their
application, with results reproducible across different devices and platforms. MediaPipe will be open-sourced at
https://github.com/google/mediapipe.

Figure 1: Object detection using MediaPipe.

1. Introduction

Sensory data such as audio and video streams enter the
graph, and perceived descriptions such as object detection
results or face landmark annotations leave the graph. An
example in shown in Figure 1.
Graphs of operations are used in projects such as TensorFlow [1], PyTorch [4], CNTK [5] or MXNet [2] to define a
neural network model. MediaPipe takes a complementary
role: our graphs do not define the internals of a neural network, but instead specify larger-scale pipelines in which one
or model models are embedded.
OpenCV 4.0 introduced the Graph API (G-API) [3]
which allows specifications of sequences of OpenCV image processing operations in the form of a graph. However, MediaPipe allows operations on arbitrary data types
and provides native support for streaming time-series data.

To enable augmented reality (AR), a typical application
processes sensory data such as video and audio at high
frame rates to enhance the user experience. Modifying such
a perception application to incorporate additional processing steps or inference models can be difficult due to excessive coupling between steps. Further, developing the same
application for different platforms is time consuming as it
usually involves optimizing inference and processing steps
to run correctly and efficiently on a target device.
MediaPipe addresses these challenges by abstracting and
connecting individual perception models into maintainable
pipelines. With MediaPipe, a perception pipeline can be
built as a graph of modular components, including, for instance, inference models and media processing functions.
1

