Supplementary Material of
MOTIA: Mastering Video Outpainting
through Input-Specific Adaptation

Fu-Yun Wang1 , Xiaoshi Wu1 , Zhaoyang Huang2 , Xiaoyu Shi1 , Dazhong Shen3 ,
Guanglu Song4 , Yu Liu3 , Hongsheng Li1,3,5
MMLab, CUHK
2
Avolution AI
3
Shanghai AI Lab
4
SenseTime Research
5
CPII under InnoHK
1

{fywang@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

I

Detailed Implementation

Model architecture. MOTIA marries generative priors with pretrained models for fast adaptation and better generalization. Specifically, the basic components of MOTIA in model architecture aspect are:
• Variational autoencoder [10]. The autoencoder consists of an encoder and
decoder, with the encoder mapping the original video frames into latent
space and the decoder decoding the video frames with latent codes.
• CLIP text encoder [9]. CLIP is trained on vast text-image pairs, enabling
its text encoder to contain meaningful and rich information for controlling
image generation.
• U-Net [10]. We apply Stable Diffusion v1-5 as our fundamental denoisier. The
U-Net is conditioned on text embeddings of CLIP through cross-attention.
To make it applicable to the 3D features of videos, we inflate the 2D convolutions and 2D group normalizations within it into pseudo-3D convolutions
and 3D group normalizations.
• Temporal module [4]. To equip the model with additional temporal priors,
we initialize additional temporal attention layers with vanilla transformer
architectures pretrained on large-scale text video datasets. Note that, we
have shown that directly applying this temporal prior for video outpainting
leads to poor results without our proposed input-specific adaptation process.
• LoRA [5]. LoRA is proposed for the efficient fine-tuning of large models.
It has been widely used in various diffusion-based applications, including
video editing and manipulation. Therefore, we also choose LoRA as the basic learning component. Additionally, unlike previous works directly inserting
the trained LoRA, we propose an effective strategy that adjusts the insertion weight of LoRA according to the spatial position of the given feature,

