A Task is Worth One Word:
Learning with Task Prompts for High-Quality
Versatile Image Inpainting
(Supplementary Materials)
Junhao Zhuang1 * Yanhong Zeng2 Wenran Liu2 Chun Yuan1† Kai Chen2†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zhuangjh23@mails, yuanc@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zengyanhong, liuwenran, chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn

We have included our codes, models, and supplementary material as part of
our submission. This material provides additional results of the qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art approaches in Section 1. Furthermore, we present
more application results in Section 2. Specifically, in Section 2.1, we demonstrate
object removal. In Section 2.2, we showcase shape-guided object inpainting with
a controllable fitting degree. Additionally, in Section 2.3, we discuss the combination of our approach with ControlNet [7].

1

Qualitative Comparisons

We present a comprehensive comparison of PowerPaint with state-of-the-art
methods in various inpainting tasks. These tasks include text-guided object inpainting, shape-guided object inpainting, context-aware image inpainting, and
image outpainting. To ensure fairness, the results we showcase are randomly
sampled, avoiding any cherry-picking to provide a more accurate demonstration.
Text-guided object inpainting. In addition to Fig. 5 in the main paper, we
provide additional qualitative results of text-guided object inpainting in Fig. 1
and Fig. 2 for a more comprehensive comparison. For these comparisons, we
carefully selected the most recent and competitive baselines, including Stable
Diffusion [4], CN-Inpainting [7], SD-Inpainting [4], and SmartBrush [6].
As shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, the first column displays the input image,
the prompt used for inpainting, and the target inpainting region marked in red.
Subsequently, we compare the inpainting results generated by state-of-the-art
approaches and PowerPaint. Stable Diffusion, as demonstrated in the results,
utilizes a method introduced in SDEdit [3] to extend a text-to-image model for
image inpainting. While Stable Diffusion can occasionally fill in regions based
on the text prompt, it struggles to generate content coherent with the image
* Work done during an internship in Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Lab.
†
Corresponding authors.

