Supplementary Material:
Un-EVIMO: Unsupervised Event-based Independent
Motion Segmentation

1

Additional Results

Consecutive Segmentation Results In Figure 3 of the main manuscript, we show samples of the test sequences. These images only show how individual predictions perform.
In this supplementary material, we include more consecutive predictions to show that
the network prediction is consistent, although the prediction at each time is independent.
In Figure 1, we show clips of continuous IMO segmentation to demonstrate temporal
consistency. Similarly to our evaluation procedure, each image uses 0.025s of events. In
each clip, we show six consecutive event slices in ascending order by time from left to
right. We see in these figures that the boundaries of objects are sometimes misclassified
as background events. There are two main reasons for this issue. First, the pseudo-masks
are computed on a specific time rather than over a duration, which causes the network to
predict the mask at a given time. Thus, the motion of objects during the time of the event
slice can cause the network to underestimate the size of the IMO regions. In our experiments, networks trained with ground-truth labels also experience the same problem.
Second, the sharp boundaries in the ground truth masks help the network learn better
decision boundaries on binary classification. The baseline CNN we trained was able
to keep slowly improving performance even after many epochs, whereas our method
stopped improving after the first few epochs.
Egomotion Estimation Results In the main manuscript, we assume that the camera pose
can be accurately estimated from the flow prediction. Although we do not train a network to estimate the pose, accurate optical flow and depth can be combined to estimate
egomotion robustly. In Figure 2, we show the complete velocity estimate (linear and
rotational) computed on unseen wall and floor sequences. Due to the high-frequency
movements in EVIMO, our flow at 40Hz acts as a filter that smooths the velocities.
On the other hand, the VICON ground truth is captured at 200Hz, which allows one
to see the high-frequency vibrations. Overall, the robust RANSAC algorithm is able to
estimate egomotion accuarately for idenfying the IMO regions.

2

Additional Detection Rate Results

In Section 5.1 in the main manuscript, we explain the lower performance of our approach compared to supervised baseline methods. Sharp boundaries in ground-truth
masks provide stronger discriminative signals to the network. However, in fast motion
estimation, an essential task is to locate the IMOs. In Table 1, we computed the detection rate using the IoU threshold at 0.3.

