Appendix for "PaPr: Training-Free One-Step
Patch Pruning with Lightweight ConvNets for
Faster Inference"
Tanvir Mahmud1 Burhaneddin Yaman2 Chun-Hao Liu3 Diana Marculescu1
1

University of Texas at Austin
{tanvirmahmud, dianam}@utexas.edu
2
Bosch Research North America
yaman013@umn.edu
3
Amazon Prime Video
liuch37@gmail.com

We provide additional qualitative analysis to illustrate the effectiveness of
PaPr in practice (Sec. A–Sec. D). Additionally, we provide simple PyTorch pseudo
code for PaPr implementation (Sec. E).

A

Robustness of PaPr with Various ConvNet Proposals

We study the patch significance map (PSM), and patch masks generated by
different ConvNet proposal networks. To make PaPr more computationally
efficient and accurate, we need precise mask of discriminative regions irrespective
of the size and top-1 accuracy of the proposal network. In Fig. 1, Fig. 2, and
Fig. 3, we demonstrate more visualizations of generated PSMs and patch masks
with different keeping ratios for various ConvNets. Despite little variations in
PSMs for different ConvNets, the top z% patch mask remains almost identical
focusing on the key image patches. With patch keeping ratio of z = 0.5, all
proposal models mostly keep the key patches representing target objects. With
much lower keeping ratio such as z = 0.3, few parts of the object in Fig. 2
are masked, however, in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3, most key object patches are visible
even with such high masking ratio. This highlights that PaPr can operate with
extremely lightweight ConvNet (MobileOne-S0 has 42× smaller FLOPs than
ResNet-152) for precise key discriminative patch localization, which makes it
particularly suitable for pruning redundant image patches in larger models.

B

Robustness of PaPr over CAM Methods

Class activation mapping (CAM) methods mostly focus on highlighting key image
patches responsible for the target class prediction to make the decision more
interpretable [1, 7, 13, 16, 19]. Such CAM methods have two major limitations
preventing their use for patch masking: (1) These methods cannot leverage
batch processing for separately tracing the sample activation for each prediction.
Moreover, many of these methods rely on gradient modulation [1, 13], or complex
activation decomposition [11, 16] which practically makes them infeasible for

