AutoCTS: Automated Correlated Time Series Forecasting
Xinle Wu1 , Dalin Zhang1 , Chenjuan Guo1 , Chaoyang He2 , Bin Yang1∗ , Christian S. Jensen1
1 Aalborg University, Denmark

2 University of Southern California, USA

1 {xinlewu, dalinz, cguo, byang, csj}@cs.aau.dk

ABSTRACT

plays an essential role in ensuring effective operation of CPSs, such
as identifying trends, predicting future behavior [7], and detecting
outliers [2]. For instance, traffic time series forecasting can improve
vehicle routing in transportation systems [13, 29, 36, 50].
By considering both temporal dependencies in time series and
spatial correlations among different time series, recent deep learning
models demonstrate impressive performance on correlated time
series forecasting. Temporal dependencies capture how historical
values influence future values. We use “spatial correlations” because
the correlations among time series are often due to the proximity of
the locations in which the sensors that generate the time series are
deployed, but correlations may also be due to other factors. More
specifically, correlated time series are modeled as a spatio-temporal
(ST) graph, where nodes represent time series, and edges represent
spatial correlations between pairs of time series [6, 44, 48].
Based on the above ST-graph modeling, different models are
proposed to enable forecasting. Figure 1(a) summarizes existing
forecasting models, which often include (1) an embedding layer that
transforms the input time series data, (2) a ST-backbone that consists
of a stack of multiple ST-blocks that are able to extract appropriate
spatio-temporal features from the embedded time series data, and
(3) an output layer that produces a final forecasting based on the
features extracted by the ST-backbone.
Different studies propose unique ST-blocks that are responsible for the capture of both the temporal dependencies and spatial
correlations [7, 9, 11, 14, 16, 24, 28, 45, 46, 51, 52]. For example,
STGCN [51] employs a “sandwich” ST-block that includes two temporal convolutions, which model temporal dependencies, with one
graph convolution in-between, which captures spatial correlations;
and Graph Wavenet [45] uses a simpler ST-block that first employs
gated temporal convolution to model temporal dependencies and
then uses graph convolution to capture spatial correlations.

Correlated time series (CTS) forecasting plays an essential role in
many cyber-physical systems, where multiple sensors emit time
series that capture interconnected processes. Solutions based on
deep learning that deliver state-of-the-art CTS forecasting performance employ a variety of spatio-temporal (ST) blocks that are able
to model temporal dependencies and spatial correlations among
time series. However, two challenges remain. First, ST-blocks are
designed manually, which is time consuming and costly. Second,
existing forecasting models simply stack the same ST-blocks multiple times, which limits the model potential. To address these
challenges, we propose AutoCTS that is able to automatically identify highly competitive ST-blocks as well as forecasting models
with heterogeneous ST-blocks connected using diverse topologies,
as opposed to the same ST-blocks connected using simple stacking. Specifically, we design both a micro and a macro search space
to model possible architectures of ST-blocks and the connections
among heterogeneous ST-blocks, and we provide a search strategy that is able to jointly explore the search spaces to identify
optimal forecasting models. Extensive experiments on eight commonly used CTS forecasting benchmark datasets justify our design
choices and demonstrate that AutoCTS is capable of automatically
discovering forecasting models that outperform state-of-the-art
human-designed models.
PVLDB Reference Format:
Xinle Wu, Dalin Zhang, Chenjuan Guo, Chaoyang He, Bin Yang, Christian
S. Jensen. AutoCTS: Automated Correlated Time Series Forecasting.
PVLDB, 15(4): 971-983, 2022.
doi:10.14778/3503585.3503604
PVLDB Artifact Availability:
The source code, data, and/or other artifacts have been made available at
https://github.com/WXL520/AutoCTS.

1

2 chaoyang.he@usc.edu

INTRODUCTION

We are witnessing continued developments in sensor technologies
in cyber-physical systems (CPS), where sensors produce correlated
time series [5, 15]. For example, in transportation, traffic sensors
embedded in roads emit multiple traffic time series that record
traffic flows at their locations across time. Since the traffic on a road
is often correlated with the traffic on nearby roads, the traffic time
series are often correlated [35]. Forecasting on correlated time series

(a) Existing Model.

∗ : Corresponding author.
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
License. Visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ to view a copy of
this license. For any use beyond those covered by this license, obtain permission by
emailing info@vldb.org. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights
licensed to the VLDB Endowment.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 15, No. 4 ISSN 2150-8097.
doi:10.14778/3503585.3503604

(b) Example from the Proposed Model Space.

Figure 1: Existing vs. Proposed CTS Forecasting Models, with
Different ST-blocks Colored Differently.

971

