VideoClusterNet: Self-Supervised and Adaptive
Face Clustering for Videos
Supplementary Material
Devesh Walawalkar

and Pablo Garrido

Flawless AI
{devesh.walawalkar,pablo.garrido}@flawlessai.com
https://www.flawlessai.com/

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Model Architecture

As part of our algorithm, any CNN or Transformer architecture can be incorporated as the base Face ID model. For the attached MLP head, we incorporate
a 3-layer network with GELU activation [4]. The length of the head’s output
feature embedding is kept the same as the length of the base model’s output
embedding. Unnormalized model output embeddings are used for both training
and the final clustering stage. Also, teacher branch head weights are initialized
separately from their student counterpart. When using a transformer class base
model, the head is shared between the class and path token embeddings in both
student and teacher branches, respectively (see Fig. 3 in the main paper).
1.2

Data Pre-Processing

Generation of face tracks as part of given video dataset curation for finetuning
and/or clustering purposes involves processing the video through the four-stage
pipeline, as mentioned in the main paper Sec. 3.2. To further augment variations in a sampled face crop pair, ’global’ and ’local’ views are created from the
original crops. Specifically, crops are randomly cropped and resized with a scale
between 0.7 and 1.0 to create multiple global crops, while a scale between 0.4 and
0.6 provides local crop variants. Given a total of 6 views for each non-cropped
original pair, we set the global and local crop count to 2 and 4, respectively. The
loss for a given original pair is computed as the sum of contrastive losses for each
possible pair of constituent global and local crops. We further apply horizontal
flipping and color temperature variations as additional augmentations.
Face alignment is performed for each face crop prior to the model finetuning
and final clustering stages to further enhance model learning of facial features
and, in turn, for better face clustering performance. More specifically, a given
face crop is first resized to the pre-trained model’s expected input image size.
Then, face landmarks (five points) are predicted for that crop (we incorporate

