Octopus: Embodied Vision-Language
Programmer from Environmental
Feedback
Jingkang Yang1 , Yuhao Dong2,3 , Shuai Liu2,4 , Bo Li1 , Ziyue Wang1 ,
Haoran Tan4 , Chencheng Jiang5 , Jiamu Kang3 , Yuanhan Zhang1 ,
Kaiyang Zhou6 , and Ziwei Liu1(B)
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
{jingkang001,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
BUPT, Beijing, China
5
XJTU, Xi’an, China
6
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

Abstract. Large vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved substantial progress in multimodal perception and reasoning. When integrated into an embodied agent, existing embodied VLM works either
output detailed action sequences at the manipulation level or only provide plans at an abstract level, leaving a gap between high-level planning
and real-world manipulation. To bridge this gap, we introduce Octopus,
an embodied vision-language programmer that uses executable code generation as a medium to connect planning and manipulation. Octopus
is designed to 1) proﬁciently comprehend an agent’s visual and textual task objectives, 2) formulate intricate action sequences, and 3)
generate executable code. To facilitate Octopus model development, we
introduce OctoVerse: a suite of environments tailored for benchmarking
vision-based code generators on a wide spectrum of tasks, ranging from
mundane daily chores in simulators to sophisticated interactions in complex video games such as Grand Theft Auto (GTA) and Minecraft. To
train Octopus, we leverage GPT-4 to control an explorative agent that
generates training data, i.e., action blueprints and corresponding executable code. We also collect feedback that enables an enhanced training scheme called Reinforcement Learning with Environmental
Feedback (RLEF). Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate
Octopus’s functionality and present compelling results, showing that the
proposed RLEF reﬁnes the agent’s decision-making. By open-sourcing
our simulation environments, dataset, and model architecture, we aspire
J. Yang, Y. Dong, S. Liu and B. Li—Equal contribution.
Z. Wang, H. Tan, C. Jiang and J. Kang—Equal engineering contribution.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4 2.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 20–38, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_2

