20

C.-A. Yang et al.

Appendix:
The appendix is organized as follows:
– In Sec. A1, we provide additional details and comparisons to learned and
non-learned TTA in other setups, e.g., additional TTA policy or architectures.
– In Sec. A2, we provide additional image classification results of our approach
on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets [24]. We also provide more detailed
results on ImageNet for image classification, Cityscapes, and ADE20k for
semantic segmentation.
– In Sec. A3, we provide additional implementation details of our method,
including how to implement subsampling layers for each of the corresponding
backbones.

A1

Additional details and comparison to TTA

A1.1

Details for integrating Ours with existing TTA methods.

Existing TTA methods take an input image and form an augmented image pool
(a)
tta
{Iaug }B
a=1 to make a prediction by
✓n
oBtta ◆
(a)
ŷ = T
ŷ (a)
, where ŷ (a) = C (F✓ (Iaug
; 0)),
(A13)
a=1

where T is an aggregation function (diﬀerent from ours) merging all logits
resulting from Btta augmented images with default s = 0. To integrate Ours
with existing TTA methods, we perform our search and aggregation method for
each augmented image to make the prediction ŷ (a) in Eq. (A13), i.e.,
⇣
⌘
(a)
ŷ (a) = C A(F (a) ) , where F (a) = {F (Iaug
; s) | s 2 Ŝ}
(A14)
following a simple aggregation A as described in the main paper. We use this
described approach in our experiments when incorporating our approach with
existing TTA methods.
A1.2

Learned TTA methods

A diﬀerent TTA policy. We conduct additional experiments following another
TTA policy setting proposed by Shanmugam et al. [52], i.e., the standard TTA
policy. The standard TTA consists of the following data transformations: Flip,
Scale, and FiveCrop. The original standard policy fixes Btta at 30. We increase
the possible range of Btta for standard policy to cover up to 190. Please refer
to Sec. A3.2 for the details.
We report the comparison between the baseline TTA methods with and without our learned approach in Tab. A1 and Tab. A2 on ImageNet and Flowers102
respectively. We observe that, unlike our approach, the performance of TTA
baselines is highly dependent on the TTA policy. Although the standard policy

