Motion-Prior Contrast Maximization
for Dense Continuous-Time Motion
Estimation
Friedhelm Hamann1(B) , Ziyun Wang2 , Ioannis Asmanis2 ,
Kenneth Chaney2 , Guillermo Gallego1,3 , and Kostas Daniilidis2,4
1

TU Berlin and SCIoI Excellence Cluster, Berlin, Germany
f.hamann@tu-berlin.de
2
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
3
Einstein Center Digital Future and Robotics Institute Germany, Berlin, Germany
4
Archimedes, Athena, RC, Greece

Abstract. Current optical ﬂow and point-tracking methods rely heavily on synthetic datasets. Event cameras are novel vision sensors with
advantages in challenging visual conditions, but state-of-the-art framebased methods cannot be easily adapted to event data due to the limitations of current event simulators. We introduce a novel self-supervised
loss combining the Contrast Maximization framework with a non-linear
motion prior in the form of pixel-level trajectories and propose an eﬃcient solution to solve the high-dimensional assignment problem between
non-linear trajectories and events. Their eﬀectiveness is demonstrated in
two scenarios: In dense continuous-time motion estimation, our method
improves the zero-shot performance of a synthetically trained model on
the real-world dataset EVIMO2 by 29%. In optical ﬂow estimation, our
method elevates a simple UNet to achieve state-of-the-art performance
among self-supervised methods on the DSEC optical ﬂow benchmark.
Our code is available at https://github.com/tub-rip/MotionPriorCMax.

1

Introduction

Determining the motion of arbitrary projected world points on the image
plane over long time intervals is a diﬃcult low-level computer vision problem. Researchers have studied it as optical ﬂow and lately as point-tracking,
with many practical applications in robotics, computational photography, video
compression, and object-level tracking [26]. The best-performing frame-based
methods for optical ﬂow estimation and point tracking use large-scale synthetic
datasets. Synthetic data is diverse and has highly accurate ground truth (GT),
but is unrealistic and methods trained on synthetic data show a sim-to-real gap.
Novel vision sensors called event cameras [16,17,39] have emerged as promising alternatives to take on the problem. Inspired by the transient visual pathway,
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 2.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 18–37, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_2

