Supplementary Materials of
Omni-Recon: Harnessing Image-based Rendering
for General-Purpose Neural Radiance Fields
Yonggan Fu, Huaizhi Qu, Zhifan Ye, Chaojian Li,
Kevin Zhao, and Yingyan (Celine) Lin
Georgia Institute of Technology
{yfu314,zye327,cli851,kzhao14,celine.lin}@gatech.edu

1

Overview and Outline

In this supplementary material, we provide additional experiments, visualizations, and analysis as complements to the main content, outlined as follows:
– We extend our predict-then-blend strategy, introduced in Sec. 4 of our main
paper, to the 2D CLIP-LSeg model [3] for language-driven 3D semantic segmentation in Sec. 2;
– We offer additional visualizations of the reconstructed meshes on various
datasets and the scene editing effects in Sec. 3 and Sec. 4, respectively;
– We elaborate on more details about the dataset, training, and finetuning
settings of our performed experiments in Sec. 5;
– We provide a detailed formulation of the subtraction attention used by our
appearance transformer in Sec. 6;
– We conduct ablation studies on different components of our proposed NeRF
model backbone in Sec. 7;
– We discuss the limitations and future directions of our work in Sec. 8.
– We discuss the potential negative societal impacts of our work in Sec. 9.

2

Zero-shot Language-driven 3D Semantic Segmentation

In addition to monocular models, we also apply our predict-then-blend strategy,
introduced in Sec. 4 of our main paper, to the 2D CLIP-LSeg model [3] for
language-driven 3D semantic segmentation, i.e., performing segmentation based
on the relevance between pixel-wise embeddings and the target class’s textual
embedding. This is achieved by lifting the CLIP embeddings of the source views
to novel views of the 3D scene. More specifically, we apply CLIP-LSeg [3] to
each source view to acquire their embeddings in CLIP-LSeg’s latent space and
then reuse the blending weights and density to derive the embeddings of novel
views through volumetric rendering. The visual effects, including the zero-shot
performance with and without PET, on Replica and ScanNet are provided in
Fig. 1. This set of experiments indicates that our strategy can effectively lift a
diverse range of vision models into the 3D world in a zero-shot manner.

