Learning 3D Geometry and Feature
Consistent Gaussian Splatting for Object
Removal
Yuxin Wang1 , Qianyi Wu2 , Guofeng Zhang3 , and Dan Xu1(B)
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
{ywangom,danxu}@cse.ust.hk
2
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
qianyi.wu@monash.edu
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
zhangguofeng@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. This paper tackles the intricate challenge of object removal
to update the radiance ﬁeld using the 3D Gaussian Splatting. The main
challenges of this task lie in the preservation of geometric consistency and
the maintenance of texture coherence in the presence of the substantial
discrete nature of Gaussian primitives. We introduce a robust framework speciﬁcally designed to overcome these obstacles. The key insight
of our approach is the enhancement of information exchange among visible and invisible areas, facilitating content restoration in terms of both
geometry and texture. Our methodology begins with optimizing the positioning of Gaussian primitives to improve geometric consistency across
both removed and visible areas, guided by an online registration process informed by monocular depth estimation. Following this, we employ
a novel feature propagation mechanism to bolster texture coherence,
leveraging a cross-attention design that bridges sampling Gaussians from
both uncertain and certain areas. This innovative approach signiﬁcantly
reﬁnes the texture coherence within the ﬁnal radiance ﬁeld. Extensive
experiments validate that our method not only elevates the quality of
novel view synthesis for scenes undergoing object removal but also showcases notable eﬃciency gains in training and rendering speeds. Project
Page: https://w-ted.github.io/publications/gscream.
Keywords: Object Removal · 3D Scene In-painting · Gaussian
Splatting

1

Introduction

3D object removal from pre-captured scenes stands as a complex yet pivotal
challenge in the realm of 3D vision, garnering signiﬁcant attention in computer
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 1.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 1–17, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_1

