22

F. Pérez-García, S. Bond-Taylor et al.

Supplementary Material
RadEdit: stress-testing biomedical vision models via
diffusion image editing
A

Medical terminology

With our editing approach being readily applicable to many (non-medical) applications,
we tried our best to keep the paper as accessible as possible to a wider audience, using
only a small number of medical terms. In the following section we describe the terms
used in more detail.
Note, when interpreting a chest X-ray, it is important to remember that the left and
right sides are switched. This is because we view the patient from their anatomical
laterality point of view, as if we are facing them. So, what appears on the left in an
image is actually the patient’s right side, and vice versa.

A.1

Pathologies

Cardiomegaly This term refers to an enlarged heart, which is usually indicative of an
underlying heart condition. The enlargement can include the entire heart, one side of
the heart, or a specific area. On a chest X-ray, the heart may appear larger than normal.
Opacities In the context of a chest X-ray, opacity is a nonspecific descriptor for areas
that appear whiter than normal lung. Normally, lungs look dark gray on an X-ray due to
presence of air (note the black pure air surrounding the patient on x-ray for reference).
If there are whiter areas, it means something is filling up that space inside the lungs,
replacing the air.
Pulmonary Edema is caused by accumulation of fluid in the lungs. In the context of
chest X-rays, pulmonary edema appears as increased opacity within and around the air
space. In Fig. 12, we show a variety of pulmonary edema examples.
Consolidation In the context of chest X-rays, consolidation refers to a region of the
lung where the air spaces are filled with fluid, cells, tissue, or other substances. This
results in a white region on the X-ray. In Fig. 14, we show a variety of consolidation
examples.
COVID-19 refers to pneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-2 virus which manifests most
commonly as multifocal, bilateral opacities with predominance in the lower half of the
lung.

