Unified Medical Image Pre-training in
Language-Guided Common Semantic Space
Xiaoxuan He2⋆ , Yifan Yang1 , Xinyang Jiang1 , Xufang Luo1⋆⋆ , Haoji Hu2 ,
Siyun Zhao1 , Dongsheng Li1 , Yuqing Yang1 , Lili Qiu1
1
2

Microsoft Research
Zhejiang University

Roadmap of Appendix
The structure of the appendix is delineated as follows: Descriptions of the relevant experimental details are provided in the Section 1 and Section 2. Subsequently, we conducted further experimental analysis in Section 3. Lastly, Section 4 encompasses a presentation of supplementary visualization results.

1

More Implementation Details of Fig.1(b)

1.1

Implementation Details

We randomly compile an extensive collection of disease diagnostic reports from
both 2D and 3D pre-training datasets, such as (1) 2D: “concerning for pneumonia.”, “Trace bilateral pleural effusions.”, “Unchanged minimal left pleural effusion.”, “Small left pleural effusion stable.”, (2) 3D: “Mild right pleural effusion was
also present.”, “areas of opacity in frosted glass with peripheral predominance in
both hemithoraces.”, “both upper lobes and in the left lower lobe with a pattern of organizing pneumonia.”, “Pulmonary edema present.”. Subsequently, we
employ BioClinicalBERT [1] to encode these diagnostic reports into corresponding tokens. Following this encoding process, we utilized t-SNE for visualization
purposes, leading to the results depicted in Figure 1b. The outcomes illustrate
that the representations of reports corresponding to 2D and 3D images coalesce
within a shared semantic space.

2

More Implementation Details of Downstream Tasks

2.1

Medical Classification

2D Medical Image Classification. Except for the fine-tuning of the entire
CheXpert dataset, where we use a batch size of 96, we use a batch size of 48 for
the rest of the linear classification settings. Similar to the image preprocessing
⋆
⋆⋆

Work done during an internship with Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to Xufang Luo, contact: xufluo@microsoft.com

