Placing Objects in Context via Inpainting

A

1

POC datasets object list

Our POC evaluation sets (i.e., POC-CS, POC-IDD and POC-ACDC) are obtained by adding objects to diﬀerent self-driving datasets. Following works like
Lost and Found [47], we compiled a list of 25 objects that can be found on the
road.
The anomaly list is as follows: “stroller”, “trolley”, “garbage bag”, “wheelie
bin”, “suitcase”, “skateboard”, “chair dumped on the street”, “sofa dumped on
the street”, “furniture dumped on the street”, “matress dumped on the street”,
“garbage dumped on the street”, “clothes dumped on the street”, “cement mixer
on the street”, “cat”, “dog”, “bird flying”, “horse”, “skunk”, “sheep”, “crocodile”,
“alligator”, “bear”, “llama”, “tiger” and “monkey”.
Additionally, we also add a few classes from Cityscapes to make sure that
anomaly segmentation models are indeed detecting anomalies and not merely
identifying synthetic objects.
Cityscapes classes inluded are: “rider”, “bicycle”, “motorcycle”, “bus”, “person” and “car”.

B

Anomaly segmentation methods: mIoU on Cityscapes

Although fine-tuning methods with OOD samples can improve anomaly segmentation significantly, they may aﬀect the closed-set performance. In Tab. 4
we report the mIoU on Cityscapes of all methods reported in the main paper,
showing that fine-tuning with POC data does not negatively impact closed-set
performance.
Method

Mask2Anomaly

RPL

RbA

OOD data No ft. coco POC c POC alt. No ft. coco POC c POC alt. No ft. coco POC c POC alt.
mIoU "
78.29 78.34 78.33
78.49 90.94 90.94 90.94
90.94 82.25 82.15 82.17
82.16

Table 4: mIoU on Cityscapes validation set. We compute the mIoU after finetuning with diﬀerent datasets (complementing results in Tab. 2). We observe that
fine-tuning with our POC datasets does not degrade the closed-set performance.

C

Adding objects with Instruct Pix2Pix

When building our pipeline, we explored diﬀerent generative methods. In particular, InstructPix2Pix (IP2P) [4] has showed remarkable performance following
natural language instructions (e.g., “turn the sofa red”). Therefore, it would be
natural to have such “general-purpose editing” methods as baselines to add objects to the images. We observed that IP2P seems to be biased towards modifying
objects in the scene rather than adding new ones. In Fig. 8 we show several examples of images generated with IP2P. In our initial experiments, we observe
how new objects tend to replace the logo of the ego vehicle (top images). If we
remove the bottom of the image (middle section), we then observe that some

