LCM-Lookahead for Encoder-based
Text-to-Image Personalization - Supplementary
Materials

1

Additional comparisons

1.1

Celebrity Comparisons

In fig. 1 we show additional comparisons against the baseline methods, using
celebrity inputs. Most baselines succeed in preserving the identities of all celebrities. The baseline IP-Adapter [17] variants still struggle with stylization prompts,
and show background leak (though the latter can be fixed through appropriate
background masking). Our results show good identity preservation while providing high editability.
1.2

Comparisons on InstantID paper results

In fig. 2 we expand Fig. 5 of the InstantID paper [16] with the results of PhotoMaker [5] and our own method. Here too, our method shows improvement
over the prior art, and particularly the IP-Adapter variations on which it is
based. While we were unable to verify this due to the LAION [11] dataset being
withdrawn, a search through https://haveibeentrained.com/ indicates that
some of these individuals (e.g., Yann Lecun) may be included dozens of times
in InstantID’s reported training set. IP-Adapter did not report their training
set for their FaceID versions. However, their diminished performance on these
individuals hints that they did not observe them.

2

Maintaining model alignment

In the core paper, we note that applying the LCM-lookhead loss naively over
extended training leads to a breaking of the alignment between the LCM [7] and
non-LCM models. To avoid this, we investigated three options for preserving
model alignment: (1) Applying a score distillation sampling (SDS) loss [9] to the
LCM-model outputs, while using the non-LCM model to estimate the score function. (2) Adding the standard Consistency Model [13] loss to the objective of the
LCM-path’s outputs, and (3) scaling the LCM-LoRA weights during training.
Finally, we also investigate the results when avoiding any alignment-preserving
mechanism.
The results are provided in Tab. 1. Notably, without using any alignmentpreserving objective, our method shows only mild improvement over not using
an identity loss at all. Introducing the SDS objective improves matters, but

