Supplemental Materials to
“Dense Multimodal Alignment for
Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Understanding”
Ruihuang Li1 , Zhengqiang Zhang1 , Chenhang He1 , Zhiyuan Ma1 ,
Vishal M. Patel2 , and Lei Zhang1(k)
1

Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Joins Hopkins University
{csrhli, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, vpatel36@jhu.edu
https://github.com/lslrh/DMA

In this supplemental file, we provide the following materials:
• The instructions to reduce noisy tags via GPT and the corresponding visualizations of 3D label map by using denoised tags (referring to “Sec. 3.1Comprehensive Text Modality Generation-Reliable GPT-based Denoising” in
the main paper);
• Examples of scene-level captions extracted by MLLMs and the corresponding
visualizations of 3D label map by using the captions as queries (referring to
“Sec. 3.1-Comprehensive Text Modality Generation-Scalable Scene Descriptions” in the main paper);
• The impacts of tagging models and MLLMs on different datasets (referring to
“Sec. 3.1-Comprehensive Text Modality Generation” and “Sec. 4.3-Ablation
Study-tagging models vs. MLLMs” in the main paper);
• Effect of Mutually Inclusive Loss (MIL) (referring to “Sec. 3.4-Dense Multimodal Alignment-Mutually Inclusive Loss” in the main paper);
• More qualitative results on indoor and outdoor datasets (referring to “Sec. 4.2Comparison with State-of-The-Arts” in the main paper).

1

Reducing Noisy Tags

Instruction. We use GPT to reduce noisy tags generated by RAM [4]. The
corresponding instructions and examples are given in Fig. 1. Given the input list
of tags, we instruct GPT to evaluate each word individually to determine if it
meets the given rules, and we ask it to output the chain of thought and the final
boolean list.
Denoised tagging results. We give some examples of the denoised scene tags
and the corresponding visualizations in Fig. 2. We can observe that many noisy
tags can be filtered out in terms of the rules given in Fig. 1. We also visualize the
3D
text-to-3D label map Mtag
as defined in Eq. 2 of the main paper. Label errors in
this 3D label map are consequently reduced based on the denoised tags.

