Elegantly Written: Disentangling Writer and
Character Styles for Enhancing Online Chinese
Handwriting
Yu Liu1,2 , Fatimah binti Khalid1 , Lei Wang1 , Youxi Zhang1 , and Cunrui
Wang2
1

Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, University Putra
Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Malaysia
{gs64481,fatimahk,gs68180,gs64680}@upm.edu.my
2
Dalian Chinese Font Design Technology Innovation Center, Dalian Minzu
University, 116600 Dalian, China
wcr@dlnu.edu.cn

A. 1

Reference Selection

In many font generation methods, at each iteration, one or more characters
are randomly selected from the training set as style reference. This makes it
challenging for the model to accurately extract styles from diverse combinations
of style reference sets. Therefore, we introduce a strategy by setting a fixed
style reference set S = {s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , sn } , which is composed of 500 characters.
Additionally, we design a content-style reference mapping to select a fixed K
style reference characters for each content character.
A. 1.1

Decomposition of Chinese Character Structure

According to the structure decomposition table of Chinese characters, each character is decomposed into a component set T consisting of explicit components T c
and implicit components T h . An example of character decomposition is shown
in Figure 1. During the decomposition process, it is ensured that the character retains the integrity of its components, which are then further subdivided.
The components obtained from the initial decomposition are defined as explicit
decomposition T c = {tc1 , tc2 , tc3 , . . . , tcn }, and those obtained
 from further decomposition are defined as implicit decomposition T h = th1 , th2 , th3 , . . . , thn . The
explicit decomposition contains structures that are more easily transferred from
the style reference set to the target set, while the implicit decomposition ensures
that each character can select K reference characters from the style reference
set.
A. 1.2

Content-Style Reference Mapping:

We select 2000 high-frequency commonly used Chinese characters as the content character set C = {c1 , c2 , c3 , . . . , cn }. Our goal is to map K style references

