Similarity of Neural Architectures
using Adversarial Attack Transferability
–Appendix–

Appendix
We include additional materials in this document, such as the network details,
feature importance analysis details, spectral clustering method, training settings,
and setting of knowledge distillation. We also provide experimental results of
spectral clustering, computing pairwise similarities, ensemble performance, and
distillation performance. We discuss some limitations and discussion points of our
work, such as the effect of an efficient approximation, and possible applications.

Author Contributions
This work is done as an internship project by J Hwang under the supervision
of S Chun. S Chun initialized the project idea: understanding how different
architectures behave differently by using an adversarial attack. J Hwang, S Chun,
and D Han jointly designed the analysis toolbox. J Hwang implemented the
analysis toolbox and conducted the experiments with input from S Chun, D Han,
and J Lee. J Hwang, D Han, B Heo, and S Chun contributed to interpreting and
understanding various neural architectures under our toolbox. The initial version
of “model card” (Tab. C.3 and C.4) was built by J Hwang, S Park, and verified
by D Han and B Heo. B Heo contributed to interpreting distillation results. All
ResNet and ViT models newly trained in this work were trained by S Park. J
Lee supervised J Hwang and verified the main idea and experiments during the
project. S Chun and J Hwang wrote the initial version of the manuscript. All
authors contributed to the final manuscript.

A

Empirical Comparison of SAT and Other Methods

A.1

Comparison with Somepalli et al. in the Variance of Similarity

Somepalli et al. [23] proposed a sampling-based similarity score for comparing
decision boundaries of models. SAT has two advantages over Somepalli et al .:
computational efficiency and the reliability of the results. First, SAT involves
sampling 5,000 images and using 50-step PGD; the computation cost is [5,000
(sampled images) × 50 (PGD steps) + 5,000 (test to the other model)] × 2
(two models). Meanwhile, Somepalli et al. [23] sample 500 triplets and generate
2,500 points to construct decision boundaries. In this case, the total inference
cost is [500 (sampled triplets) × 2,500 (grid points)] × 2 (two models), which

