Denoising Vision Transformers

1

Supplementary Material:
Denoising Vision Transformers
In the appendix, we provide detailed implementation details in §A, elaborate
on evaluation protocols and additional results in §B, and discuss the understanding of position embeddings in ViT in §C. Lastly, we discuss the limitations of
this work and propose a few avenues for future work in §D.

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Denosing with Neural Fields

Recall that we decompose the output feature map from a pre-trained ViT into
three components: y ⇡ F(A)+G +h(y), where F is a feature semantic field, G is
an artifact field, and h is a residual predictor. We describe their implementation
details below.
Neural field F. To facilitate eﬃcient learning, we use InstantNGP [23], a type
of compact and fast coordinate network, parameterized by learnable multi-level
hash grids H and a lightweight MLP (·), to learn F. It takes as input a normalized 2D coordinate (i, j), within the range of [0, 1], and outputs its corresponding
feature vector, i.e., F(i, j) = (H(i, j)). We refer readers to [23] for a more detailed understanding of the learnable hash grids. In our implementation, we use
a hash encoding resolution that spans from 24 to 210 with 16 levels. Each hash
entry has a channel size of 8. The maximum number of hash entries of each resolution is 220 . For the lightweight MLP, we use a two-layer Linear-ReLu-Linear
structure. The hidden dimension of this MLP is half the size of the output feature dimension, which corresponds to the feature dimension of the ViT being
studied (e.g., 768 for a ViT-base and 1024 for a ViT-large).
Artifact field G. For all experiments, we use a 2D learnable feature map of size
C ⇥ K ⇥ K to learn the input-independent noise, where C corresponds to the
feature dimension of the studied ViT, and K is the spatial size. We compute K
by (H P )/S +1, where H is the height&width of input images (which we resize
to be square), P is the patch size, and S is the stride size used in the model. To
accommodate ViTs with diﬀerent patch sizes, we set H to 518 for those trained
with a patch size of 14, and 512 for ViTs with a patch size of 16, resulting in K
values of 37 and 32, respectively. Note that this feature map, G, can be bilinearly
interpolated to fit any arbitrary image resolution. We specifically choose these
K values to minimize the need for run-time interpolation during training, thus
improving denoising eﬃciency.
Residual predictor h. The residual predictor is structured as a 3-layer MLP
with ReLU activation after the hidden layers. The hidden dimension is set to be
one-quarter of the channel dimension of the ViT being studied.
Optimization. In our implementation, we extract N = 768 views (crops) from
each image, applying random augmentations, which include random flipping

