Deblur e-NeRF: NeRF
from Motion-Blurred Events under
High-speed or Low-light Conditions
Weng Fei Low1,2,3(B)

and Gim Hee Lee1,2,3

1
The NUS Graduate School’s Integrative Sciences and Engineering
Programme (ISEP), National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute of Data Science (IDS), National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
{wengfei.low,gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg
https://wengflow.github.io/deblur-e-nerf

Abstract. The distinctive design philosophy of event cameras makes
them ideal for high-speed, high dynamic range & low-light environments,
where standard cameras underperform. However, event cameras also suffer from motion blur, especially under these challenging conditions, contrary to what most think. This is due to the limited bandwidth of the
event sensor pixel, which is mostly proportional to the light intensity.
Thus, to ensure event cameras can truly excel in such conditions where it
has an edge over standard cameras, event motion blur must be accounted
for in downstream tasks, especially reconstruction. However, no prior
work on reconstructing Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) from events, nor
event simulators, have considered the full eﬀects of event motion blur.
To this end, we propose, Deblur e-NeRF, a novel method to directly and
eﬀectively reconstruct blur-minimal NeRFs from motion-blurred events,
generated under high-speed or low-light conditions. The core component
of this work is a physically-accurate pixel bandwidth model that accounts
for event motion blur. We also introduce a threshold-normalized total
variation loss to better regularize large textureless patches. Experiments
on real & novel realistically simulated sequences verify our eﬀectiveness.
Our code, event simulator and synthetic event dataset are open-sourced.
Keywords: Neural Radiance Field · Motion blur · Event camera

1

Introduction

Event cameras oﬀer a complementary approach to visual sensing, commonly
achieved with frame-based cameras. Instead of capturing intensity images at a
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4 11.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 192–209, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_11

