Supplementary Materials of Boosting Gaze
Object Prediction via Pixel-level Supervision
from Vision Foundation Model
Yang Jin1 , Lei Zhang2 , Shi Yan2 , Bin Fan3 , and Binglu Wang1 †
1

Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi’an, China
{jin91999, wbl921129}@gmail.com
† Corresponding author
2
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
zl_hnly@163.com, yanshi@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
3
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Peking University, Beijing, China
binfan@pku.edu.cn

A

Gaze object detection compared to GTR [8]

Recently, Tu et al . proposed GTR [8] to jointly predict gaze location and gaze
object but only did limited validation for gaze object detection on the GOO-Real
dataset. In GTR [8], the AP of object detection is used to evaluate gaze object
detection, and mean average precision (mAP) is used to evaluate the detection
accuracy of multiple indicators. In the process of calculating mAP, a predicted
gaze instance detection is considered a true positive if and only if it is highly
accurate (i.e., the IoU between the predicted human head box and ground truth
is greater than 0.5 while the L2 distance is less than 0.15 and confidence for gaze
object is larger than 0.75), and only calculate AUC and L2 distance for those
predicted instances considered as true positives, thereby ignoring relatively poor
detection instances, resulting in an incomplete evaluation. For a fair comparison,
we also report the performance of our model using the same metric in Table 1.
Our model outperforms GTR by 19.06 (77.32% vs. 58.26%) and 18.08 (75.20%
vs. 57.12%) in real-world and non-real-world settings respectively. At the same
time, mAP also increased by 0.183 (0.810 vs. 0.627) in real-world setting compared to GTR, which indicates that compared to directly using the Transformer
to globally model the relationship between head and gazed location, our special attention to the human head produced by RoI reconstruction module and
space-to-object gaze regression approach can more effectively perceive the gaze
direction and search gaze object in the corresponding area, achieving more accurate detection results.

B

Energy aggregation loss

In this paper, following TransGOP [9], we use an energy aggregation loss to
further guide the gaze heatmap to converge toward the location of the gazed
object. Since we perform gaze object segmentation, we replace the bounding

