1

In the main paper, we introduce DiffFAS, a novel diffusion-based generative
method designed to reduce cross-domain style shifts. Additionally, we propose
the Relative Quality (RQ) loss function, which utilizes quality priors to address
cross-domain quality shifts. The supplementary material includes further analysis of these methods through a series of experiments.

1

Ablation Study about STFM

In this section, we present an ablation study evaluating the effects of different
patch sizes for both means and variance patches within the Spoofing Style Fusion
Module (STFM). Main paper investigates the relationship between image statistics and some image factors, including color, shape, and texture. To assess the
influence of these statistics on the generative spoof samples, we conducted experiments to evaluate the impact of different patch sizes in STFM across various
attack scenarios, including mask attacks in the PADISI dataset and print/replay
attacks in the OCIM dataset. The results of experiments with means as shown
in Fig. 1 (a), revealing that excessively small means patches lead to significant
alterations in facial features, such as replacing by the mask ID or blending with
the guide image’s identity information. On the contrary, larger variance patches
might overlook details in the generative samples, such as the color smears on the
surface of plastic masks and punched eye holes in printed attacks, as illustrated
in Fig. 1 (b). Additionally, an increase in the size of the variance patches leads to
a reduction in the intensity of the attack texture. Therefore, we recommend the
means patch size of 6×6 and variance patch size of 2×2 to achieve a balanced
representation of identity and spoof information in the generative samples.
In contrast, DiffFAS utilizes an image editing-based sampling algorithm that
effectively integrates identity information from live faces while closely matching
the dataset’s spoof texture patterns, thus leveraging the overfitting to datasets’
texture feature and preserving the model’s generative diversity. Furthermore,
we assess the objective quality of the generative samples by calculating the
BRISQUE scores for both the generative and original datasets. These scores are
obtained by averaging the BRISQUE scores across all samples in each dataset,
and comparison results are shown in Fig. 2. It is observed that in the PADISI
dataset, the generative quality of DiffFAS slightly surpasses that of the original
dataset and considerably outperforms the generative samples of DSDG [2]. For
the OCIM dataset, the average quality score of DiffFAS falls between those of
the high-quality and low-quality datasets, modestly outperforming DSDG.

2

Results on More Datasets

In this section, we present additional generative results of the WMCA dataset,
which includes various illumination conditions, backgrounds, and head pose conditions, contrasting with the uniform image conditions in the PADISI dataset.
The results are shown in Fig. 5 (a). Experiments conducted with the WMCA

