SAIR: Learning Semantic-Aware Implicit
Representation
Canyu Zhang1 , Xiaoguang Li1 , Qing Guo2(B) , and Song Wang1
1

University of South Carolina, Columbia, USA
{canyu,xl22}@email.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu
2
IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),
Singapore, Singapore
tsingqguo@ieee.org
Abstract. Implicit representation of an image can map arbitrary coordinates in the continuous domain to their corresponding color values,
presenting a powerful capability for image reconstruction. Nevertheless,
existing implicit representation approaches only focus on building continuous appearance mapping, ignoring the continuities of the semantic
information across pixels. Consequently, achieving the desired reconstruction results becomes challenging when the semantic information
within input image is corrupted, such as when a large region is missing. To address the issue, we suggest learning semantic-aware implicit
representation ( SAIR), that is, we make the implicit representation of
each pixel rely on both its appearance and semantic information (e.g.,
which object does the pixel belong to). To this end, we propose a framework with two modules: (1) a semantic implicit representation (SIR)
for a corrupted image. Given an arbitrary coordinate in the continuous
domain, we can obtain its respective text-aligned embedding indicating
the object the pixel belongs. (2) an appearance implicit representation
(AIR) based on the SIR. Given an arbitrary coordinate in the continuous
domain, we can reconstruct its color whether or not the pixel is missed
in the input. We validate the novel semantic-aware implicit representation method on the image inpainting task, and the extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method surpasses state-of-the-art approaches by a
signiﬁcant margin.
Keywords: Image inpainting · Semantic-aware implicit
representation · Visual language model

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representation has demonstrated surprising performance in the
2D image [5,10], video [4] and novel view [29,40,49] reconstruction. They achieve
this by extracting appearance features from 2D images using an encoder and
then associating continuous coordinates with corresponding appearance features
Canyu Zhang and Xiaoguang Li are co-ﬁrst authors and contribute equally.
Code is available at https://github.com/tsingqguo/sair..
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 319–335, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_18

