Supplementary Material:
WTS: A Pedestrian-Centric Traffic Video Dataset
for Fine-grained Spatial-Temporal Understanding
Quan Kong1⋆ , Yuki Kawana1 , Rajat Saini1 , Ashutosh Kumar1 , Jingjing Pan1 ,
Ta Gu2⋆⋆ , Yohei Ozao1 , Balazs Opra1 , Yoichi Sato2 , and Norimasa Kobori1
1

2

1

Woven by Toyota
The University of Tokyo

Caption Generation and Checklist Examples

The checklist is prepared for pedestrian and vehicle respectively. There are four
supercategories named "Location", "Attention", "Behavior" and "Context". Each
supercategory includes several sub-categories such as "Orientation(pedestrian)",
"Position", and "Relative distance (to the vehicle)" for "Location". Furthermore,
each sub-category consists of several check items for the annotator to check by
watching the video segments. The detail of our checklist example used for caption
generation is listed in Table 1 for reference.

2

Instruction for Annotation

As "left" or "right" etc., as the position items are relatively defined by the
reference object. To remove the bias from the annotator to judge the location
and attention-related check items. We prepared an instruction guideline for the
annotator to follow up. The location and attention are based on the anchor
position of the vehicle to define the pedestrian positions. Figure 1 shows the
instructions about our guideline for the annotator to judge this information.

3

Difference for Phase Segments

Our caption includes the "Location", "Attention", "Behavior" and "Context"
information in a long paragraph. The major difference across each segment is
mainly regarding the "Location", "Attention", and "Behavior" parts. "Context"
is the static information to show the attributes of the environment, pedestrian,
and vehicle during a short duration. It is not frequently changed along a short time
direction. From Figure 2 we could see the fine-grained level difference changed
along the time direction across each segment in our captions. These fine-grained
level changes will be the key used for the traffic safety reasoning / causal analysis
for the downstream task e.g., accident prediction as well.
⋆
⋆⋆

Corresponding author: quan.kong@woven.toyota
Work done while Ta Gu was an intern at Woven by Toyota.

