Supplementary Materials for
Smoothness, Synthesis, and Sampling: Re-thinking
Unsupervised Multi-View Stereo with DIV Loss
Alex Rich , Noah Stier , Pradeep Sen , and Tobias Höllerer
University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara CA, USA
{anrich, noahstier, psen, thollerer}@ucsb.edu

1

Overview

In this supplementary material, we include additional details to complement the main
text. In Sec. 2, we include additional qualitative results. In Sec. 3, we include additional
studies beyond those presented in the main paper.

2

Additional Qualitative Results

In Sec. 2.1, we include more qualitative reconstruction results for Tanks and Temples
(T&T) outdoor scenes. In Sec. 2.2, we include additional visual ablation results.
2.1

Additional T&T outdoor scenes

See Fig. 1 for several additional scenes from the T&T dataset. Note that, as in Fig. 7
of the main text, all visualizations are for outdoor scenes. We specifically include outdoor scenes, as these represent the most challenging reconstruction scenarios. We find
DIV-MVS produces reconstructions with substantially cleaner, more accurate edges
than competing unsupervised baselines while containing less per-point error than the
supervised baseline. As in the examples in the main text, this shows two things. First,
it shows that models trained using DIV loss generalize effectively beyond the training
distribution, performing well even in these challenging, fully-outdoor scenarios. Second, it shows that improvements in object boundaries in predicted depth maps transfer
to improvements in the downstream reconstructions.
2.2

Additional visual ablation results

See Fig. 2 for additional qualitative visualizations of the individual components of DIV
loss. The first example shows that DIV loss helps fill large holes in textureless regions.
We find our clamped 2nd -order smoothness to be most responsible for this, with each
additional component also providing improvement. The second example shows that
DIV loss leads to substantially cleaner 3D edge quality, with each component having a
positive, cumulative effect. The full details of the ablation study can be found in Sec. 4.3
of the main text.

