Is Retain Set All You Need in Machine
Unlearning? Restoring Performance
of Unlearned Models
with Out-of-Distribution Images
Jacopo Bonato , Marco Cotogni(B) , and Luigi Sabetta
Leonardo Labs, Rome, Italy
{jacopo.bonato.ext,luigi.sabetta.ext}@leonardo.com, cotogni@proton.me

Abstract. In this paper, we introduce Selective-distillation for Class
and Architecture-agnostic unleaRning (SCAR), a novel approximate
unlearning method. SCAR eﬃciently eliminates speciﬁc information
while preserving the model’s test accuracy without using a retain set,
which is a key component in state-of-the-art approximate unlearning
algorithms. Our approach utilizes a modiﬁed Mahalanobis distance to
guide the unlearning of the feature vectors of the instances to be forgotten, aligning them to the nearest wrong class distribution. Moreover,
we propose a distillation-trick mechanism that distills the knowledge of
the original model into the unlearning model with out-of-distribution
images for retaining the original model’s test performance without using
any retain set. Importantly, we propose a self-forget version of SCAR
that unlearns without having access to the forget set. We experimentally veriﬁed the eﬀectiveness of our method, on three public datasets,
comparing it with state-of-the-art methods. Our method obtains performance higher than methods that operate without the retain set and
comparable w.r.t the best methods that rely on the retain set.
Keywords: Machine Unlearning · Retain-Free · Data Removal

1

Introduction

Over the past decades, deep learning algorithms have grown signiﬁcantly in
applications like image classiﬁcation, detection, and segmentation. For optimal
performance, these models learn from big training datasets and update their
weights to capture intrinsic patterns. Despite their eﬀectiveness, many ethical
concerns such as potential biases aﬀecting certain demographics [12] and privacy like unauthorized use of sensitive or personal data [38,48] have been raised.
J. Bonato, M. Cotogni and L. Sabetta—Contributed equally.
M. Cotogni—Work done while at Leonardo Labs.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4 1.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 1–19, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_1

