Supplementary Material:
One-DM: One-Shot Diffusion Mimicker for
Handwritten Text Generation

Quhui Ke

1

Gang Dai1⋆ , Yifan Zhang2,3⋆ ,
, Qiangya Guo1 , and Shuangping Huang1,4†

1

South China University of Technology
National University of Singapore, 3 Skywork AI, 4 Pazhou Laboratory
{eedaigang@mail., eehsp@}scut.edu.cn, yifan.zhang@u.nus.edu

2

We organize our supplementary material as follows.
– In Appendix A, we discuss several similar works, and review the related work
of diffusion methods in general image generation.
– In Appendix B, we describe more method details about the conditional diffusion model of our One-shot Diffusion Mimcker (One-DM).
– In Appendix C, we provide more implementation details.
– In Appendix D, we report additional quantitative results, comparing our
One-DM with official VATr and HWT for generating 32-pixel high images.
– In Appendix E, we provide user study experiments.
– In Appendix F, we explore the generalization of our One-DM to style images
with various noisy backgrounds.
– In Appendix G, we assess the generation quality through OCR system.
– In Appendix H, we conduct failure case analysis.
– In Appendix I, we analyze the impact of different high-frequency filters,
style-content fusion mechanisms, and style sample lengths.
– In Appendix J, we provide more analysis experiments to explain the different
ink color in Figure 4 of Section 4.3.
– In Appendix K, we show more visual comparisons of handwritten text generation, covering English, Chinese, and Japanese scripts.

A

More Related Work

Discussion on several similar works. Our Laplacian contrastive learning
LlapN CE differs from the CC loss [30] in one key aspect: LlapN CE is applied to
high-frequency information Hs for enhancing handwriting style features, whereas
the CC loss is applied to text images for extracting scene text content features.
Ours is a specialized design for style extraction, where we find simply using
LlapN CE on images leads to poor performance (cf. Table 3 in Section 4.3). The
idea of using Hs also differs from prior work [17, 21]. We aim to enhance handwriting style extraction, whereas [17] targets improving content representations
of general images, and [21] aims to address domain shifts of scene texts.
⋆

Authors contributed equally; † Corresponding author

