COSMU: Complete 3D human shape from
monocular unconstrained images: Supplementary
Material
Marco Pesavento , Marco Volino , and Adrian Hilton
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey,
Guildford, UK {m.pesavento,m.volino,a.hilton}@surrey.ac.uk

1

Overview

In the following sections, we present additional information that supplements the
main paper. Additional details on the implementation of COSMU are presented
in Sec. 2. A pseudocode of COSMU algorithm is outlined in Sec. 3. Examples of
limitations of COSMU are shown in Sec. 4 while Sec. 5 presents an additional
study on the level of similarity between target and reference images. Sec. 6
shows results obtained with six views as input to the multi-view attention-based
implicit model. Examples of 3D shapes reconstructed directly from registered
point clouds rather than generating and processing 2D normal maps are illustrated in Sec. 7. 2D normal maps generated by different configurations of the
multi-view scenario simulation module presented in Sec. 4.1 of the main paper
are illustrated in Sec. 8. A summary of the notation used in the main paper is
presented in Sec. 9. Finally, additional results are shown in Sec. 10

2

Implementation details

To extract segmentation masks from the input image we use the method presented by K. Lin et al . [34] whilst 3D poses are estimated with the work by W.
Li et al . [28]. We apply FilterReg [14] to compute the rotation matrix R and
translation T .
•fc : The neural implicit model fc (Fig. 1a) used to create the coarse point clouds
ζ, is trained with images of size (NI × NI , NI = 512) obtained by downscaling
ground truth images IHR by a factor of 2 with bicubic degradation. NT = 24000
3D points Xc are sampled with a mixture of uniform sampling and importance
sampling around the ground-truth surface following PIFu [47]. A subset of Xc
of N = 6000 points is selected for training. Input images are processed by a
U-net (Tab. 1) that aims to increase the resolution of the feature to encode
high-frequency details. High-resolution features φ(I) of size (1024 × 1024 × 64)
and low-resolution features of size (256 × 256 × 256) to enable holistic reasoning
are extracted by the U-Net and processed by a stacked hourglass architecture,
which has been proven to be efficient for surface reconstruction [47]. We adopt 4
stacks of the stacked hourglass network [40] with modifications proposed by [22].

