MapDistill: Boosting Eﬃcient
Camera-Based HD Map Construction
via Camera-LiDAR Fusion Model
Distillation
Xiaoshuai Hao1 , Ruikai Li2 , Hui Zhang1 , Dingzhe Li1 , Rong Yin3 ,
Sangil Jung4 , Seung-In Park4 , ByungIn Yoo4 , Haimei Zhao5(B) ,
and Jing Zhang5(B)
1

Samsung R&D Institute, Beijing, China
{xshuai.hao,hui123.zhang,dingzhe.li}@samsung.com
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Transportation System,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
ricky_developer@buaa.edu.cn
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
yinrong@iie.ac.cn
4
Computer Vision TU, SAIT, SEC, Suwon, Korea
{sang-il.jung,si14.park,byungin.yoo}@samsung.com
5
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
hzha7798@uni.sydney.edu.au, jingzhang.cv@gmail.com

Abstract. Online high-deﬁnition (HD) map construction is an important and challenging task in autonomous driving. Recently, there has
been a growing interest in cost-eﬀective multi-view camera-based methods without relying on other sensors like LiDAR. However, these methods suﬀer from a lack of explicit depth information, necessitating the
use of large models to achieve satisfactory performance. To address this,
we employ the Knowledge Distillation (KD) idea for eﬃcient HD map
construction for the ﬁrst time and introduce a novel KD-based approach called MapDistill to transfer knowledge from a high-performance
camera-LiDAR fusion model to a lightweight camera-only model. Specifically, we adopt the teacher-student architecture, i.e., a camera-LiDAR
fusion model as the teacher and a lightweight camera model as the
student, and devise a dual BEV transform module to facilitate crossmodal knowledge distillation while maintaining cost-eﬀective cameraonly deployment. Additionally, we present a comprehensive distillation
scheme encompassing cross-modal relation distillation, dual-level feature
distillation, and map head distillation. This approach alleviates knowledge transfer challenges between modalities, enabling the student model
to learn improved feature representations for HD map construction.
Experimental results on the challenging nuScenes dataset demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness of MapDistill, surpassing existing competitors by over
7.7 mAP or 4.5× speedup.
X. Hao and R. Li: The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 166–183, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_10

