Supplementary Material of
Bidirectional Stereo Image Compression with
Cross-Dimensional Entropy Model
Zhening Liu , Xinjie Zhang , Jiawei Shao ,
Zehong Lin⋆ , and Jun Zhang
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong SAR
{zhening.liu,xzhangga,jiawei.shao}@connect.ust.hk,
{eezhlin,eejzhang}@ust.hk

The supplementary material provides additional visualization results in Sec. 6,
extra ablation studies in Sec. 7, more experimental details in Sec. 8, and discussion about potential extensions in Sec. 9.

6

Additional Visualization Results

6.1

Qualitative Results

We visualize the qualitative results in Fig. 9, Fig. 16, and Fig. 17 to show the
effectiveness of the proposed method, compared with baselines BPG [1], HEVC
[12], VVC [3], SASIC [14], and ECSIC [13].
As shown in Fig. 9, our proposed BiSIC achieves higher PSNR quality with a
lower BPP for both left and right views, compared with other methods. Besides,
the reconstruction details and texture of BiSIC are closer to the ground truth.
Moreover, the image qualities of the left and right views in our bidirectional
design remain close, mitigating the imbalance issue in unidirectional methods.
In contrast, HEVC and VVC adopt a predictive compression pipeline where one
view is compressed normally, and the other view is generated through the disparity between the prediction and the real view. The unidirectional compression
results in a 2.265 dB PSNR gap for HEVC and a 1.844 dB PSNR gap for VVC
between stereo views, as seen in Fig. 9. ECSIC utilizes the spatial context from
the left image to compress the right one, resulting in a higher compression quality of the right image. In Fig. 16, we illustrate another example on InStereo2K,
where we can visually observe that the same area appears differently in the left
and right views between Fig. 16d and Fig. 16j, as well as Fig. 16e and Fig. 16k,
due to the unidirectional compression. Another group of visualization comparisons on Cityscapes is shown in Fig. 17.
6.2

Downstream Task Verification

The previous subsection provides a visual comparison between our method and
the baselines. Note that imbalanced stereo quality is unfavorable for machine
⋆

Corresponding author

