ZeroI2V: Zero-Cost Adaptation of Pre-trained
Transformers from Image to Video
(Supplementary Material)
Xinhao Li1,2 , Yuhan Zhu1 , and Limin Wang1,2⋆
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
xinhaoli00@outlook.com
zyuhan0812@gmail.com
lmwang@nju.edu.cn
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/ZeroI2V
1

In this appendix, we provide more details of ZeroI2V from the following
aspects:
– Implementation details of our method are in § 1.
– Experimental results with other pre-trained weights and backbone architectures can be found in § 2.
– Visualization of our proposed Spatial-Temporal Dual-Headed Attention
(STDHA) is in § 3.
– Limitations and societal impact are in § 4
– License of the datasets and pre-trained models are in § 5

1

Implementation details of our method

1.1

Model Details

Our model details are shown in the Table 1a and Table 1b. Due to different
requirements for spatial modeling and temporal modeling in different datasets,
there are slight differences in the specific implementation settings.
Settings of STDHA For the settings of STDHA, we allocate 1/6 to 1/4 of the
heads for temporal modeling based on the conclusions obtained from previous
ablation experiments. For long inputs, we increase the absolute value of \Delta t to
obtain a larger temporal receptive field. When using Swin-B as the backbone,
due to its four stages and different numbers of heads in each stage, we simply
allocate temporal heads to each stage at a ratio of 1/4. Since its input length is
halved after patch embedding (from 32 frames to 16 frames), we set the value of
\Delta t according to the best temporal receptive field of 16 frames, which is 5. Please
note that we have not tried other configurations due to time constraints, so there
may be better configurations.
Number of adapters Considering the balance between performance and training
cost, we only assign different adapters for each weight for the minimum setting
(ViT-B with 8-frame input) on the SSv2 dataset, which requires 6 adapters.
For all other settings, we only use 4 adapters. And the bottleneck ratios of all
adapters are set to 0.25.
⋆

Corresponding author.

