Efficient Bias Mitigation Without Privileged
Information: Appendix

A

Ethical Considerations

Our work improves a DNN’s fairness through a pragmatic and effective pipeline.
We hope this may lead to TAB being included as a standard debiasing good
practice in real-world workloads. Nevertheless, we recognise there are potential
negative societal aspects to consider. First, TAB trains its model twice, doubling the carbon footprint of training [2]. This, however, can be amortised in
practice by TAB’s lack of model selection. Second, the ability of TAB to identify
a large portion of bias-conflicting samples implies that bad actors may use this
information to further increase a model’s bias (e.g., by removing these training
samples). Nevertheless, we argue that this ill-intended use of our method is not
unique to our approach, but rather an inherent but unlikely negative aspect of
all BM methods.

B

Summary of Previous Bias Mitigation Methods

To complement our related work discussion in Section 2, in this section we include a summary of previous work that is closely aligned with our proposed
method. In Table B.1, we show several bias mitigation methods together with
(1) their level of group supervision (whether they need group labels in the training set, in the validation set, or in both), and (2) the set of key hyperparameters
that require fine-tuning each method. We note, however, that most of these approaches have more underlying hyperparameters than those shown as they may
still require fine-tuning of hyperparameters specific to the target model (e.g.,
the underlying model’s weight decay, learning rate, batch size, etc). Nevertheless, as these are hyperparameters that are not unique to any BM method but
rather a necessity of the model chosen to be debiased, in Table B.1 we show
only the BM-specific hyperparameters. By contrasting methods this way, we see
how TAB is unique within fully unsupervised BM approaches by not requiring
any extra hyperparameters, avoiding a potentially costly model selection and
enabling easy adoption in modern training pipelines.

C

Price of Unawareness and Mean Model Selection

In this section, we formally define the metrics discussed in Section 4 and describe
how we can compute such metrics in practice.
Price of Unawareness (PoU) Borrowing inspiration from similar concepts in game theory [17, 24], we capture the cost “paid” by a BM pipeline

