Supplemental Material
∗

Zhenbang Du1,2*† , Wei Feng2 , Haohan Wang2 , Yaoyu Li2 , Jingsen Wang2 ,
Jian Li2 , Zheng Zhang2 , Jingjing Lv2 , Xin Zhu2 , Junsheng Jin2 , Junjie Shen2 ,
Zhangang Lin2 , and Jingping Shao2
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
dzb99@hust.edu.cn
2
Retail Platform Operation and Marketing Center, JD, Beijing, China
{fengwei25, wanghaohan1, liyaoyu1, wangjingsen, lijian21, zhangzheng11,
lvjingjing1, zhuxin3, jinjunsheng1, shenjunjie, linzhangang,
shaojingping}@jd.com

In this supplemental material, we first describe the construction of the RF1M
dataset (Sec. 1). The Recurrent Generation is described in Sec. 2. We then
detail the human-involved experiments (Sec. 3) and address our responsibilities
towards human subjects (Sec. 4). The detailed configuration for image generation
is outlined in Sec. 5, followed by additional visualization results in Sec. 6. Finally,
we discuss our ethical concerns (Sec. 7) and future work (Sec. 8).

1

Dataset Construction

1.1

Annotation Guidance

During the RF1M annotation process, annotators are provided with the original
product images, product captions, and generated images along with the following
instructions:
Based on the product image and caption, determine the category of the
advertising image:
1. Space Mismatch. Image where the product and background have inappropriate spatial relations contrary to physical laws, such as a part of
the product is floating.
2. Size Mismatch. Discrepancies between the product size and its background violate common sense, e.g., a massage chair appears smaller than
a cabinet.
3. Indistinctiveness. Image where the product fails to stand out due to
background complexity or color similarities, and you cannot clearly figure out which or where the product is. Additionally, this confusion might
lead to misconceptions about the product itself, mistakenly suggesting
the inclusion of extra freebies.
*
†

Equal contribution
Work done while interning at JD.com

