Knowledge Transfer with Simulated Inter-Image
Erasing for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Tao Chen1 , Xiruo Jiang1 , Gensheng Pei1 ,
Zeren Sun1 , Yucheng Wang2 , and Yazhou Yao1(B)
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
{taochen,jiangxiruo622,peigsh,zerens,yazhou.yao}@njust.edu.cn
2
Horizon Robotics, Beijing 100089, China
yucheng.wang@horizon.cc

This is the supplementary material for the paper entitled “Knowledge Transfer with Simulated Inter-Image Erasing for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation”. Although the main paper stands on its own, it is still worthwhile
providing more analysis and experimental results. In this supplementary material, we provide
• Discussions about the inter-class loss in self-supervised regularization.
• Parameter analysis of βh , βl ωf g and λinter .
• Visual comparison with previous SOTA.
• More visualizations of our segmentation results.

1

Discussions about the inter-class loss in self-supervised
regularization

For the self-supervised regularization module, besides leveraging the generated
pseudo labels to directly supervise the CAM activation of simple images, we also
propose an inter-class loss to implicitly encourage the activation consistency
for the multiple foreground classes in complex images. As shown in Tab. 1,
without our inter-class loss, the mIoU of segmentation seeds derived from our
approach will drop from 67% to 65.7%. We also provide a qualitative analysis
in Fig. 1. As can be seen from Fig. 1 (c), without our inter-class loss, most of
the horse regions will be simultaneously highlighted in the CAM of horse and
person categories. After improving the exclusivity of the class activation for each
pixel, as demonstrated in Fig. 1 (d), we can further constrain the localization
for each foreground class in complex images, demonstrating the effectiveness of
our proposed inter-class loss.

2

Parameter analysis

Thresholds of βh and βl . For the self-supervised regularization module, we
first conduct experiments to study the effect of thresholds βh and βl , which are
used to locate the confident foreground and background regions. As shown in

