Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

P ROXYLESS NAS: D IRECT N EURAL A RCHITECTURE
S EARCH ON TARGET TASK AND H ARDWARE
Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, Song Han
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{hancai, ligeng, songhan}@mit.edu

arXiv:1812.00332v2 [cs.LG] 23 Feb 2019

A BSTRACT
Neural architecture search (NAS) has a great impact by automatically designing
effective neural network architectures. However, the prohibitive computational
demand of conventional NAS algorithms (e.g. 104 GPU hours) makes it difficult
to directly search the architectures on large-scale tasks (e.g. ImageNet). Differentiable NAS can reduce the cost of GPU hours via a continuous representation of
network architecture but suffers from the high GPU memory consumption issue
(grow linearly w.r.t. candidate set size). As a result, they need to utilize proxy
tasks, such as training on a smaller dataset, or learning with only a few blocks,
or training just for a few epochs. These architectures optimized on proxy tasks
are not guaranteed to be optimal on the target task. In this paper, we present
ProxylessNAS that can directly learn the architectures for large-scale target tasks
and target hardware platforms. We address the high memory consumption issue
of differentiable NAS and reduce the computational cost (GPU hours and GPU
memory) to the same level of regular training while still allowing a large candidate set. Experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet demonstrate the effectiveness
of directness and specialization. On CIFAR-10, our model achieves 2.08% test
error with only 5.7M parameters, better than the previous state-of-the-art architecture AmoebaNet-B, while using 6× fewer parameters. On ImageNet, our model
achieves 3.1% better top-1 accuracy than MobileNetV2, while being 1.2× faster
with measured GPU latency. We also apply ProxylessNAS to specialize neural
architectures for hardware with direct hardware metrics (e.g. latency) and provide
insights for efficient CNN architecture design.1

1

I NTRODUCTION

Neural architecture search (NAS) has demonstrated much success in automating neural network architecture design for various deep learning tasks, such as image recognition (Zoph et al., 2018; Cai
et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2018a; Zhong et al., 2018) and language modeling (Zoph & Le, 2017). Despite the remarkable results, conventional NAS algorithms are prohibitively computation-intensive,
requiring to train thousands of models on the target task in a single experiment. Therefore, directly
applying NAS to a large-scale task (e.g. ImageNet) is computationally expensive or impossible,
which makes it difficult for making practical industry impact. As a trade-off, Zoph et al. (2018)
propose to search for building blocks on proxy tasks, such as training for fewer epochs, starting
with a smaller dataset (e.g. CIFAR-10), or learning with fewer blocks. Then top-performing blocks
are stacked and transferred to the large-scale target task. This paradigm has been widely adopted
in subsequent NAS algorithms (Liu et al., 2018a;b; Real et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2018b; Liu et al.,
2018c; Tan et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2018).
However, these blocks optimized on proxy tasks are not guaranteed to be optimal on the target
task, especially when taking hardware metrics such as latency into consideration. More importantly,
to enable transferability, such methods need to search for only a few architectural motifs and then
repeatedly stack the same pattern, which restricts the block diversity and thereby harms performance.
In this work, we propose a simple and effective solution to the aforementioned limitations, called
ProxylessNAS, which directly learns the architectures on the target task and hardware instead of with
1

Pretrained models and evaluation code are released at https://github.com/MIT-HAN-LAB/ProxylessNAS.

1

