HeadStudio

1

HeadStudio: Text to Animatable Head Avatars
with 3D Gaussian Splatting
Supplementary Material
A

Additional Implementation Details

A.1

Text to Animatable Avatar Optimization

For each text prompt, we first initialize an animatable head Gaussian via the
super-dense Gaussian initialization. Each iteration of HeadStudio performs the
following: (1) randomly sample a camera and animation inputs (pose and expression); (2) drive the animatable head Gaussian with the given pose and expression and render an image from that camera; (3) compute the gradients of
the animation-based text-to-3D distillation; (4) compute the loss of the adaptive
geometry regularization; At the end of an iteration, we update the animatable
head Gaussian parameters using an optimizer.

FLAME

Mesh Triangle

Animatable Head
Gaussian

3D Gaussians
"𝑹
𝑹! = 𝑹
"𝝁 + 𝒕
𝝁! = 𝑎𝑹

Eq. (5)

𝒔! = 𝑎𝒔
Center position 𝒕

Shape 𝜷
Pose 𝜸
Expression 𝝍

"
Rotation matrix 𝑹
Area 𝑎

Position vector 𝝁
Rotation matrix 𝑹
Scaling vector 𝒔
Color 𝒄
Opacity 𝜶

Position vector 𝝁′
Rotation matrix 𝑹′
Scaling vector 𝒔′
Color 𝒄
Opacity 𝜶

Deformable Gaussian Texture (Sec. 4.1.2)

Fig. 11: The Details of Deformable Gaussian Texture. Animatable head Gaussian uses the mesh triangle’s center position, rotation matrix and area to translate,
rotate and scale the corresponding rigged 3D Gaussians, resulting in a deformed 3D
Gaussians.

0. Initialization. We evenly sample K = 10 points per triangle from FLAME
with the standard pose, and initialize the scaling via the square root of the mean
distance of K-nearest neighbor points. The 3D Gaussians rigged with a large
mesh triangle are initialized with a larger radius, compared to the ones rigged
with a small mesh. As a result, it initializes 3D Gaussians that can thoroughly
cover the head model. The further discussion of K selection can be found in
Sec. B.2.
1. Random camera and animation sampling. At each iteration, the animation inputs, pose and expression are sampled from the FLAME sequences

