MANIKIN: Biomechanically Accurate
Neural Inverse Kinematics for Human
Motion Estimation
Jiaxi Jiang(B) , Paul Streli, Xuejing Luo, Christoph Gebhardt,
and Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
{jiaxi.jang,paul.streli,xuejing.luo,christoph.gebhardt,
christian.holz}@inf.ethz.ch
https://github.com/eth-siplab/MANIKIN

Abstract. Mixed Reality systems aim to estimate a user’s full-body
joint conﬁgurations from just the pose of the end eﬀectors, primarily
head and hand poses. Existing methods often involve solving inverse
kinematics (IK) to obtain the full skeleton from just these sparse observations, usually directly optimizing the joint angle parameters of a human
skeleton. Since this accumulates error through the kinematic tree, predicted end eﬀector poses fail to align with the provided input pose. This
leads to discrepancies between the predicted and the actual hand positions or feet that penetrate the ground. In this paper, we ﬁrst reﬁne
the commonly used SMPL parametric model by embedding anatomical constraints that reduce the degrees of freedom for speciﬁc parameters to more closely mirror human biomechanics. This ensures that our
model produces physically plausible pose predictions. We then propose a
biomechanically accurate neural inverse kinematics solver (MANIKIN)
for full-body motion tracking. MANIKIN is based on swivel angle prediction and perfectly matches input poses while avoiding ground penetration. We evaluate MANIKIN in extensive experiments on motion capture
datasets and demonstrate that our method surpasses the state of the art
in quantitative and qualitative results at fast inference speed.
Keywords: Inverse Kinematics · Human Body Models · Motion
Tracking · Character Animation · Mixed Reality

1

Introduction

In today’s Mixed Reality environments, user interaction primarily relies on the
user’s head pose and hand for input. The problem of full human body pose estimation has since emerged as a challenging task using such sparse tracking cues as
input. Recent work [3,4,11,13,21,64,67,74] has leveraged data-driven techniques
to address this challenge by learning the mapping from sparse observations to
full-body poses, trained on large-scale motion capture datasets.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 128–146, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_8

