C. LI ET AL: MULTI-VIEW NEURAL SURFACE RECONSTRUCTION

1

Multi-View Neural Surface Reconstruction
with Structured Light
Chunyu Li
chunyuli@preferred.jp

Taisuke Hashimoto
hashimotot@preferred.jp

Preferred Networks, Inc.
3F Otemachi-building,
1-6-1 Otemachi, Chiyoda-Ku,
Tokyo, Japan

Eiichi Matsumoto
matsumoto@preferred.jp

Hiroharu Kato
hkato@preferred.jp

Abstract
Three-dimensional (3D) object reconstruction based on differentiable rendering (DR)
is an active research topic in computer vision. DR-based methods minimize the difference between the rendered and target images by optimizing both the shape and appearance and realizing a high visual reproductivity. However, most approaches perform
poorly for textureless objects because of the geometrical ambiguity, which means that
multiple shapes can have the same rendered result in such objects. To overcome this
problem, we introduce active sensing with structured light (SL) into multi-view 3D object
reconstruction based on DR to learn the unknown geometry and appearance of arbitrary
scenes and camera poses. More specifically, our framework leverages the correspondences between pixels in different views calculated by structured light as an additional
constraint in the DR-based optimization of implicit surface, color representations, and
camera poses. Because camera poses can be optimized simultaneously, our method realizes high reconstruction accuracy in the textureless region and reduces efforts for camera pose calibration, which is required for conventional SL-based methods. Experiment
results on both synthetic and real data demonstrate that our system outperforms conventional DR- and SL-based methods in a high-quality surface reconstruction, particularly
for challenging objects with textureless or shiny surfaces.

1

Introduction

Importing 3D objects from the real world into virtual worlds is an essential technology in
digital arts, extended reality (XR) applications, cultural heritage protection [20, 23], paleontology [34], visual inspection [14], and 3D printing [4]. Conventional methods applied
to achieve this automatically include photogrammetry, which integrates multiple 2D images
from different views.
Differentiable rendering (DR) [15, 33] is an emerging tool for multi-view stereo. In
contrast to traditional methods that rely on matching features from different views [5, 7,
© 2022. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.

