1

SkyScenes: A Synthetic Dataset for Aerial Scene
Understanding
Supplementary Material
1

Overview

This supplementary material is organized as follows. In Sec. 2.1, we provide more
details on different aspects of dataset – including the procedural image curation
algorithm, algorithm to ensure appropriate representation of human instances,
brief descriptions of all the classes in SkyScenes and comparisons between data
distribution of SkyScenes and real datasets. Then, we describe experimental
details in Sec. 3 – class-merging schemes used for our SkyScenes →Real transfer
experiments, train / val / test splits and experimental details for SkyScenes
diagnostic setup to probe model vulnerabilities. Sec. 4 provides more quantitative
and qualitative experimental results.

2

SkyScenes Details

2.1

Image Generation Algorithms

We curate SkyScenes using Carla [5] 0.9.14 simulator. The generation process broadly consists of two key steps: (1) positioning the agent camera in an
aerial perspective and (2) procedurally guiding the agent within the scene to
capture images. We accomplish the first by mimicking a UAV perspective in
Carla [5] by positioning the ego vehicle (with RGB, semantic, depth and instance segmentation sensors) based on specified altitude (h) and pitch (θ) values
to generate aerial views. This also requires setting other scene information like –
town, weather, and daytime. The camera FoV = 110◦ (field of view) and H × W
= 2160 × 1440 (image resolution) are also set.
To maintain the adequate representation of tail classes, especially for humans we
incorporate structured spawning of humans using Algo. 2. Carla [5] has a limit
on the number of actors that can be spawned in a scene, which depends on factors
such as the type and size of the town, number of lanes to spawn vehicles, and
amount of sidewalk area. To overcome this limitation, we decided to bring the
actors into the field of view of the camera instead of having them spread out in
the scene. We developed an algorithm to find all the points to spawn pedestrians
in the field of view using the camera location and spawn them like vehicles on
roads. After taking a snapshot, we destroy the spawned pedestrians and repeat
the process. Manual spawning not only increases the number of human instances
and their proportion but also aligns their placement with real-world settings.
As SkyScenes images are curated by teleoperating over entire maps (rural or
urban) across multiple layouts that differ substantially in class distributions (Fig.

