Supplementary Materials for Human Hair
Reconstruction with Strand-Aligned
3D Gaussians
Egor Zakharov1 , Vanessa Sklyarova1,2 , Michael Black2 , Giljoo Nam3 ,
Justus Thies2,4 , and Otmar Hilliges1
1

2

1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Meta, Pittsburgh, USA
4
Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany

Implementation Details

Below we describe each processing step of our proposed method in more detail.
1.1

Preprocessing

We experiment with video-based captures but can employ a similar pipeline to
process image-based captures. First, we extract the frames from the video with
the framerate of 3 FPS. To reduce the motion blur, among the frames spanning
each 1/3 of a second, we pick the one with the highest image quality score calculated via a HyperIQA [7] network. We run COLMAP SfM [4] algorithm for the
extracted frames to estimate the initial point cloud and the camera parameters.
To obtain the segmentation masks, we rely on Matte-Anything [8] prompt-based
image matting system. To produce the corresponding segmentation masks, we
use the following prompts: “hair”, “face”, and “human”. We then filter the cases
where segmentation masking fails. For that, we have designed a heuristic in
which we calculate the intersection between the hair and face and prune the
frame if it is higher than 10% of the body mask area. Lastly, we calculate image
quality scores again for the masked hair crops. We split the filtered images into
consecutive 128 bins and picked the image with the highest score from each bin
for training, resulting in 128 training views. These pre-processing steps closely
follow the ones used in Neural Haircut [5]. We rely on the pipeline proposed
in [1] for orientation map calculation and use the code of Neural Haircut [5].
1.2

Guiding Strands Upsampling

We follow HAAR [6] in the procedure that we use for the interpolation of the
hair strands. In this work, they perform upsampling using a regular grid of latent
maps and blend the strands produced using nearest and bilinear interpolation
methods. In our case, we use irregular grids and thus use K nearest neighbors
for both, replacing bilinear interpolation with the one that blends four nearest

