Improving Language Understanding
by Generative Pre-Training

Alec Radford
OpenAI
alec@openai.com

Karthik Narasimhan
OpenAI
karthikn@openai.com

Tim Salimans
OpenAI
tim@openai.com

Ilya Sutskever
OpenAI
ilyasu@openai.com

Abstract
Natural language understanding comprises a wide range of diverse tasks such
as textual entailment, question answering, semantic similarity assessment, and
document classification. Although large unlabeled text corpora are abundant,
labeled data for learning these specific tasks is scarce, making it challenging for
discriminatively trained models to perform adequately. We demonstrate that large
gains on these tasks can be realized by generative pre-training of a language model
on a diverse corpus of unlabeled text, followed by discriminative fine-tuning on each
specific task. In contrast to previous approaches, we make use of task-aware input
transformations during fine-tuning to achieve effective transfer while requiring
minimal changes to the model architecture. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on a wide range of benchmarks for natural language understanding.
Our general task-agnostic model outperforms discriminatively trained models that
use architectures specifically crafted for each task, significantly improving upon the
state of the art in 9 out of the 12 tasks studied. For instance, we achieve absolute
improvements of 8.9% on commonsense reasoning (Stories Cloze Test), 5.7% on
question answering (RACE), and 1.5% on textual entailment (MultiNLI).

1

Introduction

The ability to learn effectively from raw text is crucial to alleviating the dependence on supervised
learning in natural language processing (NLP). Most deep learning methods require substantial
amounts of manually labeled data, which restricts their applicability in many domains that suffer
from a dearth of annotated resources [61]. In these situations, models that can leverage linguistic
information from unlabeled data provide a valuable alternative to gathering more annotation, which
can be time-consuming and expensive. Further, even in cases where considerable supervision
is available, learning good representations in an unsupervised fashion can provide a significant
performance boost. The most compelling evidence for this so far has been the extensive use of pretrained word embeddings [10, 39, 42] to improve performance on a range of NLP tasks [8, 11, 26, 45].
Leveraging more than word-level information from unlabeled text, however, is challenging for two
main reasons. First, it is unclear what type of optimization objectives are most effective at learning
text representations that are useful for transfer. Recent research has looked at various objectives
such as language modeling [44], machine translation [38], and discourse coherence [22], with each
method outperforming the others on different tasks.1 Second, there is no consensus on the most
effective way to transfer these learned representations to the target task. Existing techniques involve
a combination of making task-specific changes to the model architecture [43, 44], using intricate
learning schemes [21] and adding auxiliary learning objectives [50]. These uncertainties have made
it difficult to develop effective semi-supervised learning approaches for language processing.
1

https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard

Preprint. Work in progress.

