GAMMA-FACE: GAussian Mixture Models
Amend Diffusion Models for Bias Mitigation in
Face Images
Basudha Pal1† , Arunkumar Kannan1† , Ram Prabhakar Kathirvel1 , Alice J.
O’Toole2 , and Rama Chellappa1
1

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, USA
The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson TX, USA
{bpal5,akannan7,rprabha3,rchella4}@jhu.edu, otoole@utdallas.edu
2

1

Introduction

In this supplementary material, we explore the rationale behind our approach
to reduce bias in face generative models, with a particular emphasis on diffusion models, in relation to sensitive attributes such as age, gender, and race.
Our primary objective is to reduce any intrinsic biases during the unconditional
generation of faces by diffusion models, striving for ‘fairer’ and less biased representations. We discuss our approach for determining the optimal number of components (K) to disentangle using the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Following this, we incorporate these disentangled components into the reverse diffusion
process to categorize the generated images into distinct, fairer classes, thereby enabling bias reduction without necessitating the retraining of the diffusion model.
Furthermore, we assess the efficacy of our technique by conducting comparative
analyses with other generative frameworks. In particular, we compare our diffusion model-based approach against using StyleGAN as backbone1 [2] in our
setting. We demonstrate results on the FFHQ dataset for evaluation. The subsequent sections detail the quality of images generated, the GMM parameters
utilized for disentangling the latent space, the generation of pseudolabels via pretrained classifiers, and additional experiments conducted on the FFHQ dataset
using GANs as opposed to diffusion models.

2

Diffusion models for Face Generation

Diffusion models have increasingly become popular for image generation tasks,
including the generation of facial images. We present a selection of synthetic
images produced using diffusion models on the FFHQ and FairFace datasets,
showcased in Figure 1 and Figure 2, respectively. The quality of these generated
images is evident visually from these figures. This not only demonstrates the
effectiveness of diffusion models but also highlights their superiority over images
†
1

Indicates equal contribution.
https://github.com/huangzh13/StyleGAN.pytorch/tree/master

