Enhancing Perceptual Quality in Video
Super-Resolution through Temporally-Consistent
Detail Synthesis using Diffusion Models
- Supplementary Material Claudio Rota1 , Marco Buzzelli1 , and Joost van de Weijer2
1

University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
{claudio.rota, marco.buzzelli}@unimib.it
2
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
joost@cvc.uab.es

This supplementary file provides additional details that were not included in the
main paper due to page limitations. Demo videos are available on the project
page3 .

1

Additional methodology details

1.1

Description of the pre-trained LDM for SISR

The proposed StableVSR is built upon a pre-trained Latent Diffusion Model
(LDM) for single image super-resolution (SISR). We use Stable Diffusion ×4
Upscaler (SD×4Upscaler)4 . It follows the LDM framework [14], which performs
the iterative refinement process into a latent space and uses the VAE decoder
D [7] to decode latents into RGB images. Starting from a low-resolution RGB
image LR (conditioning image) and an initial noisy latent xT , the denoising UNet
ϵθ is used to generate the high-resolution counterpart via an iterative refinement
process. In this process, noise is progressively removed from xt guided by LR.
After a defined number of sampling steps, the obtained latent x0 is decoded using
the VAE decoder D [7] into a high-resolution RGB image HR. The obtained
image HR has a ×4 higher resolution than the low-resolution image LR, as
D performs ×4 upscaling. In practice, the low-resolution RGB image LR and
the initial noisy latent xT are concatenated along the channel dimension and
inputted to the denoising UNet.
1.2

Bidirectional information propagation in the Frame-wise
Bidirectional Sampling strategy

We show in Figure 1 a graphical representation of the proposed Frame-wise Bidirectional Sampling strategy to better show the bidirectional information propagation. We take a sampling step t in video time i = 1, ..., N before moving to the
3
4

https://github.com/claudiom4sir/StableVSR
https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-x4-upscaler

