CONDA: Condensed Deep Association Learning
for Co-Salient Object Detection (Supplementary
Materials)
Long Li1 , Nian Liu3,∗ , Dingwen Zhang1 , Zhongyu Li4 , Salman Khan3,5 ,
Rao Anwer3 , Hisham Cholakkal3 , Junwei Han1,2,∗ , and
Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,6
1

2

Northwestern Polytechnical University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University
5
Australian National University
6
CVL, Linköping University

Abstract. There are four aspects included in this supplementary material. 1) More details of our model implementation. 2) An ablation study
for the hyperparameter setting. 3) Experimentation with a superior backbone. 4) Additional qualitative examples, including comparison results
of all ablation modules, visual samples for correspondence estimations,
and comparison results with other state-of-the-art models.

1

More Implementation Details

Hyperassociation Aggregation. We conduct the aggregation layers three
times, each time reducing the spatial dimension of 4D tensors by a specific scaling
factor, to eliminate the target Hs ×Ws dimension of As ∈ RN ×Hs ×Ws ×N ×Hs ×Ws
×Ls
. Specifically, we set the downsampling factors in the first two aggregation
layers to reduce the target Hs × Ws dimension as 2 × 2. Subsequently, we can set
the downsampling factor in the third aggregation layer as 2 for the final elimination purpose. Additionally, after each convolution operation in the aggregation
layer, we apply group normalization [5] and ReLU activation.
Object-aware Cycle Consistency Loss. Here we want to describe OCC loss
in more detail. We use C s ∈ RN ×Hs ×Ws ×N ×2 to represent the correspondence
estimations. We provide a diagram in Figure 1 (a) to facilitate the understanding
of the correspondence estimations between Iis and Ijs (resized Ii and Ij to align
the scales in the s-th stage). The cycle consistency can be explained as: if a
co-salient pixel (hi , wi ) of image Ii corresponds to the pixel (hj , wj ) in image
Ij , i.e. C s (i, hi , wi , j, :) = (hj , wj ), then the pixel (hj , wj ) should also correspond
to pixel (hi , wi ), i.e. C s (j, hj , wj , i, :) = (hi , wi ), such as
and
in Figure 1
(a). Based on this cycle consistency constraint, we adopt the image warping
∗

Corresponding authors: {liunian228, junweihan2010}@gmail.com

