Supplementary Materials for

DoughNet: A Visual Predictive Model for
Topological Manipulation of Deformable Objects
Dominik Bauer1 , Zhenjia Xu1,2 , and Shuran Song1,2
1

Columbia University
Stanford University
Corresponding Author: dominik.bauer@columbia.edu
https://dough-net.github.io
2

1

Overview

In the following, we provide experiments for real-world planning with goals
defined by both robotic and human manipulation (i.e., using fingers or
palms) in Sec. 2, generalizing from synthetic training data to real test cases. We
utilize our predictive model for plan rollouts and a plan scoring that exploits
our learned latent space. In addition to examples of our successful goal-directed
planning, we investigate the specific challenges in this generalized setting.
In Sec. 3, we show how DoughNet may be used to predict when topological
change occurs in a sequence of observations. To this end, we investigate
the relationships between our learned latent space, the manipulated objects’
geometry, their number of components and genera. We qualitatively show that
topological change is salient in a t-SNE visualization of subsequent manipulation
frames; and quantitatively, we validate that this may be exploited to accurately
predict the exact time at which such a change occurs, using a simple classifier.
Finally, Sec. 4 further illustrates the concept of topological manipulation
and how DoughNet may predict plans that (i) achieve different topological goals
while maintaining the overall deformed geometry, and (ii) achieve a given topological goal independent of geometry, creating multiple candidate outcomes. We
provide a quantitative planning-performance comparison with the baselines described in the main text, evaluating the accuracy of the actual outcome
of the predicted plans with respect to the desired goal.

2

Real-world Planning

We provide real-world planning results in Fig. 1. Note that these accompany
the real-world results in Sec. 5.2 and Fig. 6, as well as the planning results
in Sec. 5.3 and Fig. 8 of the main paper. The latter provide complementary
detail on how our approach is combined with the CEM-based planner for goaldirected actions. Please also see the videos of the real-world planning results on
our project website, https://dough-net.github.io.

