Towards Robust Event-based Networks for
Nighttime via Unpaired Day-to-Night Event
Translation
—Supplementary Material—
Yuhwan Jeong ⋆ , Hoonhee Cho ⋆ , and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{jeongyh98, gnsgnsgml, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Our supplementary material provides additional information about our proposed method and includes detailed discussions on the following contents that
were not extensively covered in the main paper:
– Details about the unpaired translation using Schrödinger Bridge (Sec. A).
– Pseudocode for temporally shuffling contrastive regularization (Sec. B).
– More details about the implementation, architecture, and dataset (Sec. C).
– Details about the redesigned evaluation metrics and analyses for metrics
(Sec. D).
– Additional analysis and discussion of the proposed method (Sec. E).
– More qualitative results of day-to-night event translation (Sec. F).
– Details of applications on downstream tasks that utilize translated night
events from annotated day events (Sec. G).
– Opposite direction: night-to-day event translation (Sec. H).

A

Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation via Neural
Schrödinger Bridge.

Paired translation changes style when structures are identical. On the other
hand, in an unpaired setting, neither the style nor the structure of day and night
events is identical. Therefore, the key challenge is to maintain the structure while
only changing the style, which often leads to divergence and collapse. Event
modality exacerbates these issues compared to images due to the additional
temporal dimension. To address these issues, various regularizations are required.
In this section, we provide more detailed information about the unpaired
translation via Schrödinger Bridge [18], which combines score-based diffusion
and discriminator. Schrodinger Bridge(SB) addresses optimal transport (OT)
for unpaired translation using entropy regularization and bidirectional processes
between distributions. In contrast, other OT methods (e.g., Wasserstein distance
and maximum mean discrepancy), which are non-dynamic processes, often produce sparse plans, compromising translation quality. These two features of SB
⋆

Equal contribution.

