Supplementary Material for DreamLIP
Kecheng Zheng ⋆,1,2 , Yifei Zhang⋆,3 , Wei Wu4 , Fan Lu4 ,
Shuailei Ma6 , Xin Jin5 , Wei Chen1 , and Yujun Shen2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Ant Group 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
University of Science and Technology of China
5
Eastern Institute of Technology 6 Northeastern University, China
{zkechengzk, xiaomabufei, shenyujun0302}@gmail.com,
qidouxiong619@sjtu.edu.cn, {lufan,wuvy}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinxin@eias.ac.cn

A

Long Caption in Multi-modality Learning

In this section, we discuss various studies related to the generation of extended
captions within the context of text-to-image (T2I) synthesis. Several notable
works [1, 4, 5] have employed Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLM) to
produce comprehensive and rich captions for T2I tasks. These approaches let
models better capture and draw a picture by utilizing more intricate and accurate
captions of scenes. Meanwhile, in language-image pretraining tasks, our objective
is for elaborate captions to leverage real-world images more effectively, thereby
endowing multimodal foundation models with some additional capabilities (e.g.,
Vision-Language Compositionality in Appendix D).

B

Sampling from Mixture Generated Long Captions

In the main paper, we mainly use the long caption from ShareGPT4V as the
training text. However, different MLLMs may focus on different regions of realworld images due to their difference of training process and data. Thus, the
generated long/short captions from MLLMs can help each other. Inspired by this
straightforward idea, we merge all captions from different MLLMs together, and
sample the sub-captions from the set of merged captions. As shown in Figure 1,
we use three kinds of MLLMs to generate the long captions and short captions,
and then sample the sub-captions from it as the input of text encoder.
As shown in Table 1, the number of sub-captions and tokens exceeds the
result of using ShareGPT4V alone. Further, our ablation studies on the mixture generated long captions reveal that an increased number of sub-captions
correlates with enhanced performance, surpassing the result achieved with long
captions solely from ShareGPT4V. These findings suggest that various MLLMs
capture distinct image regions, providing complementary information.
We also analyze the mixture generated long captions, characterized by a
greater number of tokens and subcaptions, can capture the contents of an image
⋆

Equal contribution

