Supplementary Material
CLEO: Continual Learning of Evolving Ontologies
Shishir Muralidhara1 , Saqib Bukhari2 , Georg Schneider2 , Didier Stricker1,3 ,
and René Schuster1,3
1

1

DFKI – German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence
2
ZF Friedrichshafen AG
3
RPTU -– University of Kaiserslautern-Landau
{firstname.lastname}@{dfki.de, zf.com}

Overview

This document provides the supplementary material to our main paper on CLEO:
Continual Learning of Evolving Ontologies. We first present the detailed class
hierarchies that we use to design our experiments for Cityscapes [2], PASCAL
VOC [4], and Mapillary Vistas [5]. Afterwards, we extend our motivation for the
design of these experiments, i.e. explain how they differ and which possible types
of evolution are covered in each experiment. Additionally, we present the task-wise
evaluation of our approach MoOn and the state-of-the-art for Cityscapes and
provide a visualization for the task-wise evolution. The task-wise evaluation is
extended by a detailed breakdown of per-class results after each task. Finally, we
list the exact sets of classes for each task of each experiment as well as the final
groups of classes that are considered in our evaluation of CLEO.

2

Class Hierarchies

2.1

Cityscapes

The Cityscapes dataset [2] provides annotations for 30 classes categorized into 8
groups namely, flat, construction, object, nature, sky, human, and void classes.
Within these 30 classes, 19 classes are used for training and evaluation, while
the remainder are treated as void. These 19 classes and their grouping into the
7 parent classes are visualized in Fig. 1. Notably, sky is the only class which in
turn does not contain any further classes. The dataset exhibits varying levels of
representation among the individual classes, with some being underrepresented,
which significantly impacts the learning process. We use this class hierarchy to
derive two settings for the Cityscapes dataset and list the classes included in
each task in Tabs. 4 and 5.
2.2

PASCAL VOC 2012

The PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset [4] is widely used for benchmarking tasks
such as classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. It provides

