Supplementary Material: Adaptive Human
Trajectory Prediction via Latent Corridors
Neerja Thakkar1 , Karttikeya Mangalam1 , Andrea Bajcsy2 , and Jitendra Malik1
1

2

UC Berkeley
Carnegie Mellon University

In the supplementary material, we provide an ablation on the implementation
of our prompting method and a visual overview of our ATP problem formulation.
We also show additional qualitative results on MOTSynth and more detailed
quantitative results on EarthCam data, quantitative results on ETH/UCY, and
compare our implementation of the scene-aware baseline to the original YNet
paper [1]. Video results can be seen at this webpage.

1

Details on Latent Corridors for Adaptive Trajectory
Prediction

1.1

Adaptive Trajectory Prediction Visualization

We provide an illustrative overview of adaptive trajectory prediction problem,
formulated in main text Sec. 3, in Fig. 1.
1.2

ATP via Latent Corridors on Architectures Beyond YNet

ATP is an architecture-agnostic paradigm, and latent corridors are also not specific to Y-Net but rather can also work on different architectures. To demonstrate
this, we experimented with the Learned Trajectory (PECNet-Ours) architecture
on the 473 MOTSynth scenes. Taking the pretrained PECNet-Ours model, we
summed a per-scene 16 parameter latent directly to the input, eight xy coordinates. Training the 16D latent along with finetuning the last layer of PECNetOurs, we see an improvement of 10.2% on ADE and 10.4% on FDE.
1.3

Ablation on Prompt Location/Size

We ablated the prompt location and method of combining with the input. For
the input location, we experimented with combining the prompt with several
parts of the input to P, [Mτ −H:τ , S]: all of the input heatmaps Mτ −H:τ , just
the first input heatmap M0 , just the segmentation map S, and all of the inputs.
For method of combination, we experimented with element-wise summing and
element-wise multiplication. We ran this ablation on the latent corridors-only
approach to training on MOTSynth. Results can be seen in Table 2. While
summing seems to lead to better performance than multiplying, and summing
to the heatmaps seems to be more helpful than summing to the segmentation,

