OpenSight: A Simple Open-Vocabulary
Framework for LiDAR-Based Object Detection
Supplementary Material
Hu Zhang1 , Jianhua Xu4 , Tao Tang5 , Haiyang Sun6 ,
Xin Yu2∗ , Zi Huang2∗ , and Kaicheng Yu3
1

CSIRO DATA61, Australia
The University of Queensland, Australia
3
Westlake University
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba, China
5
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
6
LiAuto Inc.
Hu1.Zhang@csiro.au, xin.yu@uq.edu.au, kyu@westlake.edu.cn
https://github.com/huzhangcs/OpenSight
2

1

Implementation Details

We use the backbone in [5] as our LiDAR backbone and voxelize the LiDAR point
cloud by the default settings in [1, 7]. For designed novel classes, we eliminate
the usage of ground truth labels in training. We use the “bert-base-uncased”
encoder in Grounding DINO [4] for text embedding extraction. For convenience,
we also apply Grounding DINO to extract 2D boxes. The accompanying images
with a high resolution of 900 × 1600 are directly fed into Grounding DINO for
accurate 2D box generation and corresponding object-level features generation.
The number of object queries is set to 200. We adopt the AdamW optimizer and
jointly optimize the 3D loss in known classes and the 2D loss in novel classes
for 20 epochs. The learning rate and weight decay are set as 1.0e-4 and 0.01,
respectively. τ and d in spatial awareness are 0.2 and 54, and the size of object
bank O is 5,000. For the 2D boxes in generic object perception, we actually
employ the detection results from Grounding DINO for the sake of simplicity.
It is important to note that this component can seamlessly be substituted with
any other detection models, as elaborated in Section 3.2. We emphasize that
our use of Grounding DINO is to derive class-agnostic 2D boxes and ignore
the corresponding semantics. Only the location information is needed in that
step. The threshold parameter τ in Equation (2) is set to 0.2, and the distance
parameter d in Equation (3) is specified as 54 meters. The code is implemented
in PyTorch with the open-sourced MMDetection3D [2].
*

Corresponding author.

