Learning Camouflaged Object Detection
from Noisy Pseudo Label
Jin Zhang1 , Ruiheng Zhang1(B) , Yanjiao Shi2 , Zhe Cao1 , Nian Liu3 ,
and Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,4
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
ruiheng.zhang@bit.edu.cn
2
Shanghai Institute of Technology, Shanghai, China
3
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
https://github.com/zhangjinCV/Noisy-COD

Abstract. Existing Camouﬂaged Object Detection (COD) methods
rely heavily on large-scale pixel-annotated training sets, which are both
time-consuming and labor-intensive. Although weakly supervised methods oﬀer higher annotation eﬃciency, their performance is far behind
due to the unclear visual demarcations between foreground and background in camouﬂaged images. In this paper, we explore the potential of using boxes as prompts in camouﬂaged scenes and introduce the
ﬁrst weakly semi-supervised COD method, aiming for budget-eﬃcient
and high-precision camouﬂaged object segmentation with an extremely
limited number of fully labeled images. Critically, learning from such
limited set inevitably generates pseudo labels with serious noisy pixels.
To address this, we propose a noise correction loss that facilitates the
model’s learning of correct pixels in the early learning stage, and corrects
the error risk gradients dominated by noisy pixels in the memorization
stage, ultimately achieving accurate segmentation of camouﬂaged objects
from noisy labels. When using only 20% of fully labeled data, our method
shows superior performance over the state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Noisy label · Weakly semi-supervised learning · Box
prompt · Object segmentation

1

Introduction

Camouﬂaged Object Detection (COD) aims to detect and segment objects that
blend seamlessly into their environments, presenting a signiﬁcant challenge due
to the need to counter sophisticated camouﬂage tactics and distinguish subtle
diﬀerences between objects and their surroundings. Recent advances in COD
[9,10,13,28] have been driven by the availability of abundant segmentation
labels. However, the labeling process for camouﬂaged objects is extremely laborintensive, requiring about 60 min per image [9], which poses a major obstacle
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 158–174, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_9

