DreamScene360: Unconstrained Text-to-3D Scene
Generation with Panoramic Gaussian Splatting
Shijie Zhou1⋆ , Zhiwen Fan2⋆ , Dejia Xu2⋆ , Haoran Chang1 ,
Pradyumna Chari1 , Tejas Bharadwaj1 , Suya You3 ,
Zhangyang Wang2 , and Achuta Kadambi1
1

University of California, Los Angeles
2
University of Texas at Austin
3
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Supplementary Content
This supplement is organized as follows:
– Section A contains the algorithmic details of our proposed method.
– Section B contains the experimental details of our self-refined panorama
generation module with GPT-4V.
– Section C contains the details of the environment setup for our experiments.
– Section D contains additional qualitative results.
– Section E contains additional results on baseline comparison.
– Section F contains additional ablation studies.

A

Algorithmic Details

Given the input text prompt with any level of specificity, we utilize GPT-4V to
perform prompt revision and image quality assessment inspired by Idea2Img [7].
Different from their original setup which only works for generating ordinary
2D images, our multi-round self-refinement module is incorporated with the
pretrained text-to-360◦ panoramic image diffusion model [6] which guarantees
the generated panorama images fully satisfy the equirectangular format for an
ominidirectional image representation. An upsampling process by bilinear interpolation is followed by obtaining the best candidate panorama image result,
to ensure a sufficiently dense point cloud for the 3D Gaussians initialization. In
practice, we resize the image from 512 × 1024 to 1024 × 2048 using OpenCV [1].
For the geometric field optimization, we use one set of Icosphere projection: 20
perspective images with FoV 80◦ and resolution 512 × 512 to cover the whole
panoramic sphere, following [4] and [5]. For the optimization of panoramic Gaussian splatting, the training set consists of 12 sets of perspective images of the
Icosphere projection with random rotation in radian. Additionally, different from
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [3], we turn off the Gaussians densification as
⋆

Equal contribution.

