Generalizable Human Gaussians
for Sparse View Synthesis
– Supplementary Material –
Youngjoong Kwon1 , Baole Fang1∗ , Yixing Lu1∗ , Haoye Dong1 , Cheng Zhang1 ,
Francisco Vicente Carrasco1 , Albert Mosella-Montoro1 , Jianjin Xu1 ,
Shingo Takagi2 , Daeil Kim2 , Aayush Prakash2 , and Fernando De la Torre1
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Meta Reality Labs

https://humansensinglab.github.io/Generalizable-Human-Gaussians/

A

Appendix - Overview

This appendix is organized as follows: Sec. B discusses the limitations and future works; Sec. C presents the societal impacts our work can have; Sec. D shows
additional results including video results, comparison with single-view methods,
ablations on number of outer scaffolds, ablation study with different loss supervision, ablations on the number of input views at inference time, and runtime at
inference. Sec. E provides information regarding reproducibility, which includes
implementation details.

B

Limitations and Future Works

Although our method achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of visual quality
and runtime, it is not free from limitations. (1) While our method effectively
compensates for minor inaccuracies in SMPL-X estimations through the use of
multi-scaffolds, significant deviations in SMPL-X from the input images could
compromise the quality of our results, as our Gaussians are anchored to the
SMPL-X surface. (2) Currently, the number of scaffolds is determined empirically. It would be an interesting direction to explore adaptive scaffolds based
on subject attributes (e.g., loose or tight clothing). (3) The performance of our
inpainting network is constrained by the small number of ground truth texture
maps available during training, which in turn limits its ability to generate detailed hallucinations when given a single-view input. Therefore, integrating and
fine-tuning generative models trained on extensive datasets (e.g., Stable Diffusion
model [7]) could substantially improve our network’s hallucination capabilities
and generalizability, which is a promising direction for future work.
*

Equal contribution

