Human Face Detection in Visual Scenes

Henry A. Rowley
Shumeet Baluja
Takeo Kanade
har@cs.cmu.edu
baluja@cs.cmu.edu
tk@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
We present a neural network-based face detection system. A retinally
connected neural network examines small windows of an image, and
decides whether each window contains a face. The system arbitrates
between multiple networks to improve performance over a single network.
We use a bootstrap algorithm for training, which adds false detections
into the training set as training progresses. This eliminates the difficult
task of manually selecting non-face training examples, which must be
chosen to span the entire space of non-face images. Comparisons with
another state-of-the-art face detection system are presented; our system
has better performance in terms of detection and false-positive rates.

1 INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a neural network-based algorithm to detect frontal views of faces
in gray-scale images. The algorithms and training methods are general, and can be applied
to other views of faces, as well as to similar object and pattern recognition problems.
Training a neural network for the face detection task is challenging because of the difficulty
in characterizing prototypical "non-face" images. Unlike in face recognition, where the
classes to be discriminated are different faces, in face detection, the two classes to be
discriminated are "images containing faces" and "images not containing faces". It is easy
to get a representative sample of images which contain faces, but much harder to get a
representative sample of those which do not. The size of the training set for the second
class can grow very quickly.
We avoid the problem of using a huge training set of non-faces by selectively adding images
to the training set as training progresses [Sung and Poggio, 1994]. This "bootstrapping"
method reduces the size of the training set needed. Detailed descriptions of this training
method, along with the network architecture are given in Section 2. In Section 3 the
performance of the system is examined. We find that the system is able to detect 92.9% of
faces with an acceptable number of false positives. Section 4 compares this system with a
similar system. Conclusions and directions for future research are presented in Section 5.

2

DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEM

Our system consists of two major parts: a set of neural network-based filters, and a system
to combine the filter outputs. Below, we describe the design and training of the filters,

