Learn from the Learnt: Source-Free Active
Domain Adaptation via Contrastive Sampling
and Visual Persistence
Mengyao Lyu1,2 , Tianxiang Hao1,2 , Xinhao Xu1,2 , Hui Chen1,2(B) , Zijia Lin1 ,
Jungong Han1,2 , and Guiguang Ding1,2(B)
1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
xxh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,huichen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,
linzijia07@tsinghua.org.cn,
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn
2 BNRist, Beijing, China
Abstract. Domain Adaptation (DA) facilitates knowledge transfer from a source
domain to a related target domain. This paper investigates a practical DA
paradigm, namely Source data-Free Active Domain Adaptation (SFADA), where
source data becomes inaccessible during adaptation, and a minimum amount
of annotation budget is available in the target domain. Without referencing the
source data, new challenges emerge in identifying the most informative target
samples for labeling, establishing cross-domain alignment during adaptation, and
ensuring continuous performance improvements through the iterative query-andadaptation process. In response, we present learn from the learnt (LFTL), a novel
paradigm for SFADA to leverage the learnt knowledge from the source pretrained
model and actively iterated models without extra overhead. We propose Contrastive Active Sampling to learn from the hypotheses of the preceding model,
thereby querying target samples that are both informative to the current model
and persistently challenging throughout active learning. During adaptation, we
learn from features of actively selected anchors obtained from previous intermediate models, so that the Visual Persistence-guided Adaptation can facilitate
feature distribution alignment and active sample exploitation. Extensive experiments on three widely-used benchmarks show that our LFTL achieves state-ofthe-art performance, superior computational efficiency and continuous improvements as the annotation budget increases. Our code is available at https://github.
com/lyumengyao/lftl.
Keywords: Transfer learning · Domain adaptation · Active learning

1 Introduction
Deep neural networks have thrived in computer vision but struggle when real-world
data deviates from the ideal independent and identical distribution of training data,
M. Lyu and T. Hao—Equal Contribution

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4 13.
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025

A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 228–246, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_13

