Common Sense Reasoning for Deepfake Detection
–Supplementary Material–
Yue Zhang?1,2 , Ben Colman2 , Xiao Guo1 , Ali Shahriyari2 , and Gaurav Bharaj2
Michigan State University
2
Reality Defender Inc
{zhan1624, guoxia11}@msu.edu
1

1

DD-VQA Dataset Annotations

Annotation Tools. Annotations for DD-VQA are collected entirely by crowd
workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) 3 . The dataset is collected over
the course of 3 months and 3 iterations of updating annotation schemes. Approximate 9000 Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) are launched on AMT, where
each HIT involves 3-6 questions, answers, and the corresponding images. Each
HIT was designed such that workers manage to earn anywhere between $6-$8
per hour, which follows ethical research standards on AMT [37].
Fakeness Annotations. From Tab. 2-Tab. 7, we present examples of finegrained fake facial features and the corresponding descriptions in our dataset.
We provide the annotators with fine-grained feature options and use templates
to comprise the description with our templates. Some fakenesses require the annotators to provide the corresponding area, for example, “left or right eyebrows.
Also, for the question of which area looks unnatural brighter/darer, the answers
need to include the corresponding facial areas, such as "left/right cheeks", "beside
the left/right eyes", "around nose", etc.
Challenging Annotation Cases. In Fig 2, we provide examples where at
least two annotators mistakenly perceive manipulated images as real. Such cases
are excluded when annotators provide inaccurate labels, as eﬀective deception
of humans requires the human face in the image to adhere to common-sense
knowledge.
Uncertainty of Fakeness. There are cases where annotators express uncertainty regarding the image’s authenticity. To capture this ambiguity, we oﬀer
annotators a fakeness rating scale ranging from 0 to 5, where 0 and 1 indicate
authenticity, 2 and 3 means a slight degree of fakeness, and 4 and 5 represent a
high degree of fakeness. The corresponding descriptions are “real”, “a bit fake”,
and “very fake”. Annotating the uncertainty of fakeness helps the model simulate human perception of fakeness, thereby enhancing its ability to generate
explanations that align more accurately with human judgment.
General Questions assess the overall authenticity of an image. The format of
the general question is “Does the person in the image look fake? ”. The answers to
?
3

This work was completed during an internship at Reality Defender Inc.
https://www.mturk.com/

