InstructIR: High-Quality Image Restoration
Following Human Instructions
Supplementary Material
Marcos V. Conde1,2 , Gregor Geigle1 , and Radu Timofte1
1

A

Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Würzburg
2
Sony PlayStation, FTG
https://github.com/mv-lab/InstructIR

Additional Training Details and Ablations

We define our loss functions in the paper Sec. 4.1. Our training loss function is
L = L1 + Lce , which includes the loss function of the image model (L1 ), and the
loss function for intent (task/degradation) classification (Lce ) given the prompt
embedding. We provide the loss evolution plots in Figures 1 and 2. In particular,
in Figure 2 we can observe how the intent classification loss (i.e. predicting the
task (or degradation) given the prompt), tends to 0 very fast, indicating that
our language model component can infer easily the task given the instruction.
Additionally, we study three different text (sentence) encoders: (i) BGE-microv2 3 , (ii) all-MiniLM-L6-v2 4 , (iii) CLIP text encoder (OpenAI CLIP ViT
B-16). Note that these are always frozen. We use pre-trained weights from HuggingFace.
In Table 1 we show the ablation study. There is no significant difference between the text encoders. This is related to the previous results (Fig. 2), any text
encoder with enough complexity can infer the task from the prompt. Therefore,
we use BGE-micro-v2, as it is just 17M parameters in comparison to the others
(40-60M parameters). Note that for this ablation study, we keep fixed the image
model (16M), and we only change the language model.

Text Discussion We shall ask, do the text encoders perform great because the
language and instructions are too simple?
We believe our instructions cover a wide range of expressions (technical,
common language, ambiguous, etc). The language model works properly on realworld instructions. Therefore, we believe the language for this specific task is
self-constrained, and easier to understand and to model in comparison to other
“open" tasks such as image generation.
3
4

https://huggingface.co/TaylorAI/bge-micro-v2
https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2

