Refine, Discriminate and Align (RDA)

A

Supplementary Material

A.1

Elaborations on Existing Methods

1

In this section, we will elaborate on the three baselines considered in this paper,
namely, the conventional method [34], StolenEnoder [26], and Cont-Steal [34].
• Conventional method: Given a surrogate dataset DS = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN },
the conventional method first queries the target encoder ET once with each sample xi ∈ DS . The output embedding ET (xi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , N, will be stored in a
memory bank to serve as a “ground truth” for the sample across the whole training. Next, to train the surrogate encoder ES , it feeds each sample xi ∈ DS to ES
and pulls the output embedding ES (xi ) close to its corresponding optimization
objective, i.e., ET (xi ).
• StolenEncoder: Similar to the conventional method, StolenEncoder first
queries the target encoder ET once with each sample xi ∈ DS and stores the
output embedding ET (xi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , N, in a memory bank. Next, it not only
feeds each sample xi ∈ DS but also an augmentation x′i of it to the surrogate
encoder ES . The output embeddings ES (xi ) and ES (x′i ) will be pulled close to
ET (xi ) simultaneously for optimizing the surrogate encoder ES .
• Cont-Steal: In particular, Cont-Steal adopts an end-to-end training strategy to train the surrogate encoder ES . In each epoch, Cont-Steal first augments
each image xi ∈ DS into two perspectives, denoted as x′i,t and x′i,s , respectively. Next, x′i,t is used to query the target encoder ET , while x′i,s is fed to the
surrogate encoder ES . The surrogate encoder then is optimized via contrastive
learning that pulls ET (x′i,t ) and ES (x′i,s ) close while pushing ES (x′k,s ), k ̸= i,
and ET (x′i,t ) apart. Moreover, to enhance contrastive learning, Cont-Steal also
includes ES (x′i,s ) and ES (x′k,s ), i ̸= k, as negative pairs to train ES .
Table 7: Query cost analysis of three baseline methods.
Surrogate Dataset
Training Epoch Query Cost
Size
Conventioanl [34]
N
L
N
StolenEncoder [26]
N
L
N
Cont-Steal [34]
N
L
N ×L
Method

Query Cost Analysis. Assuming the attacker has a surrogate dataset DS =
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } consisting of N images. To train a surrogate encoder, the attacker will use DS to query the target encoder and optimize the surrogate encoder to mimic its outputs. Regarding the conventional method and StolenEncoder, each image xi ∈ Ds will be used to query only once. Therefore, the query
cost of them is N , and nothing about the number of training epochs. As for ContSteal, each image in DS will be augmented into two perspectives and one is used
to query the target encoder in each epoch. Therefore, assuming the training will
last for L epochs, the query cost of Cont-Steal is N × L. Although Cont-Steal
achieves superior results, its query cost is formidable since the training typically

