Supplementary Material for:
LEROjD: Lidar Extended Radar-Only Object
Detection
Patrick Palmer1 , Martin Krüger1 , Stefan Schütte1 , Richard Altendorfer2 ,
Ganesh Adam2 , and Torsten Bertram1
1

A

Institute of Control Theory and Systems Engineering, TU Dortmund University
2
ZF Group

Detailed Experimental Results

Table 1 extends Table 4 in the original paper by evaluating the detection performance per vehicle class. General trends shown in the main paper on the mAP
are also observable across the three considered vehicle classes. Notable are:
– The best performance of RLSSTM
1⁄4 / vox → R in the cyclist class in the MR.
– The consistently good performance of teacher RLSSTM
across different knowl1
edge distillation methods for the pedestrian and cyclist class.
→ R in the car class in the SR.
– The best performance of RLSSTM
1
– The best performance of RLSSTM
→ R and LSSTM
→ Rfeat for the car class
1
1
in the MR.
Tables 2 to 3 show the object detection results for lidar-only SSTM shown in
Fig. 3 in the main paper, split into the two considered range areas and vehicle
classes. While the performance for most training methods decreases monotonically with each thin-out step, there are a few exceptions. For example, while
SSTM
the performance of LSSTM
1⁄4 / knn is worse than L1⁄2 / knn for cars and pedestrians in
the SR, it is better for cyclists by 3.9 percentage points. One reason for this is
the variance between runs in training due to random initialization of the model,
which has been partly mitigated by using three random initializations of each
model. Another reason is the performance tradeoff between classes. Training the
model for optimal performance over all classes can lead to increased performance
for one class at the cost of performance in the other. Comparing the performance
between vehicle classes and the thin-out method, it is observable that the voxelbased sampling suffers in the pedestrian class due to the comparably small size
of pedestrians. For the different range areas, it can be observed that random
sampling is not well suited for the MR due to the point cloud losing its structure
in this area when randomly thinned-out.

B

Qualitative Evaluation of MSTM and Cross-Modal
Knowledge Distillation

Fig. 1 and 2 show annotated ground truth and detection outputs on radaronly data overlaid on a bird’s-eye view representation of the radar-only point

