PointNeRF++

1

Supplementary Material
We detail the multi-scale point generation and coordinate system of the global
triplane. Furthermore, in the provided https://pointnerfpp.github.io, we
provide more rendering results.

A

Multi-scale Point Generation via Grid-subsampling

We build multi-scale points from an input point cloud using grid subsampling,
which is more robust to varying density as shown in KPConv [49]. Specifically,
a new support point at each scale is the barycenter of the original input points
contained in a grid cell. Thereby, we control the scale and density at each level
via the grid size of cells.
We set the grid size at the level s as ! ⇤ s 1 where ! is the initial grid size
at the first level and is the stride size. We use the larger grid size for severely
incomplete point clouds and a small grid size for the complete point cloud.
Specifically, for KITTI-360 [28], we set ! as 8cm and as 2.92. As a result, the
grid size at the coarsest point level (i.e., s=4) is 2 meters. For ScanNet [10], we
set ! as 0.008 and as 2.0. For Nerf Synthetic [30] where point clouds are
relatively complete, we set ! as 0.004 and as 1.6.

B

The Coordinate System of Global Triplane

We align the world coordinate system and the normalized coordinate system
of global triplane. We use principal component analysis (PCA) to calculate the
reference coordinate frame of input point cloud. The resulting reference frame
consists of rotation, translation and scale, thereby defining the alignment matrix transforming world coordinates to coordinate system of global triplane. In
ScanNet [10] and Nerf Synthetic [30], where points distribute uniformly along
three axes and center at the origin, we simply normalize world coordinates using
the scale part of the reference frame. For KITTI 360 [28], we use full reference frame instead – i.e., we rotate, translate and scale the world coordinates
– because, in this dataset, the car moves along one major direction, leading to
the points heavily unbalanced along three axes. With this PCA-based canonicalization, we compactly compress all possible query points into the triplane’s
normalized frame, allowing for fully utilizing the capacity of the global triplane.

C

More rendering results

We furthermore provide more rendering results – rendering more frames and
generating videos from them. For more details, please refer to the website linked
above.

