ShapeFusion: A 3D diffusion model for localized shape editing
Supplementary Material
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias, Michail Tarasiou, Stylianos Ploumpis, Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, United Kingdom

1. Ablation Study

novelty of the proposed framework is the hierarchical message passing scheme that enables the aggregation of low and
high level features across vertices (see Eq. 3 on the main
paper). Using the proposed hierarchical message passing,
each node features contain both global and local topological
information, which is extremely important in tasks such as
region sampling and manipulation. As the proposed model
utilizes masked inputs, the generation of masked regions is
strongly contingent upon the context of the unmasked regions. As shown in Fig. 1 (bottom row), without the use
of hierarchical features, several artifacts arise around the region boundaries. In contrast using the proposed hierarchical
message passing scheme, the generated regions are smooth
and preserve the topology of the input mesh since its vertex
contains contextual information of the global shape.

The proposed diffusion model incorporates three critical
components, which contribute significantly to its effectiveness: the relative features message passing scheme, the
vertex-index positional embeddings and the hierarchical
message passing scheme (see lines 215-271, including Fig.
3, of the main manuscript). To systematically assess the
contribution of one of the key elements to the overall performance, we perform a series of ablation experiments.
Relative Features. As has been shown in the literature
[3, 11, 14], a key technique to increase the expressivity of
a graph neural network is the use of relative features on the
message passing scheme to enable propagation of relative
information to each of the nodes. Without the relative features, the vertex update function relies only on the current
vertex features along with each neighbor which limits the
expressivity of the layer. This not only results in degradation of the performance, as shown in Tab. 2, but also in poor
manipulation performance from anchor points. Specifically,
as can be easily observed in Fig. 1 (first row), the manipulations result in discontinuous spikes around the anchor
vertices. In contract, the proposed method, that utilizes a
relative feature message passing scheme, achieves smooth
manipulations that follow the anchor points without any artifacts.
Vertex-Index Embedding. As described in the main paper, training a network directly on the partially noisy shape
space, is considerably challenging. The noise added on
the vertices translates to permutation equivariance for the
model, which results into learning point distributions without any semantic topological information. To break this
equivariance, we introduced a vertex-index positional encoding p to enable the preservation of the topology on the
generated meshes [2, 8]. As shown in Fig. 1 (middle row),
the network trained without the vertex positional embeddings fails to generate results that preserve the topology of
the input, resulting in meshes with permuted triangles. This
can be quantified in Tab. 2, where the model trained without the vertex positional embeddings results in significant
performance drop under both FID and ID metrics.
Hierarchical Message Passing. Inspired from [9], a key

Proposed

w/o Hierarchical
Features

w/o Vertex-Index
Embedding

w/o Relative
Features

Ablated

Figure 1. Ablation Study. Qualitative Evaluation of the different
components of the proposed method.

Different GCN layers. In addition to the Spiral convolution layer, we have also compared our work with some recently proposed graph convolutional layers [1, 4, 7]. As can
be seen in Tab. 2, the adaptive sprial convolution method
achieves the best performance. In this paper, we utilized
1

