1

Appendix
A

Implementation Details

For training datasets, we follow LISA to utilize a combination of datasets for
semantic segmentation, COCO-Stuff, PACO-LVIS, PASCAL-Part, and Mapillary Vistas), referring segmentation(refCLEF, refCOCO, refCOCO+, and refCOCOg), and the ReasonSeg training set for fine-tuning. We abandon using
the visual question answering (LLaVA-Instruct-150k) dataset employed by the
baseline method LISA. The rationale lies in CoReS’s control over the chainof-reasoning process through the fixed templates of LLM output formats. The
textual outputs from the VQA dataset, which may conflict with the logic of
template-based outputs and fine-grained tasks, could adversely affect the training process.
For the test dataset, we conduct experiments on the ReasonSeg. It comprises image-question pairs with reasoning difficulty and the ground truth segmentation masks. Its training and validation set includes 239 and 200 imageinstruction pairs, respectively.
As for the LoRA tuning of the MLLM, the LoRA rank is set to 8 and the
LoRA alpha and dropout are set to 16 and 0.05, respectively. We apply deepspeed
as the code engine, with 8 NVIDIA A100 for training. The optimizer for CoReS
is AdamW and its learning rate is set to 0.0003, with a 100-step warm-up-decay.

B

Ablation Experiments

As for different design alternatives of CoReS, we conduct experiments in Tab.S1.
Text-Only CoT: We first compare with a CoT-version of LISA which performs explicit text-form reasoning before segmentation, which is trained with
the additional text generated by GPT as supervision. This Text-Only CoT
decreases the performance of LISA. One possible reason is that textual outputs
weaken the info in [SEG], consequently impacting the subsequent segmentation
process. Supervised C1, we choose two ways to provide supervision for C1,
1
○‘C1-GT ’ is using the final mask for C1 loss calculation at a low weight scale.
The decrease in performance can be attributed to the undermining of the CoT
formation, regardless of weight differences. 2
○‘Pseudo’ refers to generating larger
masks as C1 gt. It can be observed that leading MLLM to generate without
constraints is better than rigid constraints. Query-Specific Textual Prompts:
We adopt query-specific textual prompts (instead of irrelevant prompts) as
inputs. Although it may not be practical in applications due to time and cost
considerations, the improvement, as a rough upper bound, indirectly validates
the effectiveness of in-context input.
We conduct experiments on the hyperparameters in Tab.S2. Placing excessive
emphasis on the reasoning chain loss leads to a decrease in model performance.
This is because it merely serves as an implicit constraint on the output of
intermediate text, while the ultimate segmentation chain loss deserves more

