Trainable Highly-expressive Activation Functions
Supplementary Material
Irit Chelly∗ , Shahaf E. Finder∗ , Shira Ifergane , and Oren Freifeld
The Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
{tohamy,finders,shiraif}@post.bgu.ac.il, orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract. This document contains the supplementary material for the
main paper. In § A, we provide additional details about the regression
and classification tasks in the toy-data experiments, such as data generation, training process scheme, result trends, function visualizations
and further experiments. In § B, we provide additional details about the
training procedures of the semantic segmentation and image generation
tasks in the real-world data experiments. In § C we present various DiTAC versions, discuss their quality, and display their illustrations. In § D
we measure DiTAC’s computational cost on various configurations.

A

Toy-data Experiments

A.1

Classification

Here we provide additional details about the toy-data classification task presented in section 4.1 in the paper. We train a simple MLP on MNIST dataset
and a synthetic dataset generated from a two-dimensional Gaussian-MixtureModel (2D-GMM).
Data generation of 2D-GMM. We generate a synthetic data sampled from
a 2D GMM with 10 groups (referred to as classes). The parameters of each
Gaussian component (the mean vector and covariance matrix) are drawn from a
normal-inverse-Wishart distribution while the mixture weights are drawn drawn
from a Dirichlet distribution. We then draw 5 · 103 i.i.d . 2D points from the
GMM, with a split of 70%/30% for train/test data. An example for such sample
is shown in Fig. 8.
Training procedure. We use a simple MLP with two hidden layers to train
on either MNIST or the 2D-GMM datasets. For MNIST we set their sizes to 128
and 64, and for the 2D-GMM we set both to 100. We train both datasets for
150 epochs, and use Adam optimizer, a batch size of 64, and a learning rate of
1 · 104 with no weight decay. As for the competitors, we use the same training
parameters except for the learning rate: we run each configuration with several
learning rates and select the best performance for each competitor.
∗

Equal contribution.

