Supplementary Materials of InterFusion
Sisi Dai1

Wenhao Li1 Haowen Sun2 Haibin Huang3 Chongyang Ma3
Hui Huang2 Kai Xu1⋆ Ruizhen Hu2⋆
1

National University of Defense Technology
2
Shenzhen University
3
Kuaishou Technology
https://sisidai.github.io/InterFusion/

Outline
In this work, we present InterFusioni , a novel zero-shot text-driven 3D human
object interaction generation method. We now provide supplementary details in
this document, which is arranged as follows:
(1) Sec. A illustrates the implementation details about the methods;
(2) Sec. B conducts more experiments to verify the superiority of InterFusion;
(3) Sec. C discusses the application potential, limitations and future work.
We also encourage readers to watch our supplementary videos on the project
page, which provide more visual representations and perspectives to showcase
the 3D properties of our generated human-object interactions.

A

Implementation Details

We implement InterFusion with threestudio [2]. Specifically, we leverage the
multi-resolution hash-grid implementation of implicit volumes in threestudio,
along with a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) for predicting density and color
values.
Shading. We adopt Lambertian shading with randomly sampled point light
during training. We consider three types of shading, including albedo, diffuse
and textureless. During training, the shading types of H-NeRF and O-NeRF are
enforced to be same for better convergence.
Prompting. We use one prefix and two suffixes in prompting. We empirically
use the prefix “a photo of” to enhance optimization. Additionally, we use the
first suffix “8K, HD” to improve the resolution and quality. The second suffix
is view-dependent and based on the camera location sampled randomly, similar
to that in [8]. Specifically, this view-dependent suffix is set to ”overhead view”
at elevation angles above 60◦ . For elevation angles below 60◦ , the corresponding
⋆
i

Corresponding authors: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com; ruizhen.hu@gmail.com.
Our code would be accessible at https://github.com/sisidai/InterFusion.

