H-V2X: A Large Scale Highway Dataset
for BEV Perception
Chang Liu(B) , Mingxu Zhu, and Cong Ma
ADLab, Tencent, Beijing, China
{changeliu,mingxuzhu,codyma}@tencent.com

Abstract. Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) technology has become an area
of interest in research due to the availability of roadside infrastructure
perception datasets. However, these datasets primarily focus on urban
intersections and lack data on highway scenarios. Additionally, the perception tasks in the datasets are mainly MONO 3D due to limited synchronized data across multiple sensors. To bridge this gap, we propose
Highway-V2X (H-V2X), the ﬁrst large-scale highway Bird’s-Eye-View
(BEV) perception dataset captured by sensors in the real world. The
dataset covers over 100 km of highway, with a diverse range of road and
weather conditions. H-V2X consists of over 1.9 million ﬁne-grained categorized samples in BEV space, captured by multiple synchronized cameras, with vector map provided. We performed joint 2D-3D calibrations
to ensure correct projection and human labor was involved to ensure
data quality. Furthermore, we propose three highly relevant tasks to the
highway scenario: BEV detection, BEV tracking, and trajectory prediction. We conducted benchmarks for each task, and innovative methods
incorporating vector map information were proposed. We hope that HV2X and benchmark methods will facilitate highway BEV perception
research direction. The dataset is available at https://pan.quark.cn/s/
86d19da10d18.
Keywords: V2X · Dataset · BEV Detection · Tracking · Prediction

1

Introduction

The highway is pivotal in transportation, but persistent safety concerns remain
unresolved. While the development of intelligent vehicles presents a potential
and practical solution to address human-driver-related issues such as fatigue,
distraction, and unsafe driving practices, the adoption of vehicle intelligence is
still in its nascent stages. It is noteworthy that the majority of vehicles on the
highway lack advanced driver assistance systems.
Conversely, there is substantial promise in the emerging research focus on
roadside infrastructure, particularly within vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication. V2X has the potential to signiﬁcantly enhance driving safety by
leveraging sensors installed along the roadside to perceive the surrounding environment of the ego-car and subsequently communicate with it through network
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15059, pp. 139–157, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73232-4_8

