Removing Rows and Columns of Tokens in Vision
Transformer enables Faster Dense Prediction
without Retraining
Supplementary Document
Diwei Su1 , Cheng Fei1 , and Jianxu Luo1(B)
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China
dvsu@mail.ecust.edu.cn, cfei_jarvis@163.com, jxluo@ecust.edu.cn

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Hyper-parameter Details

We summarize the detailed hyper-parameter configurations and results of our
method applied in the Segmenter and MaskDINO in Tabs. 2a and 2b, respectively.
Tab. 2a presents the hyper-parameters used when applying Token Adapter
to the Segmenter, along with the corresponding evaluation metrics associated
with Tab.1 of the main paper. These hyper-parameters and metrics include the
positions (Lb and Lb +Lm ), where token injectors and token ejectors are inserted,
the reduction ratios of rows and columns in tokens (rh and rw ), the proportions
of representative tokens in rows and columns (rphr and rpwr ), mIoU, and FPS
(im/s).
Tab. 2b presents the hyper-parameters used when applying Token Adapter to
different stages of MaskIDNO, along with the corresponding evaluation metrics
associated with Tab.2 of the main paper. These hyper-parameters and metrics
include the positions (Lb and Lb + Lm ), where token injectors and token ejectors
are inserted, the reduction ratios of rows and columns in tokens (rh and rw ),
the proportions of representative tokens in rows and columns (rphr and rpwr ),
PQ (Panoptic Quality), Mask AP (Average Precision), Box AP (Bounding Box
Average Precision), mIoU, and FPS (im/s).
1.2

Evaluation Details

In Tab. 1, we present the evaluation details for measuring the computational
complexity and inference efficiency of different methods. We calculate the evaluation metrics based on the input resolutions specified in the official configurations
of each method. Consistent with the official implementation of Expediting [2], we
compute the overall complexity and latency for Segmenter while only calculating
the complexity and latency of backbone for MaskDINO.

