XPSR: Cross-modal Priors for Diffusion-based
Image Super-Resolution
—— Supplementary Material ——
Yunpeng Qu1,2† , Kun Yuan2†‡ , Kai Zhao2 ,
Qizhi Xie1,2 , Jinhua Hao2 , Ming Sun2 and Chao Zhou2
1

Tsinghua University, China, Beijing
Kuaishou Technology, China, Beijing
{qyp21,xqz20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{yuankun03,zhaokai05,haojinhua,sunming03,zhouchao}@kuaishou.com
2

1

Appendix

1.1

Implementation Details of XPSR

Image Encoder Stable Diffusion [4] utilizes a VAE Encoder to map the original
512×512 image to a latent representation of 64×64 dimensions, enabling iterative
denoising in the latent space. To align with the scale of Stable Diffusion, the LR
images are also upsampled by a factor of 4 to match the same resolution. Then,
through a pyramid-like image encoder [13], the scale is gradually reduced to a
64 × 64 feature space vector. The image encoder consists of three layers, with
each layer comprising two convolutional layers where the stride of the second
convolution is 2 × 2, resulting in a halving of the feature map size.
In our pixel-space constraint, we use linear layers to map the feature maps
512
512
of i-th layer Xi to RGB images x̂i ∈ R 2i × 2i ×3 , which corresponds to the i-th
scale of the HR image after downsampling. The L1 loss is utilized to ensure that
the extracted features closely resemble the semantic content of the HR image.
ControlNet The ControlNet component, with a trainable copy of the Unet
Encoder from Stable Diffusion, extracts multi-scale features through a pyramid
structure. Within ControlNet, the features from LR images are further reduced
from a dimension of 64 × 64 to a latent representation of 8 × 8. The multi-scale
conditional controls extracted by ControlNet are connected to the Unet through
zero-convolution residual connections and conditional attention. Therefore, the
conditional features at scale j are also mapped to the channels of the latent
64
64
representation through a linear transformation as ẑj ∈ R 2j × 2j ×4 , corresponding
to the i-th scale downsampled result of the HR latent. The L1 loss is also applied
to enforce the constraint in the latent space.
1.2
†
‡

Additional Experimental Results

Equal contribution.
Project leader.

