Learning Pseudo 3D Guidance for
View-consistent Texturing with 2D Diffusion
Appendix
Kehan Li1,4 , Yanbo Fan2,6⋆ , Yang Wu2 , Zhongqian Sun2 , Wei Yang2
Xiangyang Ji5 , Li Yuan1,3,4 , and Jie Chen1,3,4⋆
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen,
China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
5
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
6
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China

I

Limitations

Both the guidance learning and the guided image generation process of the proposed method are based on text-to-image diffusion models for its high visual
quality following state-of-the-art methods [1, 3]. However, an inherent flaw of
these models is the unawareness about the true 3D structure of the input geometry. Although the depth map is adopted to constrain the image generation
with the geometry, we empirically find that the Janus problem appears in a few
cases where the geometry is similar from several mutually invisible views. Getting rid of the inherent flaws is still an open question and a possible solution is
to incorporate large-scale and high quality 3D data with text annotations. We
leave this for future research.

II

Speed Comparison

Tab. 1 shows the time spent for generating texture of a 3D shape. Although our
method introduces some acceptable additional overhead in the guidance learning
stage, it achieves better quality and consistency.

III

Additional Ablation Study

Depth-guided SDS. The 3D texturing task requires to generate high-fidelity
texture that conforms to the fixed geometry. Since classic text-to-image models
are not geometry-aware, using them to perform SDS can lead to results that
do not match the geometry, thus interfering with the convergence and quality
of multi-view optimization. As shown in Fig. 1, the depth-guided SDS improves
the speed and quality due to geometry awareness.
⋆

Corresponding author.

