Centering the Value of Every Modality: Towards
Efficient and Resilient Modality-agnostic
Semantic Segmentation
— Supplementary Material —
Xu Zheng1 , Yuanhuiyi Lyu1 , Jiazhou Zhou1 , and Lin Wang1,2

⋆

1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou, China
zhengxu128@gmail.com, {yuanhuiyilv, jiazhouzhou}@hkust-gz.edu.cn
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
linwang@ust.hk
https://vlislab22.github.io/MAGIC/

Abstract. Due to the spatial constraints within the main paper, this
supplementary material provides an expansive elucidation of the methodology proposed and additional experimental evidence supporting its efficacy. Sec. 1 offers a comprehensive examination of the implementation
details, providing details into the practical aspects of our MAGIC framework. Sec. 2 presents a broader spectrum of experimental results, emphasizing both quantitative metrics and qualitative assessments. Sec. 3
shows comprehensive ablation studies to evaluate the robustness and
contribution of individual components within the MAGIC framework.
Finall, Sec. 4 expounds upon the algorithmic foundations of the MAGIC
framework, detailing its conceptual and computational structure.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Datasets

DELIVER [11] is a large-scale multi-modal segmentation dataset which includes Depth, LiDAR, Views, Event, RGB data, based on the CARLA simulator. DELIVER [11] provides cases in two-fold, including four environmental
conditions and five partial sensor failure cases. For environmental conditions,
there are cloudy, foggy, night, and rainy weather conditions as well as the sunny
days. The environmental conditions cause variations in the position and illumination of the sun, atmospheric diffuse reflections, precipitation, and shading of
the scene, introducing challenges for robust perception. For sensor failure cases,
there are Motion Blur, Over-Exposure, and Under-Exposure common for RGB
cameras, LiDAR-Jitter for LiDAR sensor and Event Low-resolution for event
camera.
MCubeS is a multi-modal dataset with pairs of RGB, Near-Infrared (NIR),
Degree of Linear Polarization (DoLP), and Angle of Linear Polarization (AoLP)
⋆

Corresponding author

