VQA-Diff: Exploiting VQA and Diffusion for
Zero-Shot Image-to-3D Vehicle Asset Generation
in Autonomous Driving
Yibo Liu1,2,⋆ , Zheyuan Yang1,3,∗ , Guile Wu1 , Yuan Ren1 , Kejian Lin1 ,
Bingbing Liu1 , Yang Liu1 , and Jinjun Shan2
1

Huawei Noah Ark’s Lab, Toronto ON L3R 5A4, Canada
2
York University, Toronto ON M3J 1P3, Canada
3
University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 1A1, Canada
buaayorklau@gmail.com, andrewzheyuan.yang@mail.utoronto.ca, {guile.wu,
yuan.ren3, liu.bingbing, yang.liu9}@huawei.com, jjshan@yorku.ca

Supplementary Material
A. Overview
This material includes both supplementary quantitative and qualitative experimental results, along with additional information such as implementation details,
and discussions to complement the main paper.
B. Extended 3D Vehicle Assets Generation
In this section, we introduce solutions to generate extended 3D vehicle assets
with the proposed method.
Cooperating with Text-guided Style Transfer Models. While the proposed method effectively addresses the challenge of rendering novel views from
in-the-wild observations, it is also desired to generate diverse appearances to
construct a comprehensive 3D asset bank. Thus, we propose to use the textguided style transfer models [2, 5] to transform the paint of the raw vehicle,
and then generate extended 3D vehicle assets through the proposed method. An
illustration of this solution is presented in Fig. 1.
Cooperating with Text-to-image Models. We cannot guarantee that the
data collected on the road covers all the wanted car models. Hence, to build a
complete 3D vehicle assets bank, we also want to generate vehicle assets without
requiring in-the-wild observations. Therefore, we propose to use text-to-image
generative models, such as Stable Diffusion (SD) [11], to produce reference images for VQA-Diff directly. Thus, the proposed method can generate 3D vehicle
assets based on prompts. An illustration of this solution is depicted in Fig. 2.
Cooperating with Text and Shape Guided Object Inpainting Models.
VQA-Diff can cooperate with text and shape-guided object inpainting models [15] to generate intricate vehicles by providing fine-grained prompts, such as
⋆

Equal contribution. Work done during an internship with Huawei Noah Ark’s Lab.

