VisionTrap: Vision-Augmented Trajectory
Prediction Guided by Textual Descriptionss
Supplemental Material
Seokha Moon1 , Hyun Woo1 , Hongbeen Park1 , Haeji Jung1 ,
Reza Mahjourian2 , Hyung-gun Chi3 , Hyerin Lim4 , Sangpil Kim1 , and
Jinkyu Kim1
1

Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
The University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712, USA
3
Perdue University, West Lafayette 95008, USA
4
Hyundai Motor Company, Seongnam 13529, Republic of Korea
2

1

Details for Evaluation and Implementation

Dataset. Our proposed approach is developed and evaluated utilizing the widely
employed nuScenes [2] dataset, which encompasses 1000 diverse scenes from
Boston and Singapore. Annotations cover 10 classes for object detection, including car, truck, bus, trailer, construction vehicle, pedestrian, motorcycle, bicycle,
barrier, and traffic cone. It also provides ego-centric surround-view images and
HD map. In nuScenes, the model is trained with a 2-second history to predict
a 6-second future trajectory. Unlike existing works [3, 4, 6, 10] that report about
single-agent prediction performance, our research takes a different approach. Instead of utilizing only the dataset provided for the prediction task, we used the
entire nuScenes dataset for training to conduct a multi-agent prediction approach
that considers all agents in a scene simultaneously. Therefore, our nuScenes-Text
dataset used for this study is created to cover all scenes in the nuScenes dataset.
The Vision Language Model BLIP-2 [5] (VLM) used to generate this text is
trained on the DRAMA [9] dataset, which provides an image of the driving environment, bounding box pointing to specific agent, and text representing this
agent. To accurately use textual descriptions obtained from fine-tuned VLM,
we refine the descriptions using GPT [1]. We also present metrics for all agents
and metrics specifically for agents involved in the prediction task, offering a
comprehensive evaluation.
Evaluation Metrics. Our model is evaluated using standard metrics for trajectory prediction, including minimum Average Displacement Error (ADE), minimum Final Displacement Error (FDE), and Miss Rate (MR). These metrics
quantify the average and final displacement errors between the true trajectory
and the best prediction sample. MR further denotes the percentage of scenarios
where the distance between the endpoint of the true trajectory and the best
prediction exceeds a 2m threshold.
*

Corresponding author: J. Kim (jinkyukim@korea.ac.kr)

