HeadGaS: Real-Time Animatable Head
Avatars via 3D Gaussian Splatting
Helisa Dhamo(B) , Yinyu Nie , Arthur Moreau , Jifei Song ,
Richard Shaw , Yiren Zhou , and Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montreal, Canada
{helisa.dhamo,e.perez.pellitero}@huawei.com
Abstract. 3D head animation has seen major quality and runtime
improvements over the last few years, particularly empowered by the
advances in diﬀerentiable rendering and neural radiance ﬁelds. Real-time
rendering is a highly desirable goal for real-world applications. We propose HeadGaS, a model that uses 3D Gaussian Splats (3DGS) for 3D
head reconstruction and animation. In this paper we introduce a hybrid
model that extends the explicit 3DGS representation with a base of learnable latent features, which can be linearly blended with low-dimensional
parameters from parametric head models to obtain expression-dependent
color and opacity values. We demonstrate that HeadGaS delivers stateof-the-art results in real-time inference frame rates, surpassing baselines
by up to 2 dB, while accelerating rendering speed by over ×10.
Keywords: animatable head avatars · gaussian splatting · radiance
ﬁelds

1

Introduction

Reconstructing photorealistic 3D heads which are in turn controllable and naturally expressive is essential for building digital avatars that look and behave
like real humans. This has a wide range of applications including AR/VR, teleconferencing, and gaming. Designing head models that accomplish high ﬁdelity
in their appearance, are easy to capture and enable expressive control has been
an active research ﬁeld in recent years, specially due to the fast development of
neural and diﬀerentiable rendering approaches.
Animatable 3D head reconstruction consists in driving a captured head
avatar, based on a target sequence of facial expressions and head poses. In the
last decades, various parametric 3D morphable models (3DMM) have emerged
[5,6,24], which can be ﬁtted to sequences of a moving head and later on enable
pose and expression control. Though these models make it possible to drive a

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 26.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 459–476, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_26

