Supplementary Material:
A Riemannian Approach for Spatiotemporal
Analysis and Generation of 4D Tree-shaped
Structures
Tahmina Khanam1 , Hamid Laga1 , Mohammed Bennamoun2 , Guanjin
Wang1 , Ferdous Sohel1 , Farid Boussaid2 , Guan Wang3 , and Anuj
Srivastava4
1

Murdoch University, WA, Australia
34719017@student.murdoch.edu.au, {H.Laga,
Guanjin.Wang,F.Sohel}@murdoch.edu.au
2
University of Western Australia, WA, Australia
{mohammed.bennamoun, farid.boussaid}@uwa.edu.au
3
Yangtze Delta Region Institute (Huzhou), University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, China, wangguan12621@gmail.com
4
Florida State University, USA, anuj@stat.fsu.edu

Abstract. This supplementary material provides additional details and
results that could not fit in the main manuscript. Sec. 1 describes in detail
the 4D dataset we used throughout all our experiments. Sec. 2 provides
the detailed spatial registration algorithm used to compute branchwise
correspondences between 3D trees belonging to the same 4D tree and
across 4D trees. Sec. 3 analyzes the computation time of each component
of the proposed framework. Finally, Sec. 4 provides additional results to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

1

The Pheno4D dataset

Throughout the paper, we used the Pheno4D dataset [3], which contains 4D
models of seven tomato and seven maize plants captured at different points in
time during their growth season. All the models were captured in the form of 3D
point clouds and are spatially unregistered; see Fig. 1-(top row) for an example
of a growing tomato plant.
The 4D maize plants have been captured at the same points in time. The
tomato plants, on the other hand, have been captured at different intervals. In
both cases, the plants exhibit significant variability in their growth rates since
plants, even if they have been grown under the same conditions, grow at different
rates. Thus, all the 4D plants are neither spatially nor temporally registered.
Before using this data in the proposed framework, we first extract, from the
3D point clouds, their 3D skeletal structures using the method proposed in [2];
see the top row of each example in Fig. 1, and organize the skeleton into layers
of branches; see the bottom row of each example in Fig. 1.

