BlinkVision: A Benchmark for Optical Flow,
Scene Flow and Point Tracking Estimation using
RGB Frames and Events
- Supplementary Material Yijin Li1,2∗ , Yichen Shen1∗ , Zhaoyang Huang2∗ , Shuo Chen1 , Weikang Bian3 ,
Xiaoyu Shi3 , Fu-Yun Wang3 , Keqiang Sun3 , Hujun Bao1 , Zhaopeng Cui1 ,
Guofeng Zhang1† , and Hongsheng Li3,4,5†
1

2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Avolution AI 3 CUHK MMLab 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
5
CPII under InnoHK

In this supplementary document, we first provide more experiment results,
such as the effect of exposure ratio (Sec. 1), the analysis of the optical flow
methods under various stride sizes (Sec. 2), and more optical flow results in
different categories (Sec. 3). Then we provide additional information regarding the BlinkVision dataset, i.e., the samples of the semantic labels in BlinkVision (Sec. 4). Besides, we present a discussion on the comparison between event
stream and RGB frames (Sec. 5) and also a discussion on the limitation of the
proposed benchmark (Sec. 6). Finally, we show more qualitative results in Sec. 7
including scene flow, optical flow and point tracking methods. In this document,
references that point to the main manuscript will be referenced as “P-”.

1

Effect of Exposure Ratio

As we said in the main document, we uniformly sample the exposure ratio w in
log2 space and apply it to B to simulate underexposure or overexposure, which
gives us H = B × 2w . An example of the simulation is shown in Fig. 1. In this
section, we study the effect of different exposure ratios w in detail. Specifically,
we randomly sample 5 scenes from BlinkVision and apply six different exposure
ratios w from -3 to 3. We keep the other factors like CRF the same and remove
motion blur. We then compare the performance Ef with that of the clean version
Ec (i.e., w equals 0) and compute the performance loss: (Ef − Ec )/Ec × 100%.
The results are shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that underexposed and overexposed both lead to severe performance loss. In addition, as the ratio (magnitude)
increases, the performance loss caused by overexposed grows faster, which can
be understood numerically. For example, for the brightness B = 50, multiplying
by 23 = 8 and then clipping to the upper range 255 results in a huge information change of 400 to 255. In contrast, multiplying by 2− 3 = 0.125 and then
quantizing to the 8-bit integer results in a rather smaller change of 6.25 to 6.
∗ Yijin Li, Yichen Shen, and Zhaoyang Huang contributed equally to this work.
† Hongsheng Li and Guofeng Zhang are the corresponding authors.

