Supplementary of MeshSegmenter: Zero-Shot
Mesh Semantic Segmentation via Texture Synthesis
Ziming Zhong1 , Yanyu Xu2 , Jing Li3 , Jiale Xu1 , Zhengxin Li1 , Chaohui Yu4 ,
and Shenghua Gao1,5
1

ShanghaiTech University 2 Shandong University 3 Xiaohongshu Inc 4 Alibaba Group
5
The University of Hong Kong
{zhongzm, lijing1, xujl1, lizhx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
xu_yanyu@sdu.edu.cn
huakun.ych@alibaba-inc.com

We provide additional experimental results for MeshSegmenter. Appendix A
shows the details of the MeshSegmenter implementation. Appendix B shows our
additional ablation studies and the analysis of MeshSegmenter.

A

Implementation Detail

In Algorithm 1, we show the pseudocode of MeshSegmenter.
Prompt Setting In Text-Guided Texture Synthesis, we employ more appropriate prompts from different perspectives. MeshSegmenter uses “a photo of
To and {direction} view” as the prompt for synthesizing texture. When the polar
angle is in the range of (0, 40), we define this viewpoint as an “overhead” view;
and when the polar angle is between (140, 180), we define it as a “bottom” view.
When the polar angle falls within the range of (40, 140), we divide the azimuth
angle into four equal segments, namely the “front”, “right”, “back”, and “left”
views. For objects with significant variations in features across different viewing
angles, such settings can better assist in generating reasonable textures.
Texture generation. The texture generation is based on TEXTure [37].
Texture generation uses ControlNet [4] to generate a text-consistent texture
based on the depth map from the first viewpoint and then inpaints the untextured regions of subsequent viewpoints until all regions are painted with texture.
It takes 20 mins to generate a texture for a 3D object on Nvidia A40 GPU.

B

Additional Ablation Studies and Analysis

Wrong Segmentation Correction of FCR The zero-shot mesh semantic
segmentations lack reliable ground truth to supervise segmentation results from
different viewpoints. MeshSegmenter utilizes segmentation results from adjacent viewpoints to correct the wrong segmentations in certain viewpoints. Additionally, the multi-view self-supervision ensures that the segmentation results
are trustworthy across multiple viewpoints. In a specific viewpoint Fig. 1(c),
Napoleon Bonaparte’s clothing is erroneously segmented as hair, which occurs
only in a few viewpoints. The wrong segmentation in certain viewpoints can easily currupt the overall segmentation results Fig. 1(e). MeshSegmenter addresses

