A Simple Baseline for Bayesian Uncertainty
in Deep Learning
Wesley J. Maddox∗1 Timur Garipov∗2 Pavel Izmailov∗1
Dmitry Vetrov2,3 Andrew Gordon Wilson1
1
New York University
Samsung AI Center Moscow
3
Samsung-HSE Laboratory, National Research University Higher School of Economics
2

Abstract
We propose SWA-Gaussian (SWAG), a simple, scalable, and general purpose
approach for uncertainty representation and calibration in deep learning. Stochastic
Weight Averaging (SWA), which computes the first moment of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) iterates with a modified learning rate schedule, has recently been
shown to improve generalization in deep learning. With SWAG, we fit a Gaussian
using the SWA solution as the first moment and a low rank plus diagonal covariance
also derived from the SGD iterates, forming an approximate posterior distribution
over neural network weights; we then sample from this Gaussian distribution to
perform Bayesian model averaging. We empirically find that SWAG approximates
the shape of the true posterior, in accordance with results describing the stationary
distribution of SGD iterates. Moreover, we demonstrate that SWAG performs
well on a wide variety of tasks, including out of sample detection, calibration,
and transfer learning, in comparison to many popular alternatives including MC
dropout, KFAC Laplace, SGLD, and temperature scaling.

1

Introduction

Ultimately, machine learning models are used to make decisions. Representing uncertainty is crucial
for decision making. For example, in medical diagnoses and autonomous vehicles we want to protect
against rare but costly mistakes. Deep learning models typically lack a representation of uncertainty,
and provide overconfident and miscalibrated predictions [e.g., 21, 12].
Bayesian methods provide a natural probabilistic representation of uncertainty in deep learning [e.g.,
3, 24, 5], and previously had been a gold standard for inference with neural networks [38]. However,
existing approaches are often highly sensitive to hyperparameter choices, and hard to scale to modern
datasets and architectures, which limits their general applicability in modern deep learning.
In this paper we propose a different approach to Bayesian deep learning: we use the information
contained in the SGD trajectory to efficiently approximate the posterior distribution over the weights
of the neural network. We find that the Gaussian distribution fitted to the first two moments of
SGD iterates, with a modified learning rate schedule, captures the local geometry of the posterior
surprisingly well. Using this Gaussian distribution we are able to obtain convenient, efficient,
accurate and well-calibrated predictions in a broad range of tasks in computer vision. In particular,
our contributions are the following:
• In this work we propose SWAG (SWA-Gaussian), a scalable approximate Bayesian inference
technique for deep learning. SWAG builds on Stochastic Weight Averaging [20], which
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to wjm363 AT nyu.edu

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

