GPT-4V(ision) System Card
OpenAI
September 25, 2023

1

Introduction

GPT-4 with vision (GPT-4V) enables users to instruct GPT-4 to analyze image inputs provided
by the user, and is the latest capability we are making broadly available. Incorporating additional
modalities (such as image inputs) into large language models (LLMs) is viewed by some as a key
frontier in artificial intelligence research and development [1, 2, 3]. Multimodal LLMs offer the
possibility of expanding the impact of language-only systems with novel interfaces and capabilities,
enabling them to solve new tasks and provide novel experiences for their users.
In this system card, [4, 5] 1 we analyze the safety properties of GPT-4V. Our work on safety
for GPT-4V builds on the work done for GPT-4 [7] and here we dive deeper into the evaluations,
preparation, and mitigation work done specifically for image inputs.
Similar to GPT-4, training of GPT-4V was completed in 2022 and we began providing early
access to the system in March 2023. As GPT-4 is the technology behind the visual capabilities of
GPT-4V, its training process was the same. The pre-trained model was first trained to predict the
next word in a document, using a large dataset of text and image data from the Internet as well
as licensed sources of data. It was then fine-tuned with additional data, using an algorithm called
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF),[8, 9] to produce outputs that are preferred by
human trainers.
Large multimodal models introduce different limitations and expand the risk surface compared to
text-based language models. GPT-4V possesses the limitations and capabilities of each modality
(text and vision), while at the same time presenting novel capabilities emerging from the intersection
of said modalities and from the intelligence and reasoning afforded by large scale models.
This system card outlines how OpenAI prepared the vision capabilities of GPT-4 for deployment.
It describes the early access period of the model for small scale users and safety learnings OpenAI
gained from this period, multimodal evaluations built to study the model’s fitness for deployment,
key findings of expert red teamers, and the mitigations OpenAI implemented prior to broad release.

2

Deployment Preparation

2.1

Learnings from early access

OpenAI gave a diverse set of alpha users access to GPT-4V earlier this year, including Be My Eyes,
an organization that builds tools for visually impaired users.
1

This document takes inspiration from the concepts of model cards and system cards.[4, 5, 6]

1

