MVSplat: Efficient 3D Gaussian Splatting
from Sparse Multi-View Images
Supplementary Material
Yuedong Chen1 , Haofei Xu2,3 , Chuanxia Zheng4 , Bohan Zhuang1 ,
Marc Pollefeys2,5 , Andreas Geiger3 , Tat-Jen Cham6 , and Jianfei Cai1,6
1

2
3
Monash University
ETH Zurich
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
4
5
6
VGG, University of Oxford
Microsoft
Nanyang Technological University
donydchen.github.io/mvsplat

A

More Experimental Analysis

All experiments in this section follow the same settings as in Sec. 4.3 unless
otherwise specified, which are trained on RealEstate10K [9] and reported by
averaging over the full test set.
Using cost volume in pixelSplat. In the main paper, we have demonstrated
the importance of our cost volume design for learning feed-forward Gaussian
models. We note that such a concept is general and is not specifically designed for
a specific architecture. To verify this, we replace pixelSplat’s probability densitybased depth prediction module with our cost volume-based approach while keeping other components intact. The results shown in Tab. A again demonstrate
the importance of the cost volume by significantly outperforming the original
pixelSplat, indicating the general applicability of our proposed method.

Setup

PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓

pixelSplat (w/ probability density depth) [1]
25.89 0.858 0.142
pixelSplat (w/ our MVSplat cost volume depth) 26.63 0.875 0.122
Table A: Using cost volume in pixelSplat. Our cost volume-based depth prediction approach can also be used in the pixelSplat [1] model by replacing its probability
density-based depth branch and its performance can be significantly boosted, which
demonstrates the general applicability of our method.

Ablations on the backbone Transformer. Differing from pixelSplat [1] and
GPNR [6] that are based on the Epipolar Transformer, we adopt Swin Transformer [3] in our backbone (i.e., Multi-view feature extraction as in Sec. 3.1).
To compare the Transformer architectures, we conduct ablation experiment by
replacing our Swin Transformer with the Epipolar Transformer in Tab. B. Since
the Swin Transformer does not need to sample points on the epipolar line, where
the sampling process is computationally expensive, our model is more efficient
than the Epipolar Transformer counterpart. Besides, there is no clear difference

