HERGen: Elevating Radiology Report Generation
with Longitudinal Data
(Supplementary Material)
Fuying Wang1 , Shenghui Du1 , and Lequan Yu1
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{fuyingw@connect.,shenghui@connect.,lqyu@}hku.hk

The appendix is structured as follows. Section 1 offers implementation details
of the HERGen architecture, along with comprehensive details on the implementation of our experiments. Additional experimental results are showcased in Section 2. Finally, Section 3 provides a qualitative analysis of our model, providing
deeper insights into its performance.

1

More Technical Details

1.1

Modules of Our Framework

Image Encoder. Following the insights from CvT-212DistilGPT2 [8], we utilize
the CvT architecture [15], pretrained on ImageNet-21K, as the foundation for
our image encoder. This choice is supported by empirical evidence demonstrating
its effectiveness in interpreting radiological images. Subsequently, an encoder
projection layer Eproj is integrated to align the number and dimension of visual
tokens with the text decoder’s needs.
For each patient, indexed by i, our image encoder E processes its series of
(i) (i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
chest X-rays Ii = {I1 , I2 , ..., INi } into visual features Pi = {P1 , P2 , ..., PNi }.
(i)

Each X-ray image Ij ∈ RC×W ×H (0 ≤ j ≤ Ni − 1), with C, H, and W representing the number of channels, height, and width respectively, is encoded into a
(i)
feature representation Pj in RS×F . Here, S and F denote the number of visual
tokens and the feature dimension per token, respectively. To adjust the dimension of visual features and the number of visual tokens, we introduce an encoder
projection layer Eproj , consisting of a 1 × 1 convolution layer followed by a linear
projection layer. Specifically, Eproj transforms each Pj (0 ≤ j ≤ Ni − 1) into a
(i)
(i)
(i)
more compact visual representation Vj , resulting in Vi = {V1 , V2 , ..., VNi }
′
′
in RS ×F , where S ′ and F ′ represent the adjusted number of visual tokens and
their new dimensionality. In our experiments, we set S ′ = 50 and F ′ = 768.
Text Encoder. To accurately interpret the specialized language of radiology
reports, we incorporates CXR-BERT [2], a domain-specific BERT-based model
pretrained for biomedical literature and clinical domains, as the text encoder of
our framework. This choice enables our model to produce detailed text embeddings that capture the clinical nuances and specific terminologies of radiology,
laying a strong foundation for the subsequent stages of report generation.

