Supplementary Materials for
ReCon: Training-Free Acceleration for
Text-to-Image Synthesis with Retrieval of
Concept Prompt Trajectories
Chen-Yi Lu∗1,2 , Shubham Agarwal∗2 , Mehrab Tanjim2 , Kanak Mahadik2 ,
Anup Rao2 , Subrata Mitra2 , Shiv Kumar Saini2 ,
Saurabh Bagchi1 , and Somali Chaterji1
1
2

Purdue University
Adobe Research

1

Additional Implementation Details

1.1

Model Implementation Details

For all experiments, we have used the the recently proposed Stable Diffusion
XL model (SDXL) [12]. SDXL is a latent diffusion model comprising a CLIP
ViT-L/14 text encoder [13], a VAE (Variational Autoencoder) [7] for encoding
noises in the latent space for the diffusion process, and a denoising UNet [16].
There are two variations of SDXL model, one is called base and another is
refiner (a specialized high-resolution model fine-tuned using base) [1], which
adds more details. We opt for the base model for its standalone capabilities. All
images are generated at a resolution of 768 × 768 pixels, with 16-bit floatingpoint precision. We standardize our experiments using a fixed random seed (0
unless specified) to ensure reproducibility and fairness. The hardware platform
for all methods is the NVIDIA A100-80GB Tensor Core GPU, ensuring identical
hardware configurations.
1.2

Dataset Statistics

In the MS-COCO dataset, there are 82,000 image-caption pairs in the training
set and 42,000 image-caption pairs in the validation set. Since the MS-COCO
dataset was initially developed for image captioning tasks, it is not the most
suitable for text-to-image tasks. While our main competitor, ReDi [21], used
only the MS-COCO dataset with the FID score to evaluate their method, multiple studies have highlighted the limitations of this approach [8, 12]. Therefore,
we also evaluate ReCon on real-world user-input prompts using the Pick-a-Pic
and DiffusionDB datasets [8, 20], in addition to MS-COCO.
For the Pick-a-Pic and DiffusionDB datasets, we construct the knowledge
base using the unique prompts in their respective training sets, comprising 38K
and 1.6 million unique prompts. To evaluate the performance of ReCon, we
select 10, 000 captions (randomly chosen) from the MS-COCO validation set

