Osmosis: RGBD Diffusion Prior for Underwater
Image Restoration - Supplementary Material
Opher Bar Nathan1 , Deborah Levy1 , Tali Treibitz1 , and
Dan Rosenbaum2
1

Hatter Department of Marine Technologies, Charney School of Marine Sciences
2
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
osmosis-diffusion.github.io

In this supplementary material we give more details about the implementationprior training and optimization, and provide multiple additional results. All figures are placed at the end of the document.

A

Data Preprocessing and Training

Here we describe the different datasets used for training, and the preprocessing
performed on each.
KITTI [20] - 23946 images. Depth information is from Lidar measurement
and is sparse. We interpolate it into dense depth images using [1]. We then
normalize by the maximum measurement value of 80 meters. When computing
the loss we mask out depth pixels of remaining holes and non-depth information
like the sky.
DIODE [55] - 16884 images. Depth information is from a high quality laser
scanner. We normalize by the maximum value of the depth sensor which is 350.
Valid depth masks are supplied, and used when computing the loss.
HR-WSI [57]- 20378 images. Computed with stereo cameras. The data is a
relative disparity with values between 0 and 1, but without an absolute normalization value. We compute the depth as 1 − disparity. Valid mask are provided
and used when computing the loss.
Red-Web-S [36] - 2179 images - The depth information is computed from
a model’s prediction and is already dense and normalized.
We crop and resize the images to get a size of 256x256. In KITTI we cropout the upper part of the image which contain only sky to get a 256 height, and
then use different random horizontal crops of 256. In all other datasets we resize
the smaller dimension into 256, and crop the other dimension at the center. We
perform additional data augmentations by horizontal and vertical flips.
Details on the training process. We train both ϵθ (xt , t) and Σθ (xt , t)
(defined in Sec. 3.2 in the paper). We use the two losses suggested in Dhariwal
and Nichol [16], Lsimple is MSE with a mask for the non-valid pixels (e.g., holes
and horizon) in the image, and Lvlb , a Variational Lower Bound.

