PixOOD: Pixel-Level Out-of-Distribution
Detection
Supplementary Materials
Tomáš Vojíř

, Jan Šochman

, and Jiří Matas

Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Department of Cybernetics, Visual Recognition Group
{tomas.vojir, jan.sochman, matas}@fel.cvut.cz

A

Social, Ethics and Privacy Impact and Considerations

We thank anonymous Reviewer #1 for bringing these concerns to our attention:
The authors state that there is no potential negative societal impact in
their research. However, thinking about a real-world deployment of the
model proposed for, e.g., anomaly detection in video surveillance scenarios, I think it would be nice to briefly discuss ethical, privacy, transparency and fairness concerns in this paper.
In response, we considered and discussed the issue broadly. No immediate privacy or ethical issues with the current pixel-level method were identified. On the
contrary, we argue that enhancing deployed models with the ability to output
the "I do not know" label is beneficial for AI systems in general. Representing
decision uncertainty partially mitigates the lack of diversity in datasets, potential biases, and it avoids non-confident or wrong over-confident decisions in
downstream tasks by identifying these cases as out-of-distribution (OOD).
We, however, agree that in a future research there may arise privacy and
ethical concerns regarding applications in domains such as face re-identification
and recognition, surveillance, or behavior and action analysis. It is possible that
a method, similar to the proposed PixOOD, could potentially be exploited for
nefarious applications. For example, penalizing “not approved” (thus not in the
training data and identified as OOD) types of behavior or actions performed
under surveillance. The proposed method is currently not directly applicable in
such settings and the adaptation, in our expert opinion, is non-trivial.
We keep these risks in mind, noting that every tool can be used in both
socially beneficial or harmful ways.

