Supplementary Material:
Domain-adaptive Video Deblurring via Test-time
Blurring
Jin-Ting He∗,1 , Fu-Jen Tsai∗,2 , Jia-Hao Wu1 , Yan-Tsung Peng3 , Chung-Chi
Tsai4 , Chia-Wen Lin2 , and Yen-Yu Lin1
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
jinting.cs12@nycu.edu.tw, jiahao.11@nycu.edu.tw, lin@cs.nycu.edu.tw
2
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
fjtsai@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw
3
National Chengchi University, Taiwan
ytpeng@cs.nccu.edu.tw
4
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., San Diego
chuntsai@qti.qualcomm.com

1

Algorithm of Selecting Relatively Sharp Patches

In the Relatively-Sharp Detection Module (RSDM), we adopt an adaptive sharpness threshold η (i) to ensure the number of relatively sharp patches extracted
from the video V (i) to reach a specified percentage of the number of total
frames in V (i) . More precisely, we set η (i) to select the top r% relatively sharp
patches to serve as pseudo-sharp images. Here, we describe how to determine
the adaptive sharpness threshold η (i) in Algorithm 1 to select the top r% relatively sharp patches. First, the target number of selected patches is calculated
as N = r% × |V (i) |, where |V (i) | is the number of total frames in V (i) , and
the initial threshold is initialized as η (i) = 0.5. Next, we choose relatively sharp
patches based on the set threshold η (i) via RSDM (described in Algorithm 2).
If we select more patches than the specified limit N , we decrease η (i) by 0.01 to
choose fewer patches in the next iteration. On the other hand, if the number of
the patches is less than N , we increase η (i) by 0.01 to obtain more patches next
round. With the updated η (i) , we iterate the above steps until the top r% relatively sharp patches in V (i) are collected, where r is set to 20 in our work. In the
end, we obtain a set of relatively sharp patches, denoted as S (i) in Algorithm 1,
for reblurring.

2

Computational cost of our method

Table 1 presents the computational cost of each component of our method for
adapting the deblurring model, ESTRNN. The total runtime for processing 3, 000
images from the BSD testing dataset is 945 seconds, or 0.315 seconds per image
on average, on an NVIDIA 3090 GPU. Additionally, our adaptation is conducted
offline, allowing the adapted models to operate during inference without incurring additional overhead.

