Supplementary Material
ReLoo: Reconstructing Humans Dressed in Loose
Garments from Monocular Video in the Wild
Chen Guo∗1 , Tianjian Jiang∗1 , Manuel Kaufmann1 , Chengwei Zheng1 ,
Julien Valentin2 , Jie Song†1 , and Otmar Hilliges1
1

ETH Zürich
Microsoft

2

In this supplementary document, we provide additional materials to supplement our manuscript. In Sec. 1, we provide further implementation details of
our proposed method ReLoo. Sec. 2 explains details of our experiment, including
dataset descriptions and the implementation of baseline methods. Furthermore,
in Sec. 3, we show additional quantitative and qualitative comparisons to demonstrate our superior performance over prior art and provide ablation studies of
more components in our framework. Sec. 4 includes more qualitative results of
our method on in-the-wild videos and an illustration of the decomposition of
the inner body and outer garment layer. Finally, we discuss our limitations and
potential negative societal impacts in Sec. 5. In the supplementary video, we
show more 3D surface reconstruction and novel view synthesis results of dynamic
humans dressed in loose outfits using our method and qualitative comparisons
with baseline methods, both on indoor datasets and in-the-wild video sequences.

1

Implementation Details

1.1

Layered Neural Human Representation

Parameterization Details. In the main manuscript, we denote the body and
garment layer with an implicit neural network f B , or f G respectively. In practice, f B and f G each consist of two separate neural networks that model the
geometry and texture field of the respective layer, which is similar to [7, 24]. For
the neural body layer, our SDF network fsB that models the geometry takes the
point xB
c and the human pose parameters θ as input and outputs the signed
distance value sB along with global geometry features z B of dimension 256.
Our body texture network fcB takes the point xB
c , the human pose parameters
θ, points’ normals nB
in
deformed
space,
and
the extracted 256-dimensional
d
global geometry feature vectors z B from the neural body SDF network as input and predicts the radiance value cB . Specifically, the points’ normals nB
d are
calculated by the spatial gradient of the signed distance field fsB w.r.t. the 3D
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author. Now at HKUST(GZ) & HKUST

