4D Panoptic Scene Graph Generation

Jingkang Yang1 , Jun Cen2 , Wenxuan Peng1 , Shuai Liu3 , Fangzhou Hong1 ,
Xiangtai Li1 , Kaiyang Zhou4 , Qifeng Chen2 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 4 Hong Kong Baptist University
https://github.com/Jingkang50/PSG4D
(c) Reasoning & Planning

(a) Visual Input from the 4D Dynamic World

Executing PSG4D

Perceiving
#12

#30

#0

#0

PSG4D

Parsing

(b) PSG-4D: 4D Panoptic Scene Graph
#12

[keep sending scene graph…]

Oh wait, seems a man fell from his
bike, we should go help him pick up
his bike. Where is the bike?

be
booth hind

#30
adult-2
bike

loo
kin

#2 g at
4-#
30
#0-#12

riding

The bike is 2.4m ahead,
lying on the ground.

Good, go forward 2.4m to the
bike, straighten the bike, and
check whether the man injured.

b
fence eside

adult-3
adult-1

Controller

LLM

LLM

Executing!

#12-#18

lyin
g

#1 on
8-#
30

falling from
ground

n
go
ndin 30
sta #23-#

Reasoning

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of PSG-4D. PSG-4D is essentially a spatiotemporal representation capturing
not only fine-grained semantics in image pixels (i.e., panoptic segmentation masks) but also the temporal
relational information (i.e., scene graphs). In (a) and (b), the model abstracts information streaming in RGB-D
videos into (i) nodes that represent entities with accurate location and status information and (ii) edges that
encapsulate the temporal relations. Such a rich 4D representation serves as a bridge between the PSG-4D system
and a large language model, which greatly facilitates the decision-making process, as illustrated in (c).

Abstract
We are living in a three-dimensional space while moving forward through a fourth
dimension: time. To allow artificial intelligence to develop a comprehensive
understanding of such a 4D environment, we introduce 4D Panoptic Scene Graph
(PSG-4D), a new representation that bridges the raw visual data perceived in a
dynamic 4D world and high-level visual understanding. Specifically, PSG-4D
abstracts rich 4D sensory data into nodes, which represent entities with precise
location and status information, and edges, which capture the temporal relations.
To facilitate research in this new area, we build a richly annotated PSG-4D dataset
consisting of 3K RGB-D videos with a total of 1M frames, each of which is labeled
with 4D panoptic segmentation masks as well as fine-grained, dynamic scene
graphs. To solve PSG-4D, we propose PSG4DFormer, a Transformer-based model
that can predict panoptic segmentation masks, track masks along the time axis,
and generate the corresponding scene graphs via a relation component. Extensive
experiments on the new dataset show that our method can serve as a strong baseline
for future research on PSG-4D. In the end, we provide a real-world application
example to demonstrate how we can achieve dynamic scene understanding by
integrating a large language model into our PSG-4D system.
Corresponding author. Contact: {jingkang001, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

