Prompt-Driven Contrastive Learning for
Transferable Adversarial Attacks
— Supplementary Material —
Hunmin Yang1,2 , Jongoh Jeong1 , and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1

KAIST
ADD
https://PDCL-Attack.github.io
2

In this supplementary material, we provide additional details that are not
included in the paper due to space limitations. This includes the preliminaries
(Sec. A), implementation details (Sec. B), more quantitative experimental results
(Sec. C), and more qualitative experimental results (Sec. D), respectively.

A

Preliminaries

A.1

Generative Model-based Adversarial Attack

In previous years, the standard attack protocol has been instance-based iterative methods [3–6, 10, 18, 20–23, 27–29, 37, 44], favored for their simplicity and
effectiveness. However, the iterative approach often encounters limitations due
to its inefficient time complexity and overfitting to the training data and model.
In this context, generative attacks [25, 26, 30, 34, 46, 51] have garnered attention,
demonstrating their high transferability across various domains and models. This
is attributed to the fact that generative attacks utilize entire data distributions
through adversarial training [9], rather than fitting individual image samples.
Perturbation generator. Given a batch of clean image samples x, the perturbation generator Gθ (⋅) generates unbounded adversarial examples x̃′ . These
unbounded samples are constrained within a predefined budget ϵ by the perturbation projector P (⋅), ensuring that ∥P (x̃′ ) − x∥∞ ≤ ϵ. The resulting bounded
adversarial examples x′ are designed to perturb the predictions of unknown victim models. Our setting is established within a rigorous black-box scenario, in
which both the target domain distributions and model architectures vary.
Surrogate model. In transfer-based attack scenarios, the adversary leverages
surrogate models to simulate potential unknown victim models and craft adversarial examples. The perturbation generator Gθ (⋅) is trained by perturbing the
predictions of the surrogate model and back-propagating the loss gradients. Recent works [1, 2, 34, 43, 51] utilize mid-layer features fk (⋅) from the surrogate
model, which encapsulate shared attributes among various model architectures.
Building upon these approaches, we utilize a pre-trained CLIP [31] model as an
additional guidance model that has undergone large-scale training.

