———— Supplementary Material ————
When Pedestrian Detection Meets Multi-Modal
Learning: Generalist Model and Benchmark
Dataset
Yi Zhang2 , Wang Zeng2 , Sheng Jin3,2 , Chen Qian1,2
Ping Luo3,4 , and Wentao Liu2
1

Tsinghua University 2 SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
The University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
yizhang.bham.uk@outlook.com, qianc18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
3

S1

EventPed Dataset

In this section, we provide more details and analysis for our newly introduced
EventPed Dataset. We introduce more details about data processing in Section S1.1 and provides analysis and statistics of the dataset in Section S1.2.
S1.1

Data processing.

Time synchronization is achieved using a physical connection between the cameras. Given the small distance between the cameras, spatial registration can be
approximated using a homography matrix. Initially, we performed camera calibration to estimate the intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters. Subsequently,
the homography matrix was calculated to project the coordinates of event images onto the corresponding RGB images. This process ensured the alignment
of RGB-Event image pairs. Finally, we cropped the central region of the registered RGB-Event image pairs to ensure the same field of vision and image size,
resulting in a resolution of 960 × 512 pixels for all samples.
S1.2

Analysis and Statistics.

We conducted an analysis comparing the EventPed dataset with the existing
event-based dataset, PEDRo. In Fig. S1(a,b), we present heatmaps visualizing
the distribution of bounding boxes. The heatmaps illustrate the probability of
bounding boxes covering each pixel. The EventPed dataset shows a more uniform
distribution in the horizontal direction and a more concentrated distribution
in the vertical direction compared to PEDRo. Furthermore, we examined the
distribution of bounding box sizes, as shown in Fig. S1(c). Our EventPed dataset
exhibits a higher number of bounding boxes in larger sizes. This difference can
be attributed to the disparity in image resolutions between the two datasets.
The PEDRo dataset has a relatively low image resolution of 260 × 346, while
our EventPed dataset boasts a higher resolution of 960 × 512.

