Supplementary Materials for 3iGS
Zhe Jun Tang1

and Tat-Jen Cham2

1

2

A

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
College of Computing & Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
{zhejun001} at {e.ntu.edu.sg}

Training Details

We detail the training methodology for 3iGS as follows:
3iGS is structured around two key components: a Gaussian Splatting backbone and a factorised tensorial illumination field utilising a grid-based representation. To establish a stable training phase, the initial 3,000 iterations focus
on optimizing the Gaussian parameters, including standard opacity, anisotropic
covariance matrices, and diffused color. Subsequently, specular colors from the
neural renderer are incorporated, extending the training up to 30,000 iterations.
For the illumination field grid, a consistent grid size of 150 is maintained across
each axis (XYZ) to facilitate training on synthetic datasets from NeRF Synthetic
Blender and Shiny Blender.
The training process for 3iGS employs two separate Adam optimisers: one
dedicated to the 3D Gaussian Splats and the other to the illumination field
grid. The initial learning rates are adopted from the benchmarks set by 3DGS
and TensoRF, with Gaussian features starting at a learning rate of 0.0025. The
illumination grid and neural renderer network have learning rates of 0.02 and
0.001, respectively.
For the 3D Gaussian features, the number of BRDF feature channels is established at 48, aligning with the total channel size used by 3DGS for its radiance field via spherical harmonics. On top of that, we have added an additional
parameter for roughness prediction for Integrated Directional Encoding. Separately, the illumination field grid is configured with 48 feature channels on each
axis. The neural renderer is designed with a single hidden layer, comprising of
128 feature channels.

B

Colour Decomposition

In Fig. B.1, we illustrate the decomposition of both diffused and specular colour
before a linear addition to form a full colour. In the specular component, we observed that intra-scene reflections of the drums and view-dependent illumination
is well captured compared to the original Gaussian Splatting work.

