Supplementary Materials for SFPNet
Yanbo Wang1,2 , Wentao Zhao1,2 , Chuan Cao1,2 , Tianchen Deng1,2 , Jingchuan
Wang1,2 , and Weidong Chen1,2,†
1

Institute of Medical Robotics and Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China
2
Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing, Ministry of
Education, Shanghai 200240, China
{yanbowang319,wentaozhao,alex008,dengtianchen,jchwang,wdchen}@sjtu.edu.cn

1

Introduction

In this supplementary materials, we provide our dataset details about sensors,
scenes, annotation process and label distributions in Sec. 2. Additional method
details are demonstrated in Sec. 3. More experiment results and network analysis
are given in Sec. 4. Limitations and future works are discussed in Sec. 5.

2

Dataset: SeMantic InDustry

2.1

Scenes

Many applications rely on the crucial aspect of comprehending semantic scenes.
However, most existing benchmarks [3,4,17,24] focus on driving scenes. To fill the
gap in public dataset of industrial outdoor scenes for robotic application, we
collect a total of 38904 frames of hybrid-solid LiDAR data in different substations
and have annotated 25 categories as shown in Fig. 2. Overall comparison with
previous benchmarks is shown in Tab. 1.
2.2

Sensors

Fig. 1 shows the sensors equipped on our industrial robot used to collect S.MID.
To the best of our knowledge, S.MID is the first large-scale outdoor hybridsolid LiDAR semantic segmentation dataset. In addition to the features
shown in the figures, Livox Mid-360 is much more cost-effective compared to
traditional mechanical spinning LiDAR.
In accordance with the illustration provided in Fig. 1 and Fig. 1 (b) in the
main text, Livox Mid-360 is suitable for industrial robots involving scene understanding tasks since it covers a broader range of scenes with non-repetitive
scanning mode. However, it is a double-edged sword. This mode will also make
the point cloud relatively sparse and randomly distributed. Therefore, the
single-frame hybrid-solid LiDAR segmentation task brings more challenges
to network design.
†

Corresponding Author.

