18

Arman Behnam and Binghui Wang

Appendix

A

A GNN-SCM Example

The causal structure of a graph is a subgraph centering on a reference node and
accepts the SCM structure via Definition 2. The goal of causality in a graph
is to identify the subgraph with the maximum explainable node expressivity as
Theorem 4 that causally explains GNN predictions. Below, we use a toy example
graph to show how our explainer captures the causality in this graph.
We use a toy example to demonstrate SCMs and
the intervention process in GNNs. Figure 7 shows a
graph G that contains four nodes A, B, C, and D, and
A
B
D
three edges A-B, A-C, and B-D. In GNNs, these edges
contain messages passing between two nodes. For exC
ample, the message between two nodes A and B in
l−1
the l-th layer of the GNN is mlA,B = MSG(hl−1
,
h
,
A
B
Fig. 7: A toy example
eA,B ). If there exists an edge, it means that there is an
interaction between nodes that has a specific value in
each layer l. If there is no edge, two nodes don’t share
a message. If we consider node A as the reference node v, the nodes B, and C are
in the 1-hop neighbors N≤1 (v), and node D is in the 2-hop neighbors N≤2 (v).
This GNN-SCM induces its causal structure G from Graph G, as discussed in
Definition 2.

A.1

GNN-SCM construction

Following [23], we build a GNN-SCM M(G) that learns from the causal structure
G. The endogenous variables are node labels {yv ; v ∈ A, B, C, D}. The exogenous
variables in G are reference node A’s states: uA1 , uA2 (in this example we consider binary states A1 and A2 ), edges effects on reference node A: uA,B , uA,C ,
and neighbor nodes’ effects on reference node A: uB , uC , uD . All of these latent variables are assumed to accept the same probability P (U) as a probability
function defined over the domain of U since we don’t want to input new specific
information. F is a set of functions based on the observable and latent variables
discussed above. One should consider that uvi and uvj are not independent.
As discussed in Theorem 1, we construct the GNN-SCM M(G) based on
graph G as M(G) =: (U, V, F, P (U)), where:

