Supplementary Material for "Multi-modal Crowd
Counting via a Broker Modality"
Haoliang Meng1 , Xiaopeng Hong1,2⋆ , Chenhao Wang1 , Miao Shang1 , and
Wangmeng Zuo1,2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
menghaoliang2002@163.com hongxiaopeng@ieee.org 22b903078@stu.hit.edu.cn
miaos0522@gmail.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

1

Additional Experiments

Here we present two experiments to further demonstrate our proposed broker
modality generator (BMG) and the ‘two-stage’ learning scheme. First, we evaluate the image registration-based methods for ghost effect alleviation on crowd
images and find that these methods perform poorly. This underscores the necessity of designing a new method instead of using traditional alignment methods
to mitigate space misalignment between two modalities (as described in the
footnote of the main paper), which motivates the design of our method. Next,
we demonstrate the improvement in the quality of the intermediate-modal images, which further highlights the effectiveness of our proposed BMG and the
two-stage learning scheme in mitigating the ghosting effect. Further details are
elaborated below.
1.1

Illustration of the Performance of Image Registration
Algorithms on Crowd Images

The primary goal of image registration is to align and superimpose multiple images depicting the same scene but captured under varying resolutions, perspectives, or fields of view. Among all vision-infrared registration approaches, point
feature matching [1, 2, 5] is the most popular, whose target is to find matching points between vision and infrared images and obtain the transformation
parameters such as shifts, rotation, and shear.
Initially, we strive to align visual and thermal images through registration
before feeding them to the fusion model, aiming to mitigate the space misalignment and thereby mitigate the ghosting phenomenon in the intermediate
modality. Unfortunately, we have found that despite the satisfactory outcomes
achieved by the registration methods mentioned above on natural images, they
perform inadequately on crowd image pairs with low capture quality and poor
visibility conditions. We will elaborate on the experimental results and detailed
rationale in the following section.
⋆

Corresponding author.

