GazeXplain: Learning to Predict Natural
Language Explanations of Visual Scanpaths
(Supplementary Materials)
Xianyu Chen , Ming Jiang , and Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN 55455, USA
{chen6582,mjiang}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

1

Introduction

In the main paper, we have introduced GazeXplain, a novel study of visual scanpath and prediction. It involves an annotation of ground-truth explanations for
diverse eye-tracking datasets related to scanpath, a general model architecture
with an attention-language decoder simultaneously predicting scanpaths and
the corresponding natural language explanations, a novel semantic alignment
mechanism for consistent fixation-explanation alignment, and a cross-dataset
co-training to generalize the scanpath prediction and explanation as well as
overcome data and task-specific biases. Our experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method achieves competitive performance and strong generalizability. The supplementary materials provide further details and additional
results to support these findings:
1) Sec. 2 elaborates on the specific details of the proposed GazeXplain model,
including the vision-language encoding module and the objective functions.
2) Sec. 3 presents the implementation details regarding the setting of hyperparameters and the training method of the proposed GazeXplain.
3) Sec. 4 presents supplementary ablation studies conducted on all three eyetracking datasets (AiR-D [2], OSIE [19], and COCO-Search18 [20]). These
studies evaluate the effectiveness of the three key technical components of
our approach:
– Language Decoder for Scanpath Explanations (EXP)
– Semantic Alignment Mechanism (ALN)
– Cross-Dataset Co-training (CT)
4) Sec. 5 presents additional quantitative results by analyzing the generated explanations from various large vision-language models, including our GazeXplain. We provide comprehensive experiments on different prompt settings,
with or without observer answers to the prompts, varied training strategies
of competitors, and a more diverse range of eye-tracking datasets. These results highlight the robustness and effectiveness of our model across various
scenarios.
5) Sec. 6 presents additional qualitative results comparing GazeXplain’s scanpaths and explanations with those generated by state-of-the-art scanpath

