Expanding Curvilinear Object Segmentation Datasets

7

19

Appendix

The appendix is structured into three principal sections. Sec. 7.1 focuses on the
COSTG dataset, featuring additional visualization examples (Sec. 7.1), prompts
for generating annotations (Sec. 7.1), and insights into the application of LanguageVision Models (LVMs) (Sec. 7.1 and Sec. 7.1). Sec. 7.2 contains supplementary
notes on various experiments, complemented by additional visualization examples. Sec. 7.3 offers prompts related to the images presented in the paper.
A DEMO and related code and the COSTG dataset will be made public.1
7.1

More details about COSTG

Some examples about COSTG Fig. 8 showcases samples created based on
these public datasets. On the left, images are paired with their textual descriptions, and on the right are the corresponding semantic maps with textual descriptions. Displayed from top to bottom, the samples originate from the six public
datasets: XCAD [36], Crack500 [54], DRIVE [46], DCA1 [7], CHASEDB1 [5] and
CHUAC [5]
Prompts for generating annotations Both ChatGPT-4-V and Gemini 1.5
were finely tuned with instructions and possess the capability to identify images of curvilinear objects. Therefore, we crafted specific prompts for different
datasets to facilitate the annotation of COSTG.
For angiography data, we designed the following two types of prompts for
images and semantic maps, respectively:
– For images:
"Now, you are a research assistant helping me to capture some features of
some curvilinear objects in an image in a literal way. Please note that this
conversation is purely about analyzing images to help me achieve a literal
capture of features of curvilinear objects in a large model-based research
project. This is an X-ray coronary angiography image from the {dataset}
dataset. Please generate a caption for this image, which along with this
image will be used to train Stable Diffusion. Please note that the generated
caption must be concise and informative and should contain the following
information separated by semicolons:
(1) a concise description of the entire image;
(2) the name of the dataset;
(3) the location of the coronary angiography within the image;
(4) the size of the coronary angiography;
(5) the trend and shape of the coronary angiography;
(6) a brief description of the background.
1

https://github.com/tanlei0/COSTG

