Supplemental Materials of
Rawformer: Unpaired Raw-to-Raw Translation
for Learnable Camera ISPs
Georgy Perevozchikov1 , Nancy Mehta1 ⋆ , Mahmoud Afifi2
Timofte1

⋆⋆

, and Radu

1

Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Würzburg,
John Skilton Str. 4a, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
{georgii.perevozchikov,nancy.mehta,radu.timofte}@uni-wuerzburg.de
2
York University, 4700 Keele St, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M3J 1P3
m.3afifi@gmail.com

In this supplementary material, we first discuss the holistic architecture of
our proposed Rawformer along with the experimental details in Sec. 1. Then,
we delve into the details of the style modulator along with the demonstration of
its efficacy in the restoration of the overall structural fidelity of the translated
images in Sec. 2. Next, we present some additional ablation studies and inference
time comparison to prove the effectiveness of the proposed components in Sec.
3. Lastly, we provide additional results, including mappings between DSLR and
mobile phone cameras, as well as additional visual results, in Sec. 5.

1

Architecture and Experimental Details

In the main paper, we introduced Rawformer, a fully unsupervised framework
for raw-to-raw translation. The overview of the proposed framework and the
training flow are illustrated in Fig. 1. As can be seen, we train two generator networks, GA−B and GB−A , alongside two discriminator networks, DA and
DB , utilizing cycle consistency loss, identity loss, and discriminator loss. Our
framework accurately maps images from domain A to domain B through a fully
unsupervised training scheme.
1.1

Pre-training of Generator Networks

The pre-training phase of the generator network, essential for initializing the
weights effectively, involves a self-supervised image inpainting task spanning 500
epochs. This task is designed to enhance the network’s detail preservation capabilities in input images. Specifically, the network is trained on 32×32 pixel
patches from the source dataset comprising of images of size 256×256, with 40%
of these patches randomly masked. The masking is conducted by zeroing out the
pixel values. The objective of the generator is to reconstruct the original image
⋆
⋆⋆

Corresponding Author
Now at Google

