Supplementary Material of
DCDM: Diffusion-Conditioned-Diffusion Model
for Scene Text Image Super-Resolution
Shrey Singh1 , Prateek Keserwani1 , Masakazu Iwamura2 , and Partha
Pratim Roy1
1

A

Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand-247667, India
{ssingh19, pkeserwani, partha}@cs.iitr.ac.in
2
Osaka Metropolitan University, Sakai, Osaka 599-8531, Japan
masa.i@omu.ac.jp

The advantages of TCDM [23], which should be taken
into account for a fair comparison

We discuss two advantages of TCDM and how they affect the experimental
results and our findings.
Two advantages of TCDM TCDM has two advantages compared to other
conventional methods and our proposed method. For a fair comparison, we
should take them into account.
The first advantage of TCDM is to use ground truth text in training, as
described in the part of “training strategy” in Section 4.2. In other words, TCDM
always uses correct labels in the training. In contrast, the proposed method was
trained using the recognition results of the HR images like other conventional
methods. As shown in Tab. 1, the accuracy of HR images is no better than 82%
on average. Since it is known that wrong labels significantly spoil recognition
accuracy [50], this is a significant advantage of TCDM.
The second advantage of TCDM is to use large synthetic data in training.
Figure 3 of the TCDM paper shows the effect of using synthetic data in training,
as shown in Fig. A.1. The figure shows that TCDM gains its accuracy thanks
to their synthetic data. Since the primary contribution of the TCDM paper is
the introduction of large synthetic data in training, such a result is reasonable.
However, comparing methods under different conditions (i.e., some methods are
trained with large synthetic data and others are without) is not fair.
How do the advantages of TCDM affect? In the quantitative evaluation
in Section 4.3, we compared the proposed method with conventional methods.
As shown in Tab. 1, our proposed method clearly outperformed all conventional
methods except TCDM and achieved comparable accuracy with TCDM. Therefore, considering the purpose of this paper—to seek an answer to the question,

