Supplementary Material for
SwapAnything : Enabling Arbitrary Object
Swapping in Personalized Image Editing
Jing Gu1⋆ Nanxuan Zhao2 Wei Xiong2 Qing Liu2 Zhifei Zhang2 He Zhang2
Jianming Zhang2 HyunJoon Jung2 Yilin Wang2⋆⋆ Xin Eric Wang1⋆⋆
1

A

University of California, Santa Cruz 2 Adobe
https://swap-anything.github.io/

Variable Swapping Details

We use Stable Diffusion 2.1 as the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model.
DreamBooth [8] is used to convert the concept into textual space. The learning
rate for this process is set at 1e-6, and we use the Adawm optimizer for 800 steps.
The U-net and the text encoder are fine-tuned during this process, typically
taking about 2 minutes on a machine equipped with 8 A100 GPUs. The target
prompt is essentially the source prompt with a swap in object tokens to introduce
a new concept.
For object mask, we first detect the object with Grounding DINO [7] and
then extract the mask using Segment Anything [4]. For the targeting variable
swapping, we do 30 for latent image feature z, 20 steps for cross-attention map,
25 for the self-attention map, and 10 for the self-attention output, we conduct
swapping in all U-Net layer.
For area mask smooth, we first enlarge the masked areas using a dilation
operation with an elliptical kernel, which can be adjusted in size. After dilation,
the mask edges are smoothed using a Gaussian blur, creating a gradient effect
at the boundaries. For the smooth over diffusion step, we linearly increase the
mask rate from 0 to 1 during the first 30 steps. For a better understanding, we
mark the masked area using a circle in most figures in this paper.

B

Adaptation Details

Style Adaptation. This operation adjusts the mean and variance of content
image features to match those of the style features, facilitating the transfer of
artistic styles onto content images. The AdaIN technique is renowned for its
efficiency and flexibility, making it a go-to choice for real-time style transfer
and artistic image manipulation. Building on this, we introduce Masked-AdaIN.
Unlike traditional AdaIN which applies style alignment across the entire image, Masked-AdaIN focuses this alignment only on a specific target area. In
⋆
⋆⋆

This work was partly performed when the first author interned at Adobe.
Equal advising.

