Brain-ID

1

Appendix
A

Datasets and Metrics

Datasets We test and compare our method over various datasets including
modalities of MR and CT, the MR images further contain T1-weighted , T2weighted and FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery) images.
– ADNI [30]: we use T1-weighted (2045 cases) MRI scans from the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). All scans are acquired at 1 mm
isotropic resolution from a wide array of scanners and protocols. The dataset
contains aging subjects, some diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) or Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Many subjects present strong atrophy
patterns and white matter lesions.
– HCP [19]: we use T1-weighted (897 cases) and T2-weighted (897 cases) MRI
scans of young subjects from the Human Connectome Project, acquired at
0.7 mm resolution.
– ADNI3 [60]: we use T1-weighted (331 cases) and FLAIR (331 cases) MRI
scans from ADNI3, which continues the previously funded ADNI1, ADNIGO, and ADNI2 studies to determine the relationships between the clinical,
cognitive, imaging, genetic and biochemical biomarker characteristics of the
entire spectrum of sporadic late onset AD.
– ADHD200 [9]: we use T1-weighted (961 cases) MRI scans from ADH200 Sample, which is a grassroots initiative dedicated to the understanding of the
neural basis of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
– AIBL [23]: we use T1-weighted (668 cases), T2-weighted (302 cases) and
FLAIR (336 cases) MRI scans from The Australian Imaging, Biomarkers
and Lifestyle (AIBL) Study, which is a study of cognitive impairment (MCI)
and Alzheimer’s disease dementia.
– OASIS3 [35]: we use CT (885 cases) scans from OASIS3, which is a longitudinal neuroimaging, clinical, and cognitive dataset for normal aging and
AD. For our experiments, we use CT and T1-weighted MRI pair with the
earliest date, from each subject.
Data for Synthetic Generator Brain-ID’s synthetic generator uses (1) brain
segmentation labels, for random-contrast input images generation (Sec. 3.1), and
(2) MP-RAGE, the target ground truth for anatomy-guided supervision (Sec. 3.2).
In this work, we use the segmentation maps of training images from ADNI [30],
as well as their corresponding MP-RAGE images. Note that we do not use any
type of real images from ADNI as input for Brain-ID’s pre-training.
Data Preprocessing For all datasets, we skull-strip all the images using SynthStrip [26], and resample them to 1 mm isotropic resolution. For all the images,
except T1-weighted MRI, in each dataset, we use NiftyReg [43] rigid registration

