DySeT: A Dynamic Masked
Self-distillation Approach for Robust
Trajectory Prediction
Mozhgan Pourkeshavarz(B) , Junrui Zhang , and Amir Rasouli
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Canada
{mozhgan.pourkeshavarz,junrui.zhang,amir.rasouli}@huawei.com

Abstract. The lack of generalization capability of behavior prediction
models for autonomous vehicles is a crucial concern for safe motion
planning. One way to address this is via self-supervised pre-training
through masked trajectory prediction. However, the existing models rely
on uniform random sampling of tokens, which is sub-optimal because it
implies that all components of driving scenes are equally informative.
In this paper, to enable more robust representation learning, we introduce a dynamic masked self-distillation approach to identify and utilize informative aspects of the scenes, particularly those corresponding
to complex driving behaviors, such as overtaking. Speciﬁcally, for targeted sampling, we propose a dynamic method that prioritizes tokens,
such as trajectory or lane segments, based on their informativeness.
The latter is determined via an auxiliary network that estimates token
distributions. Through sampler optimization, more informative tokens
are rewarded and selected as visible based on the policy gradient algorithm adopted from reinforcement learning. In addition, we propose a
masked self-distillation approach to transfer knowledge from fully visible to masked scene representations. The distillation process not only
enriches the semantic information within the visible token set but also
progressively reﬁnes the sampling process. Further, we use an integrated
training regime to enhance the model’s ability to learn meaningful representations from informative tokens. Our extensive evaluation on two
large-scale trajectory prediction datasets demonstrates the superior performance of the proposed method and its improved prediction robustness
across diﬀerent scenarios.

1

Introduction

Trajectory prediction, as one of the crucial components for autonomous driving, involves forecasting future positions of road users based on their observed
behavior and the environment’s layout. Recently, learning-based approaches, in
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 19.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 324–342, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_19

