Spatially-Variant Degradation Model for
Dataset-free Super-resolution
Supplementary Material

A

Visual Representation of Membership Function

D
The visual representation of the proposed membership function {µi }N
i=1 with
varying values of σg and ND in Eq.(5) is shown in Fig. 1. It is evident that as
the number of membership functions ND increases, the mean difference between
different membership functions diminishes. This implies that the texture information from distinct areas is extracted more finely. Additionally, as σg increases,
the overlapping regions under the membership functions expand, indicating that
the structural information utilized by different membership functions becomes
more similar.

B

Hyper-parameter Analysis of Membership Function

We empirically analyze the impact of σg on SVDSR. The PSNR and SSIM
performance of SVDSR under different σg are shown in Tab. 1, and the corresponding visualization results of fuzzy coefficient matrices and atom blur kernels
are shown in Fig. 2.
It can be seen that when σg is 0.5, the texture information of different intensities in the image can be effectively extracted. When σg takes other different values, the captured texture information will be missing at certain frequencies. The
learned atom degradation kernel of the central atom exhibits a clear shape resembling an anisotropic Gaussian kernel, which is very different from the shapes
of other kernels. The leftmost atom degradation kernel approximates an isotropic
Gaussian blur kernel because the pixels extracted by corresponding membership
function in the textureless area cannot provide sufficient degradation information
for learning the atom degradation kernel. Since the high-frequency region contains a small number of pixels and a lot of noise, it is difficult for the rightmost
atom degradation kernel to learn a clear shape. Taking into account the quantitative results and the visual results of the learned atom degradation kernels and
fuzzy coefficient matrices, σg is empirically set to 0.5.

C

Network Architecture

The generator G is based on an encoder-decoder backbone structure. A skip
connection structure is imposed to focus on capturing more global shallow-level
information, implemented in the frequency domain using FFT/IFFT. Instance
normalization layers are incorporated to alleviate overfitting in the absence of a
dataset. The detailed network architecture is shown in Fig. 3.

