1

In this supplement, we include additional results referenced in the main text
to support our experiments and analysis, along with our source code. We furthermore include several video demos on our attached project page, which we
strongly encourage readers to view. The project page is accessible by opening
the index.html file in the website folder of the supplemental material.

A

Implementation Details

Our codebase is a heavily modified fork of the original ViperGPT [14] codebase.
We used Langchain for interfacing with large language models and including
in-context examples in the prompt. For visual modules, we used BLIP-2 [5] for
Image QA, GroundingDino [8] (with Swin-T backbone) for object detection,
LaViLa [22] for video captioning, and ByteTrack [21] for object tracking. Each
video is represented as 60 frames at their native resolution. All model inference
can be done with a single Nvidia A100 GPU, but we split the evalution over
multiple GPUs for speed, especially for datasets with large test sets, like MSRVTT.

B

Datasets and Metrics Details

B.1

Datasets

TGIF-QA [7], MSVD-QA [16], and MSRVTT-QA [16] are open-ended
VideoQA benchmarks automatically generated from captions, with some manual
annotations. Each question has a single answer that is one word or phrase. TGIFQA consists of GIFs that are a few seconds long, while MSVD and MSR-VTT
can be up to 15 seconds. For MSVD and MSRVTT, questions are split into five
categories: who, what, when, where and how, while TGIF is split into color,
object, location, and number.
iVQA [17] is a recent open-ended benchmark based on instructional videos. It
only includes visual questions, and for each answer has multiple correct answers,
reducing ambiguity for each question.
ActivityNet-QA [19] is an open-ended benchmark containing longer videos, up
to 3 minutes long. It contains nine categories: motion, spatial, temporal, yes/no,
color, object, location, number and ‘free’.
TVQA [4] is a multiple-choice video QA dataset focused on multimodal understanding from clips of popular TV shows. Each question has 5 answers, and each
question also has a ground-truth scene transcript. Questions are either visual or
focused on the narrative aspect of the scene.
EgoSchema [10] is a recent multiple-choice zero-shot benchmark focused on
long-term video understanding. Videos are sourced from Ego4D and are all 3
minutes long, which questions requiring long-horizon understanding. It contains
5K video in a held-out test split and no training data. The questions and answers
are created from processing Ego4D ground-truth narrations with an LLM.

