Supplementary Material for X-InstructBLIP: A
Framework for Aligning Image, 3D, Audio, Video
to LLMs and its Emergent Cross-modal
Reasoning
Artemis Panagopoulou1⋆ , Le Xue2,∗∗ , Ning Yu2,∗∗ , Junnan Li2 , Dongxu Li2 ,
Shafiq Joty2 , Ran Xu2 , Silvio Savarese2 , Caiming Xiong2 , and Juan Carlos
Niebles2
1

University of Pennsylvania
artemisp@seas.upenn.edu
2
Salesforce AI Research

1

Data Generation

1.1

Instruction Tuning Data Augmentation

For the audio and 3D modalities, the available range of tasks for instruction tuning is relatively limited. To address this challenge we follow a common paradigm
in the literature [37] and extract question-answer pairs from captioning datasets,
specifically from captions consisting of 10 words or more. Figure 1 delineates
the procedure to automatically generate question answering data from captioning datasets. The google/flan-t5-xxl model from huggingface-transformers is
employed, and is prompted to produce candidate single-word answers based
on the caption. Subsequently, the model is tasked with generating a relevant
question using the answer and context as inputs. The method of round-tripconsistency [29] is utilized to retain only those question-answer pairs that align
with the context. This alignment is verified by ensuring that the Levenshtein
partial similarity between the predicted and initial answers is greater than 0.90,
calculated using the Fuzzy Wuzzy Python package. Subsequently, we apply a
string matching post-processing to filter out instances that do not conform to
the prescribed format. As a result, 250,070/1,157 suitable training/validation
examples are derived from an initial 661,576/5,000 3D-caption samples from
Cap3D [24], and 24,156/1,653 training/validation examples are derived from
38,695/1,900 original audio-caption samples from AudioCaps [16]. Moreover, for
3D data, it is imperative to ensure that the question-answer pairs do not allude to color. This is due to the fact that the 3D encoder does not capture
color characteristics. To achieve this, the language model is directed to reformulate the captions by omitting any references to color, prompted as: Rewrite the
sentence {caption} by eliminating any color mentions, prior to implementing
⋆
⋆⋆

Work done while interning at Salesforce Research
Equal mentorship contribution.

