Supplementary Materials for Towards
Multimodal Open-Set Domain Generalization and
Adaptation through Self-supervision
Hao Dong1 , Eleni Chatzi1 , and Olga Fink2
1

ETH Zürich
{hao.dong, chatzi}@ibk.baug.ethz.ch
2
EPFL
olga.fink@epfl.ch

A

Details on Dataset Splits

For each dataset, we show the exact class splits for each domain.
EPIC-Kitchens dataset [15] consists of three domains, denoted as D1, D2,
and D3, corresponding to actions recorded in three different kitchen styles. This
dataset comprises eight actions, namely, ‘put’, ‘take’, ‘open’, ‘close’, ‘wash’, ‘cut’,
‘mix’, and ‘pour’. All three domains share a common label set of eight classes.
We organize the action names in alphabetic order and assign an index to each
category, 0-close, 1-cut, 2-mix, 3-open, 4-pour, 5-put, 6-take, 7-wash. Each domain is employed as the target domain, while the other two domains function
as source domains, forming three distinct cross-domain tasks (D2, D3 → D1,
and D1, D3 → D2, and D1, D2 → D3). To construct the open-set situations, we
designate the first class as unknown and the remaining classes as known. The
specific categories contained in each domain are shown in Tab. 1.
HAC dataset [5] comprises seven actions (‘sleeping’, ‘watching tv’, ‘eating’,
‘drinking’, ‘swimming’, ‘running’, and ‘opening door’) executed by humans, animals, and cartoon figures, forming three distinct domains H, A, and C. The three
domains have the same label set of 7 classes. We organize the action names in
alphabetic order and assign an index to each category, 0-drinking, 1-eating, 2opening door, 3-running, 4-sleeping, 5-swimming, 6-watching tv. We use each
domain as the target domain and the other two domains as source domains to
form three cross-domain tasks (A, C → H, and H, C → A, and H, A → C). In the
creation of open-set scenarios, the first class is designated as unknown, whereas
the remaining classes are considered known. The specific categories contained in
each domain are shown in Tab. 2.

B

Implementation Details

Our experiments encompass three modalities: video, audio, and optical flow. We
adopt SimMMDG [5] as the base framework by splitting the features within
each modality into modality-specific and modality-shared components due to

