Fast View Synthesis of Casual Videos with
Soup-of-Planes
Supplementary Material
Yao-Chih Lee1,2 , Zhoutong Zhang3 , Kevin Blackburn-Matzen2 ,
Simon Niklaus2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Jia-Bin Huang1 , and Feng Liu2
1

2
University of Maryland College Park
Adobe Research
https://casual-fvs.github.io

3

Adobe

Appendix
We present further discussion of the comparison with 3D Gaussians [5] (Sec. A),
the details of our method implementation (Sec. B), runtime analysis (Sec. C),
model-size analysis (Sec. D), efficacy of view-dependent displacement (Sec. E),
additional comparisons on the NVIDIA dataset [16] (Sec. F), and the discussion of scene flow regularization (Sec. G). Our video results are provided in our
supplementary HTML. Please open index.html in a browser.

A

Discussion of 3D Gaussians and our method

Both Our method and recent 3D Gaussians (3DGS) [5] approaches use explicit
scene representations to enable fast training and rendering. However, there are
some insights that our plane-based approach differs from 3DGS to handle some
challenging scenarios in casual videos.
In 3DGS, each Gaussian stores a single color and is
flexibly located in a 3D space, determined by parallax
cues. In our method, each plane has a 2D array of colors,
where the plane can be viewed as a strong regularization
for 3D scattered points. We can consider that Gaussians
and planes are the two ends of a spectrum. Gaussians have
more freedom to fit a scene but require more parallax cues.
Planes have strong regularization to handle weak parallax
but with relatively limited flexibility. For more flexibility,
we relax the planes with view-dependent displacements.
We illustrate the challenges of 3DGS within scenarios
of weak parallax. The challenge stems from depth ambiguity arising in triangulation due to a limited camera Fig. 1: Ambiguities
baseline. Even when 3D point clouds are well-estimated, of 3DGS in weakparallax scenes.
artifacts may persist in novel views due to limited view directions on the anisotropic Gaussians and the holes introduced by forward splatting (e.g., white spots in main paper Fig. 2). In contrast, our approach utilizing
planes capitalizes on depth priors, effectively mitigating imperfect depth estimation through scene optimization and the proposed view-dependent displacement.
Anisotropy
ambiguity

Depth
ambiguity

Short baseline

View 1

View 2

