Unifying 3D Vision-Language Understanding via Promptable Queries

A1

Appendix
A

Implementation Details

This section introduces more details about model architecture, training details,
and downstream task settings.
A.1

Model architecture

Prompt Encoding To encode textual prompts, we utilize the CLIP (clip-vitlarge-patch14) text encoder with a projection layer. This allows us to encode
text and images into a joint embedding space. For numerical prompts, we employ a linear layer to project locations and bounding box sizes into RD space.
This projection aligns the feature space with CLIP. When it comes to image
prompts, our goal is to utilize image semantics to replace text prompts for zeroshot transfer. To achieve this, we encode the text in the form of “[SOS] [object]
[EOS]”, where [object] is substituted with image semantic features encoded by
the CLIP image encoder. This approach allows us to leverage the semantic information contained within images and use it as a replacement for traditional
text prompts, facilitating zero-shot transfer learning.
Scene Representation For point cloud encoding, we utilize a three-layer PointNet++ [55] architecture. This architecture operates on the input points with different radii: 0.2, 0.4, and sampling all points within this ball. The output of this
PointNet++ is an aggregated 768-dimensional feature representation. For voxel
encoding, we use MinkowskiRes16UNet34C [16] with a voxel size of 0.02m. It
combines the ResNet-16 backbone with the UNet architecture in the Minkowski
Engine framework. It applies 3D convolutions and pooling operations to extract
hierarchical features from the input voxelized data. The network progressively
downsamples the spatial resolution in the encoder path and upsamples it in the
decoder path, while capturing and fusing features at multiple scales through
skip connections. We use four levels of voxel features and project them all to
dimension 768. For image encoding, we use a pre-trained OpenSeg feature backbone [24].
Prompt-guided Query Learning In query initialization, we first use furthest
point sampling [62] to sample points from original point clouds. After we acquire
the location of sampled points, we apply Fourier spatial position encoding [44]
to encode points pi as follows:
⇥
⇤
li = cos(2⇡pi WfT )k sin(2⇡pi WfT )
(A1)
During masked cross-attention, the location information l is incorporated into
the computation of attention by adding it to the queries Q̃l and keys F̃. Here,
Q̃l represents the instance queries, and F̃ denotes the features augmented by
locations. Following the approach described in [62], we enforce attention restriction using a mask generated from the previous layer, denoted as Ml 1 . This

