Supplementary Materials for "Beyond Prompt
Learning: Continual Adapter for Efficient
Rehearsal-Free Continual Learning"
Xinyuan Gao1# , Songlin Dong2# , Yuhang He2⋆ , Qiang Wang1 , and
Yihong Gong1,2
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{gxy010317,dsl97273141,qwang}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, heyuhang@xjtu.edu.cn
ygong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

A

Appendix

A.1

Discuss with LoRA and Naive Adapter

LoRA [5] and adapter [1, 4] aim to tuning the model to adapt the downstream
task with a few of parameters. LoRA [5] is composed of two different low-rank
matrices and is attached in parallel with the QKV attention. Adaptformer [1]
proposes that attaching the adapter in parallel with MLP leads to better performance. However, they lack a viable mechanism (similar to key-query matching in
prompt learning) to address the issue of the absence of task identifiers during the
inference stage, cannot effectively resolve the RFCL problem. Compared with
classical adapter tuning and LoRA, C-ADA expands the trainable parameters in
CAL for every new task, which is parameter-extensible to solve continual tasks.
Joint training of old and new weights in CAL allows the knowledge of the new
task to evolve from the old task and reduces forgetting old knowledge. Besides,
the attached position of C-ADA is diverse, C-ADA can be attached to different
positions such as QKV attention, MLP, projection layer, etc.
A.2

Compare with Adapter in Continual Learning

There are some previous works [2, 10] introduce the adapter tuning into the
continual learning field. [2] maintains a memory buffer (rehearsal-based method)
and leverages a distillation mechanism to merge the adapters from different tasks
to keep the stored parameters unchanged. [10] adapts a single adapter to tuning
the model in the first task. For subsequent tasks, adapter and backbone are
frozen and only the classifier is trained. Differ from the previous works, C-ADA
is a parameter-extensible architecture to solve the RFCL task. Assigning a subadapter to each task and using orthogonality to reduce conflicts leads to better
performance. We provide a more comprehensive result in table 1.
⋆

Yuhang He is the corresponding author; # Xinyuan Gao and Songlin Dong are
co-first authors

