Policy Gradient Methods for
Reinforcement Learning with Function
Approximation

Richard S. Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, Yishay Mansour
AT&T Labs - Research, 180 Park Avenue, Florham Park, NJ 07932

Abstract
Function approximation is essential to reinforcement learning, but
the standard approach of approximating a value function and determining a policy from it has so far proven theoretically intractable.
In this paper we explore an alternative approach in which the policy
is explicitly represented by its own function approximator, independent of the value function, and is updated according to the gradient
of expected reward with respect to the policy parameters. Williams's
REINFORCE method and actor-critic methods are examples of this
approach. Our main new result is to show that the gradient can
be written in a form suitable for estimation from experience aided
by an approximate action-value or advantage function. Using this
result, we prove for the first time that a version of policy iteration
with arbitrary differentiable function approximation is convergent to
a locally optimal policy.
Large applications of reinforcement learning (RL) require the use of generalizing function approximators such neural networks, decision-trees, or instance-based methods.
The dominant approach for the last decade has been the value-function approach, in
which all function approximation effort goes into estimating a value function, with
the action-selection policy represented implicitly as the "greedy" policy with respect
to the estimated values (e.g., as the policy that selects in each state the action with
highest estimated value). The value-function approach has worked well in many applications, but has several limitations. First, it is oriented toward finding deterministic
policies, whereas the optimal policy is often stochastic, selecting different actions with
specific probabilities (e.g., see Singh, Jaakkola, and Jordan, 1994). Second, an arbitrarily small change in the estimated value of an action can cause it to be, or not be,
selected. Such discontinuous changes have been identified as a key obstacle to establishing convergence assurances for algorithms following the value-function approach
(Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996). For example, Q-Iearning, Sarsa, and dynamic programming methods have all been shown unable to converge to any policy for simple
MDPs and simple function approximators (Gordon, 1995, 1996; Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis and van Roy, 1996; Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996). This can occur even if the
best approximation is found at each step before changing the policy, and whether the
notion of "best" is in the mean-squared-error sense or the slightly different senses of
residual-gradient, temporal-difference, and dynamic-programming methods.
In this paper we explore an alternative approach to function approximation in RL.

