MAP-ADAPT: Real-Time Quality-Adaptive Semantic 3D Maps
Supplementary Material
Jianhao Zheng1 Daniel Barath2 Marc Pollefeys2,3 Iro Armeni1
1
Stanford Univsersity 2 ETH Zurich 3 Microsoft

Abstract
In the supplementary material, we provide additional details about the following:
1. A video that shows detailed and comprehensive results
(Section 1).
2. Implementation details (Section 2),
3. Statistics on the generated scenes in HSSD (43 subscenes) and ScanNet (38 scenes) datasets (Section 3),
4. Additional results and ablations (Section 4).

Figure 1. Boundaries. There are three distinct types of boundaries
among coarsest voxels. (i) To create meshes from subvoxels on
faces, we need adjacent subvoxels in 1 neighboring coarse voxel.
(ii) For subvoxels positioned along the edges, subvoxels from 3
neighbors are required. (iii) Subvoxels from all 7 neighbors are
queried to form mesh for the subvoxel located at the corner.

1. Video
See the provided supplementary video for a summarized description of the method and results on different scenes.

Algorithm 1 Multi-Resolution Mesh Generation
1: for each voxel Vp in the coarse resolution at index po-

2. Implementation Details

sition (x, y, z) ∈ N3 do
2:
Form a cube, Cp = {Vp }∪Np , where Np is the set of
Vp ’s 7 neighbors at position (x+1, y, z), (x, y+1, z),
(x, y, z + 1), (x + 1, y + 1, z), (x + 1, y, z + 1),
(x, y + 1, z + 1), (x + 1, y + 1, z + 1) ∈ N3 .
3:
if ∀Vq ∈ Cp , Vq does not have child voxels then
4:
Apply Marching Cubes [4] on Cp .
5:
else
6:
if Vp has child voxels in resolution r then
7:
Form meshes on child voxels that are inside
r
Vp , i.e. on Vp,(i,j,k)
and its 7 neighbors, where
i, j, k ∈ N ∩ [1, R(Vp ) − 1].
8:
end if
9:
for 3 faces, 3 edges and 1 corner of Vp do
10:
// Assume the set of the involved coarse-size
voxel is B
11:
Traverse all child voxels on the boundary in resolution maxVq ∈B (R(Vq )) and generate meshes.
If a child voxel in that resolution does not exist,
substitute it with a lower-resolution voxel in the
same position.
12:
end for
13:
end if
14: end for

Multi-resolution Mesh Generation. Algorithm 1 summarizes how to generate meshes from our multi-resolution
voxel map. For a voxel Vp in the coarse resolution, we define R(Vp ) as the number of child voxels along each axis in
Vp . Under the setting of three resolution levels: coarse (8
cm), middle (4 cm), and fine (1 cm), R(Vp ) ∈ {1, 2, 8}. If
r
Vp is split , Vp,(i,j,k)
represents its child voxel of higher resolution r ∈ {middle, f ine}, where i, j, k ∈ N ∩ [1, R(Vp )]
is the local index of the child voxel in Vp .
We traverse each voxel Vp in the coarse resolution. When
its neighbors and itself are not split, we generate meshes on
these coarse-resolution voxels using [4]. Similar to [11],
there are in total 3 types of boundaries to consider between
Vp and its neighbors. As illustrated in Figure 1, 3 faces,
3 edges, and 1 corner should be considered when creating
mesh surfaces between them. To process these boundaries,
we need to query the information from 1, 3, and 8 neighboring coarse voxels for the face, edge, and corner boundary, respectively. When Vp has child voxels in resolution
r, we traverse all of them and create mesh surfaces (line 7
in Algorithm 1), excluding those that exist on the boundaries to the neighboring coarse voxels. Last, we iterate over
all these boundaries (lines 9-12 in Algorithm 1) and create meshes with the finest possible resolution among the involved coarse voxels. For child voxels that may not exist,
we substitute them with coarser-resolution voxels, as discussed in the main paper.
Let us assume that we are generating meshes on Vp ,
which is at index position (x, y, z) ∈ N3 , Vq is its neigh-

bor at (x + 1, y, z) ∈ N3 , R(Vp ) = 8, and R(Vq ) =
2. When processing the face boundary perpendicular to
the x-axis, information from Vq is required. The smallest possible resolution between Vp and Vq is f ine since
1

