1

Supplementary Material
1

Experiment Details

Sec. 5.2: Effectiveness of Watermark
We conducted experiments using CIFAR10 as the target dataset and ResNet18 as the
reference model. In all methods (backdoor attacks, data poisoning, radioactive data,
and our approach), we randomly selected 50% of the training data and applied specific
markings: backdoor-attacked, poisoned, radioactive-marked, or undercover-marked. For
the backdoor attacks, we used 10 different triggers (one per class) and attached them to
the selected training data. Hidden trigger and sleeper agent were tested as backdoor attacks. Additionally, we evaluated a case of attacking only one class with a single trigger
for only the sleeper agent. In data poisoning, we chose one verification image per class,
resulting in a total of 10 verification images (multi-target setting with 5% budget per
each verification image). As data poisoning, Poison Frogs, meta poison, bullseye, and
gradient matching were evaluated. For radioactive data, 50% of training data and the
entire test data were radioactive-marked. For our work, Fashion MNIST was concealed
behind 50% of training data using a pre-trained DWN. We tested three different architectures: ResNet18 trained from scratch for 100 epochs, MobileNetV2 trained from
scratch for 300 epochs following the "Training From Scratch" mode, and MobileNetV2
with ImageNet pre-trained weights trained for 100 epochs. Each experiment was repeated 10 times for each architecture with dropout, data augmentation techniques (Flip,
Rotation, Translation, Cutout, Shearing), and random selection of 50% of the training
data for watermarking in each trial.
Sec. 6.1: Applications to Various Settings
To demonstrate the general applicability across different datasets, we selected CIFAR100,
FER2013 [5], and Fashion MNIST. CIFAR100 has 32×32 images with 100 classes,
and FER2013 contains 48×48 grayscale images of human faces with 7 classes. Only
sleeper agent, and gradient matching which showed the best performance among the
backdoor attacks and data poisoning were compared. Then, ResNet18, and a simple
CNN without batch normalization were employed as reference models for CIFAR100,
FER2013, and Fashion MNIST. DenseNet-BC [8] from scratch was chosen as the architecture of cheating models. For CIFAR100, a mixture of Fashion MNIST (10 classes)
and MNIST [11] (10 classes) was used as the secret dataset to cover all 100 classes.
For FER2013, we selected the first 7 classes from MNIST as the secret dataset. This
dataset is characterized by its class imbalance, grayscale images, and the need for privacy protection due to the use of human data. For Fashion MNIST, we hid MNIST for
our work and shuffled the class order. The conversion function m(·) was obtained by
feeding training data as input. To evaluate more concretely, we tested the following architectures as cheating models on CIFAR10 as the target dataset and Fashion MNIST as
the secret dataset: EfficientNet [19], PVTv2 [22], ResMLP [20], and PiT [7]. EfficientNet is a CNN-based architecture, PVTv2 is an attention-based transformer, ResMLP

