UMBRAE: Unified Multimodal Brain Decoding
— Supplementary Material —
Weihao Xia1
1

Raoul de Charette2

University College London

Cengiz Oztireli3
2

Inria

3

Jing-Hao Xue1

University of Cambridge

In this supplementary document, we provide further insights, experiments
and analyses. First, in Sec. 1 we describe the tasks and their associated prompts
used in UMBRAE and in Sec. 2 describe the BrainHub benchmark construction.
We then report in Sec. 3 additional experiments to showcase the superiority of
UMBRAE on all tasks, and extend our ablation and analyses in Sec. 4. Finally,
in Sec. 5, we discuss the method limitations and potential negative impacts.

1

UMBRAE: Tasks and Example Prompts

Our method inherits multimodal understanding capabilities of MLLMs, enabling
the switch between different tasks through the use of various task prompts. Taking
Shikra [4] as an example, we excerpts the task prompts used during their training
process in Tab. 1. Three prompts for each task are randomly selected to provide
readers an intuitive understanding. During inference, users are not constrained to
these predefined formats and are free to frame their queries in natural language,
allowing for a broad spectrum of diverse and compelling task formats.
It should be noted that our method is compatible with nearly all tasks featured
in Shikra [4] and LLaVA [13], with the exception of tasks that necessitate initially
locating an object or scene as inputs, such as grounding captioning and referring
expression generation. Importantly, note that although the term ‘image’ is used
in the prompts we do not utilize images as input in our brain understanding tasks.
The reference images are only used for visualization purposes. In practice, the
prompt embedding will be concatenated with the brain features predicted from
our brain encoder, utilizing brain signals as inputs. We report detailed results for
each task of Tab. 1 later in Sec. 3.

2

Details on BrainHub

Our multimodal brain understanding benchmark, coined BrainHub, extends
the popular NSD [1] using COCO [12] annotations. Here, we first describe
NSD (Sec. 2.1) and then elaborate the construction of BrainHub (Sec. 2.2).
2.1

Natural Scenes Dataset

Natural Scenes Dataset [1] (NSD) stands as the largest publicly accessible fMRI
dataset. It encompasses brain activity recordings from 8 subjects (participants)

