1

A

Appendix

In this supplementary, we offer more details on implementation and experiments
in Appendix B and Appendix C, respectively. We also include more qualitative
comparisons regarding depth and normal on zero-shot test sets and in-the-wild
scenarios, 3D reconstruction, and novel view synthesis in Appendix D. Finally,
we discuss limitations and potential negative impact in Appendix E.

B

Implementation Details

B.1

Data Preprocessing

We standardize the resolution at 576×768 to blend samples from various scene
distributions. To maintain the original aspect ratio, we resize the shorter side
of a sample to 576 and randomly crop along the longer side. In the data augmentation strategy, we assign photometric distortion probabilities of 0.05, 0.1,
and 0.05, and greyization probabilities of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.1 for indoor, outdoor,
and object level, respectively. We set the far plane to be 80 meters in both 3D
Ken Burns [12] and our own city dataset for outdoor scenes, and 5 meters in
Objaverse [5] for background-free objects. We also define the normal orientation
in these far (background) regions along the z-axis. In the Replica dataset [18],
we exclude samples with fewer than 50 invalid pixels, designating the invalid
areas to represent distant depths and background normals.
B.2

Our Synthetic Urban Dataset

We first tried to add Virtual KITTI [2] to involve more driving scenarios but ultimately decided against it, as the generated normal map is of low quality due to
the limited resolution of depth map (375×1242). As an alternative, we utilize Unreal Engine to create high-resolution (1440×3840) urban samples (see Fig. S1),
and derive the normal map from depth using the least square algorithm. Our
synthetic data encompasses a wide variety of city entities under different environmental conditions. Since the data is clean and complete, it allows our model
to learn high-quality outdoor patterns.

C

Experimental Details

C.1

Limitation on Normal GT

During our zero-shot tests on traditional normal benchmarks, we discovered
that a lot of normal GT maps have noise, potentially impacting measurement
precision. As shown in Fig. S2, NYUv2’s normal maps struggle with fine details
such as book outlines, shelf edges, and folds, and even incorrectly represent the
flat wall surfaces. Likewise, the normal maps from iBims-1 (limited resolution)
and ScanNet (unexpected surface undulation and poor fine detail capture) are
also of low quality. Thus, the quantitative comparisons presented in the main
paper may only partially reflect the ground truth.

