Supplementary Materials for Occlusion-Aware
Seamless Segmentation
Yihong Cao1,∗ , Jiaming Zhang2,∗ , Hao Shi3 , Kunyu Peng2 ,
Yuhongxuan Zhang1 , Hui Zhang1,† , Rainer Stiefelhagen2 , and
Kailun Yang1,†
1

1

Hunan University, 2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 3 Zhejiang University

Datasets

Dense annotation of BlendPASS. To enhance the accuracy of dense annotations for objects of the Thing class, particularly in representing invisible
regions of occluded objects realistically, our labeling process follows the “independent annotation → cross-verification → voting” workflow. All images are
densely annotated by three skilled annotators using the EISeg tool [5] for initial
segmentation. Specifically, three annotators densely annotate the full region of
each object, and occluded objects are independently annotated by three annotators. Subsequently, cross-verification is conducted among the annotators. In
cases where there are slight discrepancies in the annotations of occluded objects,
the final annotation is determined through majority voting. For annotations that
do not reach a consensus, more iterative annotation processes are employed until
an agreement is reached. This annotation workflow aims to ensure the accuracy
of dense annotations while maximizing the fidelity of annotations for occluded
regions to the true object shape. Annotating panoramas with severe distortion
is challenging and extremely time-consuming, requiring approximately 210 minutes per person per image. Finally, as illustrated in Tab. S1, 2, 960 objects are
annotated in the Thing class. We establish a finely labeled dataset, BlendPASS,
based on panoramic images containing semantic, instance, and amodal instance
labels. All annotations are cross-checked to support five tasks simultaneously:
semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, amodal segmentation, panoptic
segmentation, and amodal panoptic segmentation.
SynPASS. The SynPASS dataset [17] is a panoramic semantic segmentation
dataset captured via the Carla simulator [3]. It has four weather conditions
including sunny, cloudy, foggy, and rainy scenes, together with daytime and
nighttime situations. Overall, it has 9, 800 panoramic images with a resolution
of 2048×1024 corresponding to a full Field of View (FoV) of 360◦ ×180◦ , divided
into training/validation/testing sets of 5, 700/1, 690/1, 690 images, respectively.
Cityscapes→DensePASS. The Cityscapes→DensePASS benchmark [11] measures the performance of pixel-wise semantic segmentation models learned on
2, 979 labeled pinhole images of Cityscapes and transferred to DensePASS, which
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence: zhanghuihby@126.com, kailun.yang@hnu.edu.cn

