Supplementary Materials:
Two-Stage Active Learning for Efficient
Temporal Action Segmentation
Yuhao Su and Ehsan Elhamifar
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{su.yuh,e.elhamifar}@northeastern.edu

1

Additional Experiments

1.1

Active Learning Hyperparameters

We analyze the performance as we change the active learning hyperparameters
while keeping the total annotation budget at 0.16% frames. More specifically,
we change the total active cycles c, percentage of selected videos and clips in
each selected video m and ρ so that (c × m × ρ)/32 = 0.16% frames. Tab. 1
shows the results on 50Salads. Comparing the first and the last two rows of the
table suggests that selecting more clips in selected videos (while reducing either
the number of active learning cycles or the number of selected videos) does not
necessarily contribute to performance improvement. This is because more active
learning cycles allow us to improve the model and subsequently better select
videos and clips for annotation and using more videos allows seeing more diverse
action sequences for better training. We conclude that under the same budget,
labeling a small percentage of videos and clips along with relatively more active
cycles often yields the best performance.
1.2

Comparison with Timestamp Supervision Methods

We compare our method against D-TSTAS (timestamp supervision method) and
EM-gen (SkipTag supervision method) on 50Salads and GTEA in Tab. 2. We
achieve comparable results to EM-gen using less budget. When comparing with
D-TSTAS, we do not expect our method to consistently outperform it, given
their much stronger supervision.
1.3

Annotation Method Effectiveness

We compare different annotation methods and show results in Tab. 3. Our standard annotation method involves labeling the middle frame of each selected clip
and using it as clip label. Majority voting, as an upper bound, requires labeling
every frame in each selected clip and takes the majority as clip label. We follow
our standard AL setting (ρ = 25%, m = 5%) and run our method for 4 AL iterations, resulting in 0.16% and 5% frames labeled for middle frame annotation

