Q&A Prompts

7

1

Overview of Supplementary Material

Our supplementary materials consist of additional analysis and experimental
results of the proposed method including:
– A detailed look into the tags and explanations about different choices of
knowledge types (in Sec. 8).
– The details of question evaluation with GPT-4V (in Sec. 9).
– More visualizations (in Sec. 10).

8

Tags && Question Types

8.1

Generated Tags

In this paper, we utilize the RAM
[58] model to recognize the tags as
the answers we need for the VQG
model, since RAM can accurately
identify 6400+ common tags in total.
Specifically, we generated an overall
359,584 tags for 23,692 images in AOKVQA, with 3,038 unique tags. Notably, this statistics is computed after
a filter from those most frequent but
general tags including: [’man’, ’person’, ’stand’, ’sit’, ’woman’, ’white’,
Fig. 8: Word cloud of the tags.
’catch’, ’table’, ’floor’, ’food’, ’road’,
’ride’, ’park’, ’walk’, ’building’, ’play’,
’green’, ’water’, ’red’, ’black’, ’yellow’,
’blue’ ]. We also present a word cloud of the generated tags for images of AOKVQA in Fig. 8 to intuitively understand the tags.
8.2

Questions Types

The world knowledge required to answer the questions in Sec. 4.4 includes:
(1) Commonsense Knowledge [40, 56]: knowledge about the world that
humans learn from their everyday experiences, including inferring the likely intents, social interactions, and future prediction. For example, suits are often
worn to formal events, and certain foods are associated with specific meals.
(2) Visual Knowledge [3, 13]: knowledge of concepts represented visually
or the spatial relationships in an image. For example, the recognition of specific
objects, animals, and actions in the image.
(3) Knowledge Bases [37, 51, 52]: knowledge obtained from textbooks,
Wikipedia, and other textual sources. This includes factoid and empirical knowledge such as knowing the names of rare categories or the date of an event.
(4) Physical Knowledge [22,43]: knowledge about the physics of the world
and processes that occur in it. An example of such knowledge is that shaded
areas are cooler than unshaded areas in direct sunlight.

