Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we provide the following information to support the main paper:
A Supervised Finetuning with Noisy Ground Truth.
B Domain Adaptation by Entropy Minimization.
C Domain Adaptation by Other Pseudo Label-based Approaches.
D Analysis of Prediction Errors after KD for GGCVT [9].
E Error Distribution of Teacher and Student Models.
F T-SNE Feature.
G Assumption on Orientation.
H Extra Qualitative Results.
I Potential Negative Impact.
J Limitations.

A. Supervised Finetuning with Noisy Ground Truth
As mentioned in Section 4.5 of the main paper, when the ground truth locations
for cross-area supervised finetuning contain errors, the finetuned model has large
test errors. We test this by applying random offsets to the ground truth locations.
In our experiments, offsets were sampled randomly and uniformly (in both
the north-south and east-west directions) within a defined range for each groundlevel image in the cross-area training set prior to finetuning. These offsets were
then applied to shift the ground truth locations of the training images. As Figure 1 demonstrates, inaccuracies in the ground truth markedly affect the localization precision of the finetuned model. For the supervised finetuned model to
outperform the model trained with our weakly-supervised learning approach in
terms of both mean and median test errors, the maximum permissible error in
the ground truth for each direction should be under approximately 2.5 m. In
practice, acquiring ground truth with this level of accuracy on a large scale is
difficult, as standard GNSS positioning does not meet this requirement [2]. Instead, our proposed method requires only ground-aerial image pairs, making it
a more scalable solution in practice.

B. Domain Adaptation by Entropy Minimization
As noted in our main paper Section 4.7, we explore entropy minimization [4]
as an alternative approach to adapt a model from the source domain to the
target domain. Entropy minimization is often used for semi-supervised domain
adaptation [10]. In this setting, the model is trained with a combination of
samples with ground truth labels from the source domain and unlabeled samples
from the target domain. When a source domain sample is presented, the model is

