SGS-SLAM: Semantic Gaussian Splatting For
Neural Dense SLAM
— Supplementary Material —
Mingrui Li1⋆ , Shuhong Liu2∗ , Heng Zhou3 , Guohao Zhu2 , Na Cheng1 ,
Tianchen Deng4 , and Hongyu Wang1
1

A

Dalian University of Technology 2 The University of Tokyo
3
Columbia University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Experiment Settings

In this section, we outline the experimental setup and hyperparameters applied
in our studies. The experiments were conducted on a server with NVIDIA A10040GB GPU. However, our method typically takes less than 12 GB of memory for
the scenes presented in this study, making it compatible with any GPU that has
more than this amount of memory. The ground-truth results we compared, particularly for the novel view rendering, were obtained from the ground-truth mesh
provided in the dataset, which was generated in an offline manner. Therefore,
some defects can be observed in the ground-truth results.
SGS-SLAM By default, both mapping and tracking operations are conducted
for each frame. During the tracking phase, we set the silhouette visibility threshold, Tsil , to 0.99. The multi-channel optimization involves three parameters:
λD = 1.0 for depth, λC = 0.5 for colors, and λS = 0.05 for semantic loss,
with the semantic loss weight being comparatively low due to the typical noisiness of real-world semantic labels. Throughout the tracking, the multi-channel
Gaussian parameters remain constant, adjusting only the camera parameters
with a learning rate of 2e-3 for transition. Key-frames are initially chosen at intervals of every 5 frames, then refined based on geometric and semantic criteria.
The geometric overlap threshold, η, is defined at 0.05, and the semantic mean
Intersection over Union (mIoU) threshold, Tsem , at 0.7. The maximum number
of keyframes per frame is limited to 25, considering the computation speed. The
uncertainty decay coefficient, τ scales with the length of the input frame series.
In the mapping process, the silhouette threshold Tsil is adjusted to 0.5. The
weights of photometric loss are set to λD = 1.0, λC = 0.5, and λS = 0.1. Here,
camera parameters are fixed, and Gaussian parameters are optimized, with specific learning rates for 3D position at 1e-4, color 2.5e-3, Gaussian rotation at
1e-3, logit opacity at 0.05, and log scale at 1e-3. Performance metrics of tracking
and mapping are assessed every 5 frames, with mIoU scores evaluated at the
same frequency.
⋆

These authors contributed equally to this work.

