Supplementary Materials for Revisiting
Supervision for Continual Representation Learning
Daniel Marczak⋆1,2 , Sebastian Cygert1,3 ,
Tomasz Trzciński1,2,4 , and Bartłomiej Twardowski1,5,6
1

IDEAS NCBR
Warsaw University of Technology
3
Gdańsk University of Technology
4
Tooploox
5
Autonomous University of Barcelona
6
Computer Vision Center
2

A

Implementation details

A.1

CL strategies

LwF [4] is a classic SCL method for feature distillation. It distills the logits of
the frozen network trained on previous tasks using cross-entropy loss. We pair it
with SL methods that train with cross-entropy loss. We use the implementation
from [5].
CaSSLe [2] is a method for self-supervised continual learning that utilizes a
learnable MLP to project past features onto the new latent space for improved
feature distillation. The distillation is performed on the outputs from the SSL
projector with the loss function of a particular SSL method. Because of reliance
on SSL-specific components, namely the projector and loss function, we do
not pair CaSSLe with supervised approaches, except for SupCon which loss
and architecture closely resemble SSL. We follow an official implementation of
CaSSLe.
PFR [3] realizes a similar idea to CaSSLe. It also uses a learnable MLP projector
to enhance feature distillation. However, it uses cosine similarity as a loss function
and performs distillation on the outputs of the backbone network. Therefore,
we pair it with both SL and SSL approaches as it does not rely on SSL-specific
components. We present the chosen values of regularization hyperparameter λ in
Table 1. We selected the best λ ∈ {1, 3, 10, 15, 25} separately for each method
and dataset.
A.2

k-NN evaluation

Each model is evaluated with a k-nearest neighbour classifier after training each
task (offline evaluation). Moreover, we perform some experiments where we use
k-nn evaluation after each epoch (online evaluation for Figure 4).
For online evaluation, we perform extensive hyperparameter search and report
results obtained by the best probe. We explore the following hyperparameters:
⋆

Corresponding author, email: daniel.marczak.dokt@pw.edu.pl

