Supplementary Materials for:
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
Seongbo Ha , Jiung Yeon , and Hyeonwoo Yu
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea
{sobo3607,wcr12st,hwyu}@skku.edu

This supplementary material includes the following sections:
– Section A: Further Implementation Details
• Section A.1: Tracking Process
• Section A.2: Mapping Process
– Section B: Experimental Details
– Section C: Additional Experimental Results
• Section C.1: Map Quality and Tracking Accuracy According to System Speed
• Section C.2: Geometric Quality of the Map
• Section C.3: Further Analysis of Advantages of the Connection Between GICP and 3DGS
• Section C.4: Qualitative Results

A. Further Implementation Details
Our G-ICP [9] module is implemented based on the VGICP [6], which is implemented
in C++ and parallel computation for faster processing. The C++ implementation of GICP is wrapped using pybind11 to make it accessible from Python. The SLAM system
is structured in parallel to operate with two processes, tracking and mapping, using
PyTorch multiprocessing.
A.1. Tracking Process
G-ICP Before generating the source point cloud from the current depth image, we
downsample it by 1/10 in the Replica [10] dataset and by 1/5 in the TUM-RGBD [11]
dataset. These values are chosen based on the resolution of the images. The covariances of the source point cloud are computed within the G-ICP module by finding the
10 nearest points to each point to make source Gaussians from the source point cloud.
Source Gaussians are aligned with the target Gaussians existing in the 3D GS map
to estimate the current camera pose, while omitting those target Gaussians with low
opacity (below 0.05 in Replica and 0.09 in TUM). During the aligning procedure, correspondences between source and target Gaussians are determined based on Euclidean
distances, excluding those with distances greater than 2cm in Replica and 3cm in TUM.
Keyframe Selection and Adding Target Gaussians We select the current frame as a
keyframe when the proportion of source Gaussians corresponding with target Gaussians

