An Empirical Study and Analysis of
Text-to-Image Generation Using Large Language
Model-Powered Textual Representation
– Supplementary Material –
Zhiyu Tan1 , Mengping Yang2 , Luozheng Qin3 , Hao Yang2 ,
Ye Qian2 , Qiang Zhou2 , Cheng Zhang4 , and Hao Li1
1 Fudan University 2 INF Tech 3 Soochow University 4 Carnegie Mellon University

https://llm-conditioned-diffusion.github.io

A

Appendix

This appendix is organized as follows: First, we discuss the limitations and future works of the paper respectively in Appendix B and Appendix C. Next,
we provide more analysis results to exhibit a more thorough perspective on the
effectiveness of our approach in Appendix D. Specifically, we compare the synthesis performance of our proposed three-stage training pipeline under different
alignment losses, including Mean Square Error (MSE), cosine similarity, and cosine similarity with Magnitude constraint. Additionally, trainable parameters are
provided to demonstrate the efficiency of our proposed adapter. Then, we exhibit
details of the human evaluation in Appendix E, including the user interface, user
guidelines, and fine-grained results of user studies. Finally, we provide more qualitative results of multilingual and long-prompt text-to-image synthesis, as well
as comparison results with existing baselines in Appendix F. Moreover, we provide the qualitative visual results synthesized by different stages of our training
pipeline, together with the quantitative results (See Tab.2) in the main paper,
the effectiveness of our three-stage training pipeline is well identified. Consistently, these qualitative results demonstrate that our proposed model effectively
enables long-prompts following, multilingual, as well as better text-alignment
understanding for text-to-image generation, providing users with satisfactory
experience for producing visual content.

B

Limitations

Despite its effectiveness of powerful language understanding capability and efficiency of training pipeline, our proposed model still have several limitations:
Human Evaluation. Conducting human evaluation can be time-consuming
and resource-intensive, limiting the scale at which we can afford. In our case,
10 individuals with sufficient proficiency in both Chinese and English comprehension were involved to perform the human evaluation, each judged 400 image
pairs produced by our proposed model and compared baselines. Although we
had tried our best to lower the difficulty of the human evaluation by organizing

