1

Appendix
A. Implementation Details
A2. Architecture
We leverage the advanced pre-existing knowledge from pretrained MLLMs to aid
in model convergence. Specifically, we initialize our multi-modal decoder with
LLaVA-v1.5-7B checkpoint [2] from HuggingFace. Its vision encoder is CLIP-vitwb
large-patch14 (CLIP-L) [5] and takes in Iref
. We use ViT-H/1 [3] to extract the
image embedding of Iref . Thus, a trained linear mapping is added at the output
of MLLM to map the learned text token from R4096 to R1024 . The model is built
on top of the IP-Adapter [7] and the training code on LDM [6]. Our foundation
model is StableDiffusion v1.5 [6] with Realistic-Vision-v4.0 [1] checkpoint. Both
subject and context cross-attentions are implemented with the diffusers attention
processor class. We call our MLLM as multi-modal decoder because: it takes in
wb
visual features of Iref
and text instruction and "generates the full image Iref "
in the form of CLIP embeddings. So our MLLM is not a typical subject-feature
encoder like in most existing works, but instead a generative MLLM decoder.
A2. Training
we lock the parameters of the image encoders and only adjust the MLLM parameters along with the newly incorporated learnable token. In stage two training, the image/text encoder, multi-modal decoder, and the entirety of the UNet
parameters are frozen. We optimize exclusively the linear mappings of subjetcross-attention and context-cross-attentions.To expedite convergence, we employ
attention mapping layers from the IP-adapter [7] and start with a zero-initialized
subject-cross-attention. We apply large gradient accumulation steps (200) and
clip grad norm for smoother training. In both stages, we use the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of  1^{-5}  . Training takes 7 days in total on 16 A100 80G
GPUs.
A3. Evaluation
We use the DDIM sampler with default parameters and 50 denoising steps.
Evaluation requires 23.5G GPU RAM for 512 × 512 resolution. The iterative
masking is disabled in the first denoising step since Mgen(t) is unavailable yet.
We apply classifier-free guidance on both the text prompt and Context-crossattention side, but not the subject-cross-attention. On the text prompt side,
simply replace the target prompt Ptgt with null embedding. On the contextcross-attention side, we zero out the contextualized features before feeding them
to attention linear mappings. We use β = 1.0 in the recontextualization task for
better subject detail accuracy and, empirically, β = 0.5 in the texture editing
task for better balance between subject and prompt.

