Supplementary Material For
“MonoTTA: Fully Test-Time Adaptation for
Monocular 3D Object Detection”
In the supplementary, we first provide more related work and discussions
to clarify existing solutions to data distribution shifts related to 3D object detection. In addition, we provide more experimental details, visualizations, and
results of MonoTTA. We organize our supplementary materials as follows.
– In Section A, we review Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in 3D Object
Detection and provide more discussions.
– In Section B, we provide more details of the construction of the KITTI-C
and two tasks of nuScenes dataset.
– In Section C,we provide more experimental details of our proposed MonoTTA
– In Section D, we show more experimental results to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed MonoTTA.

A

More Related Work and Discussions

In this section, we review the literature on Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in
3D Object Detection to provide more discussions to clarify existing solutions to
data distribution shifts related to 3D objects.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [16] seeks to improve the source
model performance on the unlabeled target domain based on a label-rich relevant source domain by alleviating the domain shifts. Specifically, ST3D [13]
has been introduced to conduct UDA on 3D object detection from point clouds
via alternatively pseudo labels updating and model training with curriculum
data augmentation. Besides, DG-BEV [11] decouples the depth estimation and
performs dynamic perspective augmentation to facilitate domain generalization
within multi-view 3D object detection tasks. Additionally, Spectral UDA [15]
has been advanced as a UDA technique that adapts in the spectral space, seeking to generalize across domains even in 3D object detection. As for UDA in
Mono3D, STMono3D [4] first proposes a self-teaching framework to address the
depth-shift issue caused by the geometric misalignment of domains.
However, UDA relies on the achievement of the source training data to overcome data distribution shifts while the source data may be unavailable in practice
due to privacy issues. In addition, UDA assumes unlabeled target data and test
data following the same data distribution, which may not be held in real.

B

More Details on Dataset Construction

In this section, we first provide more visualizations of the KITTI-C dataset to
illustrate the construction details. Then, we offer more details of 2 real scenarios
(daytime ↔ night) of the nuScenes dataset.

