20

A

K. Kadry et al.

Supplementary Materials Overview

– In Appendix B, we provide details on dataset curation and augmentation
– In Appendix C, we detail the mathematical formulation of our topological
loss.
– In Appendix D, we discuss the extraction process for te morphological features and the lumenal skeleton.
– In Appendix E, we provide implementation details for our autoencoder and
diffusion model
– In Appendix F, we provide implementation details for the neural networks
used for morphological and skeletal regression.
– In Appendix G, we visualize the effect of adaptive null guidance with each
conditioning mechanism in isolation. .
– In Appendix H, we provide details on our virtual angioplasty simulations
which demonstrated that synthetic segmentation maps can be used for numerical simulation studies.

B

Dataset Processing

Our study used 62 CCTA images obtained from the Precise Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Plan (P3) Study (37). All data has been anonymized and
approved for use by an IRB. The 3D lumen and vessel wall morphology were extracted using a methodology developed by HeartFlow Inc (37), and represented
as 3D signed distance fields (SDFs) with a resolution of 0.25 mm. To obtain a
straightened representation of the coronary artery, a virtual catheter was propagated along the main arterial branch with atherosclerotic lesions for each patient,
capturing 2D cross-sections of the lumen and vessel wall at intervals of 0.2 mm.
These 2D cross-sections were stacked to construct 3D segmentation maps of the
lumen and vessel wall. The total number of 2D frames extracted was 28,533,
where the average number of frames per artery was 460. For the segmentation
of calcified tissue, thresholding was applied to the corresponding 2D frames extracted by the virtual pullback. The threshold was determined as the greater
value between 450 Hounsfield units (HU) or the mean lumen density increased
by one standard deviation. The anisotropic resolution of the segmentation maps
was set at 60 µm in-plane and 0.2 mm out-of-plane to capture the longitudinal
variation inherent in the arterial structure. To obtain the 3D segmentation maps
that are fed into the VAE, we extract 3D patches consisting of 128 frames along
the artery with a random starting frame. We further apply random rotations
about the longitudinal axis to augment our dataset.

C

Topological Loss Implementation

Our topological loss attempts to penalize topologically incorrect voxels within
our autoencoded coronary segmentation maps. We specifically enforce that the
vessel wall contains both lumen and calcium within any 2D frame. To enforce

