Learn to Explain: Multimodal Reasoning via
Thought Chains for Science Question Answering
Pan Lu1,3 , Swaroop Mishra2,3 , Tony Xia1 , Liang Qiu1 , Kai-Wei Chang1 ,
Song-Chun Zhu1 , Oyvind Tafjord3 , Peter Clark3 , Ashwin Kalyan3
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Arizona State University, 3 Allen Institute for AI
{lupantech, kwchang.cs}@gmail.com, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu,
{oyvindt, peterc, ashwinkv}@allenai.org

Abstract
When answering a question, humans utilize the information available across different modalities to synthesize a consistent and complete chain of thought (CoT). This
process is normally a black box in the case of deep learning models like large-scale
language models. Recently, science question benchmarks have been used to diagnose the multi-hop reasoning ability and interpretability of an AI system. However,
existing datasets fail to provide annotations for the answers, or are restricted to
the textual-only modality, small scales, and limited domain diversity. To this end,
we present Science Question Answering (S CIENCE QA), a new benchmark that
consists of ⇠21k multimodal multiple choice questions with diverse science topics
and annotations of their answers with corresponding lectures and explanations. We
further design language models to learn to generate lectures and explanations as the
chain of thought (CoT) to mimic the multi-hop reasoning process when answering
S CIENCE QA questions. S CIENCE QA demonstrates the utility of CoT in language
models, as CoT improves the question answering performance by 1.20% in fewshot GPT-3 and 3.99% in fine-tuned UnifiedQA. We also explore the upper bound
for models to leverage explanations by feeding those in the input; we observe that
it improves the few-shot performance of GPT-3 by 18.96%. Our analysis further
shows that language models, similar to humans, benefit from explanations to learn
from fewer data and achieve the same performance with just 40% of the data.1

1

Introduction

A long-standing goal of AI systems is to act reliably and learn complex tasks efficiently like human
beings. In the process of reliable decision making, humans follow an explicit chain-of-thought (CoT)
reasoning process that is typically expressed as an explanation. However, machine learning models
are trained mostly using a large number of input-output examples to perform a specific task. These
black-box models only generate the final decision without reliably revealing the underlying reasoning
process. Not surprisingly, it is unclear if they understand the task and can generalize even though
they perform well on the benchmark. On the other hand, humans are able to learn from instructions
or explanations from past experience and generalize them to novel and unseen problems. This helps
them learn more quickly with fewer data. In this work, we explore if machines can be endowed with
such reasoning abilities in the context of science-based question answering.
Recently, science problem solving benchmarks [18] have been used to diagnose the multi-hop
reasoning ability and interpretability of AI systems. To answer science questions, a model needs to
1

The data and code are available at https://scienceqa.github.io.
Work was partially done while Pan Lu and Swaroop Mishra were interns at AI2.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

