Unsupervised Representation Learning for Label-Efficient BEV Mapping

1

LetsMap: Unsupervised Representation Learning
for Label-Efficient Semantic BEV Mapping
Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we present additional experimental results to
analyze the performance of LetsMap, our unsupervised representation learning
framework for semantic BEV mapping. To this end, we present further ablation
experiments in Sec. S.1 and additional qualitative results in Sec. S.2.

S.1

Additional Ablative Experiments

In this section, we present additional ablative experiments to further study
the impact of various parameters on the overall performance of the model.
Specifically, we study the influence of (1) different DINOv2 variants (Sec. S.1.1)
and (2) masking patch size in our novel T-MAE module (Sec. S.1.2) on the
overall performance of the model. Further, we also present the results obtained
when the native backbones of the best baselines are replaced with our backbone
(Sec. S.1.3) and when the BEV percentage split defined in SkyEye [9] is used for
model finetuning (Sec. S.1.4).

S.1.1

DINOv2 Backbone Variants

In this section, we study the influence of different variants of the DINOv2
backbone on the overall performance of the model. Specifically, we first pretrain
the model using four variants, namely, vit-b, vit-s, vit-l, and vit-g, and finetune
each of them using 1% of semantic BEV labels. Tab. S.1 presents the results of
this ablation study. We observe that vit-s yields the lowest performance among all
variants, achieving 3.41 pp lower than vit-b. Being the smallest of all variants, vit-s
does not generate features that are as representative as its larger counterparts,
thus resulting in its reduced overall performance.
The three larger variants, i.e., vit-b, vit-l, and vit-g, however, yield very similar
mIoU scores with the difference between the highest and lowest performance
being only 0.80 pp. In other words, the performance of semantic BEV mapping
saturates after vit-b and does not improve upon using a larger backbone. We infer
that this behavior can be attributed to one of the following reasons: (1) larger
DINOv2 backbones provide better features for FV tasks, but these features do
not easily transfer to the task of BEV mapping, or (2) 1% of BEV labels are
insufficient to leverage the full potential of larger backbones. Given the similar
performance of vit-b as compared to vit-l and vit-g while being more efficient in
terms of number of parameters, we use the vit-b variant of the DINOv2 backbone
in this work.

