Supplementary Material for "MagicMirror: Fast
and High-Quality Avatar Generation with a
Constrained Search Space"
Armand Comas-Massagué1,2 , Di Qiu1 , Menglei Chai1 , Marcel Bühler1,3 ,
Amit Raj1 , Ruiqi Gao4 , Qiangeng Xu1 , Mark Matthews1 , Paulo Gotardo1 ,
Sergio Orts-Escolano1 , and Thabo Beeler1
1

2

Google AR
Northeastern University
3
ETH Zürich
4
Google DeepMind

In this supplemental material, we provide further details about our experiments
and implementation in Sec. 1. We show additional results in Sec. 2, including
both generation and personalized editing results. Finally, in Sec. 3 we discuss
failure cases of our model, along with our hypotheses regarding their causes. As
part of the supplemental material, we also provide a web page with more results
in video format.

1

Experimental & Implementation Details

1.1

NeRF Backbone

Our NeRF is a conditional extension of MipNeRF-360 [?] and follows the architecture of Preface [?]. It consists of a proposal (coarse) MLP and a NeRF (fine)
MLP. The proposal MLP has 4 layers, and the NeRF MLP has 8 layers. The
layer width is 768 for the proposal and 1536 for the NeRF MLP. The inputs are
encoded using integrated positional encoding with 12 levels for the positional
inputs and 4 levels for the view directions.
We initialize the weights of our model after pretraining on 1,450 subjects with
a neutral facial expression. Please refer to Preface [?] for a detailed description
of the training dataset and training procedure.
To enable faster rendering and lower memory consumption during avatar
editing, we only employ a single pass through both the proposal MLP and the
NeRF MLP and reduce the number of samples. The proposal MLP is sampled 64
times and the NeRF MLP is sampled 32 times per ray. We find this configuration
a good tradeoff between resource usage and rendering quality. If needed, the
rendering quality could be improved by employing two proposal passes and
quadrupling the number of samples per ray (as in Preface).
1.2

DreamBooth

Personalized diffusion prior is a crucial ingredient of our architecture, which
employs the geometry prior across all experiments and utilizes the subject-specific
prior in every editing scenario.

