Learning with Unmasked Tokens Drives
Stronger Vision Learners
– Supplementary Material –
Taekyung Kim⋆ , Sanghyuk Chun, Byeongho Heo, and Dongyoon Han⋆
NAVER AI Lab

Appendix
This appendix includes additional experimental analyses of our proposed method,
comparing it with state-of-the-art self-supervised learning (SSL) methods and
experimental results with detailed setups. We first provide the attention map
visualizations in §A; we then provide 1) another applicability of our proposed
method to SimMIM, 2) ablation studies, and 3) our implementation details,
including hyper-parameters in §B.

A

On Distinctiveness of Attention Map

In this section, we qualitatively show the improved discriminative power of our
model compared with other SSL methods [1–3, 8] and LUT through attention
map visualization by visualizing all the multi-heads of the last self-attention
block using sample cases. We visualize the attention maps of the entire heads
of the last self-attention according to the given query patches. We compare
the diverse methods to investigate the distinctive trends. Fig. A and Fig. B
showcase when the input queries are from the background of the images, As
shown in Fig. A, models pre-trained with DINO [2] highlight foreground regions
despite the background query, which reveals DINO broadly aggregates representations across the image, losing discriminative power. Moreover, iBOT also
suffers from the correlation between the representations of foreground and background patches, as observed in Fig. Ab and Fig. Bb. data2vec shows precise
local discriminatibility in Fig. Ac, but indiscriminatively highlights attention in
Fig. Bc. While MAE does not confuse foreground and background representations in Fig. Ad, MAE suffers another confusion in Fig. Bd, which may stem
from lack of broader contexts. Besides, LUT shows enhanced discriminability
between foreground and background patches in both cases.

B

Experiments (cont’d)

This section presents continued experiments that further investigate the superiority and applicability of our method. We show another application of broader
⋆

Equal contribution

