Supplementary of “RangeLDM: Fast Realistic
LiDAR Point Cloud Generation”
Qianjiang Hu , Zhimin Zhang, and Wei Hu

⋆

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
hqjpku@pku.edu.cn zm_zhang@stu.pku.edu.cn forhuwei@pku.edu.cn

1

Visualization

Unconditional Generation Results. We show more results compared with baselines on the KITTI-360 [4] dataset in Figure 1, where we supplemented the
results of LiDAR VAE and LiDAR GAN. We see that the proposed method
outperforms baselines and generates realistic structures with consistent LiDAR
beams. We also display the qualitative results compared with baselines on the
nuScenes [1] dataset in Figure 2.
LiDAR Point Cloud Upsampling. We present the visualization results of point
cloud upsampling compared with more methods on KITTI-360, as shown in
Figure 3. Bicubic and NN are classical upsampling methods, while PU-Net [5],
DeepRS [2], and Grad-PU [3] focus on point cloud upsampling. LiDARGen is a
method specifically designed for LIDAR point clouds. For PU-Net, DeepRS, and
Grad-PU, the results shown were obtained by directly testing their pre-trained
models. These methods were not retrained on our LIDAR dataset.
LiDAR Point Cloud Inpainting. We present more point cloud inpainting results
compared with LiDARGen [6] on the KITTI-360 dataset in Figure 4, as a supplement to Figure 7. We observe that the proposed method recovers scenes with
reasonable cars, roads, and walls, outperforming the competitive method.
Visualization Results of Ablation Study. We compare the proposed method with
different variants. Figure 5 displays the visualization results of all ablation variants in Section 5.4. It is evident that variant (a), which lacks Hough voting,
captures the global structures but generates noisy point clouds. With Hough
Voting and the range-guided discriminator, variants (b) and (c) significantly
reduce noise. The red circles in (a), (b), and (c) highlight a discontinuity originating from the origin and pointing left in the point cloud. In contrast, variant
(d) mitigates the discontinuity using circular convolution but fails to accurately
represent the scene’s direction due to rotation variance. This issue is addressed
in model (e) through the proposed direction conditional sampling.
Conditioning the Model with Direction. Figure 6 shows the generation process
under the condition of different directions (as described in Section 4.4. This
demonstrates effective control over the direction of the generated point clouds.
⋆

Corresponding author: W. Hu.

