Random Walk on Pixel Manifolds
for Anomaly Segmentation of Complex
Driving Scenes
Zelong Zeng(B)

and Kaname Tomite

SenseTime Japan, Tokyo, Japan
{zengzelong,tomite}@sensetime.jp

Abstract. In anomaly segmentation for complex driving scenes, stateof-the-art approaches utilize anomaly scoring functions to calculate
anomaly scores. For these functions, accurately predicting the logits of
inlier classes for each pixel is crucial for precisely inferring the anomaly
score. However, in real-world driving scenarios, the diversity of scenes
often results in distorted manifolds of pixel embeddings in the space. This
eﬀect is not conducive to directly using the pixel embeddings for the logit
prediction during inference, a concern overlooked by existing methods.
To address this problem, we propose a novel method called Random Walk
on Pixel Manifolds (RWPM). RWPM utilizes random walks to reveal the
intrinsic relationships among pixels to reﬁne the pixel embeddings.The
reﬁned pixel embeddings alleviate the distortion of manifolds, improving
the accuracy of anomaly scores. Our extensive experiments show that
RWPM consistently improves the performance of the existing anomaly
segmentation methods and achieves the best results. Code is available
at: https://github.com/ZelongZeng/RWPM.
Keywords: Autonomous vehicles · Anomaly segmentation · Semantic
segmentation

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation [9–11,13,39] plays a crucial role in the ﬁeld of automated
driving, which can aid the automated driving system in perceiving and understanding the surrounding environment, thereby facilitating the system make
accurate decision. Typically, the semantic segmentation models are trained on
closed-datasets with ﬁxed semantic categories, showing good recognition capabilities for inlier classes (e.g., roads, vehicles, etc.). However, these models often
fail to eﬀectively detect potential outlier class objects (e.g., animals, fallen tires,

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 18.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 306–323, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_18

