VSViG: Video-based Seizure Detection via Skeleton-based ST-ViG

1

A. Data details
Data acquisition. We acquire surveillance video data of epileptic patients from
a hospital, this dataset includes 14 epileptic patients with 33 tonic-clonic seizures.
Patients in the hospital EMUs are supervised by Bosch NDP-4502-Z12 camera
with 1920 × 1080 resolution 24/7. We extract successive frames as video clips
for real-time processing. Each video clip spans a duration of 5s with the original
rate of 30 FPS. To enhance the efficiency of our real-time analysis, we apply
fixed stride sampling to reduce the frame count from the original 150 frames to
30 frames.
Data labeling. How to label the video clips is a challenge in video-based
early seizure detection. Typically, EEG-based seizure detection is treated as a
binary classification task, distinguishing between interictal (pre-seizure) and ictal
(during-seizure) periods. Medical experts annotate the moment from interictal
to ictal periods in EEG recordings as the EEG onset. However, in video analysis,
the transition from normal to seizure behavior is not as immediate. For several
seconds (ranging from 1 to 30 seconds) after the EEG onset, a patient’s behavior
may appear only slightly abnormal or nearly normal. We refer to this phase as the
transition period. The moment when patients start exhibiting clearly abnormal
actions, such as jerking, convulsion, or stiffening, is defined as clinical onset.
It is straightforward to label video clips as healthy status (0) before the EEG
onset and as seizure status (1) after the clinical onset. These labels (either 0
or 1) can be interpreted as the probability or risk of seizure onset. In terms
of the transition period, it is hard to assign a precise probability to each clip.
Clinically, it’s observed in the transition period that patients are more likely to
appear healthy closer to the EEG onset and more likely to exhibit abnormal
behaviors as the time approaches the clinical onset. To address this, we use
an exponential function to assign increasing probabilities to video clips during
the transition period, ranging from 0 to 1. Other options, sigmoid and linear
functions, are compared to exponential way in Table 4. It is noted that the
probabilities of video clips depend on the end frame of video clips lying in which
period. Consequently, we define this task as a probability regression task rather
than a traditional classification task.
Table 4: Comparisons of different increasing probability functions used for labeling
transition period.

RMSE

Linear
6.7%

Sigmoid
9.4%

Exponential
5.9%

Data splitting. For each seizure event, we categorize the video segments
based on their timing relative to the EEG onset and clinical onset, which are
annotated by medical experts. We define the period < 2min after clinical onset
as the ictal period, and the period < 30min before EEG onset as the interic-

