Local Action-Guided Motion Diffusion Model for
Text-to-Motion Generation
Supplementary Material
Peng Jin1,2,3 , Hao Li1,2,3 , Zesen Cheng1,3 , Kehan Li1,3 , Runyi Yu1,3 , Chang
⋆

Liu4

⋆

, Xiangyang Ji4 , Li Yuan1,2,3

, and Jie Chen1,2,3

1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen,
China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate
School, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
jp21@stu.pku.edu.cn, liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn

Abstract. This appendix provides implementation details (Appendix A),
several additional analyses (Appendix B), additional discussions (Appendix C), and details of motion representations and metric definitions (Appendix D).

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Semantic Graph Parsing

To obtain actions, action attributes, and the semantic role of each attribute in
relation to the corresponding action, we implement a semantic parser of motion descriptions based on a semantic role parsing toolkit [16]‡ . Specifically, the
parser, when given a motion description, identifies the verbs within the sentence,
extracts attribute phrases corresponding to each verb, and determines the semantic role of each attribute phrase. In the semantic graph, the entire sentence
is treated as the global motion node. Verbs serve as action nodes and are connected to the motion node through direct edges, facilitating implicit learning
of temporal relationships among different actions during graph reasoning. Attribute phrases represent specific nodes, linked to action nodes. The edge type
between an action node and a specific node is determined by the semantic role
of the specifics in relation to the action. As shown in Tab. A, we extract three
types (motions, actions, and specifics) of nodes and twelve types of edges to
depict various associations among these nodes.
⋆
‡

Corresponding author: Li Yuan, Chang Liu.
https://allenai.org/allennlp

