ProMerge: Prompt and Merge
for Unsupervised Instance Segmentation
Supplementary Materials
We first provide pseudo-code for our approach (Sec. 1) along with further
details about our experiments (Sec. 2) and additional ablation studies (Sec. 3).
We also visualize qualitative results in Sec. 4.

1

Pseudo-code for ProMerge

In this section, we provide pseudo-code for our method (see Algorithm 1) along
with brief descriptions for four components: (i) prompting, (ii) background aggregation, (iii) Cascade filtering, and (iv) merging.
Prompting. Our approach generates initial mask proposals by employing pointprompting on visual features extracted from an image using an image encoder,
such as a ViT [4], and creating affinity matrices based on cosine similarities between selected prompt tokens and all patch tokens. In this prompting stage, we
use a hyperparameter for stride, representing the distance between two neighboring prompt tokens. We use a default value of 4. In our standard implementation,
we use DINO [2] features of spatial dimensions 60 × 60 and generate 225 mask
proposals, which we then classify into background and foreground categories.
We use another hyperparameter, τb , to threshold the cosine similarity between the embeddings of the seed prompt token and the other patches in the
affinity matrix. This step allows us to translate continuous affinities into discrete masks for each seed prompt. For our experiments, we set τb = 0.2, unless
otherwise stated.
Following the prompting, we split connected components from each foreground mask into separate masks, which helps separate a single large mask
covering multiple instances.
Background aggregation. After prompting visual features, binary masks are
classified as foreground or background. Background masks are identified by the
presence of numerous positive pixels along multiple image edges, and a representative background mask is created using a pixel-wise voting scheme from these
candidates.
Cascade filtering. In Cascade filtering, prompted masks are first sorted by
area in ascending order, then processed sequentially to track new pixels added by
each mask. Masks that significantly overlap with the background, as determined
by Intersection over Area (IoA) and feature similarity, are excluded from the
bg
merging process. For this, we use hyperparameters, τIoA
and τfbg . If a new mask
mainly introduces pixels that intersect with the background or shares a high
feature similarity with the background, we do not include it in the merging
bg
process. We set τIoA
= 0.8 and τfbg = 0.1 by default.

