Enhancing SNN with Blurred Knowledge Distillation

1

Supplementary
A1

Definition of Time-Step.

In spiking neural network (SNN), time-step refers to a discrete unit of time used
in the simulation of the network dynamics [2, 10, 33, 45]. Unlike the traditional
artificial neural network (ANN), which often operates in a continuous manner,
SNN models the behavior of biological neurons by considering the timing (timestamp) of spikes. The simulation of SNN typically involves breaking down time
into discrete steps, and for each time-step, the network processes incoming signals, updates neuron membrane potentials, and generates spikes based on certain
rules and conditions. The time-step is a fundamental parameter that influences
the temporal resolution of the simulation and is crucial for capturing the dynamics of spiking neurons. The choice of an appropriate time-step is essential
for balancing computational efficiency and accuracy in simulating the behavior
of the network. With greater time-step, SNN can provides a more accurate representation of the temporal dynamics but the inference consumes more energy.
With smaller time-step, on the other hand, it can speed up simulations but may
lead to a loss of precision (i.e., inference accuracy).

A2

Algorithm for BKDSNN.

The process of our algorithm is specified in Algorithm 1. In each training iteration, we first calculate the logits-based distillation loss LLD , using output logits
y tea and y stu . Then, we extract the intermediate feature Ftea and Fstu in front of
the last layer from the teacher ANN MANN and the student SNN MSNN respectively. Afterwards, we leverage Ftea , Fstu together with the blurred restoration
block G and the blurred ratio λ to calculate a blurred knowledge distillation
loss LBKD . Combined with the cross entropy task loss between y tea and ground
truth label ŷ, we obtain the total loss L which can be used with back-propagation
through time (BPTT) [52, 59] algorithm to update W in MSNN .

A3

Ablation Study on CIFAR.

Ablation results on CIFAR are shown in Tabs. A1 to A3, where the introduction of logits-based distillation loss LLD , blurred knowledge distillation LBKD
and mixed distillation LMD significantly improve the performance, compared
with methods without knowledge distillation (denoted as w/o KD). However,
as shown in Tab. A1, the introduction of LLD and LBKD are more effective
than LMD on CIFAR10 with Sformer-2-384 and Sformer-4-384. Limited training
epochs on a simple dataset lead to the experimental results above. Therefore, we
increase the training epochs from 300 to 400 for more distinct results. As shown
in Tab. A2, the introduction of LMD achieves maximized accuracy boost under all
settings on CIFAR, leading to state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR (96.37%

