ColorMNet: A Memory-Based Deep
Spatial-Temporal Feature Propagation
Network for Video Colorization
Yixin Yang , Jiangxin Dong , Jinhui Tang , and Jinshan Pan(B)
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{yangyixin,jxdong,jinhuitang,jspan}@njust.edu.cn
Abstract. How to eﬀectively explore spatial-temporal features is important for video colorization. Instead of stacking multiple frames along
the temporal dimension or recurrently propagating estimated features
that will accumulate errors or cannot explore information from far-apart
frames, we develop a memory-based feature propagation module that
can establish reliable connections with features from far-apart frames
and alleviate the inﬂuence of inaccurately estimated features. To extract
better features from each frame for the above-mentioned feature propagation, we explore the features from large-pretrained visual models to
guide the feature estimation of each frame so that the estimated features can model complex scenarios. In addition, we note that adjacent
frames usually contain similar contents. To explore this property for better spatial and temporal feature utilization, we develop a local attention module to aggregate the features from adjacent frames in a spatialtemporal neighborhood. We formulate our memory-based feature propagation module, large-pretrained visual model guided feature estimation
module, and local attention module into an end-to-end trainable network (named ColorMNet) and show that it performs favorably against
state-of-the-art methods on both the benchmark datasets and real-world
scenarios. Our source codes and pre-trained models are available at:
https://github.com/yyang181/colormnet.
Keywords: Exemplar-based video colorization · Deep convolutional
neural network · Feature propagation

1

Introduction

Due to the technical limitations of old imaging devices, lots of videos captured
in the last century are in black and white, making them less visually appealing
on modern display devices. As most of these videos have historical values and
are diﬃcult to reproduce, it is of great need to colorize them.
Restoring high-quality colorized videos is challenging as it not only needs
to handle the colorization of each frame but also requires exploring temporal information from the video sequences. Therefore, directly applying existing
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5 19.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 336–352, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_19

