UniTraj: A Unified Framework for Scalable
Vehicle Trajectory Prediction Supplementary
Materials
Lan Feng∗,1 , Mohammadhossein Bahari∗,1 , Kaouther Messaoud Ben Amor1 ,
Éloi Zablocki2 , Matthieu Cord2,3 , and Alexandre Alahi1
1

EPFL, Switzerland,
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch
2
Valeo.ai, France,
3
Sorbonne Université, France

In this supplementary document, we provide additional content to complement our main paper. This includes a set of experiments that further illuminate
the capabilities of the UniTraj framework for the research community (see Section 1), additional results including cross-checking the performance of models
and reporting other metrics (see Section 2), and more details about UniTraj
framework (see Section 3).

1

Further experimentation with UniTraj

UniTraj is a flexible and comprehensive tool that opens up various research opportunities. While we have shown some of these in the main paper, we demonstrate other opportunities and capabilities of the framework here.

1.1

Continual learning on multiple datasets

Adapting trajectory prediction models to new datasets without erasing prior
knowledge, termed catastrophic forgetting [4], is crucial for autonomous driving
models. Our results in Table 1 illustrate this challenge, where we train AutoBot
on 30k samples of WOMD (resp. Argoverse 2) dataset followed by fine-tuning
on Argoverse 2 (resp. WOMD). Fine-tuning a WOMD-trained model with Argoverse 2 data modestly improves performance in Argoverse 2 (improvement
+0.92), but significantly hurts its WOMD performance (-0.52). Similarly, finetuning an Argoverse 2-trained model with WOMD data notably boosts WOMD
performance (+2.06) but severely impacts Argoverse 2 performance (-0.98). This
is attributed to the considerable domain gap between WOMD and Argoverse 2,
as shown in our cross-dataset generalization experiment. This outcome exemplifies the issue of catastrophic forgetting, highlighting the challenge of balancing
adaptation to new datasets without compromising performance on previously
learned ones.

