PosterLlama: Bridging Design Ability of
Language Model to Contents-Aware Layout
Generation
- Supplementary Matrial Jaejung Seol , Seojun Kim , and Jaejun Yoo∗
1

2

A

Laboratory of Advanced Imaging Technology (LAIT)
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
{tjfwownd,seojun.kim,jaejun.yoo}@unist.ac.kr

Code Availability

Our code is available at https://lait-cvlab.github.io/PosterLlama

B

Effect of Data Size

Here, we demonstrate the efficiency of utilizing the language model in a data
scarcity setting. We train our model on the PKU dataset with different dataset
sizes and evaluated its performance. Figure S1 shows these results, particularly
highlighting that the model can generate high-quality layouts even in small data
settings like the 1k dataset. Additionally, from these results, we can infer the
potential causes of the small degradation in FD and und_s on the CGL dataset
mentioned in the manuscript Effect of Augmentation Analysis. The possible reason could be FD’s sensitivity to the small number of the test samples; Calculating
FD with 3000 samples can introduce some variance. Another factor might be the
varying effect of augmentation across different training data sizes. The gap of
FD and und_s across different dataset sizes in Figure S1 diminishes increasing the data scale. We speculate that this reduction in performance differences
introduces variance. Additionally, while und_s has slightly decreased with augmentation in the CGL dataset (0.9987 → 0.9905), it still surpasses the value of
real data (0.9884).

C

Code Renderer

The utilization of LLM in layout generation in this study differs from the approach of learning numerical information from bounding boxes. Instead of learning the numerical values associated with bounding boxes, the generated layouts
are processed in the form of strings. This approach introduces the possibility of
encountering two issues during the rendering process of the generated HTML
code: abnormal formats and bounding box overflow beyond the constraints of

