Supplementary material PLS-LSA
Paul Albert1 , Jack Valmadre1 , Eric Arazo2 , Tarun Krishna3 ,
Noel E. O’Connor3 , Kevin McGuinness3
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
CeADAR: Ireland’s Centre for Applied Artificial Intelligence
3
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University
paul.albert@adelaide.edu.au

Supplementary material overview. Section 1 details the training hyperparameters for experiments on the CNWL, mini-Webvision and Webly-fg datasets.
Section 2 reports results when training PLS-LSA and PLS-LSA+ on miniWebivision using a ResNet50 as well as results for related state-of-the-art algorithms. Section 3 studies if PLS-LSA+ and other SOTA co-training alternatives
produce individual neural networks that are significantly more accurate than non
co-trained strategies. Section 4 studies different strategies for LSA including using a trusted ID/OOD subset, different alternating strategies and computing
the linear separation using features at different depth in the network. Section 5
shows the complementarity of the noise retrieval metrics used in PLS-LSA and
examples of missed clean examples by one metric but retreived by the other. Section 7 reports top-2 and top-5 accuracy results for the Webly-fg datasets. Finally,
Section 8 displays noisy images detected using PLS-LSA for the mini-Webivision
or the Webly-fg datasets.

1

Training details

1.1

CNWL

The Controlled Web Noisy Label (CNWL) [8] proposes a controlled web-noise
corruption of MiniImageNet [18] where some images of the original dataset are
replaced with human curated incorrect samples obtained from web-queries on the
corresponding class. We train on the CNWL at a resolution of 32×32 using a preactivation ResNet18 [5]. We train for 200 epochs using a cosine decay scheduling
from a learning rate of 0.1. We optimize the network using stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with a weight decay of 0.0005. For training augmentations, we use
random cropping and horizontal flipping, for the strong augmentations, we use a
random resize copping strategy followed by RandAugment [4] with parameters
1 and 6. For unsupervised pretraining, we train SimCLR for 1.000 epochs using
the solo-learn [17] library.
1.2

mini-Webvision

Webvision [12] is a real world classification web-dataset over the classes of ImageNet [10] the original paper estimates the noise level in Webvision to be between 20% to 34%. As in previous research, we train on the first 50 classes

