QL O RA: Efficient Finetuning of Quantized LLMs

Tim Dettmers∗

Artidoro Pagnoni∗

Ari Holtzman

Luke Zettlemoyer
University of Washington
{dettmers,artidoro,ahai,lsz}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We present QL O RA, an efficient finetuning approach that reduces memory usage enough to finetune a 65B parameter model on a single 48GB GPU while
preserving full 16-bit finetuning task performance. QL O RA backpropagates gradients through a frozen, 4-bit quantized pretrained language model into Low Rank
Adapters (LoRA). Our best model family, which we name Guanaco, outperforms
all previous openly released models on the Vicuna benchmark, reaching 99.3%
of the performance level of ChatGPT while only requiring 24 hours of finetuning
on a single GPU. QL O RA introduces a number of innovations to save memory
without sacrificing performance: (a) 4-bit NormalFloat (NF4), a new data type that
is information theoretically optimal for normally distributed weights (b) Double
Quantization to reduce the average memory footprint by quantizing the quantization
constants, and (c) Paged Optimizers to manage memory spikes. We use QL O RA
to finetune more than 1,000 models, providing a detailed analysis of instruction
following and chatbot performance across 8 instruction datasets, multiple model
types (LLaMA, T5), and model scales that would be infeasible to run with regular
finetuning (e.g. 33B and 65B parameter models). Our results show that QLoRA
finetuning on a small high-quality dataset leads to state-of-the-art results, even
when using smaller models than the previous SoTA. We provide a detailed analysis
of chatbot performance based on both human and GPT-4 evaluations showing that
GPT-4 evaluations are a cheap and reasonable alternative to human evaluation. Furthermore, we find that current chatbot benchmarks are not trustworthy to accurately
evaluate the performance levels of chatbots. A lemon-picked analysis demonstrates
where Guanaco fails compared to ChatGPT. We release all of our models and code,
including CUDA kernels for 4-bit training.2

1

Introduction

Finetuning large language models (LLMs) is a highly effective way to improve their performance,
[40, 63, 43, 62, 60, 37] and to add desirable or remove undesirable behaviors [43, 2, 4]. However,
finetuning very large models is prohibitively expensive; regular 16-bit finetuning of a LLaMA 65B
parameter model [58] requires more than 780 GB of GPU memory. While recent quantization
methods can reduce the memory footprint of LLMs [14, 13, 18, 67], such techniques only work for
inference and break down during training [66].
We demonstrate for the first time that it is possible to finetune a quantized 4-bit model without any
performance degradation. Our method, QL O RA, uses a novel high-precision technique to quantize
a pretrained model to 4-bit, then adds a small set of learnable Low-rank Adapter weights [28]
∗
2

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/artidoro/qlora and https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

