The Supplementary of ‘VCD-Texture: Variance
Alignment based 3D-2D Co-Denoising for
Text-Guided Texturing’
Shang Liu1 , Chaohui Yu1 , Chenjie Cao1 , Wen Qian1 , and Fan Wang1
DAMO Academy Alibaba Group, Beijing China
{liushang.ls, huakun.ych, caochenjie.ccj, qianwen.qian,
fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com

This supplementary material first presents Additional Results, which are organized into five sections: 1) trade-off between consistency and time, 2) time
cost comparisons, 3) visual ablation studies of variance alignment, 4) visual
comparisons with TexFusion, and 5) more visual comparison results. Next, the
limitations of the proposed method are discussed. Thereafter, we offer Algorithm
Details about the core JNP and MV-AR modules. Fourthly, we deduce the inequality of Rasterization Variance Reduction. Finally, further details about the
evaluation dataset are provided.

1

Additional Results

Trade-off between Consistency, Fidelity and Time. Our experiments reveal that the number of views significantly impacts efficiency and performance.
We conduct ablation studies to analyze the influence of view numbers. Tab. 1
summarizes the results, from which three key conclusions can be drawn:
– When comparing models (1) to (4), an increasing number of views results in
an opposite trend between fidelity metrics (FID, ClipFID) and the consistency metric (ClipVar). More views cause more overlaps, leading to higher
consistency; however, more overlap areas cause more blurriness, resulting in
lower fidelity.
– Comparing models (1) to (4), the number of views and the cost time are
positively correlated, more views require more generation time. Additionally, by comparing models (5) and (6), the inpainting refinement stage takes
approximately 11 seconds.
– Comparing models (4) and (5), we propose a sampling view policy that utilizes 9 views during the denoising process and samples a subset of 4 views
during the pixel aggregation process. This trade-off between consistency,
fidelity, and time enables achieving high consistency while maintaining relatively higher fidelity.

Time Cost Comparison. We compared the runtime efficiency of VCD-Texture
against prior approaches on a GPU server with eight NVIDIA RTX A800 GPUs.

