Multi-Sentence Grounding for Long-term
Instructional Video
Zeqian Li1⋆ , Qirui Chen1⋆ , Tengda Han3 , Ya Zhang1,2 ,
Yanfeng Wang1,2 , and Weidi Xie1,2,3
1

Coop. Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
3
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
https://lzq5.github.io/Video-Text-Alignment/

Supplementary Materials
1

Additional Implementation Details

1.1

Architecture Details

In this section, we provide more details on the visual-language backbones, and
the grounding module, as introduced in Sec. 3.2 (main paper).
Visual Backbone. We adopt S3D-G pre-trained with MIL-NCE, CLIP ViT/L-14
pre-trained with InfoNCE and InternVideo-MM-L-14 pre-trained with reconstruction and contrastive loss. For S3D-G, the procedure begins by decoding the
original video at 16 frames per second (fps), followed by resizing it to ensure
the shorter dimension is 256 pixels. After resizing, the frames are then centercropped to a resolution of 224 × 224 before being inputted into the S3D-G. Each
16-frame video clip cropped by a non-overlapping temporal window is fed into
the S3D-G architecture, resulting in one feature (512-d) per second. For CLIP
and InternVideo, the original video is first center cropped to a shorter side and
then resized to 224 × 224 resolution. When using CLIP, we decode the video into
1fps and extract one visual feature (768-d) per second with OpenAI’s ViT/L-14
model [1]. As for InternVideo, We decode the video into 8fps and feed it into the
InternVideo-MM-L14 model with an 8-frame non-overlapping temporal window,
obtaining one visual feature (768-d) per second.
Textual Backbone. The text encoder associated with S3D-G adopts a Bag-ofword (BoW) model based on Word2Vec embeddings pre-trained on GoogleNews.
Each sentence is tokenized, truncated under 32 tokens, and then encoded with
the text encoder associated with the S3D-G video encoder [4]. Specifically, the
sentence is tokenized and then converted into word vectors (300-d) through an
embedding layer trained on Google News. Following this, word vectors from the
same sentence will be projected into 512-d vectors, and turned into one sentence
vector through maxpooling. For the text encoder of CLIP and InternVideo, it
takes a maximum of 77 tokens for each sentence. Each token is passed to an
⋆

These authors contributed equally to this work.

