1

– Supplementary Material –
EvSign: Sign Language Recognition and
Translation with Streaming Events
1

Translation Head

Following [1], we introduce an auto-regressive transformer decoder as our translation head, which contains four decoder blocks. Each decoder block consists of
a masked self-attention layer, an encoder-decoder attention layer and a feedforward layer. The spoken language sentence is first prefixed with a special
beginning-of-sentence token (<bos>). Then, the generated word tokens are sent
to the masked self-attention layer, where each token can only use its predecessors to extract contextual representation. The encoder-decoder attention layer
is used to learn the mapping between gloss-aware and word tokens. Finally, a
feed-forward layer is appended to predict the probability of words in spoken
language. The translation head learns to generate target sentence in an autoregressive manner until it produces a special end-of-sentences (<eos>).

2

Comparison between Synthetic and Real Data

As shown in Fig. 1, we claim that there is a gap between synthetic and real
events. We conclude the advantages of the collected real event dataset EvSign
from three aspects.
First, the synthetic events from RGB frames suffer from poor continuity,
which relates to the framerate of RGB videos. In contrast, our dataset, captured
by high-quality event cameras, can generate rich events within mircosecond response, thus providing smoother trajectories. Second, as illustrated in the second
row, the RGB frames are blurry in fast motion scenarios. The blurriness leads
to the loss of informative boundaries in event data, which are crucial cues for
sign language tasks. However, the event frames sampled in real events contain
sharper boundaries, which can provide more discriminative details, achieving
better recognition results. As shown in Sec. 5 of the main submission, methods
utilizing real events yield superior performance compared to those relying on
RGB inputs. This shows the effectiveness of real events in sign language recognition and translation tasks. Third, we utilize an event-based image reconstruction
method (E2VID [6]) to reconstruct intensity images from events, shown in the
third row of Fig. 1. Given little movement with signer’s head, the reconstruction
method cannot recover signer’s many facial details, thereby protecting the user’s
privacy.

3

Comparison on SL-Animals-DVS

Since EvASL is not publicly available, we conduct comparison on SL-AnimalsDVS for ISLR. Please note that we focus on CSLR, which is different from ISLR.

