Supplementary - EAGLES: Efficient Accelerated 3D
Gaussians with Lightweight EncodingS
Sharath Girish , Kamal Gupta , and Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park
sgirish@umd.edu, kamalgupta308@gmail.com, abhinav@cs.umd.edu

1

Hyperparameters

We compress the color, rotation and opacity attributes of each Gaussian as explained
in the main paper. Each attribute consists of several hyperparameters; mainly latent dimension, decoder parameter learning rate, latent learning rate, decoder initialization.
The decoder parameters are initialized using a normal distribution with a standard deviation. As the uncompressed attributes a are initialized using SfM for 3D-GS [1], we
b) by inverting the deobtain the latent initialization (with continuous approximations q
coder D.
  \widehat {\boldsymbol {q}} = D^{-1}(\boldsymbol {a}) 
(1)
For a decoder which is only a linear layer, a least square approximation provides the
latent values. The learning rate of the latents is obtained by scaling the original attribute
learning rate with a scale factor and divided by the norm of the decoder (for a linear
layer). This improves training stability and convergence when decoder norm is either
too high or too low. Values used for all the compressible attributes are provided in
Tab. 1. We use these values for all of our experiments and find it to be stable across
various datasets. All other hyperaparameter values are used as is the default in [1].

2

Effect of attribute quantization

We analyze the effect of quantizing the various attributes of 3D Gaussians namely, the
higher order SH coefficients, Rotation, Opacity, Base Color, Scaling and Position. We
show results averaged on all scenes in Mip-NeRF in Table 2. To isolate the effect of
quantization, we do not do progressive training or pruning. Experiments are performed
on an RTX A4000. Standard refers to quantizing the color SH coefficients, rotation
and opacity.+/- adds/removes one quantization in comparison with the standard (not
chronological). Removing SH quantization significantly increases the storage size along
with marginally higher PSNR. Removing opacity quantization leads to 0.16 dB drop
in PSNR while still consuming much higher memory and more Gaussians (+0.54M).
Quantizing color leads to further PSNR drops while scale and position are much more
sensitive to quantization resulting in large quality degradations.

3

Per scene metrics

We provide metrics for each scene across the 3 datasets of Mip-NeRF360, Tanks&Temples,
and Deep Blending in Table 3, Table 4, Table 5 respectively.

