Stochastic Neighbor Embedding

Geoffrey Hinton and Sam Roweis
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
10 King’s College Road, Toronto, M5S 3G5 Canada
hinton,roweis @cs.toronto.edu


Abstract
We describe a probabilistic approach to the task of placing objects, described by high-dimensional vectors or by pairwise dissimilarities, in a
low-dimensional space in a way that preserves neighbor identities. A
Gaussian is centered on each object in the high-dimensional space and
the densities under this Gaussian (or the given dissimilarities) are used
to define a probability distribution over all the potential neighbors of
the object. The aim of the embedding is to approximate this distribution as well as possible when the same operation is performed on the
low-dimensional “images” of the objects. A natural cost function is a
sum of Kullback-Leibler divergences, one per object, which leads to a
simple gradient for adjusting the positions of the low-dimensional images. Unlike other dimensionality reduction methods, this probabilistic
framework makes it easy to represent each object by a mixture of widely
separated low-dimensional images. This allows ambiguous objects, like
the document count vector for the word “bank”, to have versions close to
the images of both “river” and “finance” without forcing the images of
outdoor concepts to be located close to those of corporate concepts.

1 Introduction
Automatic dimensionality reduction is an important “toolkit” operation in machine learning, both as a preprocessing step for other algorithms (e.g. to reduce classifier input size)
and as a goal in itself for visualization, interpolation, compression, etc. There are many
ways to “embed” objects, described by high-dimensional vectors or by pairwise dissimilarities, into a lower-dimensional space. Multidimensional scaling methods[1] preserve
dissimilarities between items, as measured either by Euclidean distance, some nonlinear
squashing of distances, or shortest graph paths as with Isomap[2, 3]. Principal components analysis (PCA) finds a linear projection of the original data which captures as much
variance as possible. Other methods attempt to preserve local geometry (e.g. LLE[4]) or
associate high-dimensional points with a fixed grid of points in the low-dimensional space
(e.g. self-organizing maps[5] or their probabilistic extension GTM[6]). All of these methods, however, require each high-dimensional object to be associated with only a single
location in the low-dimensional space. This makes it difficult to unfold “many-to-one”
mappings in which a single ambiguous object really belongs in several disparate locations
in the low-dimensional space. In this paper we define a new notion of embedding based on
probable neighbors. Our algorithm, Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (SNE) tries to place
the objects in a low-dimensional space so as to optimally preserve neighborhood identity,
and can be naturally extended to allow multiple different low-d images of each object.

