Supplemental Material to:
MEVG: Multi-event Video Generation with
Text-to-Video Models
Gyeongrok Oh1 , Jaehwan Jeong1 , Sieun Kim1 , Wonmin Byeon2 ,
Jinkyu Kim1 , Sungwoong Kim1 , and Sangpil Kim1
1

Korea University

2

NVIDIA

Overview
This supplementary material introduces experiment details, details of prompt
generator, additional analysis, test set, and further qualitative results.
– Section A provides more experiment details about the baseline, metrics, and
human evaluation.
– Section B presents the usage of prompt generator, including full descriptions used to generate individual prompts from the scenario containing the
sequence of events.
– Section C provides an additional analysis of computational cost and hyperparameters.
– Section D provides details of evaluation including test set.
– Section E provides more qualitative results in diverse domains. We provide
more comparison results between state-of-the-art models and qualitative results. Furthermore, we also present more generated videos conditioning on
image and multi-text and examples generated by the prompt generator.

A. Experiment Details
Baselines. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed MEVG, we compare the outcomes with several existing baselines. We select baselines that enable synthesizing the videos with multiple prompts without any training or finetuning. DirecT2V [7] and Text2Video-Zero (T2V-Zero) [9] leverage Stable Diffusion [13] trained on only text-image pairs. These models utilize the frame-level
descriptions to create individual frames constituting the video content. Furthermore, two text-to-video-based methods, Gen-L-Video [14] and VidRD [4], are
used to compare with ours. We use LVDM [5] as the foundation model for our
experiment to be a fair comparison.
Metrics. We report CLIP Similarity (“CLIP-Text") [6, 12] and temporal consistency (“CLIP Image") [1, 3, 10, 15] to evaluate our proposed MEVG. CLIPText is a commonly employed metric to measure the correlation between two
different modalities, image and text. We compute the cosine similarity over all

