SemTrack: A Large-scale Dataset for
Semantic Tracking in the Wild
(Supplementary Material)
Pengfei Wang1,* , Xiaofei Hui1,2,* , Jing Wu1,* , Zile Yang1,* ,
Kian Eng Ong1,* , Xinge Zhao1 , Beijia Lu1 , Dezhao Huang3 ,
Evan Ling3 , Weiling Chen4,‡ , Keng Teck Ma3 , Minhoe Hur3 , and
Jun Liu1,2,†
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Lancaster University
3
Hyundai Motor Group Innovation Center in Singapore (HMGICS)
4
Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute

1

Details of Collection and Annotation of Data and
Checking of Annotations

1.1

Data Collection

In order to achieve comprehensive tracking of various types of targets in different
scenarios, we use videos from publicly available datasets, i.e. YFCC100M [15],
TAO [1], ImageNet-VidVRD [14], VidOR [13], HACS [21], AVA [5], GOT-10K
[7], and ILSVRC2016 [12]. These videos encompass different types of indoor
and outdoor scenes in a wide range of scenarios, ranging from the daily life
encounters and interactions of individuals to commercial and factory settings to
outdoor settings (e.g., desert, forest, and river). Having a diverse representation
of objects and interactions in a wide range of complex and challenging scenarios
that reflects the diversity in the real world is helpful to develop and evaluate
robust and generalizable tracking models that are of great practical value to
handle various complex real-world scenarios, thus benefitting a large and diverse
range of applications.
We first curate the list of actions and interactions from AVA [5] and form
a vocabulary list of interaction classes (see Supp. Sec 2.3 for more details). We
define each interaction to minimize ambiguity. Using this list as a starting point,
we ask our annotators to screen the videos and shortlist suitable videos that
contain rich semantic trajectories. The criteria for the selection include:
1. The video must contain at least one target.
2. Interactions seen in the video should be found in our initial list of interaction
classes. If there are other interactions, the annotator will define them and
propose adding them to the vocabulary list, so that this list can be expanded
to comprehensively cover a wide range of interactions that occur in real life.
All the annotators meet again to standardize and refine this vocabulary list.

