arXiv:2206.09012v3 [cs.LG] 8 Jan 2023

Diffusion models as plug-and-play priors

Alexandros Graikos
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY

Nikolay Malkin
Mila, Université de Montréal
Montréal, QC, Canada

agraikos@cs.stonybrook.edu

nikolay.malkin@mila.quebec

Nebojsa Jojic
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA

Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY

jojic@microsoft.com

samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of inferring high-dimensional data x in a model that
consists of a prior p(x) and an auxiliary differentiable constraint c(x, y) on x
given some additional information y. In this paper, the prior is an independently trained denoising diffusion generative model. The auxiliary constraint
is expected to have a differentiable form, but can come from diverse sources.
The possibility of such inference turns diffusion models into plug-and-play modules, thereby allowing a range of potential applications in adapting models to
new domains and tasks, such as conditional generation or image segmentation.
The structure of diffusion models allows us to perform approximate inference
by iterating differentiation through the fixed denoising network enriched with
different amounts of noise at each step. Considering many noised versions of
x in evaluation of its fitness is a novel search mechanism that may lead to new
algorithms for solving combinatorial optimization problems. The code is available
at https://github.com/AlexGraikos/diffusion_priors.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models, such as denoising diffusion probabilistic models [DDPMs; 39, 13] can
capture the details of very complex distributions over high-dimensional continuous data p(x) [30, 7,
1, 38, 43, 15]. The immense effective depth of DDPMs, sometimes with thousands of deep network
evaluations in the generation process, is an apparent limitation on their use as off-the-shelf modules
in hierarchical generative models, where models can be mixed and one model may serve as a prior
for another conditional model. In this paper, we show that DDPMs trained on image data can be
directly used as priors in systems that involve other differentiable constraints.
In our main problem setting, we assume that we have a prior p(x) over high-dimensional data x and
we wish to perform inference in a model that involves this prior and a constraint c(x, y) on x given
some additional information y. That is, we want to find an approximation to the posterior distribution
p(x|y) ∝ p(x)c(x, y). In this paper, p(x = x0 , h = {xT , ..., x1 }) is provided in the form of an
independently trained DDPM over xT , . . . , x0 (§2.2), making the DDPM a ‘plug-and-play’ prior.
Although the recent community interest in DDPMs has spurred progress in training algorithms and
fast generation schedules [30, 37, 45], the possibility of their use as plug-and-play modules has not
been explored. Furthermore, as opposed to existing work on plug-and-play models (starting from
[29]), the algorithms we propose do not require additional training or finetuning of model components
or inference networks.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

