Generating Human Interaction Motions
in Scenes with Text Control
Hongwei Yi1,2(B) , Justus Thies2,3 , Michael J. Black2 , Xue Bin Peng1,4 ,
and Davis Rempe1
1
NVIDIA, Toronto, Canada
hongwei.yi@tuebingen.mpg.de
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tubingen, Germany
3
Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
4
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada

Abstract. We present TeSMo, a text-controlled scene-aware motion
generation method based on denoising diﬀusion models. Previous textto-motion methods focus on characters in isolation without considering
scenes due to the limited availability of datasets that include motion,
text descriptions, and interactive scenes. Our approach begins with pretraining a scene-agnostic text-to-motion diﬀusion model, emphasizing
goal-reaching constraints on large-scale motion-capture datasets. We
then enhance this model with a scene-aware component, ﬁne-tuned using
data augmented with detailed scene information, including ground plane
and object shapes. To facilitate training, we embed annotated navigation
and interaction motions within scenes. The proposed method produces
realistic and diverse human-object interactions, such as navigation and
sitting, in diﬀerent scenes with various object shapes, orientations, initial body positions, and poses. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach surpasses prior techniques in terms of the plausibility of
human-scene interactions and the realism and variety of the generated
motions. Code and data are available at https://research.nvidia.com/
labs/toronto-ai/tesmo.
Keywords: Scene-Aware Human Motion Generation · Text-to-Motion

1

Introduction

Generating realistic human movements that can interact with 3D scenes is crucial for many applications, ranging from gaming to embodied AI. For example,
character animators for games and ﬁlms need to author motions that successfully
navigate through cluttered scenes and realistically interact with target objects,
while still maintaining artistic control over the style of the movement. One natural way to control style is through text, e.g., “skip happily to the chair and sit
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5 14.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15062, pp. 246–263, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-73235-5_14

