Supplementary Materials for IVTP:
Instruction-guided Visual Token Pruning for
Large Vision-Language Models
Kai Huang⋆ , Hao Zou⋆ , Ye Xi, BoChen Wang, Zhen Xie, and Liang Yu
Alibaba Group, China
{zhouwan.hk, zh372956, yx150449, bochen.wbc, xiezhen.xz,
liangyu.yl}@alibaba-inc.com

1

Limitation Statement

We identify the following two shortcomings in our method, which will also be
the focal points for future improvements: 1) The second stage of our proposed
two-stage visual token pruning method for VLMs is somewhat reliant on the
aggregation of visually associated semantic information from instructions. The
operation facilitated by the CLIP text encoder as a intermediary is susceptible
to the influence of the types of ViT and LLM, necessitating that the ViT is
CLIP-based and the LLM is LLaMA-based. 2) Although the proposed method
can reduce the training computational complexity of VLMs by over 40%, the
cost of model remains high due to the vast amount of training data and model
parameters. We do not demonstrate the application of the proposed method to
a wider range of image-based VLMs or video VLMs, which would further prove
the adaptability of the method.

2

Implementation Details

Following LLaVA-1.5, the training of VLMs is divided into two steps. The first
step is cross-modal alignment of text and image, which is called pretraining,
aimed at learning the mapping of visual embedding to language embedding.
During this process, the ViT and LLM will be frozen, and only the parameters of the multimodal projection layer are optimized. The training data are all
image-caption pairs, with a learning rate set to 1e-3 and a batch size of 256.
The second step is instruction tuning, which primarily focuses on learning the
ability to follow instructions. During this process, only the ViT is frozen, and
the parameters of the multimodal projection layer and the LLM are optimized.
The training data consist of a widely collected set of VQA examples, with a
learning rate set to 2e-5 and a batch size of 128. Since the computational complexity of the LLM plays a decisive role in the entire VLMs, compared to those
methods that only perform token pruning in the ViT or between the ViT and
LLM, our proposed two-stage approach needs to pay particular attention to the
⋆

Equal contribution.

