Supplementary Material for
Look Hear: Gaze Prediction for
Speech-directed Human Attention
Sounak Mondal1 , Seoyoung Ahn2 , Zhibo Yang3 , Niranjan Balasubramanian1 ,
Dimitris Samaras1 , Gregory Zelinsky1 , and Minh Hoai4
1

Stony Brook University, NY, USA
2
UC Berkeley, CA, USA
3
Waymo LLC
4
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

In this document, we provide additional experiments, visualizations and details of our work on gaze prediction during incremental object referral task using the Attention in Referral Transformer (ART) model and RefCOCO-Gaze
dataset. The specific sections of this document are listed below.
– We provide details about how we selected the stimuli, i.e. the images and referring expressions, from RefCOCO dataset to create RefCOCO-Gaze dataset.
(Section 1).
– We discuss the gaze recording method we used to collect human fixations
for RefCOCO-Gaze dataset along with analysis of the collected gaze data
(Section 2).
– We provide a comparative analysis of our proposed RefCOCO-Gaze dataset
and other related gaze datasets discussed in the main text (Section 3).
– We provide details of various components of the ART model along with the
pre-training and training procedures (Section 4).
– We provide implementation details of several scanpath metrics used for evaluation in the main text (Section 5).
– We augment ART with fixation duration prediction capability and report
the experimental results for ART model and other baselines on RefCOCOGaze with respect to both fixation location and fixation duration prediction
(Section 6).
– We show that ART generalizes to categorical search task when trained and
evaluated using COCO-Search18 [4] dataset (Section 7).
– We provide implementation details of the baselines - Random Scanpath,
OFA [27], Chen et al . [3], Gazeformer-ref [16], and Gazeformer-cat [16] (Section 8).
– We augment the experimental results for the ablation studies on ART model,
which are discussed in the main text, with additional metrics (Section 9).
– We present additional ablation studies investigating the effects that the components of ART model have on performance and also include additional
analysis on the ablations (Section 10).
– We explore the effects of next word token prediction task on the performance
of ART model (Section 11).

