20

Y. Onoe et al.

Appendix
In this appendix, we present Image Collection and Curation (Appendix A), Key
Visual Features of DOCCI (Appendix B), Annotation Details of DOCCI (Appendix C), Object Statistics in DOCCI Images (Appendix D), Error Analysis
for Text-to-Image Generation models (Appendix E), and Datasheet for DOCCI
(Appendix H).

A

Image Collection and Curation

Section 2.1 gives an overview of the motivations, time periods and locations of
many of the photographs. Here, Jason Baldridge gives additional detail (in first
person) about further background, motivations and choices regarding DOCCI
image collection and curation.
Collection. While writing up the Parti paper [64], I put a lot of time and thought
into conveying both the process of coming up with great images (growing cherry
trees, section 6.2) and the limitations and failure modes of the model (section
6.3). This was before the time of broadly available text-to-image models and
I felt this was essential to making sure that a broader view of the model was
available than if we only included our favorite cherry picked outputs in the paper
and elsewhere. Even though Parti came out in June 2022, we had early exciting
models that I had been working with in summer 2021, and I was already obsessed
with exploring the boundaries of what they could and could not do.
My son Nash plays competitive junior tennis, and there was a rain delay
during one of his matches in August 2021. I was looking at the tennis court,
which happened to have a basketball hoop in the back corner. With the rain
falling on the court, it occurred to me that there were three interesting elements
to the scene – and perhaps by just taking pictures of scenes like that, I could
build up a library of interesting settings and controlled variations that we could
describe and try to reproduce with our models. I started tentatively, thinking to
take a couple hundred pictures. However, it takes time to build out a team and
annotation process and this ended up growing substantially, to 15,000+ images.
This was fueled in part by the fact that it started as we were coming out of the
COVID pandemic lockdown and my family made up for lost travel opportunities,
including vacations and many trips for my son’s tennis tournaments, plus I had
work travel to California and New York. This gave me opportunities to capture
animals in the Everglades, the scenes and simulacra of Las Vegas, statues and
buildings in NYC, cacti in Arizona, and many more, in addition to places and
things all around Texas (my home state).
The nature of my choices was thus fueled in part by where I ended up, the
activities I and my family took part in, what I found inherently interesting, and
my goal of finding tricky or useful scenes for text-to-image models – combined
with the exclusion of faces. As such, there are some clear biases in the image
collection as a whole, including many images related to tennis, cars (I used to

