Object-Centric Diffusion for Efficient
Video Editing - Supplementary Material
Kumara Kahatapitiya∗ , Adil Karjauv, Davide Abati, Fatih Porikli,
Yuki M. Asano, and Amirhossein Habibian
Qualcomm AI Research†
{kkahatap,akarjauv,dabati,fporikli,asano,ahabibian}@qti.qualcomm.com

This supplementary is organized into two sections. First, in Sec. A, we present
additional discussion on off-the-shelf-optimizations and benchmark settings. In
Sec. B, we present additional results, both qualitative and quantitative. Project
page: qualcomm-ai-research.github.io/object-centric-diffusion.

A

Additional Discussion

A.1

Off-the-shelf optimizations of ToMe

Pairing token locations from inversion Many inversion-based image/video
editing pipelines rely on sharing attention maps between inversion and generation stages (e.g. FateZero [8], Plug-and-Play [12]). As such, when applying
ToMe [2, 3], it is important that locations of destination (dst) and unmerged
(unm) tokens are paired in the two stages, at each corresponding attention layer
and diffusion step. If that is not the case, tokens or attention maps coming
from inversion are not compatible with the ones available at generation time. In
practice, we compute which tokens to be merged during inversion, and merge the
tokens at the same locations in generation attention maps. By doing so, we make
sure the tokens that remain after merging correspond to the same locations (or,
token indices), and hence, the attention maps from inversion and generation can
rightly be fused. We found this strategy to be of primary importance, as testified
by Fig. 3 (d-e) in the main paper.
Re-sampling destination tokens per-frame ToMe for stable diffusion [3]
samples dst tokens randomly in a single image. When extending this to multiple
frames, we initially sample the same random locations in each frame, finding this
strategy to be sub-optimal. Instead, if we re-sample different random locations
in each frame (or, in each temporal window in our spatio-temporal implementation), it allows us to preserve different information in each frame (or, window)
after merging. We found this to be beneficial, especially at higher merging rates
(e.g. see Fig. 3 (e to f) in the main paper).
How to search for destination match In the original ToMe for stable diffusion [3], for each source (src) token, we search its corresponding match within a
∗
†

Work completed during an internship at Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

