Supplementary material of Animate Your Motion:
Turning Still Images into Dynamic Videos
Mingxiao Li∗1 , Bo Wan∗2 , Marie-Francine Moens1 , and Tinne Tuytelaars2
1

Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven
{mingxiao.li,sien.moens}@kuleuven.be
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven
{bo.wan,Tinne.Tuytelaars}@esat.kuleuven.be

1

More visualization

In this section, we showcase additional videos generated by SMCD as depicted in
Fig. 1. These results illustrate SMCD’s ability to produce videos by integrating
both image and motion conditions. As SMCD uses the CLIP text encoder for
object semantic embedding, and learns general knowledge to maintain semantic
and motion consistency, excelling with out-of-distribution categories. It performs
well in tests with novel scenarios like ‘A dinosaur running in the moon’, as shown
in the last row of Fig. 1.

2

Comparison between different approaches

In Fig. 2, we offer more qualitative comparisons among various models, similar to
Fig. 3 in the main paper. Similarly, we find ModelSopde (MS) fails to accurately
represent the dynamics of the bounding box sequence. Additionally, both the
MS+MIM and GCA models fail to preserve the semantic content of the initial
frame. Conversely, ZC, CtrlNet and ZC+CtrNet are challenged by issues related
to poor visual quality. Our proposed SMCD model stands out by successfully
generating high-quality videos that not only retain the semantic integrity of the
first frame but also accurately follow the motion described by the bounding box
sequence.

3

Failure cases

Despite the superior performance achieved by SMCD, it still encounters some
limitations, which we highlight through two typical failure cases in this section.
The first issue is the inconsistency in object colors across different frames,
as illustrated in Fig. 3. This inconsistency arises because the model attempts
to transfer colors from one region to another. For instance, in the first example
of Fig. 3, the train’s head starts off blue while its body is red, and over time,
*

Equal Contribution. Project page: https://mingxiao-li.github.io/smcd/

