MarineInst: A Foundation Model
for Marine Image Analysis with Instance
Visual Description
Ziqiang Zheng1(B) , Yiwei Chen1 , Huimin Zeng2 , Tuan-Anh Vu1 ,
Binh-Son Hua3 , and Sai-Kit Yeung1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong,
Hong Kong S.A.R., China
zhengziqiang1@gmail.com
2
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
3
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland

Abstract. Recent foundation models trained on a tremendous scale of
data have shown great promise in a wide range of computer vision tasks
and application domains. However, less attention has been paid to the
marine realms, which in contrast cover the majority of our blue planet.
The scarcity of labeled data is the most hindering issue, and marine
photographs illustrate signiﬁcantly diﬀerent appearances and contents
from general in-air images. Using existing foundation models for marine
visual analysis does not yield satisfactory performance, due to not only
the data distribution shift, but also the intrinsic limitations of the existing foundation models (e.g., lacking semantics, redundant mask generation, or restricted to image-level scene understanding). In this work, we
emphasize both model and data approaches for understanding marine
ecosystems. We introduce MarineInst, a foundation model for the analysis of the marine realms with instance visual description, which
outputs instance masks and captions for marine object instances. To
train MarineInst, we acquire MarineInst20M, the largest marine image
dataset to date, which contains a wide spectrum of marine images with
high-quality semantic instance masks constructed by a mixture of humanannotated instance masks and model-generated instance masks from our
automatic procedure of binary instance ﬁltering. To generate informative
and detailed semantic instance captions, we use vision-language models
to produce semantic richness with various granularities. Our model and
dataset support a wide range of marine visual analysis tasks, from imagelevel scene understanding to regional mask-level instance understanding.
More signiﬁcantly, MarineInst exhibits strong generalization ability and
ﬂexibility to support a wide range of downstream tasks with state-ofthe-art performance as demonstrated in Fig. 1. Project website: https://
marineinst.hkustvgd.com.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9 14.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15060, pp. 239–257, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72627-9_14

