Diffusion-Based Image-to-Image Translation by
Noise Correction via Prompt Interpolation
Supplementary Document
Junsung Lee1

Minsoo Kang1

Bohyung Han1,2

1

ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
{leejs0525,kminsoo,bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

A

Appendix

In the appendix, we compare the proposed method with Prompt Tuning Inversion [3], which also uses prompt embedding interpolation. Additionally, we
compare our method with recent models, MasaCtrl [1] and Edit-Friendly DDIM
Inversion [5]. Next, we illustrate the noise correction term and present additional
qualitative results. Then, we present additional quantitative results of previous
text-driven image-to-image translation methods and our algorithm by measuring
relational distance (RD) [6]. We also demonstrate various details of our method,
explaining the differences between PIC and classifier-free guidance, as well as the
effectiveness of our interpolation strategy and hyperparameters (β, τ ). Finally,
we utilize another version of Stable Diffusion, Distilled Stable Diffusion, to verify
the generalization of our method.
A.1

Comparison with Prompt Tuning Inversion [3]

We compare our method with DDIM [11], Prompt Tuning Inversion (PTI) [3] and
a variant version of PTI using images sampled from the LAION-5B dataset [10].
As shown in Tab. 7, although the comparison methods exhibit slightly higher
values in CS, the proposed method consistently outperforms DDIM, PTI, and the
modified version of PTI in terms of BD and SD by large margins. Furthermore,
Fig. 6 illustrates that our method successfully edits the region of interest while
maintaining the other parts. In contrast, the other comparison approaches often
fail to preserve the background or structure of the source images. Additionally, as
depicted in Figs. 6 and 7, relying solely on the prompt interpolation is insufficient
to preserve the original background of the source images. Note that the optimized
embedding used for reconstruction is replaced with the source prompt embedding
provided by BLIP [7] in the variant version of PTI for fair comparisons according
to our experimental setting.
Although PTI is somewhat related to PIC in the sense that both methods
utilize prompt interpolation, the role of the prompt interpolation is entirely different. The proposed method uses the prompt interpolation in order to estimate
the noise correction term which is effective to edit the region of interest while
preserving the background area. On the other hand, PTI generates target images

