AdaptFormer: Adapting Vision Transformers for
Scalable Visual Recognition
Shoufa Chen1⇤ Chongjian Ge1⇤
Yibing Song2
1

Zhan Tong2

Jue Wang2

The University of Hong Kong

Jiangliu Wang2

Ping Luo1
2

Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Pretraining Vision Transformers (ViTs) has achieved great success in visual recognition. A following scenario is to adapt a ViT to various image and video recognition
tasks. The adaptation is challenging because of heavy computation and memory
storage. Each model needs an independent and complete finetuning process to
adapt to different tasks, which limits its transferability to different visual domains.
To address this challenge, we propose an effective adaptation approach for Transformer, namely AdaptFormer, which can adapt the pre-trained ViTs into many
different image and video tasks efficiently. It possesses several benefits more
appealing than prior arts. Firstly, AdaptFormer introduces lightweight modules
that only add less than 2% extra parameters to a ViT, while it is able to increase
the ViT’s transferability without updating its original pre-trained parameters, significantly outperforming the existing 100% fully fine-tuned models on action
recognition benchmarks. Secondly, it can be plug-and-play in different Transformers and scalable to many visual tasks. Thirdly, extensive experiments on five image
and video datasets show that AdaptFormer largely improves ViTs in the target
domains. For example, when updating just 1.5% extra parameters, it achieves
about 10% and 19% relative improvement compared to the fully fine-tuned models
on Something-Something v2 and HMDB51, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/ShoufaChen/AdaptFormer.

1

Introduction

There is a growing interest in adopting a general neural model to tackle a large variety of different
tasks since it benefits in reducing the need for task-specific model design and training. Recently,
Transformer [81] demonstrates great potential in this goal considering its success in various fields,
e.g., natural language processing (NLP) [27, 10, 82, 88], visual recognition [31, 79, 90, 63], dense
prediction [83, 11, 98, 96, 86], Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [52, 48], reinforcement
learning (RL) [18, 16, 87], robotics [50, 25], and etc. However, existing literature in computer vision
tend to focus on the same network with task-specific weights scenario, where a single network is
used to train from scratch or fully fine-tune on a specific dataset, making it infeasible to maintain a
separate model weight for every dataset when the number of task grows, especially for the increasing
model capacity of state-of-the-art models (e.g., ViT-G/14 [93] with over 1.8 billion parameters).
Different from prior arts, we step into the direction of developing same network with almost same
weights and achieve superior performance than the full-tuning approach by only tuning less than
2% parameters, with the remaining over 98% parameters shared across different tasks. There are
two challenges to learning universal representations using a single model. The first one lies in the
pre-training stage, which requires algorithms that can learn well-generalized representations that are
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

