Customized Generation Reimagined: Fidelity and
Editability Harmonized
(Supplementary Materials)
Jian Jin , Yang Shen , Zhenyong Fu⋆ , and Jian Yang⋆
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video
Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{jinj,shenyang_98,z.fu,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

In Section 1, we provide additional experiment results, including more sample generations of our method, the exploration of editability reduction, etc. In
Section 2, we provide implementation details of our method and baselines. In
Section 3, we extend the proposed ICO to multi-concept customization and show
some sample generations.

1

More Experimental Results

1.1

Subjects and Prompts

We conduct experiments on datasets from previous works [3, 6, 8], each of which
includes several reference images depicting a unique subject. For quantitative
evaluation, we utilize the query prompts from [6, 8]. Each subject is evaluated
using 20 query prompts of various types, such as recontextualization, artistic
variation, and attribute modification. We randomly generate six images for each
subject-prompt pair, resulting in a total of 120 generated images per concept
for each method. Each method is evaluated based on these generated images.
We show more sample generations of our method and the baseline methods
in Figure 8 and Figure 9 for visual comparison.
1.2

Auxiliary Noun

The editability reduction during model customization originates from the tokens
associated with the custom concept, including the entire "V∗ <noun>" and the
noun "<noun>", rather than from the fine-tuned model itself. To quantitatively
demonstrate this issue, we conduct comparative experiments using three groups
of query prompts. The query prompts in group1 contain the complete concept
expression "V∗ <noun>". The query prompts in group2 exclude the task-specific
contexts "V∗" from the entire "V∗ <noun>", while keeping the remaining part
unchanged. Regarding group3, query prompts are constructed from the query
prompts of group1 by replacing the "V∗ <noun>" with an "<auxiliary-noun>"
⋆

Corresponding author.

