Flexible Diffusion Modeling of Long Videos

William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, Frank Wood∗
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
{wsgh,saeidnp,vadmas,weilbach,fwood}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
We present a framework for video modeling based on denoising diffusion probabilistic models that produces long-duration video completions in a variety of
realistic environments. We introduce a generative model that can at test-time sample any arbitrary subset of video frames conditioned on any other subset and present
an architecture adapted for this purpose. Doing so allows us to efficiently compare
and optimize a variety of schedules for the order in which frames in a long video
are sampled and use selective sparse and long-range conditioning on previously
sampled frames. We demonstrate improved video modeling over prior work on
a number of datasets and sample temporally coherent videos over 25 minutes in
length. We additionally release a new video modeling dataset and semantically
meaningful metrics based on videos generated in the CARLA autonomous driving
simulator.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of photo-realistic videos is at the frontier of what is possible with deep learning
on currently-available hardware. Although related work has demonstrated modeling of short photorealistic videos (e.g. 30 frames [36], 48 frames [6] or 64 frames [16]), generating longer videos
that are both coherent and photo-realistic remains an open challenge. A major difficulty is scaling:
photorealistic image generative models [4, 8] are already close to the memory and processing limits
of modern hardware. A long video is at very least a concatenation of many photorealistic frames,
implying resource requirements, long-range coherence notwithstanding, that scale with frame count.
Attempting to model such long-range coherence makes the problem harder still, especially because in
general every frame can have statistical dependencies on other frames arbitrarily far back in the video.
Unfortunately fixed-lag autoregressive models impose unrealistic conditional independence assumptions (the next frame being independent of frames further back in time than the autoregressive lag is
problematic for generating videos with long-range coherence). And while deep generative models
based on recurrent neural networks (RNN) theoretically impose no such conditional independence
assumptions, in practice they must be trained over short sequences [12, 26] or with truncated gradients [31]. Despite this, some RNN-based video generative models have demonstrated longer-range
coherence, albeit without yet achieving convincing photorealistic video generation [26, 3, 7, 20, 2].
In this work we embrace the fact that finite architectures will always impose conditional independences. The question we ask is: given an explicit limit K on the number of video frames we can
jointly model, how can we best allocate these frames to generate a video of length N > K? One
option is to use the previously-described autoregressive model but, if K = N/4, we could instead
follow Ho et al. [16] by training two models: one which first samples every 4th frame in the video,
and another which (in multiple stages) infills the remaining frames conditioned on those. To enable
∗

Frank Wood is also affiliated with the Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms (Mila) and Inverted AI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

