Supplemental Material for ‘Group Testing for
Accurate and Efficient Range-Based Near
Neighbor Search for Plagiarism Detection’
Harsh Shah1 , Kashish Mittal1 , and Ajit Rajwade1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay

1

Contents

This supplemental material contains the following:
1. A figure showing the negative logarithm of the normalized histograms of dot
products between feature vectors of query images and those of all gallery
images from each of the four datasets we experimented with in the main
paper. These are shown in Fig. 2. Compare with Fig. 2 of the main paper
where normalized histograms are shown.
2. A comparison of the techniques Our-Sum and Our-Max proposed in this
paper to recent group testing based NN search methods such as [10, 14, 20]
is presented in Sec. 2.
3. A discussion regarding the limitation of using the recent advances in the
compressed sensing literature to the NN search problem is presented in Sec. 3.
4. Statistics for the average number of points pruned away in each round of
binary splitting in our method on each of the four databases, are presented
in Fig. 3 for Our-Sum and Fig. 4 for Our-Max. Notice that for both the
proposed algorithms (Our-Sum and Our-Max) there is nearly no pruning
encountered during the initial rounds. But as the adaptive tests continue,
negative tests are encountered in further rounds, and hence pools get pruned
away. Surprisingly, most negative tests for Our-Max are encountered in the
last round in contrast to that for Our-Sum.
5. Our numerical experiments, illustrated in Fig. 5 reveal that P (q t y ≤ ρ)
increases with λ and decreases as L increases. This tallies with intuition,
and supports the hypothesis that a larger number of pools will be pruned
away in a given round if there is more rapid decrease in the probability of
dot product values from 0 to 1.
6. A theoretical analysis of the Our-Max algorithm is presented in Sec. 4.
7. The hyper-parameters for various competing algorithms are presented in
Sec. 5.
8. Details of augmentation to images for generating queries in a streaming
setting are presented in Sec. 6 and Fig. 7.
9. A comparison of softmax features (on top of VGGNet features) versus VGGNet features in terms of retrieval precision and retrieval recall is presented
in Table 1 and Sec. 7.

