HARIVO

A

1

Network design

We provide pseudo-codes at the end of the appendix.
Temporal layers Similar to AnimateDiff [12], we add temporal attention layers lθ between spatial layers lϕ of the text-to-image model, as a common technique for T2V methods. For each temporal layer lθ , we reshape the input as
((b f) c h w → b c f h w) and output as (b c f h w → (b f) c h w),
where b, c, f, h, and w represent batch size, number of channels, number of
frames, height, and width, respectively.
Mapping network Our mapping network lθM tries to prepare the proper input
for the text-to-video (T2V) U-Net. In order to consider the cross-frame relationship, we design its architecture to have 3D convolution layers for f, h, w
dimensions and a temporal attention layer. Initially, the input is reshaped from
(b f c h w → (b h w) c f), following which a 3D convolution is applied. Subsequently, the data undergoes processing through a temporal attention layer and
a linear layer, facilitating effective noise distribution alignment within the frame
sequence.
Token generator While typical architectures receive identical text tokens to
cross-attention layers for all frames, our token generator tθ (·) provides framewise text tokens that model detailed temporal variations beyond the standard
text tokens of objects. To facilitate this, the token generator transforms the original text tokens into frame-wise tokens. It utilizes a sequential network of linear
and SiLU layers, followed by a 1D convolution layer. This structure is capable
of expanding the text embeddings into a format suitable for representing each
frame individually.
Projection layer g(·) We implement our projection layer g(·) for the contrastive
loss on z space. It is an MLP with SiLU between linear layers of (c h w)→ c→
c → c channels.

B

Custom noise distribution of previous methods

It is worth noting that the spatial layers of the Text-to-Image (T2I) model
remain frozen, and we directly utilize them. This practice acknowledges the
imbalance between the characteristics of a T2I model, trained to generate a
variety of images starting from Gaussian noise, and the objectives of a Text-toVideo (T2V) model, which needs to create a sequence of images. PYoCo [10]
supposes that the IID noise prior is ill-suited for training video diffusion models
due to the lack of temporal correlations between frames. Instead, they introduce
a correlated noise model that uses specific shared noise across all frames to
design frame correlations. However, this shared noise leads to a non-Gaussian
distribution that contradicts the premise of the reparameterization trick, which

