UniTalker: Scaling up Audio-Driven 3D Facial
Animation through A Unified Model
– Supplementary Materials –
Xiangyu Fan , Jiaqi Li , Zhiqian Lin , Weiye Xiao , and Lei Yang

B

SenseTime Research, China
{fanxiangyu, lijiaqi2, linzhiqian, xiaoweiye1, yanglei}@sensetime.com

1

Demonstration Video

We present a brief demonstration of UniTalker in the attached video and the
project page1 . Our model exhibits the ability to generate realistic facial motion
with different audio inputs, including clean and noisy voices in various languages,
text-to-speech-generated audios, and even noisy songs accompanied by background music. Notably, our model excels at predicting face emotion according to
the input audio. Although Vocaset consists of only neutral voices and emotionless facial motion, our model effectively infuse emotional facial motion into the
generated faces. In contrast, previous models [8,13,18,23] trained exclusively on
Vocaset struggle to generate facial motion beyond neutral expression, even when
the input audio carries strong emotional cues. When given audios with strong
emotion, the generated faces may exhibit over-exaggerated and unnatural emotion for Vocaset annotation, since Vocaset contains only neutral emotion (see
Main Paper Fig. 6a). The model needs to "guess" and generate out-of-domain
facial motion for Vocaset annotation. We include this failure case in the attached
video. The synthesized audio mentioned in the demo video is generated using
OpenAI’s Text-to-Speech voice [1].

2

Additional Experiments

2.1

Comparison between TCN and Transformer

We do experiments on TCN and transformer for the motion decoder. Like [2], the
transformer refers to the non-autoregressive transformer encoder architecture.
Both TCN and transformer have 256 channels and 3 layers. The transformer is
with 4 heads. Tab. 1 shows that TCN leads to lower LVE on most datasets.
2.2

One-shot Learning

To explore the possibility of one-shot tuning for the pre-trained UniTalker model,
we conduct an experiment using a single audio-visual pair from Vocaset as the
1

Homepage: https://github.com/X-niper/UniTalker

