1

Deblurring 3D Gaussian Splatting:
Supplementary Material

A

Additional Method Details

Defocus blur modeling According to the thin lens law [2], the scene points
that lie at the focal distance of the camera make a sharp image at the imaging
plane. On the other hand, any scene points that are not at the focal distance will
make a blob instead of a sharp point on the imaging plane, and it produces a
defocus blurred image. If the separation from the focal distance of a scene point
is large, it produces a blob of a large area, which corresponds to severe defocus
blur. We assume that 3D Gaussians with greater dispersion (greater scale s) can
represent the scene points not being located at the focal distance, while those
with smaller scale s can model the points placed at the focal distance. Table 1
shows that during training, as compared to testing, 3D Gaussians of larger values
of scale have been used to rasterize the scene. This indicates that larger values of
scale are needed to adjust the 3D Gaussians to rasterize the blurred (training)
images. While, in contrast, smaller values of the attributes demonstrate that
the smaller-sized Gaussians are more suitable to model the fine details that are
present in the sharp (testing) images.

Table 1: Scale transformation of 3D Gaussians to model the defocus blur measured
on real defocus blur dataset.
Train (ŝj ) Test (sj )
Average

0.3232

0.3079

Camera motion blur modeling Camera motion blur occurs due to the camera shake during the exposure time of a photograph. When a camera moves
while capturing an image, the rays from different points within the scene strike
different areas of the camera sensor at different moments and are intermixed,
so the blurry final image is obtained [1]. Consequently, the blurry final image is
acquired as each point in the subject is captured slightly different region on the
sensor. Meanwhile, images at all the instants when the rays hit the camera sensor are sharp, without any inherent blur. Therefore, we train the 3D Gaussians
to model clean representations at various moments the lights reach the sensor,
rasterize M clean images from M different moments, and then average them
to simulate the camera movement during training time. Fig. 1 shows the clean
images rasterized at different moments and averaged blurry image when M is 6.

