HowToCaption: Prompting LLMs to Transform
Video Annotations at Scale
Supplementary Material
Nina Shvetsova⋆1,2,3 , Anna Kukleva∗2 , Xudong Hong2,6 ,
Christian Rupprecht4 , Bernt Schiele2 , Hilde Kuehne1,3,5
1

Goethe University Frankfurt, 2 MPI for Informatics, SIC, 3 University of Bonn,
4
University of Oxford, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 6 Saarland University
{nshvetso,akukleva}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

In the appendix, we provide additional experimental results, implementation
and dataset details, and qualitative examples. Additionally, we discuss limitations and responsibility to human subjects. Specifically, we first discuss the experimental results of using MiniGPT-4 [19] to generate visually grounded captions in Sec. A. Then, we provide additional experimental results in Sec. B,
including prompt engineering experiments in Sec. B.3, ablations of our filtering
& alignment method in Sec. B.4, and robustness analysis in Sec. B.5. Then, we
provide additional implementation details in Sec. C, statistics of the HowToCaption dataset in Sec. D, and qualitative examples in Sec. E. Finally, we discuss
our method limitations in Sec. F and responsibility to human subjects in Sec. G.

A

Grounding Captions to Video Content with
MiniGPT-4

Our generated captions with Vicuna-13B are based solely on ASR subtitles.
To additionally ground the produced captions on visual content, we experiment
with the recent MiniGPT-4 model [19]. The MiniGPT-4 consists of the frozen
Vicuna-13B model and a visual encoder with a Q-Former [6] that projects visual
features from an image into tokens in a language model embedding space that
are later treated as word tokens in the Vicuna-13B model. To ground generated
captions on the visual modality, we create a grid image from 4 uniformly sampled
frames from a video clip and slightly adapt the prompt to encourage the LLM
to utilize the provided image for generating captions (Tab. A.1). We apply our
approach to obtain visually grounded captions with the MiniGPT-4 model and
obtain HowToCaption-grounded. For this dataset, we follow exactly the same
hyperparameters that we use for HowToCaption. In Tab. A.2, we evaluate the
downstream retrieval performance of the T-V model trained on HowToCaptiongrounded. The dataset shows mixed results compared to the HowToCaption;
while it is beneficial for the MSR-VTT and the MSVD dataset, performance on
the YouCook2 dataset drops. To facilitate further analysis, we will release both
caption sets: the ASR-based only HowToCaption, produced by the Vicuna-13B,
and HowToCaption-grounded, produced by the MiniGPT-4.
⋆

equal contribution

