DomainFusion: Generalizing To Unseen Domains
with Latent Diffusion Models
Yuyang Huang1 , Yabo Chen1 , Yuchen Liu1 , Xiaopeng Zhang2(B) ,
Wenrui Dai1(B) , Hongkai Xiong1 , and Qi Tian2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Huawei Inc., Shenzhen, China
{huangyuyang, chenyabo, liuyuchen6666, daiwenrui,
xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
zxphistory@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

1

More Discussion about Latent Distillation

1.1

A Recap of Differentiable Image Parameterizations

Images are conventionally parameterized as matrices of pixel values, with each
pixel defined by its RGB intensities. However, in specific application contexts,
this parametrization may not be the most efficient. Indeed, it is feasible to opt
for a new set of parameters and establish a mapping relationship between these
parameters and the image. Subsequently, we can compute an objective function
leveraging the image, and if this mapping is differentiable, the objective function
can facilitate efficacious updates to our selected novel parameters. The framework above is referred to as Differentiable Image Parameterizations [9], as is
shown in Fig. 1.
1.2

Understanding Latent Distillation from Differentiable Image
Parameterizations Perspective

Similarly, Latent Distillation can also be considered a novel form of differentiable
image parameterizations, where we map the image x to a DG discriminative
model’s parameters θ. We exploit the perception capability of the DG model Pθ
to corrupt the image x and subsequently extract the loss LLD through a LDM for
backpropagation, thereby updating the input parameters θ. Our method process
shares similarities with other applications of differentiable image parameterizations, as it involves manipulating the attributes of the image to obtain highquality results. However, in our method, the manipulation of image attributes is
not the ultimate goal. Instead, it necessitates continuous improvement of the DG
model’s perception capability. By continuously propagating meaningful gradient
information to minimize the objective function given by LDM, we can ultimately
achieve a highly generalizable DG model.
Yuyang Huang and Yabo Chen—Equal contribution.
Correspondence to Xiaopeng Zhang and Wenrui Dai.

