Supplementary Materials for
“Shifted Autoencoders for Point Annotation
Restoration in Object Counting”
Yuda Zou⋆ , Xin Xiao⋆ , Peilin Zhou , Zhichao Sun , Bo Du , and
Yongchao Xu
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China
{zouyuda,xinxiao,peilinzhou,zhichaosun,dubo,yongchao.xu}@whu.edu.cn

In this supplementary submission, we first conduct a toy experiment to quantify the enhanced consistency of the point annotations restored by SAE in Sec. 1.
Next, we validate the effectiveness of further using the trained SAE as a pretrained model for the counting task (similar to Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [1]
for downstream tasks) in Sec. 2. We also analyze the efficiency of our method
in Sec. 3. The ablation studies of the network and shifting mode are detailed in
Sec. 4 and Sec. 5, respectively. Finally, some additional visualization results of
the point annotations restored by SAE are present in Sec. 6.

1

Toy Experiment

In the main paper, we demonstrate that the point annotations revised by SAE are
more consistent than the initial manual point annotations via some qualitative
visualizations and effectiveness for final counting on eleven widely used datasets.
Here we design a toy experiment to further validate the effectiveness of SAE by
quantifying the consistency of the point annotations restored by SAE.
Specifically, we generate many images of identical stick figure heads (a circle shape with radius r) as training images. Since the relative spatial distribution of manual point annotations w.r.t. corresponding objects often roughly
obeys a Gaussian function [7], we simulate the manual point annotations with
random offset noise for each stick figure head by randomly sampling from a
two-dimensional Gaussian distribution, which is centered at the center of the
head circle. The distribution of simulated point annotations for the stick figure
heads is illustrated in the left part of Fig. 1. Some annotations may even locate
outside of the head region. This phenomenon also occurs in actual object counting datasets, which is shown by the green point within the white boxed area in
Fig.Fig. 3. With simulated training images and corresponding point annotations,
we apply our SAE to restore the simulated point annotations. As shown in the
right part of Fig. 1, the point annotations restored by SAE are closer to the
distribution center, thereby exhibiting improved consistency compared with the
⋆

Equal contribution

