SuMa++: Efficient LiDAR-based Semantic SLAM
Xieyuanli Chen

Andres Milioto Emanuele Palazzolo

Philippe Giguère

Jens Behley

Cyrill Stachniss

Abstract— Reliable and accurate localization and mapping
are key components of most autonomous systems. Besides geometric information about the mapped environment, the semantics plays an important role to enable intelligent navigation behaviors. In most realistic environments, this task is particularly
complicated due to dynamics caused by moving objects, which
can corrupt the mapping step or derail localization. In this
paper, we propose an extension of a recently published surfelbased mapping approach exploiting three-dimensional laser
range scans by integrating semantic information to facilitate
the mapping process. The semantic information is efficiently
extracted by a fully convolutional neural network and rendered
on a spherical projection of the laser range data. This computed
semantic segmentation results in point-wise labels for the whole
scan, allowing us to build a semantically-enriched map with
labeled surfels. This semantic map enables us to reliably
filter moving objects, but also improve the projective scan
matching via semantic constraints. Our experimental evaluation
on challenging highways sequences from KITTI dataset with
very few static structures and a large amount of moving
cars shows the advantage of our semantic SLAM approach
in comparison to a purely geometric, state-of-the-art approach.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Accurate localization and reliable mapping of unknown
environments are fundamental for most autonomous vehicles.
Such systems often operate in highly dynamic environments,
which makes the generation of consistent maps more difficult. Furthermore, semantic information about the mapped
area is needed to enable intelligent navigation behavior. For
example, a self-driving car must be able to reliably find a
location to legally park, or pull over in places where a safe
exit of the passengers is possible – even in locations that
were never seen, and thus not accurately mapped before.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) able to generate
such semantic maps by using three-dimensional laser range
scans. Our approach exploits ideas from a modern LiDAR
SLAM pipeline [2] and incorporates semantic information
obtained from a semantic segmentation generated by a Fully
Convolutional Neural Network (FCN) [21]. This allows us
to generate high-quality semantic maps, while at the same
time improve the geometry of the map and the quality of the
odometry.
The FCN provides class labels for each point of the laser
range scan. We perform highly efficient processing of the
X.Chen, A. Milioto, E. Palazzolo, J. Behley, and C. Stachniss are with the
University of Bonn, Germany. Philippe Giguère is with the Laval University,
Québec, Canada. This work has partly been supported by the German
Research Foundation under Germany’s Excellence Strategy, EXC-2070 390732324 (PhenoRob) and under grant number BE 5996/1-1 as well as by
the Chinese Scholarship Committee.

car

bicycle

truck

motorcycle

other-vehicle

person

other-object

road

parking

sidewalk

other-ground

building

fence

pole

vegetation

trunk

terrain

traﬃc-sign

Fig. 1: Semantic map of the KITTI dataset generated with our
approach using only LiDAR scans. The map is represented by
surfels that have a class label indicated by the respective color.
Overall, our semantic SLAM pipeline is able to provide high-quality
semantic maps with higher metric accuracy than its non-semantic
counterpart.

point cloud by first using a spherical projection. Classification results on this two-dimensional spherical projection
are then back-projected to the three-dimensional point cloud.
However, the back-projection introduces artifacts, which we
reduce by a two-step process of an erosion followed by
depth-based flood-fill of the semantic labels. The semantic
labels are then integrated into the surfel-based map representation and exploited to better register new observations to the
already built map. We furthermore use the semantics to filter
moving objects by checking semantic consistency between
the new observation and the world model when updating

