Labeled Data Selection for Category Discovery
– Supplementary Material
Bingchen Zhao1
1

A

Nico Lang2

University of Edinburgh

Serge Belongie2
2

Oisin Mac Aodha1

University of Copenhagen

Soft weighting - Beta method

In this section, we aim to provide additional ablation results to justify the design
choices we made in the main text.

A.1

Additional ablations

Ablation on α and β values. In Tab. A1, we present more results (i.e. in
additional to the results in Tab. 5 in the main paper) where we use a wider
range of α and β values. We observe that the default values of α = β = 5 across
all datasets offer a competitive performance among other choices, and that when
we chose parameters that select labeled examples that are more similar to the
unlabelled set (i.e. α > β) results in worse performance.
Ablation of using reweighting vs. resampling. The weight we obtained
from Eq.13 from the main paper can also be used to resample the dataset rather
than weighting the loss value. The resampling of the dataset can be done by
normalizing the weight associated with each of the categories to a probability
value and then using this probability to sample data from the dataset to form
training mini-batches. When using resampling, we use equal weighting in the
loss function during training. In Tab. A2, we present the comparison of using
the weight for resampling the dataset and weighting the loss. The difference
between the two approaches is marginal, thus we choose to default the design of
the beta method to do soft weighting on the losses.
Ablation of the similarity metric. In Eq. 12 of the main paper, we compute the similarity score as the cosine similarity of the labeled centroids to the
farthest unlabeled data point. However, other ways of computing this similarity
are also potentially valid. In Tab. A3, we evaluate using other choices, such as
using the maximum similarity of the labeled centroids to the unlabeled data
and the median of the all cosine similarity score between the labeled centroids
to the unlabeled data points. We can see from the results that using the cosine
similarity of the most similar unlabeled data (i.e. ‘max’) leads to a performance
drop compared to the no selection baseline, while using the median value of all
similarities and the minimum value of the similarities yield similar results.

