Supplementary – ProxyCLIP: Proxy Attention
Improves CLIP for Open-Vocabulary
Segmentation
Mengcheng Lan1 , Chaofeng Chen1 , Yiping Ke2 , Xinjiang Wang3 ,
Litong Feng3 , and Wayne Zhang3,4⋆
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
CCDS, Nanyang Technological University 3 SenseTime Research
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Digital Grid Technology
lanm0002@e.ntu.edu.sg {chaofeng.chen, ypke}@ntu.edu.sg
{wangxinjiang, fenglitong, wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com

2

Appendix
A

Implementation for Stable Diffusion.

Several recent studies [5,10,13] have demonstrated the effectiveness of large-scale
text-image diffusion models in open-vocabulary semantic segmentation tasks.
ODISE [13] noted that the internal representations of stable diffusion models
exhibit strong semantic coherence. Given the flexibility of our framework, our
ProxyCLIP can also utilize stable diffusion models as VFM to extract dense
visual representations for images. Specifically, we employ the stable diffusion [8]
model pre-trained on a subset of the LAION dataset as our VFM. We set the
time step for the diffusion process to t = 0 and extract feature maps from
the 9-th block of UNet. The input image is directly resized from 336×336 to
672×672. Consequently, we obtain a feature map with dimensions 22×22×1280,
a downsampling factor of 15.3.

B

Hyperparameters.

We further conduct experiments to investigate the effects of varying the shifting
and scaling factors in the normalization step. As depicted in Fig. 1, we examined the segmentation performance achieved across four datasets using different
values for the shifting factor β and the scaling factor γ. Notably, we observe
that ProxyCLIP consistently achieves good results when β is localized within
the range of 1.0 to 1.6 and γ falls within the range of 2.0 to 5.0. We set these
two parameters to β = 1.2 and γ = 3.0 for all datasets by default. These results further underscore the robustness of our normalization strategy within the
proxy attention mechanism, affirming its efficacy in enhancing segmentation performance across diverse datasets.
⋆

Corresponding author.

