Arc2Face: A Foundation Model for ID-Consistent
Human Faces
(Supplementary Material)
Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou1 , Alexandros Lattas1 , Stylianos
Moschoglou1 , Jiankang Deng1 , Bernhard Kainz1,2 , and Stefanos
Zafeiriou1
1

2

1

Imperial College London, UK
FAU Erlangen–Nürnberg, Germany
https://arc2face.github.io/

Effect of Training Dataset Size

As stated in the main paper, our initial experiments on low-resolution images
showed that FFHQ [3] is insufficient for training a foundation ID-conditioned
model, and large-scale datasets with multiple images per ID are essential for this
task. In addition to the evaluation presented in Fig. 3 of the main paper, Fig. 1
provides samples from our base Latent Diffusion model, trained on either FFHQ
or WebFace42M [16] (before restoration), where significant ID-distortion can be
observed for the former, confirming the superiority of FR datasets.

2

Averaging ID Features

ID-embeddings offer a compact representation of the facial characteristics that
allows interpolation across different images. In Fig. 2, we provide transitions
between pairs of subjects by linearly blending their ArcFace vectors.
While our model provides state-of-the-art ID-retention by relying solely on
the ArcFace [2] embeddings of a single input image, averaging embeddings from
multiple images of the same person can, in some cases, lead to slightly higher
ID resemblance in the generation, as shown in Fig. 3. Despite their highly discriminative nature, ID-embeddings from FR networks may still encode some
ID-irrelevant features, such as expression or appearance, to a small extent. Consequently, averaging across diverse inputs proves beneficial in filtering out this
noisy information.

3

Retrieving the Closest Training Samples

We have shown that, unlike the image memorization observed in T2I models [8],
our model avoids replicating its training IDs, owing to our extensive training
dataset. Fig. 10b of the main paper shows examples of generated images from
our model and their closest training images in terms of ID similarity. For a comprehensive analysis, we include additional examples in Fig. 5, where a significant
ID distance can be found between each sample and its closest match.

