IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2022

1

Reasoning with Scene Graphs for Robot Planning
under Partial Observability

arXiv:2202.10432v1 [cs.RO] 21 Feb 2022

Saeid Amiri, Kishan Chandan, and Shiqi Zhang

Abstract—Robot planning in partially observable domains is
difficult, because a robot needs to estimate the current state and
plan actions at the same time. When the domain includes many
objects, reasoning about the objects and their relationships makes
robot planning even more difficult. In this paper, we develop an
algorithm called scene analysis for robot planning (SARP) that enables robots to reason with visual contextual information toward
achieving long-term goals under uncertainty. SARP constructs
scene graphs, a factored representation of objects and their relations, using images captured from different positions, and reasons
with them to enable context-aware robot planning under partial
observability. Experiments have been conducted using multiple
3D environments in simulation, and a dataset collected by a
real robot. In comparison to standard robot planning and scene
analysis methods, in a target search domain, SARP improves
both efficiency and accuracy in task completion. Supplementary
material can be found at https://tinyurl.com/sarp22
Index Terms—Planning under Uncertainty, Probabilistic Inference, Semantic Scene Understanding.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HERE has been great progress in development of service
robots in the recent years, e.g., [1], [2]. Those robots
are able to conduct everyday tasks in human-inhabited environments over extended periods of time. Robot perception in
such domains is partial and unreliable, which brings a major
challenge to robot decision making.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP)
is a framework that models the uncertainty in both observations and action outcomes [3], and has been used for policy generation in partially observable domains. However, the
challenges are two-fold. First, constructing POMDPs requires
that the robot has a complete world model, which tends to be
infeasible in practice. In particular, real-world environments
(say a kitchen) frequently include many objects, making it
troublesome to use POMDPs to have a universal representation
of all objects. Second, the complexity of reasoning about these
objects and their relationships grows exponentially as more
objects are considered. In this paper, we aim to develop an
approach that reasons with contextual information for scene
analysis to enable POMDP-based robot planning.
One of the recent advancements in computer vision has
been scene graph generation networks [4]–[10]. Given an

T

Manuscript received: September, 09, 2021; Revised January, 01, 2022;
Accepted January, 30, 2022.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Hanna Kurniawati
upon evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments. This work
was supported by NSF (NRI-1925044), Ford, OPPO, and SUNY RF)
All authors are with the Department of Computer Science, the State University of New York (SUNY) at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY, 13902, USA.
Email: {samiri1; kchanda2; zhangs}@binghamton.edu
Digital Object Identifier (DOI): see top of this page.

image, scene graph systems generate a graph consisting of
detected objects (e.g, a book and a table), their corresponding
bounding boxes, and the relationships among the objects
(e.g., book on a table). Scene graphs provide a robot with
a structured understanding of the world in terms of objects,
and their relations. From the robotics perspective, however,
current scene graph research has the limitation that the context
analysis does not go beyond individual images, even though
a robot can easily capture images from different angles and
locations for analysis purposes. With the active perception
capabilities of robots, we have the objective of developing
an approach for domain-wide active scene analysis for mobile
robots.
In this work, we develop an algorithm called scene analysis
for robot planning (SARP) for planning robot actions for
context-aware, object-centric scene analysis. SARP uses local
scene graphs of single images to build and augment global
scene graphs toward context-aware robot planning under partial observability. An overview of SARP is shown in Figure 1.
More specifically, a global scene graph is incrementally constructed “on the fly” using local scene graphs generated at
different locations when new objects are perceived. Reasoning
with this global scene graph produces useful information to
help the robot estimate the current world state. This enhanced
state estimation enables the robot to improve its performance
in goal achievement.
We have evaluated SARP using target search tasks where
a robot needs to locate an object in an indoor environment.
We use POMDPs to model the robot’s perception and actuation
skills [3], use Neural Motifs [4] to compute local scene graphs,
and use approximate inference methods to build Markov
networks computed from large datasets. We have extensively
evaluated SARP through comparisons with competitive baselines in simulation. Results show that SARP reduced the
overall action costs by 16% compared with a predefined action
policy. Also, SARP helps the robot maintain its policy quality
in the presence of an increased number of objects, and enables
the robot to focus on the areas that are most relevant to the
current task.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This work aims to enable a robot to represent and reason
with contextual information to guide robot planning under
uncertainty. Researchers have developed algorithms that reason with contextual knowledge to guide sequential decision
making [11]. The contextual knowledge can be in a variety of forms, such as commonsense knowledge [12], action

