Supplementary Materials for Text2LiDAR:
Text-guided LiDAR Point Clouds Generation via
Equirectangular Transformer
Yang Wu1 , Kaihua Zhang4 , Jianjun Qian1 , Jin Xie2,3† , and Jian Yang1 ⋆
1

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
4
B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China
{wuyang98,csjqian,csjxie,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn zhkhua@gmail.com
2

A

Appendix

In this supplementary material, we first provide an overview of the content in
the nuLiDARtext constructed by us. Subsequently, we offer visual representations of the data representation using schematic diagrams. Then, we provide
further explanations and analysis of Fourier coordinate features. We also provide more uncontrolled generation and densification comparisons with other advanced methods. At last, we present additional visual results of text-controlled
generation and conduct a more in-depth analysis.
A.1

More nuLiDARtext Presentation

We show the paired LiDAR-text data in the nuLiDARtext in this section. It can
be observed from Figure 1, Figure 2, and Figure 3 that we create a diverse and
accurate set of text descriptors, which can provide high-quality paired training
data for subsequent text-controlled LiDAR point clouds generation.
Figure 1 illustrates the LiDAR point clouds and the corresponding text constructed by us when larger objects such as cars, trucks, and buses are present
in the scene. It can be observed that our constructed text not only includes
the main objects in the scene but also provides descriptions of the road conditions, such as intersections and weather, which is a capability not possessed by
datasets [2,3,5,7] that only provide category information. Under normal weather
conditions, the LiDAR point clouds exhibit regular circular beams, and the objects in the scene present well-defined contours, representing the most common
situation.
Figure 2 illustrates the scenes with smaller objects, where these smaller objects are observed to have only a minimal number of assigned LiDAR points,
⋆

† Corresponding author.

