In Defense of Lazy Visual Grounding
for Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
– Supplementary Materials –
Dahyun Kang

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/lazygrounding

In this supplementary material, we provide additional experimental details
and results of our method.

1

Terminology Reference to the “Lazy” Action

The notion of lazy action is broadly used in the context of computer software
design. Lazy action refers to the generic design choice where an action is defined
but defers launching until immediately required. For instance, in web programming [5,10], the lazy loading/fetching strategy defers the actual instantiation of
a web object until it is accessed, e.g., clicked. In the SQL database management system [8, 9], lazy connecting [2] refrains from establishing connection
to the database until it is explicitly required to execute a specific operation on
the database. In the virtual memory design of operating systems, lazy swapping [1], also known as demand paging, selectively loads portions of a program
into RAM. It defers loading the remaining portions until the already loaded
part specifically accesses them. Conversely, eager actions refer to the opposite
concept; it immediately executes actions such as data instantiation or memory
loading right away without waiting for designated requirements. Lazy action effectively reduces the operation time especially when it is mostly unnecessary or
computationally redundant to launch actions eagerly.
In our context of image semantic segmentation, our model discovers the objects first, and then visual grounding takes place afterward. This lazy grounding
strategy greatly reduces the spurious pixel-wise noise, which the eager grounding
methods [6, 7, 18, 21] often suffer during pixel-level grounding, and achieves the
remarkable segmentation quality improvement.

2

Additional Ablation Studies

Each following paragraph presents the result of ablating or replacing a single
component in our complete method. Therefore, the results of this section can
be fairly compared with the existing methods [3, 6, 7, 12–21] found in Table 1. In
Tables 1-2, the rows of our approach is colored in gray.

