Eﬃcient Few-Shot Action Recognition
via Multi-level Post-reasoning
Cong Wu1 , Xiao-Jun Wu1(B) , Linze Li1 , Tianyang Xu1 ,
Zhenhua Feng1,2,3 , and Josef Kittler2,3
1

School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Computer Science,
Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China
{congwu,linze.li}@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn,
{wu_xiaojun,tianyang.xu,fengzhenhua}@jiangnan.edu.cn
2
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing,
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
j.kittler@surrey.ac.uk
3
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK

Abstract. The integration with CLIP (Contrastive Vision-Language
Pre-training) has signiﬁcantly refreshed the accuracy leaderboard of
FSAR (Few-Shot Action Recognition). However, the trainable overhead of ensuring that the domain alignment of CLIP and FSAR is
often unbearable. To mitigate this issue, we present an Eﬃcient MultiLevel Post-Reasoning Network, namely EMP-Net. By design, a postreasoning mechanism is proposed for domain adaptation, which avoids
most gradient backpropagation, improving the eﬃciency; meanwhile, a
multi-level representation is utilised during the reasoning and matching
processes to improve the discriminability, ensuring eﬀectiveness. Specifically, the proposed EMP-Net starts with a skip-fusion involving cached
multi-stage features extracted by CLIP. After that, the fused feature is
decoupled into multi-level representations, including global-level, patchlevel, and frame-level. The ensuing spatiotemporal reasoning module
operates on multi-level representations to generate discriminative features. As for matching, the contrasts between text-visual and supportquery are integrated to provide comprehensive guidance. The experimental results demonstrate that EMP-Net can unlock the potential performance of CLIP in a more eﬃcient manner. The code and supplementary
material can be found at https://github.com/cong-wu/EMP-Net.
Keywords: Image to Video Adaption · Contrastive Vision-Language
Pre-training · Eﬃcient Few-Shot Action Recognition

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_3.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 38–56, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_3

