1

The supplementary material provides:
– Section A: Ablation on different values of k in Top-k retrieval.
– Section B: Model Hallucination problem.
– Section C: Video LLM in text tasks.
– Section D: Video length robustness.
– Section E: Prompt details.
– Section F: Implementation details.
– Section G: Qualitative results.

A

Top K Effect

In this section, we explore how performance through accuracy is affected by the
value of k for top k neighbors for the retrieval design in Section 3 of the main
paper. From Table 1, we can see that the Top 3 achieved the best results for
the “Vision + subtitles” experiments. By employing the general model summary,
we observed that the accuracy improved when incorporating information from
various neighbors. However, when this information was excessively increased,
such as including data from five neighbors, the accuracy declined due to the
introduction of noise from numerous incorrect details unrelated to the question.
This phenomenon is evident in the first four rows.
From row 5 to 8 we can see that the accuracy decreased by increasing the
number of neighbours because the related information from the wrong clips
distract the model. We observe the same behavior in the “Vision Only” and
“Subtitle Only” experiments.

B

Model Hallucinations

The model hallucinates in our case when the VideoLLM is asked questions
unrelated to the video, so the videoLLM generates incorrect information which
misguides the answer module to answer the right answer.
After retrieving the Top-k clips, our goal is to filter these clips to the single
correct one. Theoretically, we could prompt each retrieved clip with the query
and filter for which clip produces an answer. A common problem in generative
models, we find that the model hallucinates and outputs an answer instead of
stating it doesn’t have the required information to answer. This issue particularly
arises when the clips originate from the same episode. However, we do see that
the videoLLM responding with its lack of information to answer the question if
the clip is entirely unrelated to the question.
For instance, in the multi-choice questions in TVQA, if the top three retrieved
clips are guaranteed that one of them is the correct clip and the other two clips
are incorrect, when using the VideoLLM with the wrong clip it will choose a
wrong choice and when feeding the other wrong one, it will choose another wrong
choice, and when using the correct clip, it may choose the correct choice based
on the correct video content or may choose the wrong choice. In both cases
the answer module will see the context information has three choices and this

