Avatar Fingerprinting for Authorized Use of
Synthetic Talking-Head Videos:
Supplementary Document
Ekta Prashnani, Koki Nagano, Shalini De Mello, David Luebke, and Orazio Gallo
NVIDIA
{eprashnani, knagano, shalinig, dluebke, ogallo}@nvidia.com

1

Future Work

In this work, we present the novel task of avatar fingerprinting, that aims to verify the
authorized use of synthetic talking-head avatars, along with the first method to solve for
this task as well as a novel dataset that caters precisely to the needs of avatar fingerprinting. While talking-head avatars are becoming ubiquitous in across several applications,
the avatar generation technology itself is also rapidly advancing towards generating fullbody and 3D avatars [2,16,17,23], generating realistic synthetic audio [12], controlling
talking-head avatars with audio only [19], as well as controlling upper-body avatars including hands with audio only [3]. This makes our proposed first step towards verifying
authorized use of synthetic talking-head avatars all the more pertinent, and paves the
way for future research directions that verify the “dynamic identity signatures” from
newer forms of avatars ranging from full-body avatars, to 3D, to audio-driven ones.

2

Dataset

We now provide additional details of our proposed dataset, including details of the
question prompts and sentences spoken in both stages, instructions to the participants,
demographics of the dataset, and other relevant statistics.
General Instructions to Subjects. The subjects were asked to join pre-assigned Google
Meet video calls using a laptop or a desktop. For the recorded video call, the subjects
were also asked to position themselves so that their face was centered and parallel to the
screen. However, in some cases with specific video-conferencing setups, this constraint
was only approximately satisfied. Additionally, subjects were instructed to avoid hand
motion since it can occlude their face, and also excessive body motion that might impair
the visibility of their face. Before beginning each monologue, subjects were asked to
speak “start topic” in a loud, clear voice, and, similarly, the end of each monologue was
marked by the subjects speaking “end topic”. These keywords allowed for effectively
using the time-stamped transcription to automatically isolate relevant portions of the
Google Meet recordings. Right after a subject said “start topic”, they were instructed
to pause for a few seconds and look directly at the camera with a frontal head pose,
while holding a neutral expression. These frames with neutral expressions are crucial
for a successful generation of synthetic talking-head videos using face-vid2vid [21],
LIA [22], and TPS [8]. These generators work by transferring expression changes from
a driving video to the target image. Therefore, it is important that the expression of the

