Co-Student: Collaborating Strong and Weak
Students for Sparsely Annotated Object
Detection(Supplemental Material)
Lianjun Wu1
1

, Jiangxiao Han1 , Zengqiang Zheng2 , and Xinggang Wang1,

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Wuhan Jingce Electronic Group Co., Ltd.

1

More Main Results

1.1

Comparison with Calibrated-Teacher [5]

We trained our method Co-Student on the sparsely annotated MS COCO [2]
dataset, COCO-miss50p, using FCOS [4] (ResNet-101) and multi-scale training,
exactly the same as Calibrated-Teacher. The results are shown in Tab. 1. We
achieved a 0.6% higher AP than Calibrated-Teacher. This demonstrates that our
method, equipped with two collaborated students and a denoising teacher model,
achieves higher performance in the SAOD task. At the same time, CalibratedTeacher and our method are orthogonal. The former focuses on optimizing the
teacher model, while the latter emphasizes both denoising using the teacher
model and fully leveraging pseudo-labels from student networks. In principle,
the two methods are complementary.
1.2

Results in Pascal-VOC [1]

To ensure more fair comparisons and provide additional reference experimental
results for future work, we have additionally presented the performance of our
method on the sparsely annotated version of the PASCAL-VOC 2007 dataset,
i.e., 50% of annotations are missing, in Tab.2. Experiments on the PASCAL-VOC
2007 dataset were conducted using 5011 trainval images, and performance was
computed on 4952 images of the test set. We use the standard PASCAL-VOC
style AP50, which is the Average Precision computed at an IoU threshold of 0.5.
We use the PASCAL-VOC 2007 train set for training and the PASCAL-VOC
2007 test set for evaluation. We sample using exactly the same hyperparameter
settings as those used in MS COCO [2].

2

More Ablation Studies

2.1

Effect of Confidence Threshold θt

The most important hyper-parameter in our denoising teacher model is the confidence threshold θt used for generating pseudo-labels. This threshold directly
Corresponding author: xgwang@hust.edu.cn

