- Supplementary Material Rethinking Directional Parameterization in
Neural Implicit Surface Reconstruction
Zijie Jiang1⋆ , Tianhan Xu2⋆ , and Hiroharu Kato2
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology
2
Preferred Networks, Inc.
zjiang@ok.sc.e.titech.ac.jp, {xutianhan,hkato}@preferred.jp

In this supplementary material, we provide additional qualitative experimental
results, along with more discussion and insights regarding method design and
experimental results.

1

Additional Qualitative Comparison of Different
Directional Parameterizations

In Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, we provide additional qualitative comparisons of integrating
different directional parameterizations in NeuS [5] and NeuDA [2] on the DTU
dataset [1]. We observed that for some objects (e.g., Scan 24, Scan 65), the
optimization issue introduced by using reflection directional parameterization
seems to be mitigated to some extent when using multi-level voxel grid-based
methods (e.g., NeuDA, w/ reflection dir.) compared to MLP-based methods
(e.g., NeuS, w/ reflection dir.).
In Fig. 3, we provide additional qualitative comparisons of integrating different directional parameterizations in NeuS [5] and NeuDA [2] on the Shiny
Blender dataset [4]. We observed that in the reconstruction of “Toaster”, NeuDA [2]
fails to produce very good reconstruction results regardless of the used directional
parameterization.
For the above observations, we conducted an analysis by comparing the differences between MLP-based methods and multi-level voxel grid-based methods.
The former employs shared neural networks to model the entire space, exhibiting global characteristics. In contrast, the latter, with its multi-level nature,
encompasses both global characteristics (coarse grid) and local characteristics
(fine grid). The global nature of the model is more susceptible to optimization
challenges, as evidenced by the interference caused by partial updates, as demonstrated in Fig. 3 of the main paper. The local characteristics of the multi-level
voxel grid partially alleviate the optimization issue of interference, leading to
improved details, as seen in the results mentioned above wherein NeuDA outperforms NeuS. However, it also introduces the problem of overly intricate surface
details, as seen in the case of objects with strong reflection, i.e., “Toaster”.
⋆

Equal contribution. Work done while Zijie Jiang interned at Preferred Networks,
Inc.

