Supplementary Material for
SemanticHuman-HD: High-Resolution Semantic
Disentangled 3D Human Generation

In this Supplementary Material, we first introduce the implementation
details of our proposed SemanticHuman-HD. Furthermore, we present additional
results related to SemanticHuman-HD. For video demonstrations, including animations of generated humans and 3D-aware human image synthesis, please see
the Supplementary Video.

1

Implementation Details

To assist others in reproducing our work or specific components, we provide
implementation details of SemanticHuman-HD, including network architecture,
dataset processing, training strategies and other relevant information.

Local Generator. For each local generator in SemanticHuman-HD, we utilize the same generator architecture as employed in AG3D [4]. However, to reduce the computational cost, we halve the number of channels in the network.
Remarkably, this adjustment does not compromise the performance of model,
as each local generator focuses solely on generating its corresponding semantic
part. During the training, different local generators share the same semantic latent code as a condition, ensuring consistency across different semantic parts. In
inference, we can feed different semantic latent codes to different local generators, enabling interesting applications such as semantic-aware interpolation and
out-of-distribution image synthesis.

Discriminators. Throughout the training of stage 1 and stage 2, we employ
multiple discriminators, including image discriminators, normal discriminators,
semantic discriminators and face discriminators, to supervise the training. These
discriminators share a common network architecture, only differing in channels
and resolutions of input. Particularly, we opt not to use paired input of images
and semantic masks. Our experiments reveal that employing two independent
discriminators—one for images and another for semantic masks—enhances training stability. To facilitate conditional image synthesis, the discriminators also
take human pose P and semantic label Ls as input. Additionally, we amplify the
R1 penalty for the semantic discriminator by a factor of 10 compared to other
discriminators, as we observed that introducing the semantic discriminator made
the model more prone to collapse.

