Text2Place: Aﬀordance-Aware Text
Guided Human Placement
Rishubh Parihar(B) , Harsh Gupta, Sachidanand VS, and R. Venkatesh Babu
Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
rishubhp@iisc.ac.in
https://rishubhpar.github.io/Text2Place/
Abstract. For a given scene, humans can easily reason for the locations and pose to place objects. Designing a computational model to
reason about these aﬀordances poses a signiﬁcant challenge, mirroring
the intuitive reasoning abilities of humans. This work tackles the problem of realistic human insertion in a given background scene termed
as Semantic Human Placement. This task is extremely challenging
given the diverse backgrounds, scale, and pose of the generated person and, ﬁnally, the identity preservation of the person. We divide the
problem into the following two stages i) learning semantic masks using
text guidance for localizing regions in the image to place humans and
ii) subject-conditioned inpainting to place a given subject adhering to
the scene aﬀordance within the semantic masks. For learning semantic
masks, we leverage rich object-scene priors learned from the text-toimage generative models and optimize a novel parameterization of the
semantic mask, eliminating the need for large-scale training. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst ones to provide an eﬀective solution
for realistic human placements in diverse real-world scenes. The proposed
method can generate highly realistic scene compositions while preserving the background and subject identity. Further, we present results for
several downstream tasks - scene hallucination from a single or multiple
generated persons and text-based attribute editing. With extensive comparisons against strong baselines, we show the superiority of our method
in realistic human placement.
Keywords: Spatial relations · Human inpainting

1

Introduction

Given a background scene, humans can easily visualize how persons can interact
with the scene in multiple ways. For, e.g., for a living room, one can imagine a person sitting on the sofa, or walking towards the door. To understand
this relationship between humans and scenes, J.J. Gibson coined the term aﬀordances [20] which points to the interaction between objects and the environment.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0 4.
c
 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025
A. Leonardis et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2024, LNCS 15061, pp. 57–77, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72646-0_4

