– Supplementary material –

1

Additional evaluations

Qualitative results. We include additional qualitative results in Figures 4 and
5. We recommend looking at the video results to assess the quality of
our reconstruction compared to other methods. Notably, we observe that: (1)
Our reconstruction is consistent in time, which is not the case of BITE and
BARC which reconstruct frames independently. (2) The meshes reconstructed
with RAC achieve relatively good score across all metrics, except LPIPS, yet
they are qualitatively very poor, and they fall short in accurately representing
the subject’s true shape.
Qualitative ablations. We propose a qualitative comparison of CSE signal
with sparse key points in Fig. 1. BARC sparse-keypoint predictor provide strong
signal on front-facing views, however the prediction is inferior on challenging
views (i.e from the back). Additionaly, we qualitatively evaluate the result of
global orientation factorization in Fig. 2.

2

Implicit duplex-mesh rendering

We provide additional details for our implicit duplex-mesh model. During the
rendering of I¯ ∈ [0, 1]3×H×W from an arbitrary camera viewpoint P , we explained earlier that for each pixel u ∈ [1..H] × [1..W ]:
1. We compute x↑u , the first intersection between the ray in posed-space ru
and the posed outer boundary mesh F (V̂ ↑ , β, θ). We repeat the same for the
inner mesh F (V̂ ↑ , β, θ) to get intersection point x↓u .
2. Since x↑u and x↓u are defined on the posed outer and inner mesh, we can
compute their corresponding position x̂↑u and x̂↓u in the canonical space.
3. We march in the canonical space with Emission-Absorption (EA) over the
canonical ray r̂u , defined between the two canonical points: x̂↑u and x̂↓u
Trajectory sampling Given a ray in posed-space ru , the computation of (x↑u ,
x↓u ) can lead to 3 scenarios:
– ru first intersects the outer and then the inner mesh. This is the standard
scenario.
– ru only intersect the outer, and not the inner mesh. In that case, we compute
x↑u as usual. However, since x↓u cannot be defined on the inner mesh, we
replace it with the second intersection point between ru and F (V̂ ↑ , β, θ).
– ru does not intersect with the inner or the outer mesh. Here, we do not
render the pixel u.

