Supplementary Material of
Towards Certifiably Robust Face Recognition
Seunghun Paik , Dongsoo Kim , Chanwoo Hwang ,
Sunpill Kim , and Jae Hong Seo⋆
Department of Mathematics & Research Institute for Natural Sciences
Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea
{whitesoonguh,frds37,aa5568,ksp0352,jaehongseo}@hanyang.ac.kr

In this supplementary material, we provide details on the definitions, proofs,
experimental settings, results, and discussions that were omitted in the main
text due to the space limit. This document contains the followings:
– Omitted definitions for the image classification task (Section A).
– Full Proofs of Theorem 2 and 3 (Section B).
– Detailed experimental settings and visualization of Fig. 1b.(Section C).
– Additional experiments (Section D).
– Comparison with adversarial training on empirical robustness (Section E).
– Comparison with headers used for image classification (Section F).

A

Omitted Definitions for Image Classification Tasks

Notation. Throughout this paper, we will use the following notation: We define
the dataset with Nc classes for Nc ∈ N as a finite set D ⊂ RN for some N ∈ N
such that for all x ∈ D, there is an integer lx ∈ {1, . . . , Nc } associated to x,
called the label. The classifier for the dataset D is a function g : D ⊂ RN → RNc .
The output of g is often called the logit vector. For a finite set S, we denote
the uniformly random sample in S as the left arrow with a dollar sign, e.g.,
$
x←
− S. For a multivariate function f : Rm → Rn , we denote fi : Rm → R for
i ∈ {1, . . . , n} as the function that corresponds to the i’th component of f .
Adversarial Attack and Certifiable Robustness. Informally, an adversarial
attack is an attack to produce an adversarial perturbation for the given image
and the target neural network under the specified bound for the norm of the
noise. Although the type of attack is usually classified with respect to the capability of the adversary, we only consider the strongest adversary, i.e., white-box
attack where the adversary can obtain all information about the target model,
including the internal parameters, or gradients calculated from the given input.
The formal definition of adversarial attack is as follows.
Definition 1 (Adversarial Attack on Image Classification Models).
Let g : D ⊂ RN → RNc be a classifier. For x ∈ D and ϵ > 0, we define an
⋆

Corresponding Author.

