1

Appendix for VCP-CLIP:
A visual context prompting model for zero-shot
anomaly segmentation
This supplementary appendix contains the following five parts: 1) Detailed
experimental setup and introduction of state-of-the-art methods in Section A;
2) Additional experiments and further analysis in Section B; 3) Introduction of
the real industrial datasets in Section C; 4) More detailed presentations of quantitative and qualitative results in Section D; 5) Discussion of model limitations
in Section E.

A

Implementation details and state-of-the-art methods

A.1

Implementation details

Details of model configuration. In this paper, we adopt the CLIP model
with ViT-L-14-336 pretrained by OpenAI [14]. The length of learnable category
vectors (tokens) r and the length of learnable text embeddings n in each text
encoder layer are set to 2 and 1, respectively. The number of image encoder
layers B for extracting patch-level features is set to 4 and we evenly select the
6th, 12th, 18th, and 24th layers to acquire dense image embeddings. In our
baseline, we use a single linear layer to map the dense image embeddings Zsl to
Fsl in the joint embedding space. In addition, the number of attention heads M
in Post-VCP module is set to 8 and the fusion weight α is set to 0.75 in our
VCP-CLIP. All images are resized to a resolution of 518 × 518, and then fed
into the image encoder.
Details of training and testing. We conduct experiments on 10 publicly
available real-world industrial anomaly segmentation datasets, including MVTecAD and VisA, which are widely used in previous ZSAS tasks. Notably, the
products in VisA do not overlap with those in other datasets. Therefore, to evaluate ZSAS performance on other datasets, we employ
weights trained on VisA’s test sets. As for VisA, we assess ZSAS performance after training on MVTec-AD. The final results for each dataset
are derived from the average value of the products it contains. During training on
seen products, we maintain the original CLIP parameters in a frozen state, updating only the newly introduced learnable parameters. The Adam optimizer [8]
with an initial learning rate of 4e-5 is used and the model is trained for continuous 10 epochs with a batch size of 32. All experiments are conducted on a single
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090, and we perform three runs using different random
seeds and then average the results.
A.2

State-of-the-art methods

⋄ WinCLIP [7] is a representative ZSAS method that ensembles a large number of manually designed text prompts to classify sub-images within each

