Better Call SAL: Towards Learning to
Segment Anything in Lidar
Supplementary Material
Aljosa Osep1*

Tim Meinhardt1* Francesco Ferroni1
Deva Ramanan2 Laura Leal-Taixé1
*

Equal contribution

1

NVIDIA

2

Neehar Peri2

CMU

Appendix
Abstract. The appendix provides additional implementation and design details of the SAL pseudo-label engine (A.1) and zero-shot model
(A.2), along with a discussion on different training strategies with partial pseudo-labels (A.4). In A.3, we discuss the zero-shot text prompt
engineering. Further ablations on our pseudo-labels and model are provided in B and C, respectively, including fine-grained, per-class results
(D) and detailed statistics on the generated pseudo-labels (B.1) and time
and compute analysis for pseudo-labeling (B.2). We conclude with a discussion on detailed qualitative results in E.

A

Implementation Details

A.1

Pseudo-label Engine

This section details the overview of our pseudo-labeling procedure of the main
paper). We detail our pseudo-label generation steps in Algorithm 1. As input,
we assume a sequence of multi-modal data that consists of k images It,k ∈
RW ×H×3 (one per camera view, per frame t, t ∈ 1, . . . , T ), Lidar point clouds
Pt ∈ RN ×4 , and image and camera-to-Lidar calibration. The output is pairs of
Lidar segmentation masks m̃t ∈ {0, 1}N and corresponding CLIP feature tokens
ft ∈ R768 , t ∈ 1, . . . , T .
Mask generation. We start by generating an overlapping set of segmentation
masks for each image (camera view) (Algorithm 1, L6) using Segment Anything
(SAM) foundation model [7]. To generate masks, we utilize parameters, as described in Tab. A.1. This step yields 171 masks per image on average. We then
flatten SAM’s output mask hierarchy by non-maxima suppression (NMS) with
a small overlap threshold (Algorithm 1, L7, govern by NMS IoU threshold in
Tab. A.1) to obtain a small, non-overlapping set of masks per-scan (45 on average after flatening). This way, we obtain a set of non-overlapping binary masks
mkt ∈ {0, 1}W ×H for each camera view k with an image plane of size W × H.

