CARB-Net: Camera-Assisted Radar-Based
Network for Vulnerable Road User Detection
Wei-Yu Lee , Martin Dimitrievski , David Van Hamme , Jan Aelterman ,
Ljubomir Jovanov , and Wilfried Philips
TELIN-IPI, Ghent University-IMEC, Gent, Belgium

1

Proposed RadVRU Dataset

The RadVRU dataset is structured into multiple recording sessions, each comprising various sequences. Sensor data is stored as individual frames captured
at 30Hz intervals (33.333ms). To maintain consistency, frames are duplicated
if sensors drop or record slower than 30Hz. Frames beyond 30Hz recording are
excluded. In Tab. 1, we compare the radar sensors used in the CARRADAR
dataset and our RadVRU dataset.
LiDAR data is presented in the form of cumulative point clouds per head
rotation, featuring 5-D point measurements ((X, Y, Z, A, R), ...) in 32-bit floating
point format. Each point encompasses local LiDAR spatial coordinates (X, Y, Z),
ambient light measurement “A,” and target reflectance measurement “R.” The
LiDAR employs 128 laser beams, sampling 1024 points per revolution at 0.35degree azimuth resolution, covering a ±22.5-degree elevation field of view. Range
accuracy is < 5 cm for Lambertian targets, with a resolution of 0.3 cm. Operating
at 20 Hz in 1024×20 mode, the LiDAR generates 131072 (1024×128) 5-D points
per point cloud.
The world coordinate system is linked to the EGO-vehicle and Ouster OS-1
LiDAR, placing the world center on the ground plane directly below the LiDAR.
The world yaw adheres to compass heading conventions, with zero yaw angle in
the car’s travel direction, increasing to the right.

2

Additional Implementation Details

Our proposed method is built on the principle of multi-scale signal decomposition
and inspired by the U-Net architecture [7] with pixel-shuffle up- and downsampling, and customized convolution kernels. We use sigmoid as the activation
function for muli-label outputs, and hyperbolic tangent for anchor offsets. We
set the parameter λ for localization loss Lloc to 0.01, and the default focusing
parameter 2 for focal loss. In all our experiments, we use AdamW [5] with an
initial learning rate of 1e−3 as the optimizer. The learning rate is decayed by a
factor of 0.1 twice, after the completion of the second and third training epochs,
which resulted in fastest training time. Training was conducted by the PyTorch
framework with a single GeForce RTX 2080Ti.

