Prediction Exposes Your Face: Black-box Model
Inversion via Prediction Alignment:
Supplementary Material
Yufan Liu1,2 , Wanqian Zhang1B , Dayan Wu1 , Zheng Lin1,2 , Jingzi Gu1 , and
Weiping Wang1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liuyufan,zhangwanqian,wudayan,linzheng,gujingzi,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn
2

A

Evaluation metrics details

The detailed description of the evaluation metrics we use is as follows:
Attack Acc evaluates the accuracy of the reconstructed image on the target
identity via an evaluation classifier, considered as the replacement of human
judgment. We use the model proposed by Cheng et al . [1] for evaluation, which
is pre-trained on MS-Celeb-1M [2] and fine-tuned on the private dataset.
KNN Dist is the average L2 distance of reconstructed image features and
features of the nearest image corresponding to target identity.
Feat Dist is the average L2 distance of the reconstructed image features and
the centroid of image features corresponding to the target identity. Both of them
are calculated with features of the layer before fully connected layer in classifier.
LPIPS evaluates the perceptual similarity of reconstructed image and target
identity image, which is more in line with human perception.

B

More analyses on training data

In order to study the impact of training data on our method, we first assess the
impact of synthesized data in the public dataset under the standard setting. The
results in Tab. 1 show that the lack of synthesized data lead to a clear decline in
attack performance although slightly better perceptual quality. As the previous
analysis indicates in [7], synthesized data is generated from real latent codes in
the W + space, which helps our PAE to align the prediction vector space with the
W + space. However, real latent codes might be outside the real image domain,
thereby causing a slight impact on the LPIPS.
In addition, we randomly select the same amount of data from the FFHQ
dataset and synthesized data, instead of our top-n selection from public dataset,
to train our encoder. The results in Tab. 2 show that training our encoder with
unselected public data results in a 42% decrease from our baseline method. We
believe that unselected training data fails to allow our encoder to learn a good
B

Corresponding author

