Supplementary Materials for M3DBench
Mingsheng Li1 , Xin Chen2 , Chi Zhang2 , Sijin Chen1 , Hongyuan Zhu3 , Fukun
Yin1 , Zhuoyuan Li1 , Gang Yu2 , and Tao Chen1,
1

School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
limc22@m.fudan.edu.cn, eetchen@fudan.edu.cn
2
Tencent PCG, Shanghai, China
3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR),
A*STAR, Singapore

This supplementary material provides further details about M3DBench (Sec. 1),
quantitative experiments (Sec. 2) on a broader range of tasks, additional analyses
involving the scaling of model capacity and data size (Sec. 3), implementation
details (Sec. 4) of baseline model and prompt for GPT-4 evaluation (Sec. 5).

1

Dataset

In Sec. 1.1, we provide more examples in M3Dbench for each task. Following
that, we will introduce the dataset construction in Sec. 1.2 and provide statistics
for the evaluation dataset in Sec. 1.3.
1.1

More Examples

1.2

Dataset Construction

In this work, we introduce a comprehensive 3D instruction tuning dataset,
M3DBench, which serves as the foundation for developing versatile and practical general-purpose assistants in the real-world 3D environment. To construct
M3DBench, we utilize 3D data from publicly available datasets [7, 3, 1, 5, 16, 8, 4]
and propose a three-stage data generation pipeline. In the initial phase, we
manually design templates and system messages for both template-based and
LLM-prompting methods to create instruction-response pairs. From Tabs. 1 to 8,
we provide a comprehensive overview of the prompts designed for various 3D
tasks, each comprising task descriptions, specific requirements, and few-shot
examples. For tasks such as object detection, we craft templates for instruction
and response, then replace the template’s keywords with annotations to construct
instruction-response data [15], as illustrated in Tab. 9 and Tab. 10. Furthermore,
we have developed an interleaved multi-modal instruction formula, where specific
instance identifier <target> within the instructions are replaced with proposed
multi-modal prompts, as illustrated in Tab. 11.
1.3

Evaluation Dataset

To quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of instruction-tuned MLMs, we
constructed an evaluation dataset to assess the models’ performance across various

