DiffuX2CT : Diffusion Learning to Reconstruct
CT Images from Biplanar X-Rays
Xuhui Liu1 , Zhi Qiao2 , Runkun Liu2 , Hong Li1 , Juan Zhang∗1 ,
Xiantong Zhen∗2 , Zhen Qian2 , and Baochang Zhang1,3
1

2

Beihang University, Beijing, China
Central Research Institute, United Imaging Healthcare, Beijing, China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{xhliu,zhang_juan}@buaa.edu.cn, zhenxt@gmail.com

In this supplementary material, we first introduce the dataset preprocessing
techniques in Section A and additional implementation details in Section B.
Then, we provide the detailed model architecture of our regression model, ICMReg, in Section C. Lastly, we present additional results on the four datasets in
Section D.

A

Dataset Establishment

In our experiments, we need paired X-ray and CT data for training DiffuX2CT.
However, no such dataset is available and it is very challenging to collect the required dataset. Therefore, we follow [6,9] to introduce the digitally reconstructed
radiograph (DRR) for synthesizing the biplanar X-rays from CT images. We
elaborate on the DRR imaging technique and preprocessing details associated
with the CTSpine1K [1] and CTPelvic1K [5] below.
A.1

Digitally Reconstructed Radiographs (DRR)

DRR simulates radiographic images by projecting 3D volume images onto a 2D
image plane using a variety of ray tracing techniques. Current DRR algorithms
mainly build upon ray casting, a classic volume rendering technique. It simulates
the process of X-rays passing through the human body and being attenuated by
the absorption of human tissues to generate DRR images.
The goal of our DiffuX2CT is to reconstruct CT images from biplanar orthogonal X-rays. Accordingly, we need to simulate two DRR images of the front
view and side view from the real CT image. For each imaging, DRR first assumes
a source point as the conventional X-ray source, and then emits multiple virtual
X-rays from this point source, passing through the 3D CT image and projecting
onto a panel perpendicular to the center axis of the X-ray beam. The projection
points on the panel are the accumulated results of all the intersections between
the virtual X-rays and the CT image, corresponding to the pixels of the DRR
image.
⋆

Corresponding authors.

