A Comparative Study of Image Restoration
Networks for General Backbone Network Design
Supplementary Material
Xiangyu Chen* Zheyuan Li* Yuandong Pu* Yihao Liu
Jiantao Zhou† Yu Qiao Chao Dong†
https://github.com/Andrew0613/X-Restormer

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we present additional experiments and results to complement the main manuscript. First, we illustrate the importance of a general backbone network for multi-task optimization on all-in-one restoration. Then, we complement details about
schematic diagrams of mentioned three kinds of architectures. Next, we
provide complete benchmark results for the five image restoration tasks
and present visual results of X-Restormer with other benchmark networks. After that, we conduct comprehensive ablation study to further
verify the effectiveness of our X-Restormer. Finally, we present a comprehensive comparison of the model complexity of different networks.

1

Alleviating optimization conflicts

In the manuscript, we show that our X-Restormer obtains the best average performance on an all-in-one restoration setting. We provide more explanations in
this section to illustrate a more general backbone network can effectively alleviate
the optimization conflict for multi-task restoration. In Fig. 1, we provide the validation curves of different models on image SR×4 and deblurring. X-Restormer
can consistently outperform other networks during training. Restormer with
good task generality also performs the second best. However, SwinIR performs
poorly on both SR and deblurring. We believe this is because when a network has
difficulty optimizing certain tasks, the larger gradients it generates may cause the
network to focus on these more challenging tasks. Conversely, a general backbone
network can effectively circumvent such optimization conflicts.

2

Architecture Schematic Diagrams

In the realm of image restoration networks, prevailing architectures fall into
three distinct categories: (a) plain residual-in-residual, (b) U-shaped encoderdecoder and (c) multi-stage progressive architectures. In the section 3.2 of the
manuscript, we detail the characteristics of these three kinds of architectures.
In Fig. 2, we provide the schematic diagrams of these architectures for better
understanding of their characteristics.

