The supplementary material of Learning
Cross-hand Policies of High-DOF Reaching and
Grasping
Qijin She1 , Shishun Zhang1 , Yunfan Ye3 , Ruizhen Hu2 , and Kai Xu1⋆
1

National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Shenzhen University, China
3
Hunan University, China

1

Method Details

1.1

Termination conditions

Our termination conditions consist of two requirements. Firstly, in each decision
step, a random value is sampled from the range [0, 1]. If this value is less than the
predicted stop value as within the range of [−1, 1], the first requirement is met.
The other requirement necessitates that at least two gripper components are
sufficiently close to the object in current step. To determine whether a gripper
component gi is close enough to the object, we ensure that there are enough
points on the gripper component that are close enough to the object. We count
the number mi of IBS points with the distance to the object smaller than a given
threshold δd = 0.5cm. If there are enough closing points (mi ≥ 3), we consider
the gripper components close enough to the object.
1.2

Action ranges

In the policy model, we limit the predicted displacement of each point {∆pik } in
[−0.4cm, 0.4cm]3 . The change of global translation and rotation change is constrained to be within ∆p in [−2.5cm, 2.5cm]3 and ∆r in [−0.025, 0.025]3 in radian. It is important to note that any displacement of the middle phalanx will be
transferred to the fingertip on the same finger, resulting in real position changes
of the fingertips within [−0.8cm, 0.8cm]3 . Regarding the adaptation model, We
restrict the joint changes in [−0.25, 0.025] in radian.
1.3

Training details

Reward function We adopt the reward function and training strategy provided by [9]. The reward function comprises two components: “Task Reward”
and “Reaching Reward". Grasp reward evaluates the final grasp from two perspectives. First, we use the success signal S obtained from the simulator when
⋆

Corresponding author. Email: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

