Compositional Substitutivity of Visual Reasoning
for Visual Question Answering
- Supplementary Material

1

VQA-SPS v2 Dataset

We construct the VQA-SPS v2 dataset based on the val split of the VQA v2
dataset [2], where questions are human-written rather than programmatically
generated. For Word SPS and Visual Entity SPS, we use the same step as for the
GQA-SPS dataset. For Referent SPS, we use a different method than the GQASPS dataset to generate new questions, as the VQA v2 dataset does not provide
the ground-truth of scene graphs. Firstly, we collect some common relationships
as a relationship database. For each original sample in the val split of VQA v2, we
randomly select five relationships from the database for a noun in the question,
and try to artificially annotate a new question by referring the five relationships
and the corresponding image. In doing so, the three rules we mentioned in the
main manuscript are difficult to meet at the same time, resulting in a small
sample size. Finally, we obtain 62556, 9170 and 813 samples for Word SPS,
Visual Entity SPS and Referent SPS, respectively.

2

Experiments

Implementation Details For our reimplemented methods that use object features as visual input, including MAC, MAC+SUPS, LXMERT, LXMERT+SUPS
and VL-T5, we extracted object features by the official released code of LXMERT.
Inspired by the warm start mechanism, we do not apply our framework into the
baseline method until the Es epoch of training. For training MAC+SUPS, we
set Es = 10. For finetuing LXMERT+SUPS, ViLT+SUPS, mPLUG+SUPS and
BEiT-3+SUPS, we set Es = 0 as they are pretrained. For all five baseline methods incorporated with our framework, we set the loss weight λq , λv and λc as 1,
1 and 0.1, respectively.
2.1

Evaluation on VQA v2, VQA-CP v2 and VQA-SPS v2

The experimental results on VQA v2 [2], VQA-CP v2 [1] and VQA-SPS v2 are
shown in Tab. 1, which show that our framework is beneficial for in-distribution
(ID) setting (e.g., VQA v2) apart from the OOD setting (e.g., VQA-CP v2, VQASPS v2), compared to most existing methods that provide performance gains in
the OOD testing at the expense of ID performance, which can be observed from
[4]. We mainly focus on the performance gains on compositional substitutivity,
which is a special case of OOD generalization, and experimental results on VQACP v2 and VQA-SPS v2 have already demonstrated improvements.

