Neural Discrete Representation Learning

Aaron van den Oord
DeepMind
avdnoord@google.com

Oriol Vinyals
DeepMind
vinyals@google.com

Koray Kavukcuoglu
DeepMind
korayk@google.com

Abstract
Learning useful representations without supervision remains a key challenge in
machine learning. In this paper, we propose a simple yet powerful generative
model that learns such discrete representations. Our model, the Vector QuantisedVariational AutoEncoder (VQ-VAE), differs from VAEs in two key ways: the
encoder network outputs discrete, rather than continuous, codes; and the prior
is learnt rather than static. In order to learn a discrete latent representation, we
incorporate ideas from vector quantisation (VQ). Using the VQ method allows the
model to circumvent issues of “posterior collapse” -— where the latents are ignored
when they are paired with a powerful autoregressive decoder -— typically observed
in the VAE framework. Pairing these representations with an autoregressive prior,
the model can generate high quality images, videos, and speech as well as doing
high quality speaker conversion and unsupervised learning of phonemes, providing
further evidence of the utility of the learnt representations.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative modelling of images [38, 12, 13, 22, 10], audio [37, 26] and videos
[20, 11] have yielded impressive samples and applications [24, 18]. At the same time, challenging
tasks such as few-shot learning [34], domain adaptation [17], or reinforcement learning [35] heavily
rely on learnt representations from raw data, but the usefulness of generic representations trained in
an unsupervised fashion is still far from being the dominant approach.
Maximum likelihood and reconstruction error are two common objectives used to train unsupervised
models in the pixel domain, however their usefulness depends on the particular application the
features are used in. Our goal is to achieve a model that conserves the important features of the
data in its latent space while optimising for maximum likelihood. As the work in [7] suggests, the
best generative models (as measured by log-likelihood) will be those without latents but a powerful
decoder (such as PixelCNN). However, in this paper, we argue for learning discrete and useful latent
variables, which we demonstrate on a variety of domains.
Learning representations with continuous features have been the focus of many previous work
[16, 39, 6, 9] however we concentrate on discrete representations [27, 33, 8, 28] which are potentially
a more natural fit for many of the modalities we are interested in. Language is inherently discrete,
similarly speech is typically represented as a sequence of symbols. Images can often be described
concisely by language [40]. Furthermore, discrete representations are a natural fit for complex
reasoning, planning and predictive learning (e.g., if it rains, I will use an umbrella). While using
discrete latent variables in deep learning has proven challenging, powerful autoregressive models
have been developed for modelling distributions over discrete variables [37].
In our work, we introduce a new family of generative models succesfully combining the variational
autoencoder (VAE) framework with discrete latent representations through a novel parameterisation
of the posterior distribution of (discrete) latents given an observation. Our model, which relies on
vector quantization (VQ), is simple to train, does not suffer from large variance, and avoids the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

