Supplementary Material for Dilutional Noise
Initialization for Diffusion Video Editing
Sunjae Yoon , Gwanhyeong Koo , Ji Woo Hong , and Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{sunjae.yoon,cd_yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

1

Broader Impacts and Ethic Statements

Visual generative models introduce a spectrum of ethical dilemmas, from the creation of unauthorized counterfeit content and potential privacy breaches to issues
surrounding fairness. Given our reliance on the architecture of these models, our
work inherits these ethical vulnerabilities. Addressing these concerns is imperative, necessitating the establishment of comprehensive regulations and technical countermeasures. It is incumbent upon researchers, including ourselves, to
proactively engineer and implement such safeguards. To promote responsible and
ethical utilization, in this paper, we provide detailed specifications about models
and data and further explore the adoption of advanced measures including techniques of debiasing [19, 20], explainability [17], and adversarial approaches [6].
These initiatives are part of a concerted effort to ethically navigate the complex terrain of visual generative models, ensuring their development serves the
greater good.

2

Limitation and Future Work

Our proposed DNI is designed to alleviate the restrictions of initial latent noise
on non-rigid editing, as observed in our experiments. However, there are still
many limitations to perform effective non-rigid editing. While existing video
diffusion models excel at creating visual shapes, they struggle to generate a continuous and natural sequence of frames. Therefore, it is not feasible to perform
movements significantly different from those in the input video, nor is it possible to edit motion in locations that are physically distant from the editing
target. Therefore, with the existing video diffusion model, we could only make
basic motion changes, such as altering a walking motion to a running motion or
modifying arm movements to a limited extent. Our empirical studies found that
tuning-based models can handle more dynamic changes, while tuning-free models
have greater limitations in non-rigid editing. These limitations are well-known in
the video editing community. To address them, motion editing is performed by
providing motion guidance [14, 16], conditioning the movement based on other
motion videos. We are preparing to embrace this trend and develop effective
methods to utilize our motion editing technology based on motion conditioned
diffusion model in future work. To be specific, based on the editing system with

