Contextual semibandits via supervised learning oracles
Akshay Krishnamurthy†
akshay@cs.umass.edu
†

Alekh Agarwal‡
alekha@microsoft.com

College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA

Miroslav Dudík‡
mdudik@microsoft.com
‡

Microsoft Research
New York, NY

Abstract
We study an online decision making problem where on each round a learner chooses
a list of items based on some side information, receives a scalar feedback value for
each individual item, and a reward that is linearly related to this feedback. These
problems, known as contextual semibandits, arise in crowdsourcing, recommendation, and many other domains. This paper reduces contextual semibandits to
supervised learning, allowing us to leverage powerful supervised learning methods
in this partial-feedback setting. Our first reduction applies when the mapping from
feedback to reward is known and leads to a computationally efficient algorithm
with near-optimal regret. We show that this algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches on real-world learning-to-rank datasets, demonstrating the advantage of
oracle-based algorithms. Our second reduction applies to the previously unstudied
setting when the linear mapping from feedback to reward is unknown. Our regret
guarantees are superior to prior techniques that ignore the feedback.

1

Introduction

Decision making with partial feedback, motivated by applications including personalized
medicine [21] and content recommendation [16], is receiving increasing attention from the machine learning community. These problems are formally modeled as learning from bandit feedback,
where a learner repeatedly takes an action and observes a reward for the action, with the goal of
maximizing reward. While bandit learning captures many problems of interest, several applications
have additional structure: the action is combinatorial in nature and more detailed feedback is provided.
For example, in internet applications, we often recommend sets of items and record information about
the user’s interaction with each individual item (e.g., click). This additional feedback is unhelpful
unless it relates to the overall reward (e.g., number of clicks), and, as in previous work, we assume a
linear relationship. This interaction is known as the semibandit feedback model.
Typical bandit and semibandit algorithms achieve reward that is competitive with the single best fixed
action, i.e., the best medical treatment or the most popular news article for everyone. This is often
inadequate for recommendation applications: while the most popular articles may get some clicks,
personalizing content to the users is much more effective. A better strategy is therefore to leverage
contextual information to learn a rich policy for selecting actions, and we model this as contextual
semibandits. In this setting, the learner repeatedly observes a context (user features), chooses a
composite action (list of articles), which is an ordered tuple of simple actions, and receives reward for
the composite action (number of clicks), but also feedback about each simple action (click). The goal
of the learner is to find a policy for mapping contexts to composite actions that achieves high reward.
We typically consider policies in a large but constrained class, for example, linear learners or tree
ensembles. Such a class enables us to learn an expressive policy, but introduces a computational
challenge of finding a good policy without direct enumeration. We build on the supervised learning
literature, which has developed fast algorithms for such policy classes, including logistic regression
and SVMs for linear classifiers and boosting for tree ensembles. We access the policy class exclusively
through a supervised learning algorithm, viewed as an oracle.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

