Differential Privacy without Sensitivity

Kentaro Minami
The University of Tokyo
kentaro minami@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Issei Sato
The University of Tokyo
sato@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hiromi Arai
The University of Tokyo
arai@dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hiroshi Nakagawa
The University of Tokyo
nakagawa@dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The exponential mechanism is a general method to construct a randomized estimator that satisfies (ε, 0)-differential privacy. Recently, Wang et al. showed that the
Gibbs posterior, which is a data-dependent probability distribution that contains
the Bayesian posterior, is essentially equivalent to the exponential mechanism under certain boundedness conditions on the loss function. While the exponential
mechanism provides a way to build an (ε, 0)-differential private algorithm, it requires boundedness of the loss function, which is quite stringent for some learning
problems. In this paper, we focus on (ε, δ)-differential privacy of Gibbs posteriors
with convex and Lipschitz loss functions. Our result extends the classical exponential mechanism, allowing the loss functions to have an unbounded sensitivity.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy is a notion of privacy that provides a statistical measure of privacy protection
for randomized statistics. In the field of privacy-preserving learning, constructing estimators that
satisfy (ε, δ)-differential privacy is a fundamental problem. In recent years, differentially private
algorithms for various statistical learning problems have been developed [8, 14, 3].
Usually, the estimator construction procedure in statistical learning contains the following minimization problem of a data-dependent function. Given a dataset Dn = {x1 , . . . , xn }, a statistician
chooses a parameter θ that minimizes a cost function L(θ, Dn ). A typical example of cost function
is the empirical risk function, that is, a sum of loss function `(θ, xi ) evaluated at each sample point
xi ∈ Dn . For example, the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) is given by the minimizer of
empirical risk with loss function `(θ, x) = − log p(x | θ).
To achieve a differentially private estimator, one natural idea is to construct an algorithm based on a
posterior sampling, namely drawing a sample from a certain data-dependent probability distribution.
The exponential mechanism [16], which can be regarded as a posterior sampling, provides a general
method to construct a randomized estimator that satisfies (ε, 0)-differential privacy. The probability density of the output of the exponential mechanism is proportional to exp(−βL(θ, Dn ))π(θ),
where π(θ) is an arbitrary prior density function, and β > 0 is a parameter that controls the
degree of concentration. The resulting distribution is highly concentrated around the minimizer
θ∗ ∈ argminθ L(θ, Dn ). Note that most differential private algorithms involve a procedure to add
some noise (e.g. the Laplace mechanism [12], objective perturbation [8, 14], and gradient perturbation [3]), while the posterior sampling explicitly designs the density of the output distribution.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

