Perspective Transformer Nets: Learning Single-View
3D Object Reconstruction without 3D Supervision

Xinchen Yan1

Jimei Yang2 Ersin Yumer2 Yijie Guo1 Honglak Lee1,3
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
Adobe Research
3
Google Brain
{xcyan,guoyijie,honglak}@umich.edu, {jimyang,yumer}@adobe.com

Abstract
Understanding the 3D world is a fundamental problem in computer vision. However, learning a good representation of 3D objects is still an open problem due
to the high dimensionality of the data and many factors of variation involved. In
this work, we investigate the task of single-view 3D object reconstruction from a
learning agent’s perspective. We formulate the learning process as an interaction
between 3D and 2D representations and propose an encoder-decoder network with
a novel projection loss defined by the perspective transformation. More importantly,
the projection loss enables the unsupervised learning using 2D observation without
explicit 3D supervision. We demonstrate the ability of the model in generating 3D
volume from a single 2D image with three sets of experiments: (1) learning from
single-class objects; (2) learning from multi-class objects and (3) testing on novel
object classes. Results show superior performance and better generalization ability
for 3D object reconstruction when the projection loss is involved.

1

Introduction

Understanding the 3D world is at the heart of successful computer vision applications in robotics, rendering and modeling [19]. It is especially important to solve this problem using the most convenient
visual sensory data: 2D images. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end solution to the challenging
problem of predicting the underlying true shape of an object given an arbitrary single image observation of it. This problem definition embodies a fundamental challenge: Imagery observations of
3D shapes are interleaved representations of intrinsic properties of the shape itself (e.g., geometry,
material), as well as its extrinsic properties that depend on its interaction with the observer and the
environment (e.g., orientation, position, and illumination). Physically principled shape understanding
should be able to efficiently disentangle such interleaved factors.
This observation leads to insight that an end-to-end solution to this problem from the perspective
of learning agents (neural networks) should involve the following properties: 1) the agent should
understand the physical meaning of how a 2D observation is generated from the 3D shape, and 2) the
agent should be conscious about the outcome of its interaction with the object; more specifically, by
moving around the object, the agent should be able to correspond the observations to the viewpoint
change. If such properties are embodied in a learning agent, it will be able to disentangle the shape
from the extrinsic factors because these factors are trivial to understand in the 3D world. To enable the
agent with these capabilities, we introduce a built-in camera system that can transform the 3D object
into 2D images in-network. Additionally, we architect the network such that the latent representation
disentangles the shape from view changes. More specifically, our network takes as input an object
image and predicts its volumetric 3D shape so that the perspective transformations of predicted shape
match well with corresponding 2D observations.
We implement this neural network based on a combination of image encoder, volume decoder
and perspective transformer (similar to spatial transformer as introduced by Jaderberg et al. [6]).
During training, the volumetric 3D shape is gradually learned from single-view input and the
feedback of other views through back-propagation. Thus at test time, the 3D shape can be directly
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

