Clustering Signed Networks with the
Geometric Mean of Laplacians

Pedro Mercado1 , Francesco Tudisco2 and Matthias Hein1
1
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
University of Padua, Padua, Italy

Abstract
Signed networks allow to model positive and negative relationships. We analyze
existing extensions of spectral clustering to signed networks. It turns out that
existing approaches do not recover the ground truth clustering in several situations
where either the positive or the negative network structures contain no noise. Our
analysis shows that these problems arise as existing approaches take some form of
arithmetic mean of the Laplacians of the positive and negative part. As a solution
we propose to use the geometric mean of the Laplacians of positive and negative
part and show that it outperforms the existing approaches. While the geometric
mean of matrices is computationally expensive, we show that eigenvectors of the
geometric mean can be computed efficiently, leading to a numerical scheme for
sparse matrices which is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

A signed graph is a graph with positive and negative edge weights. Typically positive edges model
attractive relationships between objects such as similarity or friendship and negative edges model
repelling relationships such as dissimilarity or enmity. The concept of balanced signed networks
can be traced back to [10, 3]. Later, in [5], a signed graph is defined as k-balanced if there exists
a partition into k groups where only positive edges are within the groups and negative edges are
between the groups. Several approaches to find communities in signed graphs have been proposed
(see [23] for an overview). In this paper we focus on extensions of spectral clustering to signed
graphs. Spectral clustering is a well established method for unsigned graphs which, based on the
first eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian, embeds nodes of the graphs in Rk and then uses k-means
to find the partition. In [16] the idea is transferred to signed graphs. They define the signed ratio
and normalized cut functions and show that the spectrum of suitable signed graph Laplacians yield a
relaxation of those objectives. In [4] other objective functions for signed graphs are introduced. They
show that a relaxation of their objectives is equivalent to weighted kernel k-means by choosing an
appropriate kernel. While they have a scalable method for clustering, they report that they can not
find any cluster structure in real world signed networks.
We show that the existing extensions of the graph Laplacian to signed graphs used for spectral
clustering have severe deficiencies. Our analysis of the stochastic block model for signed graphs
shows that, even for the perfectly balanced case, recovery of the ground-truth clusters is not guaranteed.
The reason is that the eigenvectors encoding the cluster structure do not necessarily correspond to
the smallest eigenvalues, thus leading to a noisy embedding of the data points and in turn failure
of k-means to recover the cluster structure. The implicit mathematical reason is that all existing
extensions of the graph Laplacian are based on some form of arithmetic mean of operators of the
positive and negative graphs. In this paper we suggest as a solution to use the geometric mean of
the Laplacians of positive and negative part. In particular, we show that in the stochastic block
model the geometric mean Laplacian allows in expectation to recover the ground-truth clusters in
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

