Nearly Isometric Embedding by Relaxation

James McQueen
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
jmcq@u.washington.edu

Marina Meilă
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mmp@stat.washington.edu

Dominique Perrault-Joncas
Google
Seattle, WA 98103
dcpjoncas@gmail.com

Abstract
Many manifold learning algorithms aim to create embeddings with low or no distortion (isometric). If the data has intrinsic dimension d, it is often impossible to
obtain an isometric embedding in d dimensions, but possible in s > d dimensions.
Yet, most geometry preserving algorithms cannot do the latter. This paper proposes an embedding algorithm to overcome this. The algorithm accepts as input,
besides the dimension d, an embedding dimension s ≥ d. For any data embedding
Y, we compute a Loss(Y), based on the push-forward Riemannian metric associated with Y, which measures deviation of Y from from isometry. Riemannian
Relaxation iteratively updates Y in order to decrease Loss(Y). The experiments
confirm the superiority of our algorithm in obtaining low distortion embeddings.

1

Introduction, background and problem formulation

Suppose we observe data points sampled from a smooth manifold M with intrinsic dimension d
which is itself a submanifold of D-dimensional Euclidean space M ⊂ RD . The task of manifold
learning is to provide a mapping φ : M → N (where N ⊂ Rs ) of the manifold into lower
dimensional space s ≪ D. According to the Whitney Embedding Theorem [11] we know that
M can be embedded smoothly into R2d using one homeomorphism φ. Hence we seek one smooth
map φ : M → Rs with d ≤ s ≤ 2d ≪ D.
Smooth embeddings preserve the topology of the original M. Nevertheless, in general, they distort
the geometry. Theoretically speaking1 , preserving the geometry of an embedding is embodied in the
concepts of Riemannian metric and isometric embedding. A Riemannian metric g is a symmetric
positive definite tensor field on M which defines an inner product <, >g on the tangent space Tp M
for every point p ∈ M. A Riemannian manifold is a smooth manifold with a Riemannian metric at
every point. A diffeomorphism φ : M → N is called an isometry iff for all p ∈ M, u, v ∈ Tp M
we have < u, v >gp =< dφp u, dφp v >hφ(p) . By Nash’s Embedding Theorem [13], it is known that
any smooth manifold of class C k , k ≥ 3 and intrinsic dimension d can be embedded isometrically
in the Euclidean space Rs with s polynomial in d.
In unsupervised learning, it is standard to assume that (M, g0 ) is a submanifold of RD and that it
inherits the Euclidean metric from it2 . An embedding φ : M → φ(M) = N defines a metric g on
N given by < u, v >g(φ(p)) =< dφ−1 u, dφ−1 v >g0 (p) called the pushforward Riemannian metric;
(M, g0 ) and (N , g) are isometric.
Much previous work in non-linear dimension reduction[16, 20, 19] has been driven by the desire
to find smooth embeddings of low dimension that are isometric in the limit of large n. This work
has met with mixed success. There exists the constructive implementation [19] of Nash’s proof
1
2

For a more complete presentation the reader is referred to [8] or [15] or [10].
Sometimes the Riemannian metric on M is not inherited, but user-defined via a kernel or distance function.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

