Automatic Neuron Detection in Calcium Imaging
Data Using Convolutional Networks

Noah J. Apthorpe1∗ Alexander J. Riordan2∗ Rob E. Aguilar1 Jan Homann2
Yi Gu2 David W. Tank2 H. Sebastian Seung12
1
Computer Science Department 2 Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
{apthorpe, ariordan, dwtank, sseung}@princeton.edu
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work

Abstract
Calcium imaging is an important technique for monitoring the activity of thousands
of neurons simultaneously. As calcium imaging datasets grow in size, automated
detection of individual neurons is becoming important. Here we apply a supervised
learning approach to this problem and show that convolutional networks can achieve
near-human accuracy and superhuman speed. Accuracy is superior to the popular
PCA/ICA method based on precision and recall relative to ground truth annotation
by a human expert. These results suggest that convolutional networks are an
efficient and flexible tool for the analysis of large-scale calcium imaging data.

1

Introduction

Two-photon calcium imaging is a powerful technique for monitoring the activity of thousands of
individual neurons simultaneously in awake, behaving animals [1, 2]. Action potentials cause
transient changes in the intracellular concentration of calcium ions. Such changes are detected by
observing the fluorescence of calcium indicator molecules, typically using two-photon microscopy
in the mammalian brain [3]. Repeatedly scanning a single image plane yields a time series of 2D
images. This is effectively a video in which neurons blink whenever they are active [4, 5].
In the traditional workflow for extracting neural activities from the video, a human expert manually
annotates regions of interest (ROIs) corresponding to individual neurons [5, 1, 2]. Within each
ROI, pixel values are summed for each frame of the video, which yields the calcium signal of the
corresponding neuron versus time. A subsequent step may deconvolve the temporal filtering of
the intracellular calcium dynamics for an estimate of neural activity with better time resolution.
The traditional workflow has the deficiency that manual annotation becomes laborious and timeconsuming for very large datasets. Furthermore, manual annotation does not de-mix the signals from
spatially overlapping neurons.
Unsupervised basis learning methods (PCA/ICA [6], CNMF [7], dictionary learning [8], and sparse
space-time deconvolution [9]) express the video as a time-varying superposition of basis images.
The basis images play a similar role as ROIs in the traditional workflow, and their time-varying
coefficients are intended to correspond to neural activities. While basis learning methods are useful
for finding active neurons, they do not detect low-activity cells—making these methods inappropriate
for studies involving neurons that may be temporarily inactive depending on context or learning [10].
Such subtle difficulties may explain the lasting popularity of manual annotation. At first glance, the
videos produced by calcium imaging seem simple (neurons blinking on and off). Yet automating
image analysis has not been trivial. One difficulty is that images are corrupted by noise and artifacts
due to brain motion. Another difficulty is variability in the appearance of cell bodies, which vary
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

