A Consistent Regularization Approach for Structured
Prediction
Carlo Ciliberto ∗,1
cciliber@mit.edu
1

Alessandro Rudi ∗,1,2
ale_rudi@mit.edu

Lorenzo Rosasco 1,2
lrosasco@mit.edu

Laboratory for Computational and Statistical Learning - Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy &
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
2
Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy.
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
We propose and analyze a regularization approach for structured prediction problems. We characterize a large class of loss functions that allows to naturally
embed structured outputs in a linear space. We exploit this fact to design learning
algorithms using a surrogate loss approach and regularization techniques. We
prove universal consistency and finite sample bounds characterizing the generalization properties of the proposed method. Experimental results are provided to
demonstrate the practical usefulness of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning applications require dealing with data-sets having complex structures, e.g.
natural language processing, image segmentation, reconstruction or captioning, pose estimation,
protein folding prediction to name a few [1, 2, 3]. Structured prediction problems pose a challenge
for classic off-the-shelf learning algorithms for regression or binary classification. This has motivated
the extension of methods such as support vector machines to structured problems [4]. Dealing
with structured prediction problems is also a challenge for learning theory. While the theory of
empirical risk minimization provides a very general statistical framework, in practice it needs to be
complemented with an ad-hoc analysis for each specific setting. Indeed, in the last few years, an
effort has been made to analyze specific structured problems, such as multiclass classification [5],
multi-labeling [6], ranking [7] or quantile estimation [8]. A natural question is whether a unifying
learning framework can be developed to address a wide range of problems from theory to algorithms.
This paper takes a step in this direction, proposing and analyzing a general regularization approach
to structured prediction. Our starting observation is that for a large class of these problems, we can
define a natural embedding of the associated loss functions into a linear space. This allows to define
a (least squares) surrogate problem of the original structured one, that is cast within a multi-output
regularized learning framework [9, 10, 11]. We prove that by solving the surrogate, we are able to
recover the exact solution of the original structured problem. The corresponding algorithm essentially
generalizes approaches considered in [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. We study the generalization properties of
the proposed approach, establishing universal consistency as well as finite sample bounds.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we introduce the structured prediction problem
in its generality and present our algorithm to approach it. In Sec. 3 we introduce and discuss a
surrogate framework for structured prediction, from which we derive our algorithm. In Sec. 4, we
analyze the theoretical properties of the proposed algorithm. In Sec. 5 we draw connections with
previous work in structured prediction. Sec. 6 reports promising experimental results on a variety of
structured prediction problems. Sec. 7 concludes the paper outlining relevant directions for future
research.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

