Balancing Suspense and Surprise: Timely Decision
Making with Endogenous Information Acquisition

Ahmed M. Alaa
Electrical Engineering Department
University of California, Los Angeles

Mihaela van der Schaar
Electrical Engineering Department
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
We develop a Bayesian model for decision-making under time pressure with endogenous information acquisition. In our model, the decision-maker decides
when to observe (costly) information by sampling an underlying continuoustime stochastic process (time series) that conveys information about the potential
occurrence/non-occurrence of an adverse event which will terminate the decisionmaking process. In her attempt to predict the occurrence of the adverse event, the
decision-maker follows a policy that determines when to acquire information from
the time series (continuation), and when to stop acquiring information and make
a final prediction (stopping). We show that the optimal policy has a "rendezvous"
structure, i.e. a structure in which whenever a new information sample is gathered
from the time series, the optimal "date" for acquiring the next sample becomes
computable. The optimal interval between two information samples balances a
trade-off between the decision maker’s "surprise", i.e. the drift in her posterior
belief after observing new information, and "suspense", i.e. the probability that
the adverse event occurs in the time interval between two information samples.
Moreover, we characterize the continuation and stopping regions in the decisionmaker’s state-space, and show that they depend not only on the decision-maker’s
beliefs, but also on the "context", i.e. the current realization of the time series.

1

Introduction

The problem of timely risk assessment and decision-making based on a sequentially observed time
series is ubiquitous, with applications in finance, medicine, cognitive science and signal processing
[1-7]. A common setting that arises in all these domains is that a decision-maker, provided with
sequential observations of a time series, needs to decide whether or not an adverse event (e.g. financial crisis, clinical acuity for ward patients, etc) will take place in the future. The decision-maker’s
recognition of a forthcoming adverse event needs to be timely, for that a delayed decision may hinder effective intervention (e.g. delayed admission of clinically acute patients to intensive care units
can lead to mortality [5]). In the context of cognitive science, this decision-making task is known
as the two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) task [15]. Insightful structural solutions for the optimal
Bayesian 2AFC decision-making policies have been derived in [9-16], most of which are inspired
by the classical work of Wald on sequential probability ratio tests (SPRT) [8].
In this paper, we present a Bayesian decision-making model in which a decision-maker adaptively
decides when to gather (costly) information from an underlying time series in order to accumulate
evidence on the occurrence/non-occurrence of an adverse event. The decision-maker operates under
time pressure: occurrence of the adverse event terminates the decision-making process. Our abstract
model is motivated and inspired by many practical decision-making tasks such as: constructing temporal patterns for gathering sensory information in perceptual decision-making [1], scheduling lab
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

