Multi-armed Bandits:
Competing with Optimal Sequences

Oren Anava
The Voleon Group
Berkeley, CA
oren@voleon.com

Zohar Karnin
Yahoo! Research
New York, NY
zkarnin@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
We consider sequential decision making problem in the adversarial setting, where
regret is measured with respect to the optimal sequence of actions and the feedback
adheres the bandit setting. It is well-known that obtaining sublinear regret in
this setting is impossible in general, which arises the question of when can we
do better than linear regret? Previous works show that when the environment is
guaranteed to vary slowly and furthermore we are given prior knowledge regarding
its variation (i.e., a limit on the amount of changes suffered by the environment),
then this task is feasible. The caveat however is that such prior knowledge is not
likely to be available in practice, which causes the obtained regret bounds to be
somewhat irrelevant.
Our main result is a regret guarantee that scales with the variation parameter of the
environment, without requiring any prior knowledge about it whatsoever. By that,
we also resolve an open problem posted by Gur, Zeevi and Besbes [8]. An important
key component in our result is a statistical test for identifying non-stationarity
in a sequence of independent random variables. This test either identifies nonstationarity or upper-bounds the absolute deviation of the corresponding sequence
of mean values in terms of its total variation. This test is interesting on its own
right and has the potential to be found useful in additional settings.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems have been studied extensively in the past, with two important
special cases: the Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit, and the Adversarial (Non-Stochastic) Multi-Armed
Bandit. In both formulations, the problem can be viewed as a T -round repeated game between
a player and nature. In each round, the player chooses one of k actions1 and observes the loss
corresponding to this action only (the so-called bandit feedback). In the adversarial formulation, it is
usually assumed that the losses are chosen by an all-powerful adversary that has full knowledge of
our algorithm. In particular, the loss sequences need not comply with any distributional assumptions.
On the other hand, in the stochastic formulation each action is associated with some mean value
that does not change throughout the game. The feedback from choosing an action is an i.i.d. noisy
observation of this action’s mean value.
The performance of the player is traditionally measured using the static regret, which compares
the total loss of the player with the total loss of the benchmark playing the best fixed action in
hindsight. A stronger measure of the player’s performance, sometimes referred to as dynamic regret2
(or just regret for brevity), compares the total loss of the player with this of the optimal benchmark,
playing the best possible sequence of actions. Notice that in the stochastic formulation both measures
coincide, assuming that the benchmark has access to the parameters defining the random process of
1
2

We sometimes use the terminology arm for an action throughout.
The dynamic regret is occasionally referred to as shifting regret or tracking regret in the literature.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

