Neurons Equipped with Intrinsic Plasticity
Learn Stimulus Intensity Statistics

Travis Monk
Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all
University of Oldenburg
26129 Oldenburg, Germany
travis.monk@uol.de

Cristina Savin
IST Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg
Austria
csavin@ist.ac.at

Jörg Lücke
Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all
University of Oldenburg
26129 Oldenburg, Germany
joerg.luecke@uol.de

Abstract
Experience constantly shapes neural circuits through a variety of plasticity mechanisms. While the functional roles of some plasticity mechanisms are wellunderstood, it remains unclear how changes in neural excitability contribute to
learning. Here, we develop a normative interpretation of intrinsic plasticity (IP)
as a key component of unsupervised learning. We introduce a novel generative
mixture model that accounts for the class-specific statistics of stimulus intensities,
and we derive a neural circuit that learns the input classes and their intensities.
We will analytically show that inference and learning for our generative model
can be achieved by a neural circuit with intensity-sensitive neurons equipped with
a specific form of IP. Numerical experiments verify our analytical derivations and
show robust behavior for artificial and natural stimuli. Our results link IP to nontrivial input statistics, in particular the statistics of stimulus intensities for classes
to which a neuron is sensitive. More generally, our work paves the way toward
new classification algorithms that are robust to intensity variations.

1

Introduction

Confronted with the continuous flow of experience, the brain takes amorphous sensory inputs and
translates them into coherent objects and scenes. This process requires neural circuits to extract key
regularities from their inputs and to use those regularities to interpret novel experiences. Such learning is enabled by a variety of plasticity mechanisms which allow neural networks to represent the
statistics of the world. The most well-studied plasticity mechanism is synaptic plasticity, where the
strength of connections between neurons changes as a function of their activity [1]. Other plasticity
mechanisms exist and operate in tandem. One example is intrinsic plasticity (IP), where a neuron’s
response to inputs changes as a function of its own past activity. It is a challenge for computational
neuroscience to understand how different plasticity rules jointly contribute to circuit computation.
While much is known about the contribution of Hebbian plasticity to different variants of unsupervised learning, including linear and non-linear sparse coding [2–5], ICA [6], PCA [7] or clustering [8–12], other aspects of unsupervised learning remain unclear. First, on the computational side,
there are many situations in which the meaning of inputs should be invariant to its overall gain. For
example, a visual scene’s content does not depend on light intensity, and a word utterance should
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

