Learning values across many orders of magnitude
Hado van Hasselt

Arthur Guez

Matteo Hessel

Volodymyr Mnih

David Silver

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Most learning algorithms are not invariant to the scale of the signal that is being
approximated. We propose to adaptively normalize the targets used in the learning updates. This is important in value-based reinforcement learning, where the
magnitude of appropriate value approximations can change over time when we
update the policy of behavior. Our main motivation is prior work on learning to
play Atari games, where the rewards were clipped to a predetermined range. This
clipping facilitates learning across many different games with a single learning
algorithm, but a clipped reward function can result in qualitatively different behavior. Using adaptive normalization we can remove this domain-specific heuristic
without diminishing overall performance.

1

Introduction

Many machine-learning algorithms rely on a-priori access to data to properly tune relevant hyperparameters [Bergstra et al., 2011, Bergstra and Bengio, 2012, Snoek et al., 2012]. It is much harder
to learn efficiently from a stream of data when we do not know the magnitude of the function we
seek to approximate beforehand, or if these magnitudes can change over time, as is typically the case
in reinforcement learning when the policy of behavior improves over time.
Our main motivation is the work by Mnih et al. [2015], in which Q-learning [Watkins, 1989] is
combined with a deep convolutional neural network [cf. LeCun et al., 2015]. The resulting deep Q
network (DQN) algorithm learned to play a varied set of Atari 2600 games from the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE) [Bellemare et al., 2013], which was proposed as an evaluation framework to test
general learning algorithms on solving many different interesting tasks. DQN was proposed as a
singular solution, using a single set of hyperparameters.
The magnitudes and frequencies of rewards vary wildly between different games. For instance, in
Pong the rewards are bounded by 1 and +1 while in Ms. Pac-Man eating a single ghost can yield
a reward of up to +1600. To overcome this hurdle, rewards and temporal-difference errors were
clipped to [ 1, 1], so that DQN would perceive any positive reward as +1, and any negative reward as
1. This is not a satisfying solution for two reasons. First, the clipping introduces domain knowledge.
Most games have sparse non-zero rewards. Clipping results in optimizing the frequency of rewards,
rather than their sum. This is a fairly reasonable heuristic in Atari, but it does not generalize to
many other domains. Second, and more importantly, the clipping changes the objective, sometimes
resulting in qualitatively different policies of behavior.
We propose a method to adaptively normalize the targets used in the learning updates. If these targets
are guaranteed to be normalized it is much easier to find suitable hyperparameters. The proposed
technique is not specific to DQN or to reinforcement learning and is more generally applicable in
supervised learning and reinforcement learning. There are several reasons such normalization can be
desirable. First, sometimes we desire a single system that is able to solve multiple different problems
with varying natural magnitudes, as in the Atari domain. Second, for multi-variate functions the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

