Learning in Games: Robustness of Fast Convergence
Dylan J. Foster⇤

Zhiyuan Li†

Thodoris Lykouris⇤

Karthik Sridharan⇤

Éva Tardos⇤

Abstract
We show that learning algorithms satisfying a low approximate regret property
experience fast convergence to approximate optimality in a large class of repeated
games. Our property, which simply requires that each learner has small regret
compared to a (1 + ✏)-multiplicative approximation to the best action in hindsight,
is ubiquitous among learning algorithms; it is satisfied even by the vanilla Hedge
forecaster. Our results improve upon recent work of Syrgkanis et al. [28] in a
number of ways. We require only that players observe payoffs under other players’
realized actions, as opposed to expected payoffs. We further show that convergence
occurs with high probability, and show convergence under bandit feedback. Finally,
we improve upon the speed of convergence by a factor of n, the number of players.
Both the scope of settings and the class of algorithms for which our analysis
provides fast convergence are considerably broader than in previous work.
Our framework applies to dynamic population games via a low approximate regret
property for shifting experts. Here we strengthen the results of Lykouris et al. [19]
in two ways: We allow players to select learning algorithms from a larger class,
which includes a minor variant of the basic Hedge algorithm, and we increase the
maximum churn in players for which approximate optimality is achieved.
In the bandit setting we present a new algorithm which provides a “small loss”-type
bound with improved dependence on the number of actions in utility settings, and
is both simple and efficient. This result may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Consider players repeatedly playing a game, all acting independently to minimize their cost or
maximize their utility. It is natural in this setting for each player to use a learning algorithm that
guarantees small regret to decide on their strategy, as the environment is constantly changing due
to each player’s choice of strategy. It is well known that such decentralized no-regret dynamics
are guaranteed to converge to a form of equilibrium for the game. Furthermore, in a large class of
games known as smooth games [23] they converge to outcomes with approximately optimal social
welfare matching the worst-case efficiency loss of Nash equilibria (the price of anarchy). In smooth
cost minimization games the overall cost is /(1 µ) times the minimum cost, while in smooth
mechanisms [29] such as auctions it is / max(1, µ) times the maximum total utility (where and µ
are parameters of the smoothness condition). Examples of smooth games and mechanisms include
routing games and many forms of auction games (see e.g. [23, 29, 24]).
The speed at which the game outcome converges to this approximately optimal welfare is governed by
individual players’ regret bounds. There are a large number of simple regret minimization algorithms
(Hedge/Multiplicative Weights, Mirror Decent, Follow the Regularized Leader; see e.g. [12]) that
⇤
Cornell University {djfoster,teddlyk,sridharan,eva}@cs.cornell.edu. Work supported in
part under NSF grants CDS&E-MSS 1521544, CCF-1563714, ONR grant N00014-08-1-0031, a Google faculty
research award, and an NDSEG fellowship.
†
Tsinghua University, lizhiyuan13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn. Research performed while author was
visiting Cornell University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

