Learning under uncertainty: a comparison between
R-W and Bayesian approach

He Huang
Laureate Institute for Brain Research
Tulsa, OK, 74133
crane081@gmail.com
Martin Paulus
Laureate Institute for Brain Research
Tulsa, OK, 74133
mpaulus@laureateinstitute.org

Abstract
Accurately differentiating between what are truly unpredictably random and systematic changes that occur at random can have profound effect on affect and
cognition. To examine the underlying computational principles that guide different
learning behavior in an uncertain environment, we compared an R-W model and
a Bayesian approach in a visual search task with different volatility levels. Both
R-W model and the Bayesian approach reflected an individual’s estimation of the
environmental volatility, and there is a strong correlation between the learning rate
in R-W model and the belief of stationarity in the Bayesian approach in different
volatility conditions. In a low volatility condition, R-W model indicates that learning rate positively correlates with lose-shift rate, but not choice optimality (inverted
U shape). The Bayesian approach indicates that the belief of environmental stationarity positively correlates with choice optimality, but not lose-shift rate (inverted
U shape). In addition, we showed that comparing to Expert learners, individuals
with high lose-shift rate (sub-optimal learners) had significantly higher learning
rate estimated from R-W model and lower belief of stationarity from the Bayesian
model.

1

Introduction

Learning and using environmental statistics in choice-selection under uncertainty is a fundamental
survival skill. It has been shown that, in tasks with embedded environmental statistics, subjects
use sub-optimal heuristic Win-Stay-Lose-Shift (WSLS) strategy (Lee et al. 2011), and strategies
that can be interpreted using Reinforcement Learning model (Behrens et al. 2007), or Bayesian
inference model (Mathys et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2014). Value-based model-free RL model assumes
subjects learn the values of chosen options using a prediction error that is scaled by a learning rate
(Rescorla and Wagner, 1972; Sutton and Barto, 1998). This learning rate can be used to measure
an individual’s reaction to environmental volatility (Browning et al. 2015). Higher learning rate is
usually associated with a more volatile environment, and a lower learning rate is associated with
a relatively stable situation. Different from traditional (model-free) RL model, Bayesian approach
assumes subjects make decisions by learning the reward probability distribution of all options based
on Bayes’ rule, i.e., sequentially updating the posterior probability by combining the prior knowledge
and the new observation (likelihood function) over time. To examine how environment volatility may
influence this inference process, Yu & Cohen 2009 proposed to use a dynamic belief model (DBM)
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

