Wasserstein Training of
Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Grégoire Montavon
Technische Universität Berlin

Klaus-Robert Müller∗
Technische Universität Berlin

gregoire.montavon@tu-berlin.de

klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de

Marco Cuturi
CREST, ENSAE, Université Paris-Saclay
marco.cuturi@ensae.fr

Abstract
Boltzmann machines are able to learn highly complex, multimodal, structured
and multiscale real-world data distributions. Parameters of the model are usually
learned by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence from training samples
to the learned model. We propose in this work a novel approach for Boltzmann
machine training which assumes that a meaningful metric between observations is
known. This metric between observations can then be used to define the Wasserstein
distance between the distribution induced by the Boltzmann machine on the one
hand, and that given by the training sample on the other hand. We derive a
gradient of that distance with respect to the model parameters. Minimization of this
new objective leads to generative models with different statistical properties. We
demonstrate their practical potential on data completion and denoising, for which
the metric between observations plays a crucial role.

1

Introduction

Boltzmann machines [1] are powerful generative models that can be used to approximate a large
class of real-world data distributions, such as handwritten characters [9], speech segments [7], or
multimodal data [16]. Boltzmann machines share similarities with neural networks in their capability
to extract features at multiple scales, and to build well-generalizing hierarchical data representations
[15, 13]. The restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) is a special type of Boltzmann machine composed
of one layer of latent variables, and defining a probability distribution pθ (x) over a set of d binary
observed variables whose state is represented by the binary vector x ∈ {0, 1}d , and with a parameter
vector θ to be learned.
PN
Given an empirical probability distribution p̂(x) = N1 n=1 δxn where (xn )n is a list of N observations in {0, 1}d , an RBM can be trained using information-theoretic divergences (see for example
[12]) by minimizing with respect to θ a divergence ∆(p̂, pθ ) between the sample empirical measure p̂
and the modeled distribution pθ . When ∆ is for instance the KL divergence, this approach results in
the well-known Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE), which yields gradients for the θ of the form
N

1 X
∇θ KL(p̂ k pθ ) = −
∇θ log pθ (xn ) = − ∇θ log pθ (x) p̂ ,
N n=1

(1)

where the bracket notation h·ip indicates an expectation with respect to p. Alternative choices for ∆
are the Bhattacharrya/Hellinger and Euclidean distances between distributions, or more generally
∗

Also with the Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

