The non-convex Burer–Monteiro approach works
on smooth semidefinite programs

Nicolas Boumal?
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
nboumal@math.princeton.edu

Vladislav Voroninski?
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
vvlad@math.mit.edu

Afonso S. Bandeira
Department of Mathematics and Center for Data Science
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
bandeira@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Semidefinite programs (SDPs) can be solved in polynomial time by interior point
methods, but scalability can be an issue. To address this shortcoming, over a
decade ago, Burer and Monteiro proposed to solve SDPs with few equality constraints via rank-restricted, non-convex surrogates. Remarkably, for some applications, local optimization methods seem to converge to global optima of these
non-convex surrogates reliably. Although some theory supports this empirical
success, a complete explanation of it remains an open question. In this paper, we
consider a class of SDPs which includes applications such as max-cut, community
detection in the stochastic block model, robust PCA, phase retrieval and synchronization of rotations. We show that the low-rank Burer–Monteiro formulation of
SDPs in that class almost never has any spurious local optima.
This paper was corrected on April 9, 2018. Theorems 2 and 4 had the assumption that M (1) is a manifold. From this assumption it was stated that
TY M = {Ẏ ∈ Rn×p : A(Ẏ Y > + Y Ẏ >) = 0}, which is not true in general.
To ensure this identity, the theorems now make the stronger assumption that gradients of the constraints A(Y Y >) = b are linearly independent for all Y in M. All
examples treated in the paper satisfy this assumption. Appendix D gives details.

1

Introduction

We consider semidefinite programs (SDPs) of the form
f∗ =

min hC, Xi

X∈Sn×n

subject to

A(X) = b, X  0,

(SDP)

where hC, Xi = Tr(C >X), C ∈ Sn×n is the symmetric cost matrix, A : Sn×n → Rm is a linear operator capturing m equality constraints with right hand side b ∈ Rm and the variable X is
symmetric, positive semidefinite. Interior point methods solve (SDP) in polynomial time [Nesterov,
2004]. In practice however, for n beyond a few thousands, such algorithms run out of memory (and
time), prompting research for alternative solvers.
?The first two authors contributed equally.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

