Double Thompson Sampling for Dueling Bandits

Huasen Wu
University of California, Davis
hswu@ucdavis.edu

Xin Liu
University of California, Davis
xinliu@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Double Thompson Sampling (D-TS) algorithm for
dueling bandit problems. As its name suggests, D-TS selects both the first and the
second candidates according to Thompson Sampling. Specifically, D-TS maintains
a posterior distribution for the preference matrix, and chooses the pair of arms for
comparison according to two sets of samples independently drawn from the posterior distribution. This simple algorithm applies to general Copeland dueling bandits,
including Condorcet dueling bandits as a special case. For general Copeland dueling bandits, we show that D-TS achieves O(K 2 log T ) regret. Moreover, using
a back substitution argument, we refine the regret to O(K log T + K 2 log log T )
in Condorcet dueling bandits and most practical Copeland dueling bandits. In
addition, we propose an enhancement of D-TS, referred to as D-TS+ , to reduce the
regret in practice by carefully breaking ties. Experiments based on both synthetic
and real-world data demonstrate that D-TS and D-TS+ significantly improve the
overall performance, in terms of regret and robustness.

1

Introduction

The dueling bandit problem [1] is a variant of the classical multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, where
the feedback comes in the form of pairwise comparison. This model has attracted much attention as
it can be applied in many systems such as information retrieval (IR) [2, 3], where user preferences
are easier to obtain and typically more stable. Most earlier work [1, 4, 5] focuses on Condorcet
dueling bandits, where there exists an arm, referred to as the Condorcet winner, that beats all other
arms. Recent work [6, 7] turns to a more general and practical case of a Copeland winner(s), which is
the arm (or arms) that beats the most other arms. Existing algorithms are mainly generalized from
traditional MAB algorithms along two lines: 1) UCB (Upper Confidence Bound)-type algorithms,
such as RUCB [4] and CCB [6]; and, 2) MED (Minimum Empirical Divergence)-type algorithms,
such as RMED [5] and CW-RMED/ECW-RMED [7].
In traditional MAB, an alternative effective solution is Thompson Sampling (TS) [8]. Its principle is
to choose the optimal action that maximizes the expected reward according to the randomly drawn
belief. TS has been successfully applied in traditional MAB [9, 10, 11, 12] and other online learning
problems [13, 14]. In particular, empirical studies in [9] show that TS not only achieves lower regret
than other algorithms in practice, but is also more robust as a randomized algorithm.
In the wake of the success of TS in these online learning problems, a natural question is whether
and how TS can be applied to dueling bandits to further improve the performance. However, it is
challenging to apply the standard TS framework to dueling bandits, because not all comparisons
provide information about the system statistics. Specifically, a good learning algorithm for dueling
bandits will eventually compare the winner against itself. However, comparing one arm against itself
does not provide any statistical information, which is critical in TS to update the posterior distribution.
Thus, TS needs to be adjusted so that 1) comparing the winners against themselves is allowed, but, 2)
trapping in comparing a non-winner arm against itself is avoided.
In this paper, we propose a Double Thompson Sampling (D-TS) algorithm for dueling bandits,
including both Condorcet dueling bandits and general Copeland dueling bandits. As its name
suggests, D-TS typically selects both the first and the second candidates according to samples
independently drawn from the posterior distribution. D-TS also utilizes the idea of confidence
bounds to eliminate the likely non-winner arms, and thus avoids trapping in suboptimal comparisons.
Compared to prior studies on dueling bandits, D-TS has both practical and theoretical advantages.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

