A Forward Model at Purkinje Cell Synapses
Facilitates Cerebellar Anticipatory Control

Ivan Herreros-Alonso
SPECS lab
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
ivan.herreros@upf.edu

Xerxes D. Arsiwalla
SPECS lab
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain

Paul F.M.J. Verschure
SPECS, UPF
Catalan Institution of Research
and Advanced Studies (ICREA)
Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
How does our motor system solve the problem of anticipatory control in spite
of a wide spectrum of response dynamics from different musculo-skeletal systems, transport delays as well as response latencies throughout the central nervous
system? To a great extent, our highly-skilled motor responses are a result of a
reactive feedback system, originating in the brain-stem and spinal cord, combined
with a feed-forward anticipatory system, that is adaptively fine-tuned by sensory
experience and originates in the cerebellum. Based on that interaction we design
the counterfactual predictive control (CFPC) architecture, an anticipatory adaptive
motor control scheme in which a feed-forward module, based on the cerebellum,
steers an error feedback controller with counterfactual error signals. Those are
signals that trigger reactions as actual errors would, but that do not code for any current or forthcoming errors. In order to determine the optimal learning strategy, we
derive a novel learning rule for the feed-forward module that involves an eligibility
trace and operates at the synaptic level. In particular, our eligibility trace provides
a mechanism beyond co-incidence detection in that it convolves a history of prior
synaptic inputs with error signals. In the context of cerebellar physiology, this
solution implies that Purkinje cell synapses should generate eligibility traces using
a forward model of the system being controlled. From an engineering perspective,
CFPC provides a general-purpose anticipatory control architecture equipped with a
learning rule that exploits the full dynamics of the closed-loop system.

1

Introduction

Learning and anticipation are central features of cerebellar computation and function (Bastian, 2006):
the cerebellum learns from experience and is able to anticipate events, thereby complementing a
reactive feedback control by an anticipatory feed-forward one (Hofstoetter et al., 2002; Herreros
and Verschure, 2013). This interpretation is based on a series of anticipatory motor behaviors that
originate in the cerebellum. For instance, anticipation is a crucial component of acquired behavior in
eye-blink conditioning (Gormezano et al., 1983), a trial by trial learning protocol where an initially
neutral stimulus such as a tone or a light (the conditioning stimulus, CS) is followed, after a fixed
delay, by a noxious one, such as an air puff to the eye (the unconditioned stimulus, US). During early
trials, a protective unconditioned response (UR), a blink, occurs reflexively in a feedback manner
following the US. After training though, a well-timed anticipatory blink (the conditioned response,
CR) precedes the US. Thus, learning results in the (partial) transference from an initial feedback
action to an anticipatory (or predictive) feed-forward one. Similar responses occur during anticipatory
postural adjustments, which are postural changes that precede voluntary motor movements, such
as raising an arm while standing (Massion, 1992). The goal of these anticipatory adjustments is to
counteract the postural and equilibrium disturbances that voluntary movements introduce. These
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

