Distributed Flexible Nonlinear Tensor Factorization
Shandian Zhe§ , Kai Zhang† , Pengyuan Wang‡ , Kuang-chih Lee] , Zenglin Xu\ ,
Yuan Qi[ , Zoubin Gharamani?
§
Dept. Computer Science, Purdue University, † NEC Laboratories America, Princeton NJ,
‡
Dept. Marketing, University of Georgia at Athens, ] Yahoo! Research,
\
Big Data Res. Center, School Comp. Sci. Eng., Univ. of Electr. Sci. & Tech. of China,
[
Ant Financial Service Group, Alibaba, ? University of Cambridge
§
szhe@purdue.edu, † kzhang@nec-labs.com, ‡ pengyuan@uga.edu,
]
kclee@yahoo-inc.com, \ zlxu@uestc.edu.cn,
[
alanqi0@outlook.com, ? zoubin@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Tensor factorization is a powerful tool to analyse multi-way data. Recently proposed nonlinear factorization methods, although capable of capturing complex
relationships, are computationally quite expensive and may suffer a severe learning
bias in case of extreme data sparsity. Therefore, we propose a distributed, flexible
nonlinear tensor factorization model, which avoids the expensive computations and
structural restrictions of the Kronecker-product in the existing TGP formulations,
allowing an arbitrary subset of tensorial entries to be selected for training. Meanwhile, we derive a tractable and tight variational evidence lower bound (ELBO) that
enables highly decoupled, parallel computations and high-quality inference. Based
on the new bound, we develop a distributed, key-value-free inference algorithm in
the M AP R EDUCE framework, which can fully exploit the memory cache mechanism in fast M AP R EDUCE systems such as SPARK. Experiments demonstrate the
advantages of our method over several state-of-the-art approaches, in terms of both
predictive performance and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Tensors, or multidimensional arrays, are generalizations of matrices (from binary interactions) to
high-order interactions between multiple entities. For example, we can extract a three-mode tensor
(user, advertisement, context) from online advertising logs. To analyze tensor data, people usually
turn to factorization approaches, which use a set of latent factors to represent each entity and
model how the latent factors interact with each other to generate tensor elements. Classical tensor
factorization models, including Tucker [18] and CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) [5], assume multilinear interactions and hence are unable to capture more complex, nonlinear relationships. Recently,
Xu et al. [19] proposed Infinite Tucker decomposition (InfTucker), which generalizes the Tucker
model to infinite feature space using a Tensor-variate Gaussian process (TGP) and is hence more
powerful in modeling intricate nonlinear interactions. However, InfTucker and its variants [22, 23]
are computationally expensive, because the Kronecker product between the covariances of all the
modes requires the TGP to model the entire tensor structure. In addition, they may suffer from
the extreme sparsity of real-world tensor data, i.e., when the proportion of the nonzero entries is
extremely low. As is often the case, most of the zero elements in real tensors are meaningless: they
simply indicate missing or unobserved entries. Incorporating all of them in the training process may
affect the factorization quality and lead to biased predictions.
To address these issues, we propose a distributed, flexible nonlinear tensor factorization model,
which has several important advantages. First, it can capture highly nonlinear interactions in the
tensor, and is flexible enough to incorporate arbitrary subset of (meaningful) tensor entries for the
training. This is achieved by placing a Gaussian process prior over tensor entries, where the input
is constructed by concatenating the latent factors from each mode and the intricate relationships
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

