Safe Exploration in Finite Markov Decision Processes
with Gaussian Processes
Matteo Turchetta
ETH Zurich
matteotu@ethz.ch

Felix Berkenkamp
ETH Zurich
befelix@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
In classical reinforcement learning agents accept arbitrary short term loss for long
term gain when exploring their environment. This is infeasible for safety critical
applications such as robotics, where even a single unsafe action may cause system
failure or harm the environment. In this paper, we address the problem of safely
exploring finite Markov decision processes (MDP). We define safety in terms of an
a priori unknown safety constraint that depends on states and actions and satisfies
certain regularity conditions expressed via a Gaussian process prior. We develop a
novel algorithm, S AFE MDP, for this task and prove that it completely explores
the safely reachable part of the MDP without violating the safety constraint. To
achieve this, it cautiously explores safe states and actions in order to gain statistical
confidence about the safety of unvisited state-action pairs from noisy observations
collected while navigating the environment. Moreover, the algorithm explicitly
considers reachability when exploring the MDP, ensuring that it does not get stuck
in any state with no safe way out. We demonstrate our method on digital terrain
models for the task of exploring an unknown map with a rover.

1

Introduction

Today’s robots are required to operate in variable and often unknown environments. The traditional
solution is to specify all potential scenarios that a robot may encounter during operation a priori. This
is time consuming or even infeasible. As a consequence, robots need to be able to learn and adapt to
unknown environments autonomously [10, 2]. While exploration algorithms are known, safety is still
an open problem in the development of such systems [18]. In fact, most learning algorithms allow
robots to make unsafe decisions during exploration. This can damage the platform or its environment.
In this paper, we provide a solution to this problem and develop an algorithm that enables agents to
safely and autonomously explore unknown environments. Specifically, we consider the problem of
exploring a Markov decision process (MDP), where it is a priori unknown which state-action pairs
are safe. Our algorithm cautiously explores this environment without taking actions that are unsafe or
may render the exploring agent stuck.
Related Work. Safe exploration is an open problem in the reinforcement learning community and
several definitions of safety have been proposed [16]. In risk-sensitive reinforcement learning, the
goal is to maximize the expected return for the worst case scenario [5]. However, these approaches
only minimize risk and do not treat safety as a hard constraint. For example, Geibel and Wysotzki [7]
define risk as the probability of driving the system to a previously known set of undesirable states.
The main difference to our approach is that we do not assume the undesirable states to be known
a priori. Garcia and Fernández [6] propose to ensure safety by means of a backup policy; that is,
a policy that is known to be safe in advance. Our approach is different, since it does not require a
backup policy but only a set of initially safe states from which the agent starts to explore. Another
approach that makes use of a backup policy is shown by Hans et al. [9], where safety is defined in
terms of a minimum reward, which is learned from data.
29th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

