Measuring the reliability of MCMC inference with
bidirectional Monte Carlo
Roger B. Grosse

Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

Siddharth Ancha

Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

Daniel M. Roy

Department of Statistics
University of Toronto

Abstract
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is one of the main workhorses of probabilistic
inference, but it is notoriously hard to measure the quality of approximate posterior
samples. This challenge is particularly salient in black box inference methods,
which can hide details and obscure inference failures. In this work, we extend
the recently introduced bidirectional Monte Carlo [GGA15] technique to evaluate
MCMC-based posterior inference algorithms. By running annealed importance
sampling (AIS) chains both from prior to posterior and vice versa on simulated data,
we upper bound in expectation the symmetrized KL divergence between the true
posterior distribution and the distribution of approximate samples. We integrate
our method into two probabilistic programming languages, WebPPL [GS] and Stan
[CGHL+ p], and validate it on several models and datasets. As an example of how
our method be used to guide the design of inference algorithms, we apply it to
study the effectiveness of different model representations in WebPPL and Stan.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is one of the most important classes of probabilistic inference
methods and underlies a variety of approaches to automatic inference [e.g. LTBS00; GMRB+08;
GS; CGHL+ p]. Despite its widespread use, it is still difficult to rigorously validate the effectiveness
of an MCMC inference algorithm. There are various heuristics for diagnosing convergence, but
reliable quantitative measures are hard to find. This creates difficulties both for end users of automatic
inference systems and for experienced researchers who develop models and algorithms.
In this paper, we extend the recently proposed bidirectional Monte Carlo (BDMC) [GGA15] method
to evaluate certain kinds of MCMC-based inference algorithms by bounding the symmetrized KL
divergence (Jeffreys divergence) between the distribution of approximate samples and the true
posterior distribution. Specifically, our method is applicable to algorithms which can be viewed as
importance sampling over an extended state space, such as annealed importance sampling (AIS;
[Nea01]) or sequential Monte Carlo (SMC; [MDJ06]). BDMC was proposed as a method for
accurately estimating the log marginal likelihood (log-ML) on simulated data by sandwiching the true
value between stochastic upper and lower bounds which converge in the limit of infinite computation.
These log-likelihood values were used to benchmark marginal likelihood estimators. We show that it
can also be used to measure the accuracy of approximate posterior samples obtained from algorithms
like AIS or SMC. More precisely, we refine the analysis of [GGA15] to derive an estimator which
upper bounds in expectation the Jeffreys divergence between the distribution of approximate samples
and the true posterior distribution. We show that this upper bound is quite accurate on some toy
distributions for which both the true Jeffreys divergence and the upper bound can be computed exactly.
We refer to our method of bounding the Jeffreys divergence by sandwiching the log-ML as Bounding
Divergences with REverse Annealing (BREAD).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

