Near-Optimal Smoothing of Structured Conditional
Probability Matrices

Moein Falahatgar
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
moein@ucsd.edu

Mesrob I. Ohannessian
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
mesrob@ttic.edu

Alon Orlitsky
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA
alon@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Utilizing the structure of a probabilistic model can significantly increase its learning
speed. Motivated by several recent applications, in particular bigram models
in language processing, we consider learning low-rank conditional probability
matrices under expected KL-risk. This choice makes smoothing, that is the careful
handling of low-probability elements, paramount. We derive an iterative algorithm
that extends classical non-negative matrix factorization to naturally incorporate
additive smoothing and prove that it converges to the stationary points of a penalized
empirical risk. We then derive sample-complexity bounds for the global minimzer
of the penalized risk and show that it is within a small factor of the optimal
sample complexity. This framework generalizes to more sophisticated smoothing
techniques, including absolute-discounting.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental tasks in statistical learning is probability estimation. When the possible
outcomes can be divided into k discrete categories, e.g. types of words or bacterial species, the task
of interest is to use data to estimate the probability masses p1 , · · · , pk , where pj is the probability of
observing category j. More often than not, it is not a single distribution that is to be estimated, but
multiple related distributions, e.g. frequencies of words within various contexts or species in different
samples. We can group these into a conditional probability (row-stochastic) matrix Pi,1 , · · · , Pi,k
as i varies over c contexts, and Pij represents the probability of observing category j in context i.
Learning these distributions individually would cause the data to be unnecessarily diluted. Instead,
the structure of the relationship between the contexts should be harnessed.
A number of models have been proposed to address this structured learning task. One of the wildly
successful approaches consists of positing that P , despite being a c×k matrix, is in fact of much lower
rank m. Effectively, this means that there exists a latent context space of size m  c, k into which
the original context maps probabilistically via a c × m stochastic matrix A, then this latent context
in turn determines the outcome via an m × k stochastic matrix B. Since this structural model means
that P factorizes as P = AB, this problem falls within the framework of low-rank (non-negative)
matrix factorization. Many topic models, such as the original work on probabilistic latent semantic
analysis PLSA, also map to this framework. We narrow our attention here to such low-rank models,
but note that more generally these efforts fall under the areas of structured and transfer learning.
Other examples include: manifold learning, multi-task learning, and hierarchical models.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

