Catching heuristics are optimal control policies
Boris Belousov* , Gerhard Neumann* , Constantin A. Rothkopf** , Jan Peters*
**

*
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt
Cognitive Science Center & Department of Psychology, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Two seemingly contradictory theories attempt to explain how humans move to
intercept an airborne ball. One theory posits that humans predict the ball trajectory
to optimally plan future actions; the other claims that, instead of performing such
complicated computations, humans employ heuristics to reactively choose appropriate actions based on immediate visual feedback. In this paper, we show that
interception strategies appearing to be heuristics can be understood as computational solutions to the optimal control problem faced by a ball-catching agent acting
under uncertainty. Modeling catching as a continuous partially observable Markov
decision process and employing stochastic optimal control theory, we discover
that the four main heuristics described in the literature are optimal solutions if the
catcher has sufficient time to continuously visually track the ball. Specifically, by
varying model parameters such as noise, time to ground contact, and perceptual
latency, we show that different strategies arise under different circumstances. The
catcher’s policy switches between generating reactive and predictive behavior based
on the ratio of system to observation noise and the ratio between reaction time
and task duration. Thus, we provide a rational account of human ball-catching
behavior and a unifying explanation for seemingly contradictory theories of target
interception on the basis of stochastic optimal control.

1

Introduction

Humans exhibit impressive abilities of intercepting moving targets as exemplified in sports such as
baseball [6]. Despite the ubiquity of this visuomotor capability, explaining how humans manage to
catch flying objects is a long-standing problem in cognitive science and human motor control. What
makes this problem computationally difficult for humans are the involved perceptual uncertainties,
high sensory noise, and long action delays compared to artificial control systems and robots. Thus,
understanding action generation in human ball interception from a computational point of view
may yield important insights on human visuomotor control. Surprisingly, there is no generally
accepted model that explains empirical observations of human interception of airborne balls. McIntyre et al. [15] and Hayhoe et al. [13] claim that humans employ an internal model of the physical
world to predict where the ball will hit the ground and how to catch it. Such internal models allow for
planning and potentially optimal action generation, e.g., they enable optimal catching strategies where
humans predict the interception point and move there as fast as mechanically possible to await the ball.
Clearly, there exist situations where latencies of the catching task require such strategies (e.g., when
a catcher moves the arm to receive the pitcher’s ball). By contrast, Gigerenzer & Brighton [11] argue
that the world is far too complex for sufficiently precise modeling (e.g., a catcher or an outfielder
in baseball would have to take air resistance, wind, and spin of the ball into account to predict its
trajectory). Thus, humans supposedly extract few simple but robust features that suffice for successful
execution of tasks such as catching. Here, immediate feedback is employed to guide action generation
instead of detailed modeling. Policies based on these features are called heuristics and the claim
is that humans possess a bag of such tricks, the “adaptive toolbox”. For a baseball outfielder, a
successful heuristic could be “Fix your gaze on the ball, start running, and adjust your running speed
so that the angle of gaze remains constant” [10]. Thus, at the core, finding a unifying computational
account of the human interception of moving targets also contributes to the long-lasting debate about
the nature of human rationality [20].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

