f -GAN: Training Generative Neural Samplers using
Variational Divergence Minimization
Sebastian Nowozin, Botond Cseke, Ryota Tomioka
Machine Intelligence and Perception Group
Microsoft Research
{Sebastian.Nowozin, Botond.Cseke, ryoto}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Generative neural samplers are probabilistic models that implement sampling using
feedforward neural networks: they take a random input vector and produce a sample
from a probability distribution defined by the network weights. These models
are expressive and allow efficient computation of samples and derivatives, but
cannot be used for computing likelihoods or for marginalization. The generativeadversarial training method allows to train such models through the use of an
auxiliary discriminative neural network. We show that the generative-adversarial
approach is a special case of an existing more general variational divergence
estimation approach. We show that any f -divergence can be used for training
generative neural samplers. We discuss the benefits of various choices of divergence
functions on training complexity and the quality of the obtained generative models.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic generative models describe a probability distribution over a given domain X , for example
a distribution over natural language sentences, natural images, or recorded waveforms.
Given a generative model Q from a class Q of possible models we are generally interested in
performing one or multiple of the following operations:
• Sampling. Produce a sample from Q. By inspecting samples or calculating a function on
a set of samples we can obtain important insight into the distribution or solve decision
problems.
• Estimation. Given a set of iid samples {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } from an unknown true distribution
P , find Q ∈ Q that best describes the true distribution.
• Point-wise likelihood evaluation. Given a sample x, evaluate the likelihood Q(x).
Generative-adversarial networks (GAN) in the form proposed by [10] are an expressive class of
generative models that allow exact sampling and approximate estimation. The model used in GAN is
simply a feedforward neural network which receives as input a vector of random numbers, sampled,
for example, from a uniform distribution. This random input is passed through each layer in the
network and the final layer produces the desired output, for example, an image. Clearly, sampling
from a GAN model is efficient because only one forward pass through the network is needed to
produce one exact sample.
Such probabilistic feedforward neural network models were first considered in [22] and [3], here we
call these models generative neural samplers. GAN is also of this type, as is the decoder model of
a variational autoencoder [18].
In the original GAN paper the authors show that it is possible to estimate neural samplers by
approximate minimization of the symmetric Jensen-Shannon divergence,
DJS (P kQ) = 12 DKL (P k 21 (P + Q)) + 12 DKL (Qk 12 (P + Q)),

(1)

where DKL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The key technique used in the GAN training
is that of introducing a second “discriminator” neural networks which is optimized simultaneously.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

