Efficient state-space modularization for planning:
theory, behavioral and neural signatures

Daniel McNamee, Daniel Wolpert, Máté Lengyel
Computational and Biological Learning Lab
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom
{d.mcnamee|wolpert|m.lengyel}@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Even in state-spaces of modest size, planning is plagued by the “curse of dimensionality”. This problem is particularly acute in human and animal cognition given
the limited capacity of working memory, and the time pressures under which planning often occurs in the natural environment. Hierarchically organized modular
representations have long been suggested to underlie the capacity of biological
systems 1,2 to efficiently and flexibly plan in complex environments. However, the
principles underlying efficient modularization remain obscure, making it difficult to
identify its behavioral and neural signatures. Here, we develop a normative theory
of efficient state-space representations which partitions an environment into distinct
modules by minimizing the average (information theoretic) description length of
planning within the environment, thereby optimally trading off the complexity of
planning across and within modules. We show that such optimal representations
provide a unifying account for a diverse range of hitherto unrelated phenomena at
multiple levels of behavior and neural representation.

1

Introduction

In a large and complex environment, such as a city, we often need to be able to flexibly plan so that we
can reach a wide variety of goal locations from different start locations. How might this problem be
solved efficiently? Model-free decision making strategies 3 would either require relearning a policy,
determining which actions (e.g. turn right or left) should be chosen in which state (e.g. locations in
the city), each time a new start or goal location is given – a very inefficient use of experience resulting
in prohibitively slow learning (but see Ref. 4). Alternatively, the state-space representation used for
determining the policy can be augmented with extra dimensions representing the current goal, such
that effectively multiple policies can be maintained 5 , or a large “look-up table” of action sequences
connecting any pair of start and goal locations can be represented – again leading to inefficient use of
experience and potentially excessive representational capacity requirements.
In contrast, model-based decision-making strategies rely on the ability to simulate future trajectories
in the state space and use this in order to flexibly plan in a goal-dependent manner. While such
strategies are data- and (long term) memory-efficient, they are computationally expensive, especially
in state-spaces for which the corresponding decision tree has a large branching factor and depth 6 .
Endowing state-space representations with a hierarchical structure is an attractive approach to
reducing the computational cost of model-based planning 7–11 and has long been suggested to be
a cornerstone of human cognition 1 . Indeed, recent experiments in human decision-making have
gleaned evidence for the use and flexible combination of “decision fragments” 12 while neuroimaging
work has identified hierarchical action-value reinforcement learning in humans 13 and indicated that
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

