Dual Space Gradient Descent for Online Learning

Trung Le, Tu Dinh Nguyen, Vu Nguyen, Dinh Phung
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
Deakin University, Australia
{trung.l, tu.nguyen, v.nguyen, dinh.phung}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
One crucial goal in kernel online learning is to bound the model size. Common
approaches employ budget maintenance procedures to restrict the model sizes using
removal, projection, or merging strategies. Although projection and merging, in the
literature, are known to be the most effective strategies, they demand extensive computation whilst removal strategy fails to retain information of the removed vectors.
An alternative way to address the model size problem is to apply random features
to approximate the kernel function. This allows the model to be maintained directly
in the random feature space, hence effectively resolve the curse of kernelization.
However, this approach still suffers from a serious shortcoming as it needs to use a
high dimensional random feature space to achieve a sufficiently accurate kernel
approximation. Consequently, it leads to a significant increase in the computational
cost. To address all of these aforementioned challenges, we present in this paper
the Dual Space Gradient Descent (DualSGD), a novel framework that utilizes
random features as an auxiliary space to maintain information from data points
removed during budget maintenance. Consequently, our approach permits the
budget to be maintained in a simple, direct and elegant way while simultaneously
mitigating the impact of the dimensionality issue on learning performance. We
further provide convergence analysis and extensively conduct experiments on five
real-world datasets to demonstrate the predictive performance and scalability of
our proposed method in comparison with the state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Online learning represents a family of effective and scalable learning algorithms for incrementally
building a predictive model from a sequence of data samples [1]. Unlike the conventional learning
algorithms, which usually require a costly procedure to retrain the entire dataset when a new instance
arrives [2], the goal of online learning is to utilize new incoming instances to improve the model
given knowledge of the correct answers to previously processed data. The seminal line of work in
online learning, referred to as linear online learning [3, 4], aims to learn a linear predictor in the
input space. The key limitation of this approach lies in its oversimplified assumption in using a linear
hyperplane to represent data that could possibly possess nonlinear dependency as commonly seen
in many real-world applications. This inspires the work of kernel online learning [5, 6] that uses a
linear model in the feature space to capture the nonlinearity of input data.
However, the kernel online learning approach suffers from the so-called curse of kernelization [7],
that is, the model size linearly grows with the data size accumulated over time. A notable approach
to address this issue is to use a budget [8, 9, 7, 10, 11]. The work in [7] leveraged the budgeted
approach with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [12, 13] wherein the learning procedure employed
SGD and a budget maintenance procedure (e.g., removal, projection, or merging) was employed to
maintain the model size. Although the projection and merging were shown to be effective [7], their
associated computational costs render them impractical for large-scale datasets. An alternative way
to address the curse of kernelization is to use random features [14] to approximate a kernel function
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain
Acknowledgment: This work is partially supported by the Australian Research Council under the Discovery
Project DP160109394.

