Fast learning rates with heavy-tailed losses

1

Vu Dinh1 Lam Si Tung Ho2 Duy Nguyen3 Binh T. Nguyen4
Program in Computational Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
2
Department of Biostatistics, University of California, Los Angeles
3
Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Science, Vietnam

Abstract
We study fast learning rates when the losses are not necessarily bounded and may
have a distribution with heavy tails. To enable such analyses, we introduce two
new conditions: (i) the envelope function supf ∈F |` ◦ f |, where ` is the loss function and F is the hypothesis class, exists and is Lr -integrable, and (ii) ` satisfies
the multi-scale Bernstein’s condition on F. Under these assumptions, we prove
that learning rate faster than O(n−1/2 ) can be obtained and, depending on r and
the multi-scale Bernstein’s powers, can be arbitrarily close to O(n−1 ). We then
verify these assumptions and derive fast learning rates for the problem of vector
quantization by k-means clustering with heavy-tailed distributions. The analyses enable us to obtain novel learning rates that extend and complement existing
results in the literature from both theoretical and practical viewpoints.

1

Introduction

The rate with which a learning algorithm converges as more data comes in play a central role in
machine learning. Recent progress has refined our theoretical understanding about setting under
which fast learning rates are possible, leading to the development of robust algorithms that can
automatically adapt to data with hidden structures and achieve faster rates whenever possible. The
literature, however, has mainly focused on bounded losses and little has been known about rates of
learning in the unbounded cases, especially in cases when the distribution of the loss has heavy tails
[van Erven et al., 2015].
Most of previous work about learning rate for unbounded losses are done in the context of density
estimation [van Erven et al., 2015, Zhang, 2006a,b], of which the proofs of fast rates implicitly
employ the central condition [Grünwald, 2012] and cannot be extended to address losses with polynomial tails [van Erven et al., 2015]. Efforts to resolve this issue include Brownlees et al. [2015],
which proposes using some robust mean estimators to replace empirical means, and Cortes et al.
[2013], which derives relative deviation and generalization bounds for unbounded losses with the
assumption that Lr -diameter of the hypothesis class is bounded. However, results about fast learning
rates were not obtained in both approaches. Fast learning rates are derived in Lecué and Mendelson [2013] for sub-Gaussian losses and in Lecué and Mendelson [2012] for hypothesis classes that
have sub-exponential envelope functions. To the best of our knowledge, no previous work about fast
learning rates for heavy-tailed losses has been done in the literature.
The goal of this research is to study fast learning rates for the empirical risk minimizer when the
losses are not necessarily bounded and may have a distribution with heavy tails. We recall that
heavy-tailed distributions are probability distributions whose tails are not exponentially bounded:
that is, they have heavier tails than the exponential distribution. To enable the analyses of fast
rates with heavy-tailed losses, two new assumptions are introduced. First, we assume the existence
and the Lr -integrability of the envelope function F = supf ∈F |f | of the hypothesis class F for
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

