Spatio–Temporal Hilbert Maps for Continuous
Occupancy Representation in Dynamic Environments

Ransalu Senanayake
University of Sydney
rsen4557@uni.sydney.edu.au
Simon O’Callaghan
Data61/CSIRO, Australia
simon.ocallaghan@data61.csiro.au

Lionel Ott
University of Sydney
lionel.ott@sydney.edu.au
Fabio Ramos
University of Sydney
fabio.ramos@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We consider the problem of building continuous occupancy representations in
dynamic environments for robotics applications. The problem has hardly been
discussed previously due to the complexity of patterns in urban environments,
which have both spatial and temporal dependencies. We address the problem
as learning a kernel classifier on an efficient feature space. The key novelty of
our approach is the incorporation of variations in the time domain into the spatial
domain. We propose a method to propagate motion uncertainty into the kernel using
a hierarchical model. The main benefit of this approach is that it can directly predict
the occupancy state of the map in the future from past observations, being a valuable
tool for robot trajectory planning under uncertainty. Our approach preserves the
main computational benefits of static Hilbert maps — using stochastic gradient
descent for fast optimization of model parameters and incremental updates as
new data are captured. Experiments conducted in road intersections of an urban
environment demonstrated that spatio-temporal Hilbert maps can accurately model
changes in the map while outperforming other techniques on various aspects.

1

Introduction

We are in the climax of driverless vehicles research where the perception and learning are no longer
trivial problems due to the transition from controlled test environments to real world complex
interactions with other road users. Online mapping environments is vital for action planing. In such
applications, the state of the observed world with respect to the vehicle changes over time, making
modeling and predicting into the future challenging. Despite this, there is a plethora of mapping
techniques for static environments but only very few instances of truly dynamic mapping methods.
Most existing techniques merely consider a static representation, and as parallel processes, initialize
target trackers for the dynamic objects in the scene, updating the map with new information. This
approach can be effective from a computational point of view, but it disregards crucial relationships
between time and space. By treating the dynamics as a separate problem from the space representation,
such methods cannot perform higher level inference tasks such as what are the most likely regions of
the environment to be occupied in the future, or when and where a dynamic object is most likely to
appear.
In occupancy grid maps (GM) [1], the space is divided into a fixed number of non-overlapping
cells and the likelihood of occupancy for each individual cell is estimated independently based on
sensor measurements. Considering the main drawbacks of the GM, discretization of the world and
disregarding spatial relationship among cells, Gaussian process occupancy map (GPOM) [2] enabled
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

