SPALS: Fast Alternating Least Squares via Implicit
Leverage Scores Sampling
Dehua Cheng
University of Southern California
dehua.cheng@usc.edu

Richard Peng
Georgia Institute of Technology
rpeng@cc.gatech.edu

Ioakeim Perros
Georgia Institute of Technology
perros@gatech.edu

Yan Liu
University of Southern California
yanliu.cs@usc.edu

Abstract
Tensor CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition is a powerful but computationally challenging tool in modern data analytics. In this paper, we show ways of
sampling intermediate steps of alternating minimization algorithms for computing
low rank tensor CP decompositions, leading to the sparse alternating least squares
(SPALS) method. Specifically, we sample the Khatri-Rao product, which arises
as an intermediate object during the iterations of alternating least squares. This
product captures the interactions between different tensor modes, and form the
main computational bottleneck for solving many tensor related tasks. By exploiting
the spectral structures of the matrix Khatri-Rao product, we provide efficient access
to its statistical leverage scores. When applied to the tensor CP decomposition,
our method leads to the first algorithm that runs in sublinear time per-iteration
and approximates the output of deterministic alternating least squares algorithms.
Empirical evaluations of this approach show significant speedups over existing
randomized and deterministic routines for performing CP decomposition. On a
tensor of the size 2.4m ⇥ 6.6m ⇥ 92k with over 2 billion nonzeros formed by
Amazon product reviews, our routine converges in two minutes to the same error
as deterministic ALS.

1

Introduction

Tensors, a.k.a. multidimensional arrays, appear frequently in many applications, including spatialtemporal data modeling [40], signal processing [12, 14], deep learning [29] and more. Low-rank
tensor decomposition [21] is a fundamental tool for understanding and extracting the information
from tensor data, which has been actively studied in recent years. Developing scalable and provable
algorithms for most tensor processing tasks is challenging due to the non-convexity of the objective [18, 21, 16, 1]. Especially in the era of big data, scalable low-rank tensor decomposition algorithm
(that runs in nearly linear or even sublinear time in the input data size) has become an absolute must
to command the full power of tensor analytics. For instance, the Amazon review data [24] yield a
2, 440, 972 ⇥ 6, 643, 571 ⇥ 92, 626 tensor with 2 billion nonzero entries after preprocessing. Such
data sets pose challenges of scalability to some of the simplest tensor decomposition tasks.
There are multiple well-defined tensor ranks[21]. In this paper, we focus on the tensor CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition [17, 3], where the low-rank tensor is modeled by the
summation over many rank-1 tensors. Due to its simplicity and interpretability, tensor CP decomposition, which is to find the best rank-R approximation for the input tensor often by minimizing the
square loss function, has been widely adopted in many applications [21].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

