Improving PAC Exploration
Using the Median of Means
Jason Pazis
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jpazis@mit.edu

Ronald Parr
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
parr@cs.duke.edu

Jonathan P. How
Aerospace Controls Laboratory
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jhow@mit.edu

Abstract
We present the first application of the median of means in a PAC exploration
algorithm for MDPs. Using the median of means allows us to significantly reduce
the dependence of our bounds on the range of values that the value function can
take, while introducing a dependence on the (potentially much smaller) variance of
the Bellman operator. Additionally, our algorithm is the first algorithm with PAC
bounds that can be applied to MDPs with unbounded rewards.

1

Introduction

As the reinforcement learning community has shifted its focus from heuristic methods to methods
that have performance guarantees, PAC exploration algorithms have received significant attention.
Thus far, even the best published PAC exploration bounds are too pessimistic to be useful in practical applications. Even worse, lower bound results [14, 7] indicate that there is little room for
improvement.
While these lower bounds prove that there exist pathological examples for which PAC exploration
can be prohibitively expensive, they leave the door open for the existence of “well-behaved” classes
of problems in which exploration can be performed at a significantly lower cost. The challenge of
course is to identify classes of problems that are general enough to include problems of real-world
interest, while at the same time restricted enough to have a meaningfully lower cost of exploration
than pathological instances.
The approach presented in this paper exploits the fact that while the square of the maximum value
that the value function can take (Q2max ) is typically quite large, the variance of the Bellman operator
is rather small in many domains of practical interest. For example, this is true in many control tasks:
It is not very often that an action takes the system to the best possible state with 50% probability and
to the worst possible state with 50% probability.
Most PAC exploration algorithms take an average over samples. By contrast, the algorithm presented
in this paper splits samples into sets, takes the average over each set, and returns the median of the
averages. This seemingly simple trick (known as the median trick [1]), allows us to derive sample
complexity bounds that depend on the variance of the Bellman operator rather than Q2max . Addi30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

