Privacy Odometers and Filters: Pay-as-you-Go
Composition

Ryan Rogers∗

Aaron Roth†

Jonathan Ullman‡

Salil Vadhan§

Abstract
In this paper we initiate the study of adaptive composition in differential privacy
when the length of the composition, and the privacy parameters themselves can
be chosen adaptively, as a function of the outcome of previously run analyses.
This case is much more delicate than the setting covered by existing composition
theorems, in which the algorithms themselves can be chosen adaptively, but the
privacy parameters must be fixed up front. Indeed, it isn’t even clear how to define
differential privacy in the adaptive parameter setting. We proceed by defining two
objects which cover the two main use cases of composition theorems. A privacy
filter is a stopping time rule that allows an analyst to halt a computation before his
pre-specified privacy budget is exceeded. A privacy odometer allows the analyst
to track realized privacy loss as he goes, without needing to pre-specify a privacy
budget. We show that unlike the case in which privacy parameters are fixed, in the
adaptive parameter setting, these two use cases are distinct. We show that there
exist privacy filters with bounds comparable (up to constants) with existing privacy composition theorems. We also give a privacy odometer that nearly matches
non-adaptive private composition theorems, but is sometimes worse by a small
asymptotic factor. Moreover, we show that this is inherent, and that any valid
privacy odometer in the adaptive parameter setting must lose this factor, which
shows a formal separation between the filter and odometer use-cases.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [DMNS06] is a stability condition on a randomized algorithm, designed to guarantee individual-level privacy during data analysis. Informally, an algorithm is differentially private
if any pair of close inputs map to similar probability distributions over outputs, where similarity is
measured by two parameters ε and δ. Informally, ε measures the amount of privacy and δ measures
the failure probability that the privacy loss is much worse than ε. A signature property of differential
privacy is that it is preserved under composition—combining many differentially private subroutines
into a single algorithm preserves differential privacy and the privacy parameters degrade gracefully.
Composability is essential for both privacy and for algorithm design. Since differential privacy is
composable, we can design a sophisticated algorithm and prove it is private without having to rea∗
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, University of Pennsylvania.
ryrogers@sas.upenn.edu.
†
Department of Computer and Information Sciences,
University of Pennsylvania.
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu. Supported in part by an NSF CAREER award, NSF grant CNS-1513694,
and a grant from the Sloan Foundation.
‡
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University. jullman@ccs.neu.edu
§
Center for Research on Computation & Society and John A. Paulson School of Engineering & Applied Sciences, Harvard University. salil@seas.harvard.edu. Work done while visiting the Department of Applied
Mathematics and the Shing-Tung Yau Center at National Chiao-Tung University in Taiwan. Also supported by
NSF grant CNS-1237235, a grant from the Sloan Foundation, and a Simons Investigator Award.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

