Swapout: Learning an ensemble of deep architectures

Saurabh Singh, Derek Hoiem, David Forsyth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
{ss1, dhoiem, daf}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We describe Swapout, a new stochastic training method, that outperforms ResNets
of identical network structure yielding impressive results on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR100. Swapout samples from a rich set of architectures including dropout [20],
stochastic depth [7] and residual architectures [5, 6] as special cases. When viewed
as a regularization method swapout not only inhibits co-adaptation of units in
a layer, similar to dropout, but also across network layers. We conjecture that
swapout achieves strong regularization by implicitly tying the parameters across
layers. When viewed as an ensemble training method, it samples a much richer
set of architectures than existing methods such as dropout or stochastic depth.
We propose a parameterization that reveals connections to exiting architectures
and suggests a much richer set of architectures to be explored. We show that our
formulation suggests an efficient training method and validate our conclusions on
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 matching state of the art accuracy. Remarkably, our 32
layer wider model performs similar to a 1001 layer ResNet model.

1

Introduction

This paper describes swapout, a stochastic training method for general deep networks. Swapout
is a generalization of dropout [20] and stochastic depth [7] methods. Dropout zeros the output of
individual units at random during training, while stochastic depth skips entire layers at random during
training. In comparison, the most general swapout network produces the value of each output unit
independently by reporting the sum of a randomly selected subset of current and all previous layer
outputs for that unit. As a result, while some units in a layer may act like normal feedforward units,
others may produce skip connections and yet others may produce a sum of several earlier outputs. In
effect, our method averages over a very large set of architectures that includes all architectures used
by dropout and all used by stochastic depth.
Our experimental work focuses on a version of swapout which is a natural generalization of the
residual network [5, 6]. We show that this results in improvements in accuracy over residual networks
with the same number of layers.
Improvements in accuracy are often sought by increasing the depth, leading to serious practical
difficulties. The number of parameters rises sharply, although recent works such as [19, 22] have
addressed this by reducing the filter size [19, 22]. Another issue resulting from increased depth is
the difficulty of training longer chains of dependent variables. Such difficulties have been addressed
by architectural innovations that introduce shorter paths from input to loss either directly [22, 21, 5]
or with additional losses applied to intermediate layers [22, 12]. At the time of writing, the deepest
networks that have been successfully trained are residual networks (1001 layers [6]). We show that
increasing the depth of our swapout networks increases their accuracy.
There is compelling experimental evidence that these very large depths are helpful, though this may
be because architectural innovations introduced to make networks trainable reduce the capacity of
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

