Long-term causal effects via behavioral game theory

Panagiotis (Panos) Toulis
Econometrics & Statistics, Booth School
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
panos.toulis@chicagobooth.edu

David C. Parkes
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, 02138
parkes@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Planned experiments are the gold standard in reliably comparing the causal effect
of switching from a baseline policy to a new policy. One critical shortcoming of
classical experimental methods, however, is that they typically do not take into
account the dynamic nature of response to policy changes. For instance, in an
experiment where we seek to understand the effects of a new ad pricing policy on
auction revenue, agents may adapt their bidding in response to the experimental
pricing changes. Thus, causal effects of the new pricing policy after such adaptation period, the long-term causal effects, are not captured by the classical methodology even though they clearly are more indicative of the value of the new policy.
Here, we formalize a framework to define and estimate long-term causal effects
of policy changes in multiagent economies. Central to our approach is behavioral
game theory, which we leverage to formulate the ignorability assumptions that are
necessary for causal inference. Under such assumptions we estimate long-term
causal effects through a latent space approach, where a behavioral model of how
agents act conditional on their latent behaviors is combined with a temporal model
of how behaviors evolve over time.

1

Introduction

A multiagent economy is comprised of agents interacting under specific economic rules. A common
problem of interest is to experimentally evaluate changes to such rules, also known as treatments, on
an objective of interest. For example, an online ad auction platform is a multiagent economy, where
one problem is to estimate the effect of raising the reserve price on the platform’s revenue. Assessing
causality of such effects is a challenging problem because there is a conceptual discrepancy between
what needs to be estimated and what is available in the data, as illustrated in Figure 1.
What needs to be estimated is the causal effect of a policy change, which is defined as the difference
between the objective value when the economy is treated, i.e., when all agents interact under the
new rules, relative to when the same economy is in control, i.e., when all agents interact under the
baseline rules. Such definition of causal effects is logically necessitated from the designer’s task,
which is to select either the treatment or the control policy based on their estimated revenues, and
then apply such policy to all agents in the economy. The long-term causal effect is the causal effect
defined after the system has stabilized, and is more representative of the value of policy changes
in dynamical systems. Thus, in Figure 1 the long-term causal effect is the difference between the
objective values at the top and bottom endpoints, marked as the “targets of inference”.
What is available in the experimental data, however, typically comes from designs such as the socalled A/B test, where we randomly assign some agents to the treated economy (new rules B) and
the others to the control economy (baseline rules A), and then compare the outcomes. In Figure 1
the experimental data are depicted as the solid time-series in the middle of the plot, marked as the
“observed data”.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

