Hierarchical Object Representation for Open-Ended
Object Category Learning and Recognition

S.Hamidreza Kasaei, Ana Maria Tomé, Luís Seabra Lopes
IEETA - Instituto de Engenharia Electrónica e Telemática de Aveiro
University of Aveiro, Averio, 3810-193, Portugal
{seyed.hamidreza, ana, lsl}@ua.pt

Abstract
Most robots lack the ability to learn new objects from past experiences. To migrate
a robot to a new environment one must often completely re-generate the knowledgebase that it is running with. Since in open-ended domains the set of categories to
be learned is not predefined, it is not feasible to assume that one can pre-program
all object categories required by robots. Therefore, autonomous robots must have
the ability to continuously execute learning and recognition in a concurrent and
interleaved fashion. This paper proposes an open-ended 3D object recognition
system which concurrently learns both the object categories and the statistical
features for encoding objects. In particular, we propose an extension of Latent
Dirichlet Allocation to learn structural semantic features (i.e. topics) from low-level
feature co-occurrences for each category independently. Moreover, topics in each
category are discovered in an unsupervised fashion and are updated incrementally
using new object views. The approach contains similarities with the organization of
the visual cortex and builds a hierarchy of increasingly sophisticated representations.
Results show the fulfilling performance of this approach on different types of
objects. Moreover, this system demonstrates the capability of learning from few
training examples and competes with state-of-the-art systems.

1

Introduction

Open-ended learning theory in cognitive psychology has been a topic of considerable interest for many
researchers. The general principle is that humans learn to recognize object categories ceaselessly
over time. This ability allows them to adapt to new environments, by enhancing their knowledge
from the accumulation of experiences and the conceptualization of new object categories [1]. In
humans there is evidence of hierarchical models for object recognition in cortex [2]. Moreover,
in humans object recognition skills and the underlying capabilities are developed concurrently [2].
In hierarchical recognition theories, the human sequentially processes information about the target
object leading to the recognition result. This begins with lower level cortical processors such as the
elementary visual cortex and go “up” to the inferotemporal cortex (IT) where recognition occurs.
Taking this as inspiration, an autonomous robot will process visual information continuously, and
perform learning and recognition concurrently. In other words, apart from learning from a batch of
labelled training data, the robot should continuously update and learn new object categories while
working in the environment in an open-ended manner. In this paper, “open-ended” implies that the set
of object categories to be learned is not known in advance. The training instances are extracted from
on-line experiences of a robot, and thus become gradually available over time, rather than completely
available at the beginning of the learning process.
Classical object recognition systems are often designed for static environments i.e. training (offline) and testing (online) are two separated phases. If limited training data is used, this might
lead to non-discriminative object representations and, as a consequence, to poor object recog30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

