Combinatorial semi-bandit with known covariance
Rémy Degenne
LMPA, Université Paris Diderot
CMLA, ENS Paris-Saclay
degenne@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Vianney Perchet
CMLA, ENS Paris-Saclay
CRITEO Research, Paris
perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
The combinatorial stochastic semi-bandit problem is an extension of the classical
multi-armed bandit problem in which an algorithm pulls more than one arm at
each stage and the rewards of all pulled arms are revealed. One difference with the
single arm variant is that the dependency structure of the arms is crucial. Previous
works on this setting either used a worst-case approach or imposed independence
of the arms. We introduce a way to quantify the dependency structure of the
problem and design an algorithm that adapts to it. The algorithm is based on linear
regression and the analysis develops techniques from the linear bandit literature.
By comparing its performance to a new lower bound, we prove that it is optimal,
up to a poly-logarithmic factor in the number of pulled arms.

1

Introduction and setting

The multi-armed bandit problem (MAB) is a sequential learning task in which an algorithm takes at
each stage a decision (or, “pulls an arm”). It then gets a reward from this choice, with the goal of
maximizing the cumulative reward [Robbins, 1985]. We consider here its stochastic combinatorial
extension, in which the algorithm chooses at each stage a subset of arms [Audibert et al., 2013,
Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2012, Chen et al., 2013, Gai et al., 2012]. These arms could form, for
example, the path from an origin to a destination in a network. In the combinatorial setting, contrary
to the the classical MAB, the inter-dependencies between the arms can play a role (we consider that
the distribution of rewards is invariant with time). We investigate here how the covariance structure
of the arms affects the difficulty of the learning task and whether it is possible to design a unique
algorithm capable of performing optimally in all cases from the simple scenario with independent
rewards to the more challenging scenario of general correlated rewards.
Formally, at each stage t ∈ N, t ≥ 1, an algorithm pulls m ≥ 1 arms among d ≥ m. Such a set of m
arms is called an “action” and will be denoted by At ∈ {0, 1}d , a vector with exactly m non-zero
entries. The possible actions are restricted to an arbitrary fixed subset A ⊂ {0, 1}d . After choosing
d
action At , the algorithm receives the reward A>
t Xt , where Xt ∈ R is the vector encapsulating the
reward of the d arms at stage t. The successive reward vectors (Xt )t≥1 are i.i.d with unknown mean
µ ∈ Rd . We consider a semi-bandit feedback system: after choosing the action At , the algorithm
observes the reward of each of the arms in that action, but not the other rewards. Other possible
feedbacks previously studied include bandit (only A>
t Xt is revealed) and full information (Xt is
revealed). The goal of the algorithm is to maximize the cumulated reward up to stage T ≥ 1 or
equivalently to minimize the expected regret, which is the difference of the reward that would have
been gained by choosing the best action in hindsight A∗ and what was actually gained:
ERT = E

T
X
(A∗> µ − A>
t µ) .
t=1

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

