Exploiting the Structure:
Stochastic Gradient Methods Using Raw Clusters∗

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu†
Princeton University / IAS
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Yang Yuan†
Cornell University
yangyuan@cs.cornell.edu

Karthik Sridharan
Cornell University
sridharan@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
The amount of data available in the world is growing faster than our ability to deal
with it. However, if we take advantage of the internal structure, data may become
much smaller for machine learning purposes. In this paper we focus on one of
the fundamental machine learning tasks, empirical risk minimization (ERM), and
provide faster algorithms with the help from the clustering structure of the data.
We introduce a simple notion of raw clustering that can be efficiently computed
from the data, and propose two algorithms based on clustering information. Our
accelerated algorithm ClusterACDM is built on a novel Haar transformation applied
to the dual space of the ERM problem, and our variance-reduction based algorithm
ClusterSVRG introduces a new gradient estimator using clustering. Our algorithms
outperform their classical counterparts ACDM and SVRG respectively.

1

Introduction

For large-scale machine learning applications, n, the number of training data examples, is usually
very large. To search for the optimal solution, it is often desirable to use stochastic gradient methods
which only require one (or a batch of) random example(s) from the given training set per iteration in
order to form an estimator of the true gradient.
For empirical risk minimization problems (ERM) in particular, stochastic gradient methods have
received a lot of attention in the past decade. The original stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [4, 26]
simply defines the estimator using one random data example and converges slowly. Recently, variancereduction methods were introduced to improve the running time of SGD [6, 7, 13, 18, 20–22, 24],
and accelerated gradient methods were introduced to further improve the running time when the
regularization parameter is small [9, 16, 17, 23, 27].
None of the above cited results, however, have considered the internal structure of the dataset, that is,
using the stochastic gradient with respect to one data vector p to estimate the stochastic gradients
of other data vectors close to p. To illustrate why internal structure can be helpful, consider the
following extreme case: if all the data vectors are located at the same spot, then every stochastic
gradient represents the full gradient of the entire dataset. In a non-extreme case, if data vectors form
clusters, then the stochastic gradient of one data vector could provide a rough estimation for its
neighbors. Therefore, one should expect ERM problems to be easier if the data vectors are clustered.
More importantly, well-clustered datasets are abundant in big-data scenarios. For instance, although
there are more than 1 billion of users on Facebook, the intrinsic “feature vectors” of these users can be
naturally categorized by the users’ occupations, nationalities, etc. As another example, although there
∗
†

The full version of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02151.
These two authors equally contribute to this paper.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

