Depth from a Single Image by Harmonizing
Overcomplete Local Network Predictions

Ayan Chakrabarti
TTI-Chicago
Chicago, IL
ayanc@ttic.edu

Jingyu Shao
Dept. of Statistics, UCLA∗
Los Angeles, CA
shaojy15@ucla.edu

Gregory Shakhnarovich
TTI-Chicago
Chicago, IL
gregory@ttic.edu

Abstract
A single color image can contain many cues informative towards different aspects of local geometric structure. We approach the problem of monocular depth
estimation by using a neural network to produce a mid-level representation that
summarizes these cues. This network is trained to characterize local scene geometry by predicting, at every image location, depth derivatives of different orders,
orientations and scales. However, instead of a single estimate for each derivative,
the network outputs probability distributions that allow it to express confidence
about some coefficients, and ambiguity about others. Scene depth is then estimated
by harmonizing this overcomplete set of network predictions, using a globalization
procedure that finds a single consistent depth map that best matches all the local
derivative distributions. We demonstrate the efficacy of this approach through
evaluation on the NYU v2 depth data set.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the task of monocular depth estimation—i.e., recovering scene depth from
a single color image. Knowledge of a scene’s three-dimensional (3D) geometry can be useful in
reasoning about its composition, and therefore measurements from depth sensors are often used to
augment image data for inference in many vision, robotics, and graphics tasks. However, the human
visual system can clearly form at least an approximate estimate of depth in the absence of stereo and
parallax cues—e.g., from two-dimensional photographs—and it is desirable to replicate this ability
computationally. Depth information inferred from monocular images can serve as a useful proxy
when explicit depth measurements are unavailable, and be used to refine these measurements where
they are noisy or ambiguous.
The 3D co-ordinates of a surface imaged by a perspective camera are physically ambiguous along a
ray passing through the camera center. However, a natural image often contains multiple cues that can
indicate aspects of the scene’s underlying geometry. For example, the projected scale of a familiar
object of known size indicates how far it is; foreshortening of regular textures provide information
about surface orientation; gradients due to shading indicate both orientation and curvature; strong
edges and corners can correspond to convex or concave depth boundaries; and occluding contours or
the relative position of key landmarks can be used to deduce the coarse geometry of an object or the
whole scene. While a given image may be rich in such geometric cues, it is important to note that
these cues are present in different image regions, and each indicates a different aspect of 3D structure.
We propose a neural network-based approach to monocular depth estimation that explicitly leverages
this intuition. Prior neural methods have largely sought to directly regress to depth [1, 2]—with some
additionally making predictions about smoothness across adjacent regions [4], or predicting relative
∗

Part of this work was done while JS was a visiting student at TTI-Chicago.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

