Global Optimality of Local Search
for Low Rank Matrix Recovery
Srinadh Bhojanapalli
srinadh@ttic.edu

Behnam Neyshabur
bneyshabur@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
nati@ttic.edu
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Abstract
We show that there are no spurious local minima in the non-convex factorized
parametrization of low-rank matrix recovery from incoherent linear measurements.
With noisy measurements we show all local minima are very close to a global
optimum. Together with a curvature bound at saddle points, this yields a polynomial
time global convergence guarantee for stochastic gradient descent from random
initialization.

1

Introduction

Low rank matrix recovery problem is heavily studied and has numerous applications in collaborative
filtering, quantum state tomography, clustering, community detection, metric learning and multi-task
learning [21, 12, 9, 27].
We consider the “matrix sensing” problem of recovering a low-rank (or approximately low rank)
p.s.d. matrix1 X ⇤ 2 Rn⇥n , given a linear measurement operator A : Rn⇥n ! Rm and noisy
measurements y = A(X ⇤ ) + w, where w is an i.i.d. noise vector. An estimator for X ⇤ is given by
the rank-constrained, non-convex problem
minimize

X:rank(X)r

kA(X)

yk2 .

(1)

This matrix sensing problem has received considerable attention recently [30, 29, 26]. This and other
rank-constrained problems are common in machine learning and related fields, and have been used
for applications discussed above. A typical theoretical approach to low-rank problems, including (1)
is to relax the low-rank constraint to a convex constraint, such as the trace-norm of X. Indeed, for
matrix sensing, Recht et al. [20] showed that if the measurements are noiseless and the measurement
operator A satisfies a restricted isometry property, then a low-rank X ⇤ can be recovered as the unique
solution to a convex relaxation of (1). Subsequent work established similar guarantees also for the
noisy and approximate case [14, 6].
However, convex relaxations to the rank are not the common approach employed in practice. In this
and other low-rank problems, the method of choice is typically unconstrained local optimization (via
e.g. gradient descent, SGD or alternating minimization) on the factorized parametrization
minimize f (U ) = kA(U U > )
U 2Rn⇥r

yk2 ,

(2)

1
We study the case where X ⇤ is PSD. We believe the techniques developed here can be used to extend
results to the general case.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

