Local Similarity-Aware Deep Feature Embedding

Chen Huang
Chen Change Loy
Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{chuang,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing deep embedding methods in vision tasks are capable of learning a compact
Euclidean space from images, where Euclidean distances correspond to a similarity
metric. To make learning more effective and efficient, hard sample mining is
usually employed, with samples identified through computing the Euclidean feature
distance. However, the global Euclidean distance cannot faithfully characterize
the true feature similarity in a complex visual feature space, where the intraclass
distance in a high-density region may be larger than the interclass distance in
low-density regions. In this paper, we introduce a Position-Dependent Deep Metric
(PDDM) unit, which is capable of learning a similarity metric adaptive to local
feature structure. The metric can be used to select genuinely hard samples in a
local neighborhood to guide the deep embedding learning in an online and robust
manner. The new layer is appealing in that it is pluggable to any convolutional
networks and is trained end-to-end. Our local similarity-aware feature embedding
not only demonstrates faster convergence and boosted performance on two complex
image retrieval datasets, its large margin nature also leads to superior generalization
results under the large and open set scenarios of transfer learning and zero-shot
learning on ImageNet 2010 and ImageNet-10K datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep embedding methods aim at learning a compact feature embedding f (x) ∈ Rd from image x
using a deep convolutional neural network (CNN). They have been increasingly adopted in a variety of
vision tasks such as product visual search [1, 14, 29, 33] and face verification [13, 27]. The embedding
objective is usually in a Euclidean sense: the Euclidean distance Di,j = kf (xi ) − f (xj )k2 between
two feature vectors should preserve their semantic relationship encoded pairwise (by contrastive
loss [1]), in triplets [27, 33] or even higher order relationships (e.g., by lifted structured loss [29]).
It is widely observed that an effective data sampling strategy is crucial to ensure the quality and
learning efficiency of deep embedding, as there are often many more easy examples than those
meaningful hard examples. Selecting overly easy samples can in practice lead to slow convergence
and poor performance since many of them satisfy the constraint well and give nearly zero loss,
without exerting any effect on parameter update during the back-propagation [3]. Hence hard
example mining [7] becomes an indispensable step in state-of-the-art deep embedding methods.
These methods usually choose hard samples by computing the convenient Euclidean distance in the
embedding space. For instance, in [27, 29], hard negatives with small Euclidean distances are found
online in a mini-batch. An exception is [33] where an online reservoir importance sampling scheme
is proposed to sample discriminative triplets by relevance scores. Nevertheless, these scores are
computed offline with different hand-crafted features and distance metrics, which is suboptimal.
We question the effectiveness of using a single and global Euclidean distance metric for finding hard
samples, especially for real-world vision tasks that exhibit complex feature variations due to pose,
lighting, and appearance. As shown in a fine-grained bird image retrieval example in Figure 1(a),
the diversity of feature patterns learned for each class throughout the feature space can easily lead
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

