Bayesian Optimization with
Robust Bayesian Neural Networks

Jost Tobias Springenberg Aaron Klein Stefan Falkner Frank Hutter
Department of Computer Science
University of Freiburg
{springj,kleinaa,sfalkner,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a prominent method for optimizing expensive-to-evaluate
black-box functions that is widely applied to tuning the hyperparameters of machine
learning algorithms. Despite its successes, the prototypical Bayesian optimization
approach – using Gaussian process models – does not scale well to either many
hyperparameters or many function evaluations. Attacking this lack of scalability
and flexibility is thus one of the key challenges of the field. We present a general
approach for using flexible parametric models (neural networks) for Bayesian
optimization, staying as close to a truly Bayesian treatment as possible. We obtain
scalability through stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, whose robustness
we improve via a scale adaptation. Experiments including multi-task Bayesian
optimization with 21 tasks, parallel optimization of deep neural networks and deep
reinforcement learning show the power and flexibility of this approach.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter optimization is crucial for obtaining good performance in many machine learning
algorithms, such as support vector machines, deep neural networks, and deep reinforcement learning.
The most prominent method for hyperparameter optimization is Bayesian optimization (BO) based
on Gaussian processes (GPs), as e.g., implemented in the Spearmint system [1].
While GPs are the natural probabilistic models for BO, unfortunately, their complexity is cubic in
the number of data points and they often do not gracefully scale to high dimensions [2]. Although
alternative methods based on tree models [3, 4] or Bayesian linear regression using features from
a neural network [5] exist, they obtain scalability by partially sacrificing a principled treatment of
model uncertainties.
Here, we propose to use neural networks as a powerful and scalable parametric model, while
staying as close to a truly Bayesian treatment as possible. Crucially, we aim to keep the wellcalibrated uncertainty estimates of GPs since BO relies on them to accurately determine promising
hyperparameters. To this end we derive a more robust variant of the recent stochastic gradient
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) method [6].
After providing background (Section 2), we make the following contributions: We derive a general
formulation for both single-task and multi-task BO with Bayesian neural networks that leads to
a robust, scalable, and parallel optimizer (Section 3). We derive a scale adaptation technique to
substantially improve the robustness of stochastic gradient HMC (Section 4). Finally, using our
method – which we dub Bayesian Optimization with Hamiltonian Monte Carlo Artificial Neural
Networks (BOHAMIANN) – we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance for a wide range of
optimization tasks. This includes multi-task BO, parallel optimization of deep residual networks, and
deep reinforcement learning. An implementation of our method can be found at https://github.
com/automl/RoBO.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

