Learning from Small Sample Sets by Combining
Unsupervised Meta-Training with CNNs

Yu-Xiong Wang
Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This work explores CNNs for the recognition of novel categories from few examples. Inspired by the transferability properties of CNNs, we introduce an additional
unsupervised meta-training stage that exposes multiple top layer units to a large
amount of unlabeled real-world images. By encouraging these units to learn diverse
sets of low-density separators across the unlabeled data, we capture a more generic,
richer description of the visual world, which decouples these units from ties to a
specific set of categories. We propose an unsupervised margin maximization that
jointly estimates compact high-density regions and infers low-density separators.
The low-density separator (LDS) modules can be plugged into any or all of the
top layers of a standard CNN architecture. The resulting CNNs significantly improve the performance in scene classification, fine-grained recognition, and action
recognition with small training samples.

1

Motivation

To successfully learn a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) model, hundreds of millions of
parameters need to be inferred from millions of labeled examples on thousands of image categories [1,
2, 3]. In practice, however, for novel categories/tasks of interest, collecting a large corpus of annotated
data to train CNNs from scratch is typically unrealistic, such as in robotics applications [4] and for
customized categories [5]. Fortunately, although trained on particular categories, CNNs exhibit certain
attractive transferability properties [6, 7]. This suggests that they could serve as universal feature
extractors for novel categories, either as off-the-shelf features or through fine-tuning [7, 8, 9, 10].
Such transferability is promising but still restrictive, especially for novel-category recognition from
few examples [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. The overall generality of CNNs is negatively affected
by the specialization of top layer units to their original task. Recent analysis shows that from bottom,
middle, to top layers of the network, features make a transition from general to specific [6, 8]. While
features in the bottom and middle layers are fairly generic to many categories (i.e., low-level features
of Gabor filters or color blobs and mid-level features of object parts), high-level features in the top
layers eventually become specific and biased to best discriminate between a particular set of chosen
categories. With limited samples from target tasks, fine-tuning cannot effectively adjust the units and
would result in over-fitting, since it typically requires a significant amount of labeled data. Using
off-the-shelf CNNs becomes the best strategy, despite the specialization and reduced performance.
In this work we investigate how to improve pre-trained CNNs for the learning from few examples.
Our key insight is to expose multiple top layer units to a massive set of unlabeled images, as shown
in Figure 1, which decouples these units from ties to the original specific set of categories. This
additional stage is called unsupervised meta-training to distinguish this phase from the conventional
unsupervised pre-training phase [19] and the training phase on the target tasks. Based on the above
transferability analysis, intuitively, bottom and middle layers construct a feature space with highdensity regions corresponding to potential latent categories. Top layer units in the pre-trained CNN,
however, only have access to those regions associated with the original, observed categories. The
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

