Threshold Bandit, With and Without Censored
Feedback
Jacob Abernethy
Department of Computer Science
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
jabernet@umich.edu

Kareem Amin
Department of Computer Science
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
amkareem@umich.edu

Ruihao Zhu
AeroAstro&CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
rzhu@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the Threshold Bandit setting, a variant of the classical multi-armed
bandit problem in which the reward on each round depends on a piece of side
information known as a threshold value. The learner selects one of K actions
(arms), this action generates a random sample from a fixed distribution, and the
action then receives a unit payoff in the event that this sample exceeds the threshold
value. We consider two versions of this problem, the uncensored and censored case,
that determine whether the sample is always observed or only when the threshold is
not met. Using new tools to understand the popular UCB algorithm, we show that
the uncensored case is essentially no more difficult than the classical multi-armed
bandit setting. Finally we show that the censored case exhibits more challenges, but
we give guarantees in the event that the sequence of threshold values is generated
optimistically.

1

Introduction

The classical Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem provides a framework to reason about sequential
decision settings, but specifically where the learner’s chosen decision is intimately tied to information
content received as feedback. MAB problems have generated much interest in the Machine Learning
research literature in recent years, particularly as a result of the changing nature in which learning
and estimation algorithms are employed in practice. More and more we encounter scenarios in which
the procedure used to make and exploit algorithmic predictions is exactly the same procedure used to
capture new data to improve prediction performance. In other words it is increasingly harder to view
training and testing as distinct entities.
MAB problems generally involve repeatedly making a choice between one of a finite (or even infinite)
set of actions, and these actions have historically been referred to as arms of the bandit. If we “pull”
arm i at round t, then we receive a reward Rti 2 [0, 1] which is frequently assumed to be a stochastic
quantity that is drawn according to distribution Di . Typically we assume that Di are heterogeneous
across the arms i, whereas we assume the samples {Rti }t=1,...,T are independently and identically
distributed according to the fixed Di across all times t.1 Of course, were the learner to have full
knowledge of the distributions Di from the outset, she would presumably choose to pull the arm
whose expected reward µi is highest. With that in mind, we tend to consider the (expected) regret of
the learner, defined to be the (expected) reward of the best arm minus the (expected) reward of the
actual arms selected by the learner.
Early work on MAB problems (Robbins, 1952; Lai and Robbins, 1985; Gittins et al., 2011) tended to
be more focused on asymptotic guarantees, whereas more recent work (Auer et al., 2002; Auer, 2003)
1 Note that in much of our notation we use superscript t to denote the time period rather than as an exponent.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

