A Probabilistic Programming Approach To
Probabilistic Data Analysis

Feras Saad
MIT Probabilistic Computing Project
fsaad@mit.edu

Vikash Mansinghka
MIT Probabilistic Computing Project
vkm@mit.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic techniques are central to data analysis, but different approaches can
be challenging to apply, combine, and compare. This paper introduces composable
generative population models (CGPMs), a computational abstraction that extends
directed graphical models and can be used to describe and compose a broad class
of probabilistic data analysis techniques. Examples include discriminative machine
learning, hierarchical Bayesian models, multivariate kernel methods, clustering
algorithms, and arbitrary probabilistic programs. We demonstrate the integration
of CGPMs into BayesDB, a probabilistic programming platform that can express
data analysis tasks using a modeling definition language and structured query
language. The practical value is illustrated in two ways. First, the paper describes
an analysis on a database of Earth satellites, which identifies records that probably
violate Kepler’s Third Law by composing causal probabilistic programs with nonparametric Bayes in 50 lines of probabilistic code. Second, it reports the lines of
code and accuracy of CGPMs compared with baseline solutions from standard
machine learning libraries.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic techniques are central to data analysis, but can be difficult to apply, combine, and
compare. Such difficulties arise because families of approaches such as parametric statistical modeling,
machine learning and probabilistic programming are each associated with different formalisms and
assumptions. The contributions of this paper are (i) a way to address these challenges by defining
CGPMs, a new family of composable probabilistic models; (ii) an integration of this family into
BayesDB [10], a probabilistic programming platform for data analysis; and (iii) empirical illustrations
of the efficacy of the framework for analyzing a real-world database of Earth satellites.
We introduce composable generative population models (CGPMs), a computational formalism that
generalizes directed graphical models. CGPMs specify a table of observable random variables with
a finite number of columns and countably infinitely many rows. They support complex intra-row
dependencies among the observables, as well as inter-row dependencies among a field of latent random
variables. CGPMs are described by a computational interface for generating samples and evaluating
densities for random variables derived from the base table by conditioning and marginalization. This
paper shows how to package discriminative statistical learning techniques, dimensionality reduction
methods, arbitrary probabilistic programs, and their combinations, as CGPMs. We also describe
algorithms and illustrate new syntaxes in the probabilistic Metamodeling Language for building
composite CGPMs that can interoperate with BayesDB.
The practical value is illustrated in two ways. First, we describe a 50-line analysis that identifies
satellite data records that probably violate their theoretical orbital characteristics. The BayesDB script
builds models that combine non-parametric Bayesian structure learning with a causal probabilistic
program that implements a stochastic variant of Kepler’s Third Law. Second, we illustrate coverage
and conciseness of the CGPM abstraction by quantifying the improvement in accuracy and reduction
in lines of code achieved on a representative data analysis task.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

