Deep Learning Models of the Retinal Response to
Natural Scenes
Lane T. McIntosh∗1 , Niru Maheswaranathan∗1 , Aran Nayebi1 ,
Surya Ganguli2,3 , Stephen A. Baccus3
1
Neurosciences PhD Program, 2 Department of Applied Physics, 3 Neurobiology Department
Stanford University
{lmcintosh, nirum, anayebi, sganguli, baccus}@stanford.edu

Abstract
A central challenge in sensory neuroscience is to understand neural computations
and circuit mechanisms that underlie the encoding of ethologically relevant, natural stimuli. In multilayered neural circuits, nonlinear processes such as synaptic
transmission and spiking dynamics present a significant obstacle to the creation of
accurate computational models of responses to natural stimuli. Here we demonstrate that deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) capture retinal responses to
natural scenes nearly to within the variability of a cell’s response, and are markedly
more accurate than linear-nonlinear (LN) models and Generalized Linear Models (GLMs). Moreover, we find two additional surprising properties of CNNs:
they are less susceptible to overfitting than their LN counterparts when trained
on small amounts of data, and generalize better when tested on stimuli drawn
from a different distribution (e.g. between natural scenes and white noise). An
examination of the learned CNNs reveals several properties. First, a richer set
of feature maps is necessary for predicting the responses to natural scenes compared to white noise. Second, temporally precise responses to slowly varying
inputs originate from feedforward inhibition, similar to known retinal mechanisms.
Third, the injection of latent noise sources in intermediate layers enables our model
to capture the sub-Poisson spiking variability observed in retinal ganglion cells.
Fourth, augmenting our CNNs with recurrent lateral connections enables them to
capture contrast adaptation as an emergent property of accurately describing retinal
responses to natural scenes. These methods can be readily generalized to other
sensory modalities and stimulus ensembles. Overall, this work demonstrates that
CNNs not only accurately capture sensory circuit responses to natural scenes, but
also can yield information about the circuit’s internal structure and function.

1

Introduction

A fundamental goal of sensory neuroscience involves building accurate neural encoding models that
predict the response of a sensory area to a stimulus of interest. These models have been used to shed
light on circuit computations [1, 2, 3, 4], uncover novel mechanisms [5, 6], highlight gaps in our
understanding [7], and quantify theoretical predictions [8, 9].
A commonly used model for retinal responses is a linear-nonlinear (LN) model that combines a linear
spatiotemporal filter with a single static nonlinearity. Although LN models have been used to describe
responses to artificial stimuli such as spatiotemporal white noise [10, 2], they fail to generalize to
natural stimuli [7]. Furthermore, the white noise stimuli used in previous studies are often low
resolution or spatially uniform and therefore fail to differentially activate nonlinear subunits in the
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

