Globally Optimal Training of Generalized
Polynomial Neural Networks with Nonlinear
Spectral Methods

A. Gautier, Q. Nguyen and M. Hein
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarland University, Germany

Abstract
The optimization problem behind neural networks is highly non-convex.
Training with stochastic gradient descent and variants requires careful
parameter tuning and provides no guarantee to achieve the global optimum.
In contrast we show under quite weak assumptions on the data that a
particular class of feedforward neural networks can be trained globally
optimal with a linear convergence rate with our nonlinear spectral method.
Up to our knowledge this is the first practically feasible method which
achieves such a guarantee. While the method can in principle be applied to
deep networks, we restrict ourselves for simplicity in this paper to one and
two hidden layer networks. Our experiments confirm that these models are
rich enough to achieve good performance on a series of real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep learning [13, 16] is currently the state of the art machine learning technique in
many application areas such as computer vision or natural language processing. While the
theoretical foundations of neural networks have been explored in depth see e.g. [1], the
understanding of the success of training deep neural networks is a currently very active
research area [5, 6, 9]. On the other hand the parameter search for stochastic gradient descent
and variants such as Adagrad and Adam can be quite tedious and there is no guarantee that
one converges to the global optimum. In particular, the problem is even for a single hidden
layer in general NP hard, see [17] and references therein. This implies that to achieve global
optimality efficiently one has to impose certain conditions on the problem.
A recent line of research has directly tackled the optimization problem of neural networks
and provided either certain guarantees [2, 15] in terms of the global optimum or proved
directly convergence to the global optimum [8, 11]. The latter two papers are up to our
knowledge the first results which provide a globally optimal algorithm for training neural
networks. While providing a lot of interesting insights on the relationship of structured
matrix factorization and training of neural networks, Haeffele and Vidal admit themselves
in their paper [8] that their results are “challenging to apply in practice”. In the work of
Janzamin et al. [11] they use a tensor approach and propose a globally optimal algorithm
for a feedforward neural network with one hidden layer and squared loss. However, their
approach requires the computation of the score function tensor which uses the density of
the data-generating measure. However, the data generating measure is unknown and also
difficult to estimate for high-dimensional feature spaces. Moreover, one has to check certain
non-degeneracy conditions of the tensor decomposition to get the global optimality guarantee.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

