Interpretable Nonlinear Dynamic Modeling
of Neural Trajectories
Yuan Zhao and Il Memming Park
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Institute for Advanced Computational Science
Stony Brook University, NY 11794
{yuan.zhao, memming.park}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
A central challenge in neuroscience is understanding how neural system implements computation through its dynamics. We propose a nonlinear time series
model aimed at characterizing interpretable dynamics from neural trajectories.
Our model assumes low-dimensional continuous dynamics in a finite volume. It
incorporates a prior assumption about globally contractional dynamics to avoid
overly enthusiastic extrapolation outside of the support of observed trajectories.
We show that our model can recover qualitative features of the phase portrait such
as attractors, slow points, and bifurcations, while also producing reliable longterm future predictions in a variety of dynamical models and in real neural data.

1

Introduction

Continuous dynamical systems theory lends itself as a framework for both qualitative and quantitative understanding of neural models [1, 2, 3, 4]. For example, models of neural computation are
often implemented as attractor dynamics where the convergence to one of the attractors represents
the result of computation. Despite the wide adoption of dynamical systems theory in theoretical
neuroscience, solving the inverse problem, that is, reconstructing meaningful dynamics from neural
time series, has been challenging. Popular neural trajectory inference algorithms often assume linear dynamical systems [5, 6] which lack nonlinear features ubiquitous in neural computation, and
typical approaches of using nonlinear autoregressive models [7, 8] sometimes produce wild extrapolations which are not suitable for scientific study aimed at confidently recovering features of the
dynamics that reflects the nature of the underlying computation.
In this paper, we aim to build an interpretable dynamics model to reverse-engineer the neural implementation of computation. We assume slow continuous dynamics such that the sampled nonlinear
trajectory is locally linear, thus, allowing us to propose a flexible nonlinear time series model that
directly learns the velocity field. Our particular parameterization yields to better interpretations:
identifying fixed points and ghost points are easy, and so is the linearization of the dynamics around
those points for stability and manifold analyses. We further parameterize the velocity field using a
finite number of basis functions, in addition to a global contractional component. These features encourage the model to focus on interpolating dynamics within the support of the training trajectories.

2

Model

Consider a general d-dimensional continuous nonlinear dynamical system driven by external input,
ẋ = F (x, u)
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(1)

