Semiparametric Differential Graph Models
Pan Xu
University of Virginia
px3ds@virginia.edu

Quanquan Gu
University of Virginia
qg5w@virginia.edu

Abstract
In many cases of network analysis, it is more attractive to study how a network
varies under different conditions than an individual static network. We propose
a novel graphical model, namely Latent Differential Graph Model, where the
networks under two different conditions are represented by two semiparametric
elliptical distributions respectively, and the variation of these two networks (i.e.,
differential graph) is characterized by the difference between their latent precision
matrices. We propose an estimator for the differential graph based on quasi likelihood maximization with nonconvex regularization. We show that our estimator
attains a faster statistical rate in parameter estimation than the state-of-the-art methods, and enjoys the oracle property under mild conditions. Thorough experiments
on both synthetic and real world data support our theory.

1

Introduction

Network analysis has been widely used in various fields to characterize the interdependencies between
a group of variables, such as molecular entities including RNAs and proteins in genetic networks
[3]. Networks are often modeled as graphical models. For instance, in gene regulatory network,
the gene expressions are often assumed to be jointly Gaussian. A Gaussian graphical model [18] is
then employed by representing different genes as nodes and the regulation between genes as edges
in the graph. In particular, two genes are conditionally independent given the others if and only
if the corresponding entry of the precision matrix of the multivariate normal distribution is zero.
Nevertheless, the Gaussian distribution assumption, is too restrictive in practice. For example, the
gene expression values from high-throughput method, even after being normalized, do not follow a
normal distribution [19, 26]. This leads to the inaccuracy in describing the dependency relationships
among genes. In order to address this problem, various semiparametric Gaussian graphical models
[21, 20] are proposed to relax the Gaussian distribution assumption.
On the other hand, it is well-known that the interactions in many types of networks can change under
various environmental and experimental conditions [1]. Take the genetic networks for example, two
genes may be positively conditionally dependent under some conditions but negatively conditionally
dependent under others. Therefore, in many cases, more attention is attracted not by a particular
individual network but rather by whether and how the network varies with genetic and environmental
alterations [6, 15]. This gives rise to differential networking analysis, which has emerged as an
important method in differential expression analysis of gene regulatory networks [9, 28].
In this paper, in order to conduct differential network analysis, we propose a Latent Differential Graph
Model (LDGM), where the networks under two different conditions are represented by two transelliptical distributions [20], i.e., T Ed (⌃⇤X , ⇠; f1 , . . . , fd ) and T Ed (⌃⇤Y , ⇠; g1 , . . . , gd ) respectively. Here
T Ed (⌃⇤X , ⇠; f1 , . . . , fd ) denotes a d-dimensional transelliptical distribution with latent correlation
matrix ⌃⇤X 2 Rd⇥d , and will be defined in detail in Section 3. More specifically, the connectivity
of the individual network is encoded by the latent precision matrix (e.g., ⇥⇤X = (⌃⇤X ) 1 ) of the
corresponding transelliptical distribution, such that [⇥⇤X ]jk 6= 0 if and only if there is an edge
between the j-th node and the k-th node in the network. And the differential graph is defined as
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

