Fast Algorithms for Robust PCA via Gradient
Descent
Xinyang Yi∗ Dohyung Park∗ Yudong Chen† Constantine Caramanis∗
∗
†
The University of Texas at Austin
Cornell University
∗
†
{yixy,dhpark,constantine}@utexas.edu
yudong.chen@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of Robust PCA in the fully and partially observed settings. Without corruptions, this is the well-known matrix completion problem.
From a statistical standpoint this problem has been recently well-studied, and
conditions on when recovery is possible (how many observations do we need,
how many corruptions can we tolerate) via polynomial-time algorithms is by
now understood. This paper presents and analyzes a non-convex optimization
approach that greatly reduces the computational complexity of the above problems, compared to the best available algorithms. In particular, in the fully observed case, with r denoting rank and d dimension, we reduce the complexity
from O(r2 d2 log(1/ε)) to O(rd2 log(1/ε)) – a big savings when the rank is big.
For the partially observed case, we show the complexity of our algorithm is no
more than O(r4 d log d log(1/ε)). Not only is this the best-known run-time for a
provable algorithm under partial observation, but in the setting where r is small
compared to d, it also allows for near-linear-in-d run-time that can be exploited in
the fully-observed case as well, by simply running our algorithm on a subset of the
observations.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) aims to find a low rank subspace that best-approximates a data
matrix Y ∈ Rd1 ×d2 . The simple and standard method of PCA by singular value decomposition
(SVD) fails in many modern data problems due to missing and corrupted entries, as well as sheer scale
of the problem. Indeed, SVD is highly sensitive to outliers by virtue of the squared-error criterion
it minimizes. Moreover, its running time scales as O(rd2 ) to recover a rank r approximation of a
d-by-d matrix.
While there have been recent results developing provably robust algorithms for PCA (e.g., [5, 26]), the
running times range from O(r2 d2 ) to O(d3 ) and hence are significantly worse than SVD. Meanwhile,
the literature developing sub-quadratic algorithms for PCA (e.g., [15, 14, 3]) seems unable to
guarantee robustness to outliers or missing data.
Our contribution lies precisely in this area: provably robust algorithms for PCA with improved
run-time. Specifically, we provide an efficient algorithm with running time that matches SVD while
nearly matching the best-known robustness guarantees. In the case where rank is small compared to
dimension, we develop an algorithm with running time that is nearly linear in the dimension. This
last algorithm works by subsampling the data, and therefore we also show that our algorithm solves
the Robust PCA problem with partial observations (a generalization of matrix completion and Robust
PCA).
1.1 The Model and Related Work
We consider the following setting for robust PCA. Suppose we are given a matrix Y ∈ Rd1 ×d2 that
has decomposition Y = M ∗ + S ∗ , where M ∗ is a rank r matrix and S ∗ is a sparse corruption matrix
containing entries with arbitrary magnitude. The goal is to recover M ∗ and S ∗ from Y . To ease
notation, we let d1 = d2 = d in the remainder of this section.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

