Learning Sensor Multiplexing
Design through Back-propagation

Ayan Chakrabarti
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
6045 S. Kenwood Ave., Chicago, IL
ayanc@ttic.edu

Abstract
Recent progress on many imaging and vision tasks has been driven by the use of
deep feed-forward neural networks, which are trained by propagating gradients of
a loss defined on the final output, back through the network up to the first layer that
operates directly on the image. We propose back-propagating one step further—to
learn camera sensor designs jointly with networks that carry out inference on the
images they capture. In this paper, we specifically consider the design and inference
problems in a typical color camera—where the sensor is able to measure only one
color channel at each pixel location, and computational inference is required to
reconstruct a full color image. We learn the camera sensor’s color multiplexing
pattern by encoding it as layer whose learnable weights determine which color
channel, from among a fixed set, will be measured at each location. These weights
are jointly trained with those of a reconstruction network that operates on the
corresponding sensor measurements to produce a full color image. Our network
achieves significant improvements in accuracy over the traditional Bayer pattern
used in most color cameras. It automatically learns to employ a sparse color
measurement approach similar to that of a recent design, and moreover, improves
upon that design by learning an optimal layout for these measurements.

1

Introduction

With the availability of cheap computing power, modern cameras can rely on computational postprocessing to extend their capabilities under the physical constraints of existing sensor technology.
Sophisticated techniques, such as those for denoising [3, 28], deblurring [19, 26], etc., are increasingly
being used to improve the quality of images and videos that were degraded during acquisition.
Moreover, researchers have posited novel sensing strategies that, when combined with post-processing
algorithms, are able to produce higher quality and more informative images and videos. For example,
coded exposure imaging [18] allows better inversion of motion blur, coded apertures [14, 23] allow
passive measurement of scene depth from a single shot, and compressive measurement strategies [1,
8, 25] combined with sparse reconstruction algorithms allow the recovery of visual measurements
with higher spatial, spectral, and temporal resolutions.
Key to the success of these latter approaches is the co-design of sensing strategies and inference
algorithms, where the measurements are designed to provide information complimentary to the
known statistical structure of natural scenes. So far, sensor design in this regime has largely been
either informed by expert intuition (e.g., [4]), or based on the decision to use a specific image model
or inference strategy—e.g., measurements corresponding to random [1], or dictionary-specific [5],
projections are a common choice for sparsity-based reconstruction methods. In this paper, we seek to
enable a broader data-driven exploration of the joint sensor and inference method space, by learning
both sensor design and the computational inference engine end-to-end.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

