Coin Betting and Parameter-Free Online Learning

Francesco Orabona
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
francesco@orabona.com

Dávid Pál
Yahoo Research, New York, NY
dpal@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
In the recent years, a number of parameter-free algorithms have been developed
for online linear optimization over Hilbert spaces and for learning with expert advice. These algorithms achieve optimal regret bounds that depend on the unknown
competitors, without having to tune the learning rates with oracle choices.
We present a new intuitive framework to design parameter-free algorithms for both
online linear optimization over Hilbert spaces and for learning with expert advice,
based on reductions to betting on outcomes of adversarial coins. We instantiate
it using a betting algorithm based on the Krichevsky-Trofimov estimator. The
resulting algorithms are simple, with no parameters to be tuned, and they improve
or match previous results in terms of regret guarantee and per-round complexity.

1

Introduction

We consider the Online Linear Optimization (OLO) [4, 25] setting. In each round t, an algorithm
chooses a point wt from a convex decision set K and then receives a reward vector gt . The algorithm’s goal is to keep its regret small, defined as the difference between its cumulative reward and
the cumulative reward of a fixed strategy u ∈ K, that is
RegretT (u) =

T
X
t=1

hgt , ui −

T
X
hgt , wt i .
t=1

We focus on two particular decision sets, the N -dimensional probability simplex ∆N = {x ∈
RN : x ≥ 0, kxk1 = 1} and a Hilbert space H. OLO over ∆N is referred to as the problem of
Learning with Expert Advice (LEA). We assume bounds on the norms of the reward vectors: For
OLO over H, we assume that kgt k ≤ 1, and for LEA we assume that gt ∈ [0, 1]N .
OLO is a basic building block of many machine learning problems. For example, Online Convex
Optimization (OCO), the problem analogous to OLO where hgt , ui is generalized to an arbitrary
convex function `t (u), is solved through a reduction to OLO [25]. LEA [17, 27, 5] provides a
way of combining classifiers and it is at the heart of boosting [12]. Batch and stochastic convex
optimization can also be solved through a reduction to OLO [25].
To achieve optimal regret, most of the existing online algorithms require the user to set the learning
rate (step size) η to an unknown/oracle value. For example, to obtain the optimal bound for Online
Gradient Descent (OGD), the learning rate has to be set with the knowledge of the norm of the
competitor u, kuk; second entry in Table 1. Likewise, the optimal learning rate for Hedge depends on
the KL divergence between the prior weighting π and the unknown competitor u, D (ukπ); seventh
entry in Table 1. Recently, new parameter-free algorithms have been proposed, both for LEA [6, 8,
18, 19, 15, 11] and for OLO/OCO over Hilbert spaces [26, 23, 21, 22, 24]. These algorithms adapt
to the number of experts and to the norm of the optimal predictor, respectively, without the need
to tune parameters. However, their design and underlying intuition is still a challenge. Foster et al.
[11] proposed a unified framework, but it is not constructive. Furthermore, all existing algorithms for
LEA either have sub-optimal regret bound (e.g. extra O(log log T ) factor) or sub-optimal running
time (e.g. requiring solving a numerical problem in every round, or with extra factors); see Table 1.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

