Adaptive Newton Method for Empirical Risk
Minimization to Statistical Accuracy
Aryan Mokhtari?
University of Pennsylvania
aryanm@seas.upenn.edu

Hadi Daneshmand?
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
hadi.daneshmand@inf.ethz.ch

Thomas Hofmann
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Aurelien Lucchi
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
aurelien.lucchi@inf.ethz.ch

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider empirical risk minimization for large-scale datasets. We introduce
Ada Newton as an adaptive algorithm that uses Newton’s method with adaptive
sample sizes. The main idea of Ada Newton is to increase the size of the training set by a factor larger than one in a way that the minimization variable for
the current training set is in the local neighborhood of the optimal argument of
the next training set. This allows to exploit the quadratic convergence property
of Newton’s method and reach the statistical accuracy of each training set with
only one iteration of Newton’s method. We show theoretically that we can iteratively increase the sample size while applying single Newton iterations without
line search and staying within the statistical accuracy of the regularized empirical
risk. In particular, we can double the size of the training set in each iteration when
the number of samples is sufficiently large. Numerical experiments on various
datasets confirm the possibility of increasing the sample size by factor 2 at each
iteration which implies that Ada Newton achieves the statistical accuracy of the
full training set with about two passes over the dataset.1

1

Introduction

A hallmark of empirical risk minimization (ERM) on large datasets is that evaluating descent directions requires a complete pass over the dataset. Since this is undesirable due to the large number of
training samples, stochastic optimization algorithms with descent directions estimated from a subset
of samples are the method of choice. First order stochastic optimization has a long history [19, 17]
but the last decade has seen fundamental progress in developing alternatives with faster convergence.
A partial list of this consequential literature includes Nesterov acceleration [16, 2], stochastic averaging gradient [20, 6], variance reduction [10, 26], and dual coordinate methods [23, 24].
When it comes to stochastic second order methods the first challenge is that while evaluation of
Hessians is as costly as evaluation of gradients, the stochastic estimation of Hessians has proven
more challenging. This difficulty is addressed by incremental computations in [9] and subsampling
in [7] or circumvented altogether in stochastic quasi-Newton methods [21, 12, 13, 11, 14]. Despite
this incipient progress it is nonetheless fair to say that the striking success in developing stochastic
first order methods is not matched by equal success in the development of stochastic second order
methods. This is because even if the problem of estimating a Hessian is solved there are still four
challenges left in the implementation of Newton-like methods in ERM:
1?

The first two authors have contributed equally in this work.

