PAC Reinforcement Learning with Rich Observations
Akshay Krishnamurthy
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA, 01003
akshay@cs.umass.edu

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research
New York, NY 10011
alekha@microsoft.com

John Langford
Microsoft Research
New York, NY 10011
jcl@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose and study a new model for reinforcement learning with rich observations, generalizing contextual bandits to sequential decision making. These
models require an agent to take actions based on observations (features) with the
goal of achieving long-term performance competitive with a large set of policies.
To avoid barriers to sample-efficient learning associated with large observation
spaces and general POMDPs, we focus on problems that can be summarized by a
small number of hidden states and have long-term rewards that are predictable by a
reactive function class. In this setting, we design and analyze a new reinforcement
learning algorithm, Least Squares Value Elimination by Exploration. We prove
that the algorithm learns near optimal behavior after a number of episodes that is
polynomial in all relevant parameters, logarithmic in the number of policies, and
independent of the size of the observation space. Our result provides theoretical
justification for reinforcement learning with function approximation.

1

Introduction

The Atari Reinforcement Learning research program [21] has highlighted a critical deficiency of
practical reinforcement learning algorithms in settings with rich observation spaces: they cannot effectively solve problems that require sophisticated exploration. How can we construct Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms which effectively plan and plan to explore?
In RL theory, this is a solved problem for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) [6, 13, 26]. Why do
these results not apply?
An easy response is, “because the hard games are not MDPs.” This may be true for some of the hard
games, but it is misleading—popular algorithms like Q-learning with ✏-greedy exploration do not
even engage in minimal planning and global exploration1 as is required to solve MDPs efficiently.
MDP-optimized global exploration has also been avoided because of a polynomial dependence on
the number of unique observations which is intractably large with observations from a visual sensor.
In contrast, supervised and contextual bandit learning algorithms have no dependence on the number
of observations and at most a logarithmic dependence on the size of the underlying policy set.
Approaches to RL with a weak dependence on these quantities exist [15] but suffer from an exponential
dependence on the time horizon—with K actions and a horizon of H, they require ⌦(K H ) samples.
Examples show that this dependence is necessary, although they typically require a large number of
states. Can we find an RL algorithm with no dependence on the number of unique observations and a
polynomial dependence on the number of actions K, the number of necessary states M , the horizon
H, and the policy complexity log(|⇧|)?
1

We use “global exploration” to distinguish the sophisticated exploration strategies required to solve an MDP
efficiently from exponentially less efficient alternatives such as ✏-greedy.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

