The Multiple Quantile Graphical Model

Alnur Ali
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
alnurali@cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Ryan J. Tibshirani
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
ryantibs@cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Multiple Quantile Graphical Model (MQGM), which extends
the neighborhood selection approach of Meinshausen and Bühlmann for learning
sparse graphical models. The latter is defined by the basic subproblem of modeling the conditional mean of one variable as a sparse function of all others. Our
approach models a set of conditional quantiles of one variable as a sparse function
of all others, and hence offers a much richer, more expressive class of conditional
distribution estimates. We establish that, under suitable regularity conditions, the
MQGM identifies the exact conditional independencies with probability tending to
one as the problem size grows, even outside of the usual homoskedastic Gaussian
data model. We develop an efficient algorithm for fitting the MQGM using the
alternating direction method of multipliers. We also describe a strategy for sampling from the joint distribution that underlies the MQGM estimate. Lastly, we
present detailed experiments that demonstrate the flexibility and effectiveness of
the MQGM in modeling hetereoskedastic non-Gaussian data.

1

Introduction

We consider modeling the joint distribution Pr(y1 , . . . , yd ) of d random variables, given n independent draws from this distribution y (1) , . . . , y (n) ∈ Rd , where possibly d  n. Later, we generalize
this setup and consider modeling the conditional distribution Pr(y1 , . . . , yd |x1 , . . . , xp ), given n
independent pairs (x(1) , y (1) ), . . . , (x(n) , y (n) ) ∈ Rp+d . Our starting point is the neighborhood selection method [28], which is typically considered in the context of multivariate Gaussian data, and seen
as a tool for covariance selection [8]: when Pr(y1 , . . . , yd ) is a multivariate Gaussian distribution,
it is a well-known fact that yj and yk are conditionally independent given the remaining variables
if and only if the coefficent corresponding to yk is zero in the (linear) regression of yj on all other
variables (e.g., [22]). Therefore, in neighborhood selection we compute, for each k = 1, . . . , d,
a lasso regression — in order to obtain a small set of conditional dependencies — of yk on the
remaining variables, i.e.,
2
n 
X
X
(i)
(i)
minimize
yk −
θkj yj
+ λkθk k1 ,
(1)
θk ∈Rd

i=1

j6=k

for a tuning parameter λ > 0. This strategy can be seen as a pseudolikelihood approximation [4],
Pr(y1 , . . . , yd ) ≈

d
Y

Pr(yk |y¬k ),

(2)

k=1

where y¬k denotes all variables except yk . Under the multivariate Gaussian model for Pr(y1 , . . . , yd ),
the conditional distributions Pr(yk |y¬k ), k = 1, . . . , d here are (univariate) Gaussians, and maximizing the pseudolikelihood in (2) is equivalent to separately maximizing the conditionals, as is precisely
done in (1) (with induced sparsity), for k = 1, . . . , d.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

