Dynamic matrix recovery from incomplete
observations under an exact low-rank constraint
Liangbei Xu
Mark A. Davenport
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
lxu66@gatech.edu mdav@gatech.edu

Abstract
Low-rank matrix factorizations arise in a wide variety of applications – including
recommendation systems, topic models, and source separation, to name just a few.
In these and many other applications, it has been widely noted that by incorporating temporal information and allowing for the possibility of time-varying models,
significant improvements are possible in practice. However, despite the reported
superior empirical performance of these dynamic models over their static counterparts, there is limited theoretical justification for introducing these more complex
models. In this paper we aim to address this gap by studying the problem of recovering a dynamically evolving low-rank matrix from incomplete observations. First,
we propose the locally weighted matrix smoothing (LOWEMS) framework as one
possible approach to dynamic matrix recovery. We then establish error bounds for
LOWEMS in both the matrix sensing and matrix completion observation models.
Our results quantify the potential benefits of exploiting dynamic constraints both
in terms of recovery accuracy and sample complexity. To illustrate these benefits
we provide both synthetic and real-world experimental results.

1

Introduction

Suppose that X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 is a rank-r matrix with r much smaller than n1 and n2 . We observe X
through a linear operator A : Rn1 ×n2 → Rm ,
y = A(X),

y ∈ Rm .

In recent years there has been a significant amount of progress in our understanding of how to recover
X from observations of this form even when the number of observations m is much less than the
number of entries in X. (See [8] for an overview of this literature.) When A is a set of weighted linear
combinations of the entries of X, this problem is often referred to as the matrix sensing problem.
In the special case where A samples a subset of entries of X, it is known as the matrix completion
problem. There are a number of ways to establish recovery guarantee in these settings. Perhaps the
most popular approach for theoretical analysis in recent years has focused on the use of nuclear norm
minimization as a convex surrogate for the (nonconvex) rank constraint [1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 15, 19, 21, 22].
An alternative, however is to aim to directly solve the problem under an exact low-rank constraint.
This leads a non-convex optimization problem, but has several computational advantages over most
approaches to minimizing the nuclear norm and is widely used in large-scale applications (such
as recommendation systems) [16]. In general, popular algorithms for solving the rank-constrained
models – e.g., alternating minimization and alternating gradient descent – do not have as strong of
convergence or recovery error guarantees due to the non-convexity of the rank constraint. However,
there has been significant progress on this front in recent years [11, 10, 12, 13, 14, 23, 25], with many
of these algorithms now having guarantees comparable to those for nuclear norm minimization.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

