Multi-step learning and
underlying structure in statistical models
Maia Fraser
Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics
Brain and Mind Research Institute
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada
mfrase8@uottawa.ca

Abstract
In multi-step learning, where a final learning task is accomplished via a sequence of
intermediate learning tasks, the intuition is that successive steps or levels transform
the initial data into representations more and more “suited" to the final learning
task. A related principle arises in transfer-learning where Baxter (2000) proposed a
theoretical framework to study how learning multiple tasks transforms the inductive
bias of a learner. The most widespread multi-step learning approach is semisupervised learning with two steps: unsupervised, then supervised. Several authors
(Castelli-Cover, 1996; Balcan-Blum, 2005; Niyogi, 2008; Ben-David et al, 2008;
Urner et al, 2011) have analyzed SSL, with Balcan-Blum (2005) proposing a
version of the PAC learning framework augmented by a “compatibility function"
to link concept class and unlabeled data distribution. We propose to analyze SSL
and other multi-step learning approaches, much in the spirit of Baxter’s framework,
by defining a learning problem generatively as a joint statistical model on X ⇥ Y .
This determines in a natural way the class of conditional distributions that are
possible with each marginal, and amounts to an abstract form of compatibility
function. It also allows to analyze both discrete and non-discrete settings. As tool
for our analysis, we define a notion of -uniform shattering for statistical models.
We use this to give conditions on the marginal and conditional models which
imply an advantage for multi-step learning approaches. In particular, we recover a
more general version of a result of Poggio et al (2012): under mild hypotheses a
multi-step approach which learns features invariant under successive factors of a
finite group of invariances has sample complexity requirements that are additive
rather than multiplicative in the size of the subgroups.

1

Introduction

The classical PAC learning framework of Valiant (1984) considers a learning problem with unknown
true distribution p on X ⇥ Y , Y = {0, 1} and fixed concept class C consisting of (deterministic)
functions f : X ! Y . The aim of learning is to select a hypothesis h : X ! Y , say from C itself
(realizable case), that best recovers f . More formally, the class C is said to be PAC learnable if there
is a learning algorithm that with high probability selects h 2 C having arbitrarily low generalization
error for all possible distributions D on X. The distribution D governs both the sampling of points
z = (x, y) 2 X ⇥ Y by which the algorithm obtains a training sample and also the cumulation of
error over all x 2 X which gives the generalization error. A modification of this model, together
with the notion of learnable with a model of probability (resp. decision rule) (Haussler, 1989;
Kearns and Schapire, 1994), allows to treat non-deterministic functions f : X ! Y and the case
Y = [0, 1] analogously. Polynomial dependence of the algorithms on sample size and reciprocals
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

