Human Decision-Making under Limited Time

Pedro A. Ortega
Department of Psychology
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ope@seas.upenn.edu

Alan A. Stocker
Department of Psychology
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19014
astocker@sas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Subjective expected utility theory assumes that decision-makers possess unlimited
computational resources to reason about their choices; however, virtually all decisions in everyday life are made under resource constraints—i.e. decision-makers
are bounded in their rationality. Here we experimentally tested the predictions
made by a formalization of bounded rationality based on ideas from statistical
mechanics and information-theory. We systematically tested human subjects in
their ability to solve combinatorial puzzles under different time limitations. We
found that our bounded-rational model accounts well for the data. The decomposition of the fitted model parameter into the subjects’ expected utility function and
resource parameter provide interesting insight into the subjects’ information capacity limits. Our results confirm that humans gradually fall back on their learned
prior choice patterns when confronted with increasing resource limitations.

1

Introduction

Human decision-making is not perfectly rational. Most of our choices are constrained by many factors such as perceptual ambiguity, time, lack of knowledge, or computational effort [6]. Classical
theories of rational choice do not apply in such cases because they ignore information-processing
resources, assuming that decision-makers always pick the optimal choice [10]. However, it is well
known that human choice patterns deviate qualitatively from the perfectly rational ideal with increasing resource limitations.
It has been suggested that such limitations in decision-making can be formalized using ideas from
statistical mechanics [9] and information theory [16]. These frameworks propose that decisionmakers act as if their choice probabilities were an optimal compromise between maximizing the
expected utility and minimizing the KL-divergence from a set of prior choice probabilities, where
the trade-off is determined by the amount of available resources. This optimization scheme reduces
the decision-making problem to the inference of the optimal choice from a stimulus, where the likelihood function results from a combination of the decision-maker’s subjective preferences and the
resource limitations.
The aim of this paper is to systematically validate the model of bounded-rational decision-making
on human choice data. We conducted an experiment in which subjects had to solve a sequence
of combinatorial puzzles under time pressure. By manipulating the allotted time for solving each
puzzle, we were able to record choice data under different resource conditions. We then fit the
bounded-rational choice model to the dataset, obtaining a decomposition of the choice probabilities
in terms of a resource parameter and a set of stimulus-dependent utility functions. Our results show
that the model captures very well the gradual shifts due to increasing time constraints that are present
in the subjects’ empirical choice patterns.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

