Synthesis of MCMC and Belief Propagation

Sungsoo Ahn∗
Michael Chertkov†
Jinwoo Shin∗
∗
School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea
†1
Theoretical Division, T-4 & Center for Nonlinear Studies,
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA,
†2
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 143026 Moscow, Russia
∗
†
{sungsoo.ahn, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
chertkov@lanl.gov

Abstract
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and Belief Propagation (BP) are the most
popular algorithms for computational inference in Graphical Models (GM). In
principle, MCMC is an exact probabilistic method which, however, often suffers
from exponentially slow mixing. In contrast, BP is a deterministic method, which is
typically fast, empirically very successful, however in general lacking control of accuracy over loopy graphs. In this paper, we introduce MCMC algorithms correcting
the approximation error of BP, i.e., we provide a way to compensate for BP errors
via a consecutive BP-aware MCMC. Our framework is based on the Loop Calculus
approach which allows to express the BP error as a sum of weighted generalized
loops. Although the full series is computationally intractable, it is known that a truncated series, summing up all 2-regular loops, is computable in polynomial-time for
planar pair-wise binary GMs and it also provides a highly accurate approximation
empirically. Motivated by this, we first propose a polynomial-time approximation
MCMC scheme for the truncated series of general (non-planar) pair-wise binary
models. Our main idea here is to use the Worm algorithm, known to provide fast
mixing in other (related) problems, and then design an appropriate rejection scheme
to sample 2-regular loops. Furthermore, we also design an efficient rejection-free
MCMC scheme for approximating the full series. The main novelty underlying
our design is in utilizing the concept of cycle basis, which provides an efficient
decomposition of the generalized loops. In essence, the proposed MCMC schemes
run on transformed GM built upon the non-trivial BP solution, and our experiments
show that this synthesis of BP and MCMC outperforms both direct MCMC and
bare BP schemes.

1

Introduction

GMs express factorization of the joint multivariate probability distributions in statistics via graph of
relations between variables. The concept of GM has been used successfully in information theory,
physics, artificial intelligence and machine learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Of many inference problems
one can set with a GM, computing partition function (normalization), or equivalently marginalizing
the joint distribution, is the most general problem of interest. However, this paradigmatic inference
problem is known to be computationally intractable in general, i.e., formally it is #P-hard even to
approximate [7, 8].
To address this obstacle, extensive efforts have been made to develop practical approximation methods,
among which MCMC- [9] based and BP- [10] based algorithms are, arguably, the most popular
and practically successful ones. MCMC is exact, i.e., it converges to the correct answer, but its
convergence/mixing is, in general, exponential in the system size. On the other hand, message
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

