An equivalence between high dimensional Bayes
optimal inference and M-estimation

Madhu Advani
Surya Ganguli
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
msadvani@stanford.edu and sganguli@stanford.edu

Abstract
When recovering an unknown signal from noisy measurements, the computational
difficulty of performing optimal Bayesian MMSE (minimum mean squared error)
inference often necessitates the use of maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference,
a special case of regularized M-estimation, as a surrogate. However, MAP is
suboptimal in high dimensions, when the number of unknown signal components
is similar to the number of measurements. In this work we demonstrate, when
the signal distribution and the likelihood function associated with the noise are
both log-concave, that optimal MMSE performance is asymptotically achievable
via another M-estimation procedure. This procedure involves minimizing convex
loss and regularizer functions that are nonlinearly smoothed versions of the widely
applied MAP optimization problem. Our findings provide a new heuristic derivation
and interpretation for recent optimal M-estimators found in the setting of linear
measurements and additive noise, and further extend these results to nonlinear
measurements with non-additive noise. We numerically demonstrate superior
performance of our optimal M-estimators relative to MAP. Overall, at the heart
of our work is the revelation of a remarkable equivalence between two seemingly
very different computational problems: namely that of high dimensional Bayesian
integration underlying MMSE inference, and high dimensional convex optimization
underlying M-estimation. In essence we show that the former difficult integral may
be computed by solving the latter, simpler optimization problem.

1

Introduction

Modern technological advances now enable scientists to simultaneously record hundreds or thousands
of variables in fields ranging from neuroscience and genomics to health care and economics. For
example, in neuroscience, we can simultaneously record P = O(1000) neurons in behaving animals.
However, the number of measurements N we can make of these P dimensional neural activity
patterns can be limited in any given experimental condition due to constraints on recording time.
Thus a critical parameter is the measurement density α = N
P . Classical statistics focuses on the
limit of few variables and many measurements, so P is finite, N is large, and α → ∞. Here, we
instead consider the modern high dimensional limit where the measurement density α remains finite
as N, P → ∞. In this important limit, we ask what is the optimal way to recover signal from noise?
More precisely, we wish to recover an unknown signal vector s0 ∈ RP given N noisy measurements
yµ = r(xµ · s0 , µ ) where xµ ∈ RP

and

yµ ∈ R,

for

µ = 1, . . . , N.

(1)

Here, xµ and yµ are input-output pairs for measurement µ, r is a measurement nonlinearity, and
µ is a noise realization. For example, in a brain machine interface, xµ could be a neural activity
pattern, yµ a behavioral covariate, and s0 the unknown regression coefficients of a decoder relating
neural activity to behavior. Alternatively, in sensory neuroscience, xµ could be an external stimulus,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

