Community Detection on Evolving Graphs

Aris Anagnostopoulos
Sapienza University of Rome
aris@dis.uniroma1.it

Jakub Ł ˛
acki
Sapienza University of Rome
j.lacki@mimuw.edu.pl

Stefano Leonardi
Sapienza University of Rome
leonardi@dis.uniroma1.it

Silvio Lattanzi
Google
silviol@google.com

Mohammad Mahdian
Google
mahdian@google.com

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental step in many information-retrieval and data-mining applications. Detecting clusters in graphs is also a key tool for finding the community
structure in social and behavioral networks. In many of these applications, the input
graph evolves over time in a continual and decentralized manner, and, to maintain
a good clustering, the clustering algorithm needs to repeatedly probe the graph.
Furthermore, there are often limitations on the frequency of such probes, either
imposed explicitly by the online platform (e.g., in the case of crawling proprietary
social networks like twitter) or implicitly because of resource limitations (e.g., in
the case of crawling the web).
In this paper, we study a model of clustering on evolving graphs that captures
this aspect of the problem. Our model is based on the classical stochastic block
model, which has been used to assess rigorously the quality of various static
clustering methods. In our model, the algorithm is supposed to reconstruct the
planted clustering, given the ability to query for small pieces of local information
about the graph, at a limited rate. We design and analyze clustering algorithms
that work in this model, and show asymptotically tight upper and lower bounds on
their accuracy. Finally, we perform simulations, which demonstrate that our main
asymptotic results hold true also in practice.

1

Introduction

This work studies the problem of detecting the community structure of a dynamic network according
to the framework of evolving graphs [3]. In this model the underlying graph evolves over time,
subject to a probabilistic process that modifies the vertices and the edges of the graph. The algorithm
can learn the changes that take place in the network only by probing the graph at a limited rate. The
main question for the evolving graph model is to design strategies for probing the graph, such as to
obtain information that is sufficient to maintain a solution that is competitive with a solution that can
be computed if the entire underlying graph is known.
The motivation for studying this model comes from the the inadequacy of the classical computational
paradigm, which assumes perfect knowledge of the input data and an algorithm that terminates. The
evolving graph model captures the evolving and decentralized nature of large-scale online social
networks. An important part of the model is that only a limited number of probes can be made at
each time step. This assumption is motivated by the limitations imposed by many social network
platforms such as Twitter or Facebook, where the network is constantly evolving and the access to the
structure is possible through an API that implements a rate-limited oracle. Even in cases where such
rate-limits are not exogenously imposed (e.g., when the network under consideration is the Web),
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

