Active Nearest-Neighbor Learning in Metric Spaces

Aryeh Kontorovich
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer Sheva 8499000, Israel

Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer Sheva 8499000, Israel

Ruth Urner
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Department for Empirical Inference
Tübingen 72076, Germany

Abstract
We propose a pool-based non-parametric active learning algorithm for general metric spaces, called MArgin Regularized Metric Active Nearest Neighbor
(MARMANN), which outputs a nearest-neighbor classifier. We give prediction
error guarantees that depend on the noisy-margin properties of the input sample,
and are competitive with those obtained by previously proposed passive learners.
We prove that the label complexity of MARMANN is significantly lower than
that of any passive learner with similar error guarantees. Our algorithm is based
on a generalized sample compression scheme and a new label-efficient active
model-selection procedure.

1

Introduction

In this paper we propose a non-parametric pool-based active learning algorithm for general metric
spaces, which outputs a nearest-neighbor classifier. The algorithm is named MArgin Regularized
Metric Active Nearest Neighbor (MARMANN). In pool-based active learning [McCallum and Nigam,
1998] a collection of random examples is provided, and the algorithm can interactively query an
oracle to label some of the examples. The goal is good prediction accuracy, while keeping the label
complexity (the number of queried labels) low. MARMANN receives a pool of unlabeled examples
in a general metric space, and outputs a variant of the nearest-neighbor classifier. The algorithm
obtains a prediction error guarantee that depends on a noisy-margin property of the input sample, and
has a provably smaller label complexity than any passive learner with a similar guarantee.
The theory of active learning has received considerable attention in the past decade [e.g., Dasgupta,
2004, Balcan et al., 2007, 2009, Hanneke, 2011, Hanneke and Yang, 2015]. Active learning has
been mostly studied in a parametric setting (that is, learning with respect to a fixed hypothesis class
with a bounded capacity). Various strategies have been analyzed for parametric classification [e.g.,
Dasgupta, 2004, Balcan et al., 2007, Gonen et al., 2013, Balcan et al., 2009, Hanneke, 2011, Awasthi
et al., 2013].An active model selection procedure has also been developed for the parametric setting
Balcan et al. [2010]. However, the number of labels used there depends quadratically on the number
of possible model classes, which is prohibitive in our non-parametric setting.
The potential benefits of active learning for non-parametric classification in metric spaces are less well
understood. The paradigm of cluster-based active learning [Dasgupta and Hsu, 2008] has been shown
to provide label savings under some distributional clusterability assumptions [Urner et al., 2013,
Kpotufe et al., 2015]. Certain active learning methods for nearest neighbor classification are known
to be Bayes consistent [Dasgupta, 2012], and an active querying rule, based solely on information in
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

