Strategic Attentive Writer for Learning
Macro-Actions
Alexander (Sasha) Vezhnevets, Volodymyr Mnih, John Agapiou,
Simon Osindero, Alex Graves, Oriol Vinyals, Koray Kavukcuoglu
Google DeepMind
{vezhnick,vmnih,jagapiou,osindero,gravesa,vinyals,korayk}@google.com

Abstract
We present a novel deep recurrent neural network architecture that learns to build
implicit plans in an end-to-end manner purely by interacting with an environment
in reinforcement learning setting. The network builds an internal plan, which is
continuously updated upon observation of the next input from the environment.
It can also partition this internal representation into contiguous sub-sequences
by learning for how long the plan can be committed to – i.e. followed without
replaning. Combining these properties, the proposed model, dubbed STRategic Attentive Writer (STRAW) can learn high-level, temporally abstracted macro-actions
of varying lengths that are solely learnt from data without any prior information.
These macro-actions enable both structured exploration and economic computation.
We experimentally demonstrate that STRAW delivers strong improvements on
several ATARI games by employing temporally extended planning strategies (e.g.
Ms. Pacman and Frostbite). It is at the same time a general algorithm that can
be applied on any sequence data. To that end, we also show that when trained
on text prediction task, STRAW naturally predicts frequent n-grams (instead of
macro-actions), demonstrating the generality of the approach.

1

Introduction

Using reinforcement learning to train neural network controllers has recently led to rapid progress
on a number of challenging control tasks [15, 17, 26]. Much of the success of these methods has
been attributed to the ability of neural networks to learn useful abstractions or representations of
the stream of observations, allowing the agents to generalize between similar states. Notably, these
agents do not exploit another type of structure – the one present in the space of controls or policies.
Indeed, not all sequences of low-level controls lead to interesting high-level behaviour and an agent
that can automatically discover useful macro-actions should be capable of more efficient exploration
and learning. The discovery of such temporal abstractions has been a long-standing problem in
both reinforcement learning and sequence prediction in general, yet no truly scalable and successful
architectures exist.
We propose a new deep recurrent neural network architecture, dubbed STRategic Attentive Writer
(STRAW), that is capable of learning macro-actions in a reinforcement learning setting. Unlike the
vast majority of reinforcement learning approaches [15, 17, 26], which output a single action after
each observation, STRAW maintains a multi-step action plan. STRAW periodically updates the plan
based on observations and commits to the plan between the replanning decision points. The replanning
decisions as well as the commonly occurring sequences of actions, i.e. macro-actions, are learned
from rewards. To encourage exploration with macro-actions we introduce a noisy communication
channel between a feature extractor (e.g. convolutional neural network) and the planning modules,
taking inspiration from recent developments in variational auto-encoders [11, 13, 24]. Injecting noise
at this level of the network generates randomness in plans updates that cover multiple time steps and
thereby creates the desired effect.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

