Multistage Campaigning in Social Networks
Mehrdad Farajtabar∗

Xiaojing Ye⋄

Sahar Harati†

Le Song∗
Hongyuan Zha∗
Georgia Institute of Technology∗
Georgia State University⋄
Emory University†
mehrdad@gatech.edu
xye@gsu.edu
sahar.harati@emory.edu
{lsong,zha}@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of how to optimize multi-stage campaigning over social
networks. The dynamic programming framework is employed to balance the high
present reward and large penalty on low future outcome in the presence of extensive uncertainties. In particular, we establish theoretical foundations of optimal
campaigning over social networks where the user activities are modeled as a multivariate Hawkes process, and we derive a time dependent linear relation between
the intensity of exogenous events and several commonly used objective functions
of campaigning. We further develop a convex dynamic programming framework
for determining the optimal intervention policy that prescribes the required level
of external drive at each stage for the desired campaigning result. Experiments on
both synthetic data and the real-world MemeTracker dataset show that our algorithm can steer the user activities for optimal campaigning much more accurately
than baselines.

1

Introduction

Obama was the first US president in history who successfully leveraged online social media in presidential campaigning, which has been popularized and become a ubiquitous approach to electoral
politics (such as in the on-going 2016 US presidential election) in contrast to the decreasing relevance of traditional media such as TV and newspapers [1, 2]. The power of campaigning via social
media in modern politics is a consequence of online social networking being an important part of
people’s regular daily social lives. It has been quite common that individuals use social network sites
to share their ideas and comment on other people’s opinions. In recent years, large organizations,
such as governments, public media, and business corporations, also start to announce news, spread
ideas, and/or post advertisements in order to steer the public opinion through social media platform.
There has been extensive interest for these entities to influence the public’s view and manipulate
the trend by incentivizing influential users to endorse their ideas/merits/opinions at certain monetary
expenses or credits. To obtain most cost-effective trend manipulations, one needs to design an optimal campaigning strategy or policy such that quantities of interests, such as influence of opinions,
exposure of a campaign, adoption of new products, can be maximized or steered towards the target
amount given realistic budget constraints.
The key factor differentiating social networks from traditional media is peer influence. In fact, events
in an online social network can be categorized roughly into two types: endogenous events where
users just respond to the actions of their neighbors within the network, and exogenous events where
users take actions due to drives external to the network. Then it is natural to raise the following
fundamental questions regarding optimal campaigning over social networks: can we model and
exploit those event data to steer the online community to a desired exposure level? More specifically,
can we drive the overall exposure to a campaign to a certain level (e.g., at least twice per week per
user) by incentivizing a small number of users to take more initiatives? What about maximizing the
overall exposure for a target group of people?
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

