End-to-End Goal-Driven Web Navigation

Rodrigo Nogueira
Tandon School of Engineering
New York University
rodrigonogueira@nyu.edu

Kyunghyun Cho
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose a goal-driven web navigation as a benchmark task for evaluating an
agent with abilities to understand natural language and plan on partially observed
environments. In this challenging task, an agent navigates through a website,
which is represented as a graph consisting of web pages as nodes and hyperlinks as
directed edges, to find a web page in which a query appears. The agent is required
to have sophisticated high-level reasoning based on natural languages and efficient
sequential decision-making capability to succeed. We release a software tool,
called WebNav, that automatically transforms a website into this goal-driven web
navigation task, and as an example, we make WikiNav, a dataset constructed from
the English Wikipedia. We extensively evaluate different variants of neural net
based artificial agents on WikiNav and observe that the proposed goal-driven web
navigation well reflects the advances in models, making it a suitable benchmark
for evaluating future progress. Furthermore, we extend the WikiNav with questionanswer pairs from Jeopardy! and test the proposed agent based on recurrent neural
networks against strong inverted index based search engines. The artificial agents
trained on WikiNav outperforms the engined based approaches, demonstrating the
capability of the proposed goal-driven navigation as a good proxy for measuring
the progress in real-world tasks such as focused crawling and question-answering.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there have been many exciting advances in building an artificial agent, which can be
trained with one learning algorithm, to solve many relatively large-scale, complicated tasks (see, e.g.,
[8, 10, 6].) In much of these works, target tasks were computer games such as Atari games [8] and
racing car game [6].
These successes have stimulated researchers to apply a similar learning mechanism to language-based
tasks, such as multi-user dungeon (MUD) games [9, 4]. Instead of visual perception, an agent
perceives the state of the world by its written description. A set of actions allowed to the agent is
either fixed or dependent on the current state. This type of task can efficiently evaluate the agent’s
ability of not only in planning but also language understanding.
We, however, notice that these MUD games do not exhibit the complex nature of natural languages
to the full extent. For instance, the largest game world tested by Narasimhan et al. [9] uses a
vocabulary of only 1340 unique words, and the largest game tested by He et al. [4] uses only 2258
words. Furthermore, the description of a state at each time step is almost always limited to the visual
description of the current scene, lacking any use of higher-level concepts present in natural languages.
In this paper, we propose a goal-driven web navigation as a large-scale alternative to the text-based
games for evaluating artificial agents with natural language understanding and planning capability.
The proposed goal-driven web navigation consists of the whole website as a graph, in which the web
pages are nodes and hyperlinks are directed edges. An agent is given a query, which consists of one
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

