Variational Information Maximization for
Feature Selection
Shuyang Gao
Greg Ver Steeg
Aram Galstyan
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute
gaos@usc.edu, gregv@isi.edu, galstyan@isi.edu

Abstract
Feature selection is one of the most fundamental problems in machine learning.
An extensive body of work on information-theoretic feature selection exists which
is based on maximizing mutual information between subsets of features and class
labels. Practical methods are forced to rely on approximations due to the difficulty
of estimating mutual information. We demonstrate that approximations made by
existing methods are based on unrealistic assumptions. We formulate a more flexible and general class of assumptions based on variational distributions and use
them to tractably generate lower bounds for mutual information. These bounds
define a novel information-theoretic framework for feature selection, which we
prove to be optimal under tree graphical models with proper choice of variational
distributions. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method strongly
outperforms existing information-theoretic feature selection approaches.

1

Introduction

Feature selection is one of the fundamental problems in machine learning research [1, 2]. Its problematic issues include a large number of features that are either irrelevant or redundant for the task at
hand. In these cases, it is often advantageous to pick a smaller subset of features to avoid over-fitting,
to speed up computation, or simply to improve the interpretability of the results.
Feature selection approaches are usually categorized into three groups: wrapper, embedded and
filter [3, 4, 5]. The first two methods, wrapper and embedded, are considered classifier-dependent,
i.e., the selection of features somehow depends on the classifier being used. Filter methods, on the
other hand, are classifier-independent and define a scoring function between features and labels in
the selection process.
Because filter methods may be employed in conjunction with a wide variety of classifiers, it is important that the scoring function of these methods is as general as possible. Since mutual information
(MI) is a general measure of dependence with several unique properties [6], many MI-based scoring
functions have been proposed as filter methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]; see [5] for an exhaustive list.
Owing to the difficulty of estimating mutual information in high dimensions, most existing MI-based
feature selection methods are based on various low-order approximations for mutual information.
While those approximations have been successful in certain applications, they are heuristic in nature
and lack theoretical guarantees. In fact, as we demonstrate in Sec. 2.2, a large family of approximate
methods are based on two assumptions that are mutually inconsistent.
To address the above shortcomings, in this paper we introduce a novel feature selection method
based on a variational lower bound on mutual information; a similar bound was previously studied
within the Infomax learning framework [13]. We show that instead of maximizing the mutual information, which is intractable in high dimensions (hence the introduction of many heuristics), we can
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

