Gradient-based Sampling: An Adaptive Importance
Sampling for Least-squares

Rong Zhu
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
rongzhu@amss.ac.cn

Abstract
In modern data analysis, random sampling is an efficient and widely-used strategy
to overcome the computational difficulties brought by large sample size. In previous
studies, researchers conducted random sampling which is according to the input
data but independent on the response variable, however the response variable may
also be informative for sampling. In this paper we propose an adaptive sampling
called the gradient-based sampling which is dependent on both the input data
and the output for fast solving of least-square (LS) problems. We draw the data
points by random sampling from the full data according to their gradient values.
This sampling is computationally saving, since the running time of computing
the sampling probabilities is reduced to O(nd) where n is the full sample size
and d is the dimension of the input. Theoretically, we establish an error bound
analysis of the general importance sampling with respect to LS solution from full
data. The result establishes an improved performance of the use of our gradientbased sampling. Synthetic and real data sets are used to empirically argue that the
gradient-based sampling has an obvious advantage over existing sampling methods
from two aspects of statistical efficiency and computational saving.

1

Introduction

Modern data analysis always addresses enormous data sets in recent years. Facing the increasing large
sample data, computational savings play a major role in the data analysis. One simple way to reduce
the computational cost is to perform random sampling, that is, one uses a small proportion of the data
as a surrogate of the full sample for model fitting and statistical inference. Among random sampling
strategies, uniform sampling is simple but trivial way since it fails to exploit the unequal importance
of the data points. As an alternative, leverage-based sampling is to perform random sampling with
respect to nonuniform sampling probabilities that depend on the empirical statistical leverage scores
of the input matrix X. It has been intensively studied in the machine learning community and has
been proved to achieve much better results for worst-case input than uniform sampling [1, 2, 3, 4].
However it is known that leverage-based sampling replies on input data but is independent on the
output variable, so does not make use of the information of the output. Another shortcoming is that it
needs to cost much time to get the leverage scores, although approximating leverage scores has been
proposed to further reduce the computational cost [5, 6, 7].
In this paper, we proposed an adaptive importance sampling, the gradient-based sampling, for solving
least-square (LS) problem. This sampling attempts to sufficiently make use of the data information
including the input data and the output variable. This adaptive process can be summarized as follows:
given a pilot estimate (good “guess") for the LS solution, determine the importance of each data
point by calculating the gradient value, then sample from the full data by importance sampling
according to the gradient value. One key contribution of this sampling is to save more computational
time than leverage-based sampling, and the running time of getting the probabilities is reduced to
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

