Blazing the trails before beating the path:
Sample-efficient Monte-Carlo planning

Jean-Bastien Grill
Michal Valko
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France
jean-bastien.grill@inria.fr

michal.valko@inria.fr

Rémi Munos
Google DeepMind, UK∗
munos@google.com

Abstract
You are a robot and you live in a Markov decision process (MDP) with a finite or an
infinite number of transitions from state-action to next states. You got brains and so
you plan before you act. Luckily, your roboparents equipped you with a generative
model to do some Monte-Carlo planning. The world is waiting for you and you
have no time to waste. You want your planning to be efficient. Sample-efficient.
Indeed, you want to exploit the possible structure of the MDP by exploring only a
subset of states reachable by following near-optimal policies. You want guarantees
on sample complexity that depend on a measure of the quantity of near-optimal
states. You want something, that is an extension of Monte-Carlo sampling (for
estimating an expectation) to problems that alternate maximization (over actions)
and expectation (over next states). But you do not want to StOP with exponential
running time, you want something simple to implement and computationally
efficient. You want it all and you want it now. You want TrailBlazer.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of sampling-based planning in a Markov decision process (MDP) when a
generative model (oracle) is available. This approach, also called Monte-Carlo planning or MonteCarlo tree search (see e.g., [12]), has been popularized in the game of computer Go [7, 8, 15] and
shown impressive performance in many other high dimensional control and game problems [4]. In
the present paper, we provide a sample complexity analysis of a new algorithm called TrailBlazer.
Our assumption about the MDP is that we possess a generative model which can be called from any
state-action pair to generate rewards and transition samples. Since making a call to this generative
model has a cost, be it a numerical cost expressed in CPU time (in simulated environments) or a
financial cost (in real domains), our goal is to use this model as parsimoniously as possible.
Following dynamic programming [2], planning can be reduced to an approximation ofhthe (optimal)
i
P
t
value function, defined as the maximum of the expected sum of discounted rewards: E
t≥0 γ rt ,
where γ ∈ [0, 1) is a known discount factor. Indeed, if an ε-optimal approximation of the value
function at any state-action pair is available, then the policy corresponding to selecting in each state
the action with the highest approximated value will be O (ε/ (1 − γ))-optimal [3].
Consequently, in this paper, we focus on a near-optimal approximation of the value function for
a single given state (or state-action pair). In order to assess the performance of our algorithm we
measure its sample complexity defined as the number of oracle calls, given that we guarantee its
consistency, i.e., that with probability at least 1 − δ, TrailBlazer returns an ε-approximation of the
value function as required by the probably approximately correct (PAC) framework.
∗

on the leave from SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

