Online Bayesian Moment Matching for
Topic Modeling with Unknown Number of Topics

Wei-Shou Hsu and Pascal Poupart
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Wateroo, ON N2L 3G1
{wwhsu,ppoupart}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a very popular model for topic modeling as
well as many other problems with latent groups. It is both simple and effective.
When the number of topics (or latent groups) is unknown, the Hierarchical Dirichlet Process (HDP) provides an elegant non-parametric extension; however, it is a
complex model and it is difficult to incorporate prior knowledge since the distribution over topics is implicit. We propose two new models that extend LDA in a
simple and intuitive fashion by directly expressing a distribution over the number
of topics. We also propose a new online Bayesian moment matching technique to
learn the parameters and the number of topics of those models based on streaming data. The approach achieves higher log-likelihood than batch and online HDP
with fixed hyperparameters on several corpora. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/whsu/bmm.

1

Introduction

Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [3] recently emerged as the dominant framework for topic modeling as well as many other applications with latent groups. The Hierarchical Dirichlet Process
(HDP) [18] provides an elegant extension to LDA when the number of topics (latent groups) is
unknown. The non-parametric nature of HDPs is quite attractive since HDPs effectively allow an
unbounded number of topics to be inferred from the data. There is also a rich mathematical theory
underlying HDPs as well as attractive metaphors (e.g., stick breaking process, Chinese restaurant
franchise) to ease the understanding by those less comfortable with non-parametric statistics [18].
That being said, HDPs are not perfect. They do not expose an explicit distribution over the topics
that could allow practitioners to incorporate prior knowledge and to inspect the model’s posterior
confidence in different number of topics. Furthermore, the implicit distribution over the number of
topics is restricted to a regime where the number of topics grows logarithmically with the amount of
data in expectation [18]. For instance, this growth rate is insufficient for applications that exhibit a
power law distribution [6] – a generalization of the HDP known as the hierarchical Pitman-Yor process [21] is often used instead. Existing inference algorithms for HDPs (e.g., Gibbs sampling [18],
variational inference [19, 24, 23, 4, 17]) are also fairly complex. As a result, practitioners often stick
with LDA and estimate the number of topics by repeatedly evaluating different number of topics by
cross-validation; however, this is an expensive procedure.
We propose two new models that extend LDA in a simple and intuitive fashion by directly expressing
a distribution over the number of topics under the assumption that an upper bound on the number of
topics is available. When the amount of data is finite, this assumption is perfectly fine since there
cannot be more topics than the amount of data. Otherwise, domain experts can often define a suitable
range for the number of topics and if they plan to inspect the resulting topics, they cannot inspect
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

