Iterative Refinement of the Approximate Posterior for
Directed Belief Networks
R Devon Hjelm
University of New Mexico and the Mind Research Network
dhjelm@mrn.org
Kyunghyun Cho
Courant Institute & Center for Data Science, New York University
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu
Junyoung Chung
University of Montreal
junyoung.chung@umontreal.ca

Russ Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Melon University
rsalakhu@cs.toronto.edu

Vince Calhoun
University of New Mexico and the Mind Research Network
vcalhoun@mrn.org

Nebojsa Jojic
Microsoft Research
jojic@microsoft.com

Abstract
Variational methods that rely on a recognition network to approximate the posterior
of directed graphical models offer better inference and learning than previous
methods. Recent advances that exploit the capacity and flexibility in this approach
have expanded what kinds of models can be trained. However, as a proposal for the
posterior, the capacity of the recognition network is limited, which can constrain the
representational power of the generative model and increase the variance of Monte
Carlo estimates. To address these issues, we introduce an iterative refinement
procedure for improving the approximate posterior of the recognition network and
show that training with the refined posterior is competitive with state-of-the-art
methods. The advantages of refinement are further evident in an increased effective
sample size, which implies a lower variance of gradient estimates.

1

Introduction

Variational methods have surpassed traditional methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo [MCMC,
15] and mean-field coordinate ascent [25] as the de-facto standard approach for training directed
graphical models. Helmholtz machines [3] are a type of directed graphical model that approximate
the posterior distribution with a recognition network that provides fast inference as well as flexible
learning which scales well to large datasets. Many recent significant advances in training Helmholtz
machines come as estimators for the gradient of the objective w.r.t. the approximate posterior. The
most successful of these methods, variational autoencoders [VAE, 12], relies on a re-parameterization
of the latent variables to pass the learning signal to the recognition network. This type of parameterization, however, is not available with discrete units, and the naive Monte Carlo estimate of the
gradient has too high variance to be practical [3, 12].
However, good estimators are available through importance sampling [1], input-dependent baselines
[13], a combination baselines and importance sampling [14], and parametric Taylor expansions [9].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

