A Unified Approach for Learning the Parameters of
Sum-Product Networks
Han Zhao
Machine Learning Dept.
Carnegie Mellon University
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

Pascal Poupart
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Geoff Gordon
Machine Learning Dept.
Carnegie Mellon University
ggordon@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present a unified approach for learning the parameters of Sum-Product networks
(SPNs). We prove that any complete and decomposable SPN is equivalent to a
mixture of trees where each tree corresponds to a product of univariate distributions.
Based on the mixture model perspective, we characterize the objective function
when learning SPNs based on the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) principle
and show that the optimization problem can be formulated as a signomial program.
We construct two parameter learning algorithms for SPNs by using sequential
monomial approximations (SMA) and the concave-convex procedure (CCCP),
respectively. The two proposed methods naturally admit multiplicative updates,
hence effectively avoiding the projection operation. With the help of the unified
framework, we also show that, in the case of SPNs, CCCP leads to the same
algorithm as Expectation Maximization (EM) despite the fact that they are different
in general.

1

Introduction

Sum-product networks (SPNs) are new deep graphical model architectures that admit exact probabilistic inference in linear time in the size of the network [14]. Similar to traditional graphical
models, there are two main problems when learning SPNs: structure learning and parameter learning.
Parameter learning is interesting even if we know the ground truth structure ahead of time; structure learning depends on parameter learning , so better parameter learning can often lead to better
structure learning. Poon and Domingos [14] and Gens and Domingos [6] proposed both generative
and discriminative learning algorithms for parameters in SPNs. At a high level, these approaches
view SPNs as deep architectures and apply projected gradient descent (PGD) to optimize the data
log-likelihood. There are several drawbacks associated with PGD. For example, the projection step in
PGD hurts the convergence of the algorithm and it will often lead to solutions on the boundary of the
feasible region. Also, PGD contains an additional arbitrary parameter, the projection margin, which
can be hard to set well in practice. In [14, 6], the authors also mentioned the possibility of applying
EM algorithms to train SPNs by viewing sum nodes in SPNs as hidden variables. They presented an
EM update formula without details. However, the update formula for EM given in [14, 6] is incorrect,
as first pointed out and corrected by [12].
In this paper we take a different perspective and present a unified framework, which treats [14, 6] as
special cases, for learning the parameters of SPNs. We prove that any complete and decomposable
SPN is equivalent to a mixture of trees where each tree corresponds to a product of univariate
distributions. Based on the mixture model perspective, we can precisely characterize the functional
form of the objective function based on the network structure. We show that the optimization problem
associated with learning the parameters of SPNs based on the MLE principle can be formulated
as a signomial program (SP), where both PGD and exponentiated gradient (EG) can be viewed as
first order approximations of the signomial program after suitable transformations of the objective
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

