Dimension-Free Iteration Complexity of Finite Sum
Optimization Problems

Yossi Arjevani
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 7610001, Israel
yossi.arjevani@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 7610001, Israel
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Many canonical machine learning problems boil down to a convex optimization
problem with a finite sum structure. However, whereas much progress has been
made in developing faster algorithms for this setting, the inherent limitations of
these problems are not satisfactorily addressed by existing lower bounds. Indeed,
current bounds focus on first-order optimization algorithms, and only apply in
the often unrealistic regime where the number of iterations is less than O(d/n)
(where d is the dimension and n is the number of samples). In this work, we
extend the framework of Arjevani et al. [3, 5] to provide new lower bounds, which
are dimension-free, and go beyond the assumptions of current bounds, thereby
covering standard finite sum optimization methods, e.g., SAG, SAGA, SVRG,
SDCA without duality, as well as stochastic coordinate-descent methods, such as
SDCA and accelerated proximal SDCA.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks reduce to Finite Sum Minimization (FSM) problems of the form
n

min F (w) :=

w∈Rd

1X
fi (w),
n i=1

(1)

where fi are L-smooth and µ-strongly convex. In recent years, a major breakthrough was made
when a linear convergence rate was established for this setting (SAG [16] and SDCA [18]), and since
then, many methods have been developed to achieve better convergence rate. However, whereas a
large body of literature is devoted for upper bounds, the optimal convergence rate with respect to the
problem parameters is not quite settled.
Let us discuss existing lower bounds for this setting, along with their shortcomings, in detail. One
approach to obtain lower bounds for this setting is to consider the average of carefully handcrafted
functions defined on n disjoint sets of variables. This approach was taken by Agarwal and Bottou [1]
who derived a lower bound for FSM under the first-order oracle model (see Nemirovsky and Yudin
[12]). In this model, optimization algorithms are assumed to access a given function by issuing queries
to an external first-order oracle procedure. Upon receiving a query point in the problem domain, the
oracle reports the corresponding function value and gradient. The construction used by Agarwal and
Bottou consisted of n different quadratic functions which are adversarially determined based on the
first-order queries being issued during the optimization process. The resulting bound in this case does
not apply to stochastic algorithms, rendering it invalid for current state-of-the-art methods. Another
instantiation of this approach was made by Lan [10] who considered n disjoint copies of a quadratic
function proposed by Nesterov in [13, Section 2.1.2]. This technique is based on the assumption that
any iterate generated by the optimization algorithm lies in the span of previously acquired gradients.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

