Unifying Count-Based Exploration and Intrinsic Motivation

Marc G. Bellemare
bellemare@google.com

Sriram Srinivasan
srsrinivasan@google.com

Georg Ostrovski
ostrovski@google.com

Tom Schaul
schaul@google.com

David Saxton
saxton@google.com

Rémi Munos
munos@google.com

Google DeepMind
London, United Kingdom

Abstract
We consider an agent’s uncertainty about its environment and the problem of generalizing this uncertainty across states. Specifically, we focus on the problem of
exploration in non-tabular reinforcement learning. Drawing inspiration from the
intrinsic motivation literature, we use density models to measure uncertainty, and
propose a novel algorithm for deriving a pseudo-count from an arbitrary density
model. This technique enables us to generalize count-based exploration algorithms to the non-tabular case. We apply our ideas to Atari 2600 games, providing
sensible pseudo-counts from raw pixels. We transform these pseudo-counts into
exploration bonuses and obtain significantly improved exploration in a number of
hard games, including the infamously difficult M ONTEZUMA’ S R EVENGE.

1

Introduction

Exploration algorithms for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are typically concerned with reducing the agent’s uncertainty over the environment’s reward and transition functions. In a tabular
setting, this uncertainty can be quantified using confidence intervals derived from Chernoff bounds,
or inferred from a posterior over the environment parameters. In fact, both confidence intervals
and posterior shrink as the inverse square root of the state-action visit count N (x, a), making this
quantity fundamental to most theoretical results on exploration.
Count-based exploration methods directly use visit counts to guide an agent’s behaviour towards
reducing uncertainty. For example, Model-based Interval Estimation with Exploration Bonuses
(MBIE-EB; Strehl and Littman, 2008) solves the augmented Bellman equation
h
i
V (x) = max R̂(x, a) + γ EP̂ [V (x0 )] + βN (x, a)−1/2 ,
a∈A

involving the empirical reward R̂, the empirical transition function P̂ , and an exploration bonus
proportional to N (x, a)−1/2 . This bonus accounts for uncertainties in both transition and reward
functions and enables a finite-time bound on the agent’s suboptimality.
In spite of their pleasant theoretical guarantees, count-based methods have not played a role in the
contemporary successes of reinforcement learning (e.g. Mnih et al., 2015). Instead, most practical
methods still rely on simple rules such as -greedy. The issue is that visit counts are not directly
useful in large domains, where states are rarely visited more than once.
Answering a different scientific question, intrinsic motivation aims to provide qualitative guidance
for exploration (Schmidhuber, 1991; Oudeyer et al., 2007; Barto, 2013). This guidance can be
summarized as “explore what surprises you”. A typical approach guides the agent based on change
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

