Bi-Objective Online Matching and Submodular
Allocations
Hossein Esfandiari
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740
hossein@cs.umd.edu

Nitish Korula
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
nitish@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Online allocation problems have been widely studied due to their numerous practical applications (particularly to Internet advertising), as well as considerable
theoretical interest. The main challenge in such problems is making assignment
decisions in the face of uncertainty about future input; effective algorithms need to
predict which constraints are most likely to bind, and learn the balance between
short-term gain and the value of long-term resource availability.
In many important applications, the algorithm designer is faced with multiple
objectives to optimize. In particular, in online advertising it is fairly common to
optimize multiple metrics, such as clicks, conversions, and impressions, as well
as other metrics which may be largely uncorrelated such as ‘share of voice’, and
‘buyer surplus’. While there has been considerable work on multi-objective offline
optimization (when the entire input is known in advance), very little is known
about the online case, particularly in the case of adversarial input. In this paper,
we give the first results for bi-objective online submodular optimization, providing
almost matching upper and lower bounds for allocating items to agents with two
submodular value functions. We also study practically relevant special cases of
this problem related to Internet advertising, and obtain improved results. All our
algorithms are nearly best possible, as well as being efficient and easy to implement
in practice.

1

Introduction

As a central optimization problem with a wide variety of applications, online resource allocation
problems have attracted a large body of research in networking, distributed computing, and electronic
commerce. Here, items arrive one at a time (i.e. online), and when each item arrives, the algorithm
must irrevocably assign it to an agent; each agent has a limited resource budget / capacity for items
assigned to him. A big challenge in developing good algorithms for these problems is to predict future
binding constraints or learn future capacity availability, and allocate items one by one to agents who
are unlikely to hit their capacity in the future. Various stochastic and adversarial models have been
proposed to study such online allocation problems, and many techniques have been developed for
these problems. For stochastic input, a natural approach is to build a predicted instance (for instance,
via sampling, or using historical data), and some of these techniques solve a dual linear program
to learn dual variables that are used by the online algorithm moving forward [6, 10, 2, 23, 16, 18].
However, stochastic approaches may provide poor results on some input (for example, when there
are unexpected spikes in supply / demand), and hence such problems have been extensively studied
in adversarial models as well. Here, the algorithm typically maintains a careful balance between
greedily exploiting the current item by assigning it to agents with high value for it, and assigning the
item to a lower-value agent for whom the value is further from the distribution of ‘typical’ items they
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

