Structured Prediction Theory Based on
Factor Graph Complexity
Corinna Cortes
Google Research
New York, NY 10011

Vitaly Kuznetsov
Google Research
New York, NY 10011

corinna@google.com

vitaly@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohrii
Courant Institute and Google
New York, NY 10012

Scott Yang
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012

mohri@cims.nyu.edu

yangs@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present a general theoretical analysis of structured prediction with a series
of new results. We give new data-dependent margin guarantees for structured
prediction for a very wide family of loss functions and a general family of hypotheses, with an arbitrary factor graph decomposition. These are the tightest margin
bounds known for both standard multi-class and general structured prediction
problems. Our guarantees are expressed in terms of a data-dependent complexity
measure, factor graph complexity, which we show can be estimated from data and
bounded in terms of familiar quantities for several commonly used hypothesis sets
along with a sparsity measure for features and graphs. Our proof techniques include generalizations of Talagrand’s contraction lemma that can be of independent
interest.
We further extend our theory by leveraging the principle of Voted Risk Minimization (VRM) and show that learning is possible even with complex factor graphs. We
present new learning bounds for this advanced setting, which we use to design two
new algorithms, Voted Conditional Random Field (VCRF) and Voted Structured
Boosting (StructBoost). These algorithms can make use of complex features and
factor graphs and yet benefit from favorable learning guarantees. We also report
the results of experiments with VCRF on several datasets to validate our theory.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction covers a broad family of important learning problems. These include key tasks
in natural language processing such as part-of-speech tagging, parsing, machine translation, and
named-entity recognition, important areas in computer vision such as image segmentation and object
recognition, and also crucial areas in speech processing such as pronunciation modeling and speech
recognition.
In all these problems, the output space admits some structure. This may be a sequence of tags as in
part-of-speech tagging, a parse tree as in context-free parsing, an acyclic graph as in dependency
parsing, or labels of image segments as in object detection. Another property common to these tasks
is that, in each case, the natural loss function admits a decomposition along the output substructures.
As an example, the loss function may be the Hamming loss as in part-of-speech tagging, or it may be
the edit-distance, which is widely used in natural language and speech processing.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

