Blind Attacks on Machine Learners
Alex Beatson
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
abeatson@princeton.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
zhaoran@princeton.edu

Han Liu
Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
hanliu@princeton.edu

Abstract
The importance of studying the robustness of learners to malicious data is well
established. While much work has been done establishing both robust estimators
and effective data injection attacks when the attacker is omniscient, the ability of
an attacker to provably harm learning while having access to little information is
largely unstudied. We study the potential of a “blind attacker” to provably limit
a learner’s performance by data injection attack without observing the learner’s
training set or any parameter of the distribution from which it is drawn. We provide
examples of simple yet effective attacks in two settings: firstly, where an “informed
learner” knows the strategy chosen by the attacker, and secondly, where a “blind
learner” knows only the proportion of malicious data and some family to which the
malicious distribution chosen by the attacker belongs. For each attack, we analyze
minimax rates of convergence and establish lower bounds on the learner’s minimax
risk, exhibiting limits on a learner’s ability to learn under data injection attack even
when the attacker is “blind”.

1

Introduction

As machine learning becomes more widely adopted in security and in security-sensitive tasks, it is
important to consider what happens when some aspect of the learning process or the training data
is compromised [1–4]. Examples in network security are common and include tasks such as spam
filtering [5, 6] and network intrusion detection [7, 8]; examples outside the realm of network security
include statistical fraud detection [9] and link prediction using social network data or communications
metadata for crime science and counterterrorism [10].
In a training set attack, an attacker either adds adversarial data points to the training set (“data
injection”) or preturbs some of the points in the dataset so as to influence the concept learned by the
learner, often with the aim of maximizing the learner’s risk. Training-set data injection attacks are
one of the most practical means by which an attacker can influence learning, as in many settings an
attacker which does not have insider access to the learner or its data collection or storage systems
may still be able to carry out some activity which is monitored and the resulting data used in the
learner’s training set [2, 6]. In a network security setting, an attacker might inject data into the training
set for an anomaly detection system so that malicious traffic is classified as normal, thus making a
network vulnerable to attack, or so that normal traffic is classified as malicious, thus harming network
operation.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

