Computational and Statistical Tradeoffs in Learning
to Rank
Ashish Khetan and Sewoong Oh
Department of ISE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Email: {khetan2,swoh}@illinois.edu

Abstract
For massive and heterogeneous modern data sets, it is of fundamental interest to
provide guarantees on the accuracy of estimation when computational resources
are limited. In the application of learning to rank, we provide a hierarchy of rankbreaking mechanisms ordered by the complexity in thus generated sketch of the
data. This allows the number of data points collected to be gracefully traded off
against computational resources available, while guaranteeing the desired level
of accuracy. Theoretical guarantees on the proposed generalized rank-breaking
implicitly provide such trade-offs, which can be explicitly characterized under
certain canonical scenarios on the structure of the data.

1

Introduction

In classical statistical inference, we are typically interested in characterizing how more data points
improve the accuracy, with little restrictions or considerations on computational aspects of solving
the inference problem. However, with massive growths of the amount of data available and also
the complexity and heterogeneity of the collected data, computational resources, such as time and
memory, are major bottlenecks in many modern applications. As a solution, recent advances in
[7, 23, 8, 1, 16] introduce hierarchies of algorithmic solutions, ordered by the respective computational
complexity, for several fundamental machine learning applications. Guided by sharp analyses on the
sample complexity, these approaches provide theoretically sound guidelines that allow the analyst the
flexibility to fall back to simpler algorithms to enjoy the full merit of the improved run-time.
Inspired by these advances, we study the time-data tradeoff in learning to rank. In many applications
such as election, policy making, polling, and recommendation systems, we want to aggregate individual preferences to produce a global ranking that best represents the collective social preference.
Learning to rank is a rank aggregation approach, which assumes that the data comes from a parametric
family of choice models, and learns the parameters that determine the global ranking. Traditionally,
each revealed preference is assumed to have one of the following three structures. Pairwise comparison, where one item is preferred over another, is common in sports and chess matches. Best-out-of-κ
comparison, where one is chosen among a set of κ alternatives, is common in historical purchase
data. κ-way comparison, where we observe a linear ordering of a set of κ candidates, is used in some
elections and surveys. For such traditional preferences, efficient schemes for learning to rank have
been proposed, e.g. [12, 9]. However, modern data sets are unstructured and heterogeneous. This can
lead to significant increase in the computational complexity, requiring exponential run-time in the
size of the problem in the worst case [15].
To alleviate this computational challenge, we propose a hierarchy of estimators which we call
generalized rank-breaking, ordered in increasing computational complexity and achieving increasing
accuracy. The key idea is to break down the heterogeneous revealed preferences into simpler pieces
of ordinal relations, and apply an estimator tailored for those simple structures treating each piece as
independent. Several aspects of rank-breaking makes this problem interesting and challenging. A
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

