The Robustness of Estimator Composition

Jeff M. Phillips
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
jeffp@cs.utah.edu

Pingfan Tang
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
tang1984@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
We formalize notions of robustness for composite estimators via the notion of
a breakdown point. A composite estimator successively applies two (or more)
estimators: on data decomposed into disjoint parts, it applies the first estimator on
each part, then the second estimator on the outputs of the first estimator. And so
on, if the composition is of more than two estimators. Informally, the breakdown
point is the minimum fraction of data points which if significantly modified will
also significantly modify the output of the estimator, so it is typically desirable to
have a large breakdown point. Our main result shows that, under mild conditions
on the individual estimators, the breakdown point of the composite estimator is the
product of the breakdown points of the individual estimators. We also demonstrate
several scenarios, ranging from regression to statistical testing, where this analysis
is easy to apply, useful in understanding worst case robustness, and sheds powerful
insights onto the associated data analysis.

1

Introduction

Robust statistical estimators [5, 7] (in particular, resistant estimators), such as the median, are an
essential tool in data analysis since they are provably immune to outliers. Given data with a large
fraction of extreme outliers, a robust estimator guarantees the returned value is still within the nonoutlier part of the data. In particular, the role of these estimators is quickly growing in importance
as the scale and automation associated with data collection and data processing becomes more
commonplace. Artisanal data (hand crafted and carefully curated), where potential outliers can be
removed, is becoming proportionally less common. Instead, important decisions are being made
blindly based on the output of analysis functions, often without looking at individual data points
and their effect on the outcome. Thus using estimators as part of this pipeline that are not robust are
susceptible to erroneous and dangerous decisions as the result of a few extreme and rogue data points.
Although other approaches like regularization and pruning a constant number of obvious outliers
are common as well, they do not come with the important guarantees that ensure these unwanted
outcomes absolutely cannot occur.
In this paper we initiate the formal study of the robustness of composition of estimators through the
notion of breakdown points. These are especially important with the growth of data analysis pipelines
where the final result or prediction is the result of several layers of data processing. When each layer
in this pipeline is modeled as an estimator, then our analysis provides the first general robustness
analysis of these processes.
The breakdown point [4, 3] is a basic measure of robustness of an estimator. Intuitively, it describes
how many outliers can be in the data without the estimator becoming unreliable. However, the
literature is full of slightly inconsistent and informal definitions of this concept. For example:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

