Towards Conceptual Compression

Karol Gregor
Google DeepMind
karolg@google.com

Frederic Besse
Google DeepMind
fbesse@google.com

Ivo Danihelka
Google DeepMind
danihelka@google.com

Danilo Jimenez Rezende
Google DeepMind
danilor@google.com

Daan Wierstra
Google DeepMind
wierstra@google.com

Abstract
We introduce convolutional DRAW, a homogeneous deep generative model achieving state-of-the-art performance in latent variable image modeling. The algorithm
naturally stratifies information into higher and lower level details, creating abstract
features and as such addressing one of the fundamentally desired properties of
representation learning. Furthermore, the hierarchical ordering of its latents creates
the opportunity to selectively store global information about an image, yielding a
high quality ‘conceptual compression’ framework.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models with latent variables can capture image information in a probabilistic manner
to answer questions about structure and uncertainty. Such models can also be used for representation
learning, and the associated procedures for inferring latent variables are vital to important application
areas such as (semi-supervised) classification and compression.
In this paper we introduce convolutional DRAW, a new model in this class that is able to transform
an image into a progression of increasingly detailed representations, ranging from global conceptual
aspects to low level details (see Figure 1). It significantly improves upon earlier variational latent
variable models (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Gregor et al., 2014). Furthermore, it
is simple and fully convolutional, and does not require complex design choices, just like the recently
introduced DRAW architecture (Gregor et al., 2015). It provides an important insight into building
good variational auto-encoder models of images: positioning multiple layers of stochastic variables
‘close’ to the pixels (in terms of nonlinear steps in the computational graph) can significantly improve
generative performance. Lastly, the system’s ability to stratify information has the side benefit of
allowing it to perform high quality lossy compression, by selectively storing a higher level subset of
inferred latent variables, while (re)generating the remainder during decompression (see Figure 3).
In the following we will first discuss variational auto-encoders and compression. The subsequent
sections then describe the algorithm and present results both on generation quality and compression.
1.1

Variational Auto-Encoders

Numerous deep generative models have been developed recently, ranging from restricted and deep
Boltzmann machines (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009), generative
adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), autoregressive models (Larochelle & Murray, 2011;
Gregor & LeCun, 2011; van den Oord et al., 2016) to variational auto-encoders (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Gregor et al., 2014). In this paper we focus on the class of models in the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

