Exponential Family Embeddings

Maja Rudolph
Columbia University

Francisco J. R. Ruiz
Univ. of Cambridge
Columbia University

Stephan Mandt
Columbia University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
Word embeddings are a powerful approach for capturing semantic similarity among
terms in a vocabulary. In this paper, we develop exponential family embeddings,
a class of methods that extends the idea of word embeddings to other types of
high-dimensional data. As examples, we studied neural data with real-valued
observations, count data from a market basket analysis, and ratings data from
a movie recommendation system. The main idea is to model each observation
conditioned on a set of other observations. This set is called the context, and
the way the context is defined is a modeling choice that depends on the problem.
In language the context is the surrounding words; in neuroscience the context is
close-by neurons; in market basket data the context is other items in the shopping
cart. Each type of embedding model defines the context, the exponential family of
conditional distributions, and how the latent embedding vectors are shared across
data. We infer the embeddings with a scalable algorithm based on stochastic
gradient descent. On all three applications—neural activity of zebrafish, users’
shopping behavior, and movie ratings—we found exponential family embedding
models to be more effective than other types of dimension reduction. They better
reconstruct held-out data and find interesting qualitative structure.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings are a powerful approach for analyzing language (Bengio et al., 2006; Mikolov et al.,
2013a,b; Pennington et al., 2014). A word embedding method discovers distributed representations of
words; these representations capture the semantic similarity between the words and reflect a variety of
other linguistic regularities (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Bengio et al., 2006; Mikolov et al., 2013c). Fitted
word embeddings can help us understand the structure of language and are useful for downstream
tasks based on text.
There are many variants, adaptations, and extensions of word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013a,b;
Mnih and Kavukcuoglu, 2013; Levy and Goldberg, 2014; Pennington et al., 2014; Vilnis and McCallum, 2015), but each reflects the same main ideas. Each term in a vocabulary is associated with
two latent vectors, an embedding and a context vector. These two types of vectors govern conditional
probabilities that relate each word to its surrounding context. Specifically, the conditional probability
of a word combines its embedding and the context vectors of its surrounding words. (Different methods combine them differently.) Given a corpus, we fit the embeddings by maximizing the conditional
probabilities of the observed text.
In this paper we develop the exponential family embedding (ef-emb), a class of models that generalizes
the spirit of word embeddings to other types of high-dimensional data. Our motivation is that other
types of data can benefit from the same assumptions that underlie word embeddings, namely that
a data point is governed by the other data in its context. In language, this is the foundational idea
that words with similar meanings will appear in similar contexts (Harris, 1954). We use the tools of
exponential families (Brown, 1986) and generalized linear models (glms) (McCullagh and Nelder,
1989) to adapt this idea beyond language.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

