Structured Matrix Recovery via the Generalized
Dantzig Selector

Sheng Chen
Arindam Banerjee
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
{shengc,banerjee}@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
In recent years, structured matrix recovery problems have gained considerable
attention for its real world applications, such as recommender systems and computer
vision. Much of the existing work has focused on matrices with low-rank structure,
and limited progress has been made on matrices with other types of structure. In
this paper we present non-asymptotic analysis for estimation of generally structured
matrices via the generalized Dantzig selector based on sub-Gaussian measurements.
We show that the estimation error can always be succinctly expressed in terms of a
few geometric measures such as Gaussian widths of suitable sets associated with
the structure of the underlying true matrix. Further, we derive general bounds on
these geometric measures for structures characterized by unitarily invariant norms,
a large family covering most matrix norms of practical interest. Examples are
provided to illustrate the utility of our theoretical development.

1

Introduction

Structured matrix recovery has found a wide spectrum of applications in real world, e.g., recommender
systems [22], face recognition [9], etc. The recovery of an unknown structured matrix Θ∗ ∈ Rd×p
essentially needs to consider two aspects: the measurement model, i.e., what kind of information
about the unknown matrix is revealed from each measurement, and the structure of the underlying
matrix, e.g., sparse, low-rank, etc. In the context of structured matrix estimation and recovery, a
widely used measurement model is the linear measurement, i.e., one has access to n observations
of the form yi = hhΘ∗ , Xi ii + ωi for Θ∗ , where hh·, ·ii denotes the matrix inner product, i.e.,
hhA, Bii = Tr(AT B) for any A, B ∈ Rd×p , and ωi ’s are additive noise. In the literature, various
types of measurement matrices Xi has been investigated, for example, Gaussian ensemble where Xi
consists of i.i.d. standard Gaussian entries [11], rank-one projection model where Xi is randomly
generated with constraint rank(Xi ) = 1 [7]. A special case of rank-one projection is the matrix
completion model [8], in which Xi has a single entry equal to 1 with all the rest set to 0, i.e., yi
takes the value of one entry from Θ∗ at each measurement. Other measurement models include
row-and-column affine measurement [34], exponential family matrix completion [21, 20], etc.
Previous work has shown that low-complexity structure of Θ∗ , often captured by a small value of
some norm R(·), can significantly benefit its recovery [11, 26]. For instance, one of the popular
structures of Θ∗ is low-rank, which can be approximated by a small value of trace norm (i.e., nuclear
norm) k · ktr . Under the low-rank assumption of Θ∗ , recovery guarantees have been established for
different measurement matrices using convex programs, e.g., trace-norm regularized least-square
estimator [10, 27, 26, 21],
n

1X
2
(yi − hhXi , Θii) + βn kΘ∗ ktr ,
d×p
2 i=1
Θ∈R
min

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(1)

