Computing and maximizing influence in linear
threshold and triggering models

Justin Khim
Department of Statistics
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
jkhim@wharton.upenn.edu

Varun Jog
Electrical & Computer Engineering Department
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Madison, WI 53706
vjog@wisc.edu

Po-Ling Loh
Electrical & Computer Engineering Department
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Madison, WI 53706
loh@ece.wisc.edu

Abstract
We establish upper and lower bounds for the influence of a set of nodes in certain
types of contagion models. We derive two sets of bounds, the first designed for
linear threshold models, and the second more broadly applicable to a general class
of triggering models, which subsumes the popular independent cascade models, as
well. We quantify the gap between our upper and lower bounds in the case of the
linear threshold model and illustrate the gains of our upper bounds for independent
cascade models in relation to existing results. Importantly, our lower bounds
are monotonic and submodular, implying that a greedy algorithmfor influence
maximization is guaranteed to produce a maximizer within a 1 − 1e -factor of the
truth. Although the problem of exact influence computation is NP-hard in general,
our bounds may be evaluated efficiently. This leads to an attractive, highly scalable
algorithm for influence maximization with rigorous theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Many datasets in contemporary scientific applications possess some form of network structure [20].
Popular examples include data collected from social media websites such as Facebook and Twitter [1],
or electrical recordings gathered from a physical network of firing neurons [22]. In settings involving
biological data, a common goal is to construct an abstract network representing interactions between
genes, proteins, or other biomolecules [8].
Over the last century, a vast body of work has been developed in the epidemiology literature to
model the spread of disease [10]. The most popular models include SI (susceptible, infected), SIS
(susceptible, infected, susceptible), and SIR (susceptible, infected, recovered), in which nodes may
infect adjacent neighbors according to a certain stochastic process. These models have recently been
applied to social network and viral marketing settings by computer scientists [6, 14]. In particular,
the notion of influence, which refers to the expected number of infected individuals in a network
at the conclusion of an epidemic spread, was studied by Kempe et al. [9]. However, determining
an influence-maximizing seed set of a certain cardinality was shown to be NP-hard—in fact, even
computing the influence exactly in certain simple models is #P-hard [3, 5]. Recent work in theoretical
computer science has therefore focused on maximizing influence up to constant factors [9, 2].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

