Beyond Exchangeability: The Chinese Voting Process
Moontae Lee
Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
moontae@cs.cornell.edu

Seok Hyun Jin
Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
sj372@cornell.edu

David Mimno
Dept. of Information Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
mimno@cornell.edu

Abstract
Many online communities present user-contributed responses such as reviews of
products and answers to questions. User-provided helpfulness votes can highlight
the most useful responses, but voting is a social process that can gain momentum
based on the popularity of responses and the polarity of existing votes. We propose
the Chinese Voting Process (CVP) which models the evolution of helpfulness votes
as a self-reinforcing process dependent on position and presentation biases. We
evaluate this model on Amazon product reviews and more than 80 StackExchange
forums, measuring the intrinsic quality of individual responses and behavioral
coefficients of different communities.

1

Introduction

With the expansion of online social platforms, user-generated content has become increasingly
influential. Customer reviews in e-commerce like Amazon are often more helpful than editorial
reviews [14], and question answers in Q&A forums such as StackOverflow and MathOverflow are
highly useful for coders and researchers [9, 18]. Due to the diversity and abundance of user content,
promoting better access to more useful information is critical for both users and service providers.
Helpfulness voting is a powerful means to evaluate the quality of user responses (i.e., reviews/answers)
by the wisdom of crowds. While these votes are generally valuable in aggregate, estimating the
true quality of the responses is difficult because users are heavily influenced by previous votes. We
propose a new model that is capable of learning the intrinsic quality of responses by considering their
social contexts and momentum.
Previous work in self-reinforcing social behaviors shows that although inherent quality is an important
factor in overall ranking, users are susceptible to position bias [12, 13]. Displaying items in an order
affects users: top-ranked items get more popularity, while low-ranked items remain in obscurity.
We find that sensitivity to orders also differs across communities: some value a range of opinions,
while others prefer a single authoritative answer. Summary information displayed together can
lead to presentation bias [19]. As the current voting scores are visibly presented with responses,
users inevitably perceive the score before reading the contents of responses. Such exposure could
immediately nudge user evaluations toward the majority opinion, making high-scored responses more
attractive. We also find that the relative length of each response affects the polarity of future votes.
Standard discrete models for self-reRes
Votes
Diff Ratio Relative Quality
inforcing process include the Chinese
1 +++
0
0.5
quite negative
Restaurant Process and the Pólya urn
2 + + +
0
0.5 moderately negative
model. Since these models are exchange3
+ + + 0
0.5
moderately positive
able, the order of events does not affect
4
+ ++ 0
0.5
quite positive
the probability of a sequence. However,
Table 1 suggests how different contexts Table 1: Quality interpretation for each sequence of six votes.
of votes cause different impacts. While the four sequences have equal numbers of positive and
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

