A Sparse Interactive Model for Matrix Completion
with Side Information
Jin Lu

Guannan Liang
Jiangwen Sun
Jinbo Bi
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
{jin.lu, guannan.liang, jiangwen.sun, jinbo.bi}@uconn.edu

Abstract
Matrix completion methods can benefit from side information besides the partially observed matrix. The use of side features that describe the row and column
entities of a matrix has been shown to reduce the sample complexity for completing the matrix. We propose a novel sparse formulation that explicitly models the
interaction between the row and column side features to approximate the matrix
entries. Unlike early methods, this model does not require the low rank condition
on the model parameter matrix. We prove that when the side features span the
latent feature space of the matrix to be recovered, the number of observed entries
needed for an exact recovery is O(log N ) where N is the size of the matrix. If the
side features are corrupted latent features of the matrix with a small perturbation,
our method can achieve an -recovery with O(log N ) sample complexity. If side
information is useless, our method maintains a O(N 3/2 ) sampling rate similar to
classic methods. An efficient linearized Lagrangian algorithm is developed with
a convergence guarantee. Empirical results show that our approach outperforms
three state-of-the-art methods both in simulations and on real world datasets.

1

Introduction

Matrix completion has been a basis of many machine learning approaches for computer vision [6],
recommender systems [21, 24], signal processing [19, 27], and among many others. Classically,
low-rank matrix completion methods are based on matrix decomposition techniques which require
only the partially observed data in the matrix [15, 3, 14] by solving the following problem
minE kEk∗ , subject to RΩ (E) = RΩ (F),

(1)

where F ∈ Rm×n is the partially observed low-rank matrix (with a rank of r) that needs to be
recovered, Ω ⊆ {1, · · · , m}×{1, · · · , n} be the set of indexes where the corresponding components
in F are observed, the mapping RΩ (M): Rm×n → Rm×n gives another matrix whose (i, j)-th
entry is Mi,j if (i, j) ∈ Ω (or 0 otherwise), and kEk∗ computes the nuclear norm of E. Early
theoretical analysis [4, 5, 20] proves that O(N r log2 N ) entries are sufficient for an exact recovery
if the observed entries are uniformly sampled at random where N = max{n, m}.
Recent studies start to explore side information for matrix completion and factorization [1, 18, 7,
17, 8]. For example, to infer the missing ratings in a user-movie rating matrix, descriptors of the
users and movies are often known and may help to build a content-based recommender system. For
instance, kids tend to like cartoons, so the age of a user likely interacts with the cartoon feature of a
movie. When few ratings are known, this side information could be the main source for completing
the matrix. Although based on empirical studies, several works found that side features are helpful
[17, 18], those methods are based on non-convex matrix factorization formulations without any
theoretical guarantees. Three recent methods have focussed on convex nuclear-norm regularized
objectives, which leads to theoretical guarantees on matrix recovery [13, 28, 9, 16]. These methods
all construct an inductive model XT GY so that RΩ (XT GY) = RΩ (F) where the side matrices
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

