Efficient and Robust Spiking Neural Circuit for
Navigation Inspired by Echolocating Bats

Pulkit Tandon, Yash H. Malviya
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
pulkit1495,yashmalviya94@gmail.com

Bipin Rajendran
New Jersey Institute of Technology
bipin@njit.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate a spiking neural circuit for azimuth angle detection inspired by
the echolocation circuits of the Horseshoe bat Rhinolophus ferrumequinum and
utilize it to devise a model for navigation and target tracking, capturing several key
aspects of information transmission in biology. Our network, using only a simple
local-information based sensor implementing the cardioid angular gain function,
operates at biological spike rate of approximately 10 Hz. The network tracks large
angular targets (60◦ ) within 1 sec with a 10% RMS error. We study the navigational
ability of our model for foraging and target localization tasks in a forest of obstacles
and show that it requires less than 200X spike-triggered decisions, while suffering
less than 1% loss in performance compared to a proportional-integral-derivative
controller, in the presence of 50% additive noise. Superior performance can be
obtained at a higher average spike rate of 100 Hz and 1000 Hz, but even the accelerated networks require 20X and 10X lesser decisions respectively, demonstrating the
superior computational efficiency of bio-inspired information processing systems.

1

Introduction

One of the most remarkable engineering marvels of nature is the ability of many species such as
bats, toothed whales and dolphins to navigate and identify preys and predators by echolocation, i.e.,
emit sounds with complex characteristics, and use neural circuits to discern the location, velocity
and features of obstacles or targets based on the echo of the signal. Echolocation problem can be
sub-divided into estimating range, height and azimuth angle of objects in the environment. These
coordinates are resolved by the bat using separate mechanisms and networks [1, 2]. While the bat’s
height detection capability is obtained through the unique structure of its ear that creates patterns
of interference in the spectrum of incoming echoes [3], the coordinates of range and azimuth are
estimated using specialized neural networks [1, 2].
Artificial neural networks are of great engineering interest, as they are suitable for a wide variety
of autonomous data analytics applications [4]. In spite of their impressive successes in solving
complex cognitive tasks [5], the commonly used neuronal and synaptic models today do not capture
the most crucial aspects of the animal brain where neuronal signals are encoded and transmitted as
spikes or action potentials and the synaptic strength which encodes memory and other computational
capabilities is adjusted autonomously based on the time of spikes [6, 7]. Spiking neural networks
(SNNs) are believed to be computationally more efficient than their second-generation counterparts[8].
Bat’s echolocation behavior has two distinct attributes – prey catching and random foraging. It is
believed that an ‘azimuth echolocation network’ in the bat’s brain plays a major role in helping it to
forage randomly as it enables obstacle detection and avoidance, while a ‘range detection network’
helps in modulating the sonar vocalizations of the bat which enable better detection, tracking and
catching of prey [1, 2]. In this paper, we focus on the relatively simple azimuth detection network of
the greater horseshoe bat to develop a SNN for object tracking and navigation.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

