Learning shape correspondence with
anisotropic convolutional neural networks
Davide Boscaini1 , Jonathan Masci1 , Emanuele Rodolà1 , Michael Bronstein1,2,3
1
2
3
USI Lugano, Switzerland
Tel Aviv University, Israel
Intel, Israel
name.surname@usi.ch

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have achieved extraordinary results in many computer vision and pattern recognition applications; however, their adoption in the
computer graphics and geometry processing communities is limited due to the
non-Euclidean structure of their data. In this paper, we propose Anisotropic Convolutional Neural Network (ACNN), a generalization of classical CNNs to nonEuclidean domains, where classical convolutions are replaced by projections over
a set of oriented anisotropic diffusion kernels. We use ACNNs to effectively learn
intrinsic dense correspondences between deformable shapes, a fundamental problem in geometry processing, arising in a wide variety of applications. We tested
ACNNs performance in challenging settings, achieving state-of-the-art results on
recent correspondence benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In geometry processing, computer graphics, and vision, finding intrinsic correspondence between
3D shapes affected by different transformations is one of the fundamental problems with a wide
spectrum of applications ranging from texture mapping to animation [25]. Of particular interest is
the setting in which the shapes are allowed to deform non-rigidly. Traditional hand-crafted correspondence approaches are divided into two main categories: point-wise correspondence methods
[17], which establish the matching between (a subset of) the points on two or more shapes by minimizing metric distortion, and soft correspondence methods [23], which establish a correspondence
among functions defined over the shapes, rather than the vertices themselves. Recently, the emergence of 3D sensing technology has brought the need to deal with acquisition artifacts, such as
missing parts, geometric, and topological noise, as well as matching 3D shapes in different representations, such as meshes and point clouds. With new and broader classes of artifacts, comes the
need of learning from data invariance that is otherwise impossible to model axiomatically.
In the past years, we have witnessed the emergence of learning-based approaches for 3D shape
analysis. The first attempts were aimed at learning local shape descriptors [15, 5, 27], and shape
correspondence [20]. The dramatic success of deep learning (in particular, convolutional neural
networks [8, 14]) in computer vision [13] has led to a recent keen interest in the geometry processing
and graphics communities to apply such methodologies to geometric problems [16, 24, 28, 4, 26].
Extrinsic deep learning. Many machine learning techniques successfully working on images were
tried “as is” on 3D geometric data, represented for this purpose in some way “digestible” by standard frameworks. Su et al. [24] used CNNs applied to range images obtained from multiple views
of 3D objects for retrieval and classification tasks. Wei et al. [26] used view-based representation
to find correspondence between non-rigid shapes. Wu et al. [28] used volumetric CNNs applied to
rasterized volumetric representation of 3D shapes. The main drawback of such approaches is their
treatment of geometric data as Euclidean structures. Such representations are not intrinsic, and vary
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

