Learning a Probabilistic Latent Space of Object
Shapes via 3D Generative-Adversarial Modeling

Jiajun Wu*
MIT CSAIL

Chengkai Zhang*
MIT CSAIL

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL, Google Research

Tianfan Xue
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
We study the problem of 3D object generation. We propose a novel framework,
namely 3D Generative Adversarial Network (3D-GAN), which generates 3D objects from a probabilistic space by leveraging recent advances in volumetric convolutional networks and generative adversarial nets. The benefits of our model are
three-fold: first, the use of an adversarial criterion, instead of traditional heuristic
criteria, enables the generator to capture object structure implicitly and to synthesize high-quality 3D objects; second, the generator establishes a mapping from
a low-dimensional probabilistic space to the space of 3D objects, so that we can
sample objects without a reference image or CAD models, and explore the 3D
object manifold; third, the adversarial discriminator provides a powerful 3D shape
descriptor which, learned without supervision, has wide applications in 3D object
recognition. Experiments demonstrate that our method generates high-quality 3D
objects, and our unsupervisedly learned features achieve impressive performance
on 3D object recognition, comparable with those of supervised learning methods.

1

Introduction

What makes a 3D generative model of object shapes appealing? We believe a good generative model
should be able to synthesize 3D objects that are both highly varied and realistic. Specifically, for
3D objects to have variations, a generative model should be able to go beyond memorizing and
recombining parts or pieces from a pre-defined repository to produce novel shapes; and for objects to
be realistic, there need to be fine details in the generated examples.
In the past decades, researchers have made impressive progress on 3D object modeling and synthesis [Van Kaick et al., 2011, Tangelder and Veltkamp, 2008, Carlson, 1982], mostly based on meshes
or skeletons. Many of these traditional methods synthesize new objects by borrowing parts from
objects in existing CAD model libraries. Therefore, the synthesized objects look realistic, but not
conceptually novel.
Recently, with the advances in deep representation learning and the introduction of large 3D CAD
datasets like ShapeNet [Chang et al., 2015, Wu et al., 2015], there have been some inspiring attempts
in learning deep object representations based on voxelized objects [Girdhar et al., 2016, Su et al.,
2015a, Qi et al., 2016]. Different from part-based methods, many of these generative approaches
do not explicitly model the concept of parts or retrieve them from an object repository; instead,
they synthesize new objects based on learned object representations. This is a challenging problem
because, compared to the space of 2D images, it is more difficult to model the space of 3D shapes due
to its higher dimensionality. Their current results are encouraging, but often there still exist artifacts
(e.g., fragments or holes) in the generated objects.
In this paper, we demonstrate that modeling volumetric objects in a general-adversarial manner could
be a promising solution to generate objects that are both novel and realistic. Our approach combines
∗ indicates equal contributions. Emails: {jiajunwu, ckzhang, tfxue, billf, jbt}@mit.edu
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

