A Bandit Framework for Strategic Regression

Yang Liu and Yiling Chen
School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University
{yangl,yiling}@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider a learner’s problem of acquiring data dynamically for training a regression model, where the training data are collected from strategic data sources.
A fundamental challenge is to incentivize data holders to exert effort to improve
the quality of their reported data, despite that the quality is not directly verifiable
by the learner. In this work, we study a dynamic data acquisition process where
data holders can contribute multiple times. Using a bandit framework, we leverage the long-term incentive of future job opportunities to incentivize high-quality
contributions. We propose a Strategic Regression-Upper Confidence Bound (SRUCB) framework, a UCB-style index combined with a simple payment rule,
where the index of a worker approximates the quality of his past contributions
and is used by the learner to determine whether the worker receives future work.
For linear regression and a certainpfamily ofnon-linear regression problems, we
show that SR-UCB enables an O log T /T -Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE)
where each worker exerts a target effort level that the learner has chosen, with T
being the number of data acquisition stages. The SR-UCB framework also has
some other desirable properties: (1) The indexes can be updated in an online fashion (hence computation is light). (2) A slight
 variant, namely Private SR-UCB
(PSR-UCB), is able to preserve (O log−1 T , O log−1 T )-differential privacy for
workers’ data, with only a small compromise
on incentives (each worker exerting
√ 
6
a target effort level is an O log T / T -BNE).

1

Introduction

More and more data for machine learning nowadays are acquired from distributed, unmonitored
and strategic data sources and the quality of these collected data is often unverifiable. For example,
in a crowdsourcing market, a data requester can pay crowd workers to label samples. While this
approach has been widely adopted, crowdsourced labels have been shown to degrade the learning
performance significantly, see e.g., [19], due to the low quality of the data. How to incentivize
workers to contribute high-quality data is hence a fundamental question that is crucial to the longterm viability of this approach.
Recent works [2,4,10] have considered incentivizing data contributions for the purpose of estimating
a regression model. For example Cai et al. [2] design payment rules so that workers are incentivized
to exert effort to improve the quality of their contributed data, while Cummings et al. [4] design
mechanisms to compensate privacy-sensitive workers for their privacy loss when contributing their
data. These studies focus on a static data acquisition process, only considering one-time data acquisition from each worker. Hence, the incentives completely rely on the payment rule. However, in
stable crowdsourcing markets, workers return to receive additional work. Future job opportunities
are thus another dimension of incentives that can be leveraged to motive high-quality data contributions. In this paper, we study dynamic data acquisition from strategic agents for regression problems
and explore the use of future job opportunities to incentivize effort exertion.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

