Recovery Guarantee of Non-negative Matrix
Factorization via Alternating Updates

Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Andrej Risteski
Computer Science Department at Princeton University
35 Olden St, Princeton, NJ 08540
{yuanzhil, yingyul, risteski}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Non-negative matrix factorization is a popular tool for decomposing data into
feature and weight matrices under non-negativity constraints. It enjoys practical
success but is poorly understood theoretically. This paper proposes an algorithm
that alternates between decoding the weights and updating the features, and shows
that assuming a generative model of the data, it provably recovers the groundtruth under fairly mild conditions. In particular, its only essential requirement on
features is linear independence. Furthermore, the algorithm uses ReLU to exploit
the non-negativity for decoding the weights, and thus can tolerate adversarial noise
that can potentially be as large as the signal, and can tolerate unbiased noise much
larger than the signal. The analysis relies on a carefully designed coupling between
two potential functions, which we believe is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the problem of non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), where given a matrix
Y ∈ Rm×N , the goal to find a matrix A ∈ Rm×n and a non-negative matrix X ∈ Rn×N such
that Y ≈ AX.1 A is often referred to as feature matrix and X referred as weights. NMF has been
extensively used in extracting a parts representation of the data (e.g., [LS97, LS99, LS01]). It has
been shown that the non-negativity constraint on the coefficients forcing features to combine, but not
cancel out, can lead to much more interpretable features and improved downstream performance of
the learned features.
Despite all the practical success, however, this problem is poorly understood theoretically, with only
few provable guarantees known. Moreover, many of the theoretical algorithms are based on heavy
tools from algebraic geometry (e.g., [AGKM12]) or tensors (e.g. [AKF+ 12]), which are still not
as widely used in practice primarily because of computational feasibility issues or sensitivity to
assumptions on A and X. Some others depend on specific structure of the feature matrix, such as
separability [AGKM12] or similar properties [BGKP16].
A natural family of algorithms for NMF alternate between decoding the weights and updating the
features. More precisely, in the decoding step, the algorithm represents the data as a non-negative
combination of the current set of features; in the updating step, it updates the features using the
decoded representations. This meta-algorithm is popular in practice due to ease of implementation,
computational efficiency, and empirical quality of the recovered features. However, even less
theoretical analysis exists for such algorithms.
1

In the usual formulation of the problem, A is also assumed to be non-negative, which we will not require in
this paper.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

