Unsupervised Feature Extraction by
Time-Contrastive Learning and Nonlinear ICA

Aapo Hyvärinen1,2 and Hiroshi Morioka1
1

Department of Computer Science and HIIT
University of Helsinki, Finland

2

Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London, UK

Abstract
Nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) provides an appealing framework
for unsupervised feature learning, but the models proposed so far are not identifiable.
Here, we first propose a new intuitive principle of unsupervised deep learning
from time series which uses the nonstationary structure of the data. Our learning
principle, time-contrastive learning (TCL), finds a representation which allows
optimal discrimination of time segments (windows). Surprisingly, we show how
TCL can be related to a nonlinear ICA model, when ICA is redefined to include
temporal nonstationarities. In particular, we show that TCL combined with linear
ICA estimates the nonlinear ICA model up to point-wise transformations of the
sources, and this solution is unique — thus providing the first identifiability result
for nonlinear ICA which is rigorous, constructive, as well as very general.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised nonlinear feature learning, or unsupervised representation learning, is one of the
biggest challenges facing machine learning. Various approaches have been proposed, many of them
in the deep learning framework. Some of the most popular methods are multi-layer belief nets and
Restricted Boltzmann Machines [13] as well as autoencoders [14, 31, 21], which form the basis for
the ladder networks [30]. While some success has been obtained, the general consensus is that the
existing methods are lacking in scalability, theoretical justification, or both; more work is urgently
needed to make machine learning applicable to big unlabeled data.
Better methods may be found by using the temporal structure in time series data. One approach which
has shown a great promise recently is based on a set of methods variously called temporal coherence
[17] or slow feature analysis [32]. The idea is to find features which change as slowly as possible,
originally proposed in [6] for learning invariant features. Kernel-based methods [12, 26] and deep
learning methods [23, 27, 9] have been developed to extend this principle to the general nonlinear
case. However, it is not clear how one should optimally define the temporal stability criterion; these
methods typically use heuristic criteria and are not based on generative models.
In fact, the most satisfactory solution for unsupervised deep learning would arguably be based
on estimation of probabilistic generative models, because probabilistic theory often gives optimal
objectives for learning. This has been possible in linear unsupervised learning, where sparse coding
and independent component analysis (ICA) use independent, typically sparse, latent variables that
generate the data via a linear mixing. Unfortunately, at least without temporal structure, the nonlinear
ICA model is seriously unidentifiable [18], which means that the original sources cannot be found.
In spite of years of research [20], no generally applicable identifiability conditions have been found.
Nevertheless, practical algorithms have been proposed [29, 1, 5] with the hope that some kind of
useful solution can still be found even for data with no temporal structure (that is, an i.i.d. sample).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

