A Non-generative Framework and Convex
Relaxations for Unsupervised Learning
Elad Hazan
Princeton University
35 Olden Street 08540
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu.

Tengyu Ma
Princeton University
35 Olden Street, NJ 08540
tengyu@cs.princeton.edu.

Abstract
We give a novel formal theoretical framework for unsupervised learning with two
distinctive characteristics. First, it does not assume any generative model and
based on a worst-case performance metric. Second, it is comparative, namely
performance is measured with respect to a given hypothesis class. This allows
to avoid known computational hardness results and improper algorithms based
on convex relaxations. We show how several families of unsupervised learning
models, which were previously only analyzed under probabilistic assumptions and
are otherwise provably intractable, can be efficiently learned in our framework by
convex optimization.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning is the task of learning structure from unlabelled examples. Informally, the
main goal of unsupervised learning is to extract structure from the data in a way that will enable
efficient learning from future labelled examples for potentially numerous independent tasks.
It is useful to recall the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning theory for supervised learning [28], based on Vapnik’s statistical learning theory [29]. In PAC learning, the learning can access
labelled examples from an unknown distribution. On the basis of these examples, the learner constructs a hypothesis that generalizes to unseen data. A concept is said to be learnable with respect to
a hypothesis class if there exists an (efficient) algorithm that outputs a generalizing hypothesis with
high probability after observing polynomially many examples in terms of the input representation.
The great achievements of PAC learning that made it successful are its generality and algorithmic
applicability: PAC learning does not restrict the input domain in any way, and thus allows very
general learning, without generative or distributional assumptions on the world. Another important
feature is the restriction to specific hypothesis classes, without which there are simple impossibility
results such as the “no free lunch” theorem. This allows comparative and improper learning of
computationally-hard concepts.
The latter is a very important point which is often understated. Consider the example of sparse
regression, which is a canonical problem in high dimensional statistics. Fitting the best sparse vector
to linear prediction is an NP-hard problem [20]. However, this does not prohibit improper learning,
since we can use a `1 convex relaxation for the sparse vectors (famously known as LASSO [26]).
Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, while extremely applicative and well-studied, has not seen
such an inclusive theory. The most common approaches, such as restricted Boltzmann machines,
topic models, dictionary learning, principal component analysis and metric clustering, are based
almost entirely on generative assumptions about the world. This is a strong restriction which makes
it very hard to analyze such approaches in scenarios for which the assumptions do not hold. A
more discriminative approach is based on compression, such as the Minimum Description Length
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

