Graphons, mergeons, and so on!
Justin Eldridge Mikhail Belkin Yusu Wang
The Ohio State University
{eldridge, mbelkin, yusu}@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract
In this work we develop a theory of hierarchical clustering for graphs. Our modeling assumption is that graphs are sampled from a graphon, which is a powerful
and general model for generating graphs and analyzing large networks. Graphons
are a far richer class of graph models than stochastic blockmodels, the primary
setting for recent progress in the statistical theory of graph clustering. We deﬁne
what it means for an algorithm to produce the “correct" clustering, give suﬃcient
conditions in which a method is statistically consistent, and provide an explicit
algorithm satisfying these properties.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in the theory of clustering is that of deﬁning a cluster. There is no single
answer to this seemingly simple question. The right approach depends on the nature of the data
and the proper modeling assumptions. In a statistical setting where the objects to be clustered
come from some underlying probability distribution, it is natural to deﬁne clusters in terms of the
distribution itself. The task of a clustering, then, is twofold – to identify the appropriate cluster
structure of the distribution and to recover that structure from a ﬁnite sample. Thus we would like
to say that a clustering is good if it is in some sense close to the ideal structure of the underlying
distribution, and that a clustering method is consistent if it produces clusterings which converge to
the true clustering, given larger and larger samples. Proving the consistency of a clustering method
deepens our understanding of it, and provides justiﬁcation for using the method in the appropriate
setting.
In this work, we consider the setting in which the objects to be clustered are the vertices of a graph
sampled from a graphon – a very general random graph model of signiﬁcant recent interest. We
develop a statistical theory of graph clustering in the graphon model; To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst general consistency framework developed for such a rich family of random graphs.
The speciﬁc contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we deﬁne the clusters of a graphon. Our
deﬁnition results in a graphon having a tree of clusters, which we call its graphon cluster tree. We
introduce an object called the mergeon which is a particular representation of the graphon cluster
tree that encodes the heights at which clusters merge. Second, we develop a notion of consistency
for graph clustering algorithms in which a method is said to be consistent if its output converges to
the graphon cluster tree. Here the graphon setting poses subtle yet fundamental challenges which
diﬀerentiate it from classical clustering models, and which must be carefully addressed. Third, we
prove the existence of consistent clustering algorithms. In particular, we provide suﬃcient conditions under which a graphon estimator leads to a consistent clustering method. We then identify a
speciﬁc practical algorithm which satisﬁes these conditions, and in doing so present a simple graph
clustering algorithm which provably recovers the graphon cluster tree.
Related work. Graphons are objects of signiﬁcant recent interest in graph theory, statistics, and
machine learning. The theory of graphons is rich and diverse; A graphon can be interpreted as
a generalization of a weighted graph with uncountably many nodes, as the limit of a sequence of
ﬁnite graphs, or, more importantly for the present work, as a very general model for generating
29th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

