Riemannian SVRG: Fast Stochastic Optimization on
Riemannian Manifolds
Hongyi Zhang

Sashank J. Reddi

Suvrit Sra

MIT

Carnegie Mellon University

MIT

Abstract
We study optimization of finite sums of geodesically smooth functions on Riemannian manifolds. Although variance reduction techniques for optimizing finite-sums
have witnessed tremendous attention in the recent years, existing work is limited to vector space problems. We introduce Riemannian SVRG (R SVRG), a new
variance reduced Riemannian optimization method. We analyze R SVRG for both
geodesically convex and nonconvex (smooth) functions. Our analysis reveals that
R SVRG inherits advantages of the usual SVRG method, but with factors depending
on curvature of the manifold that influence its convergence. To our knowledge,
R SVRG is the first provably fast stochastic Riemannian method. Moreover, our
paper presents the first non-asymptotic complexity analysis (novel even for the
batch setting) for nonconvex Riemannian optimization. Our results have several
implications; for instance, they offer a Riemannian perspective on variance reduced
PCA, which promises a short, transparent convergence analysis.

1

Introduction

We study the following rich class of (possibly nonconvex) finite-sum optimization problems:
n

min

x2X ⇢M

f (x) ,

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where (M, g) is a Riemannian manifold with the Riemannian metric g, and X ⇢ M is a geodesically
convex set. We assume that each fi : M ! R is geodesically L-smooth (see §2). Problem (1)
generalizes the fundamental machine learning problem of empirical risk minimization, which is
usually cast in vector spaces, to a Riemannian setting. It also includes as special cases important
problems such as principal component analysis (PCA), independent component analysis (ICA),
dictionary learning, mixture modeling, among others (see e.g., the related work section).
The Euclidean version of (1) where M = Rd and g is the Euclidean inner-product has been the subject
of intense algorithmic development in machine learning and optimization, starting with the classical
work of Robbins and Monro [26] to the recent spate of work on variance reduction [10; 18; 20; 25; 28].
However, when (M, g) is a nonlinear Riemannian manifold, much less is known beyond [7; 38].
When solving problems with manifold constraints, one common approach is to alternate between
optimizing in the ambient Euclidean space and “projecting” onto the manifold. For example, two
well-known methods to compute the leading eigenvector of symmetric matrices, power iteration and
Oja’s algorithm [23], are in essence projected gradient and projected stochastic gradient algorithms.
For certain manifolds (e.g., positive definite matrices), projections can be quite expensive to compute.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

