Deep Submodular Functions: Definitions & Learning

Brian Dolhansky‡ <bdol@cs.washington.edu>
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering‡
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105

Jeff Bilmes†‡ <bilmes@uw.edu>
Dept. of Electrical Engineering†
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105

Abstract
We propose and study a new class of submodular functions called deep submodular
functions (DSFs). We define DSFs and situate them within the broader context of
classes of submodular functions in relationship both to various matroid ranks and
sums of concave composed with modular functions (SCMs). Notably, we find that
DSFs constitute a strictly broader class than SCMs, thus motivating their use, but
that they do not comprise all submodular functions. Interestingly, some DSFs can
be seen as special cases of certain deep neural networks (DNNs), hence the name.
Finally, we provide a method to learn DSFs in a max-margin framework, and offer
preliminary results applying this both to synthetic and real-world data instances.

1

Introduction

Submodular functions are attractive models of many physical processes primarily because they
possess an inherent naturalness to a wide variety of problems (e.g., they are good models of diversity,
information, and cooperative costs) while at the same time they enjoy properties sufficient for efficient
optimization. For example, submodular functions can be minimized without constraints in polynomial
n
time [12] even though they lie within a 2n -dimensional cone in R2 . Moreover, while submodular
function maximization is NP-hard, submodular maximization is one of the easiest of the NP-hard
problems since constant factor approximation algorithms are often available — e.g., in the cardinality
constrained case, the classic 1 − 1/e result of Nemhauser [21] via the greedy algorithm. Other
problems also have guarantees, such as submodular maximization subject to knapsack or multiple
matroid constraints [8, 7, 18, 15, 16].
One of the critical problems associated with utilizing submodular functions in machine learning
contexts is selecting which submodular function to use, and given that submodular functions lie
in such a vast space with 2n degrees of freedom, it is a non-trivial task to find one that works
well, if not optimally. One approach is to attempt to learn the submodular function based on either
queries of some form or based on data. This has led to results, mostly in the theory community,
showing how learning submodularity can be harder or easier depending on how we judge what is
being learnt. For example, it was shown that learning submodularity in the PMAC setting is fairly
hard [2] although in some cases things are a bit easier [11]. In both of these cases, learning is over
all points in the hypercube. Learning can be made easier if we restrict ourselves to learn within
only a subfamily of submodular functions. For example, in [24, 19], it is shown that one can learn
mixtures of submodular functions using a max-margin learning framework — here the components
of the mixture are fixed and it is only the mixture parameters that are learnt, leading often to a convex
optimization problem. In some cases, computing gradients of the convex problem can be done using
submodular maximization [19], while in other cases, even a gradient requires minimizing a difference
of two submodular functions [27].
Learning over restricted families rather than over the entire cone is desirable for the same reasons that
any form of regularization in machine learning is useful. By restricting the family over which learning
occurs, it decreases the complexity of the learning problem, thereby increasing the chance that one
finds a good model within that family. This can be seen as a classic bias-variance tradeoff, where
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

