Efficient High-Order Interaction-Aware Feature
Selection Based on Conditional Mutual Information
Alexander Shishkin, Anastasia Bezzubtseva, Alexey Drutsa,
Ilia Shishkov, Ekaterina Gladkikh, Gleb Gusev, Pavel Serdyukov
Yandex; 16 Leo Tolstoy St., Moscow 119021, Russia
{sisoid,nstbezz,adrutsa,ishfb,kglad,gleb57,pavser}@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
This study introduces a novel feature selection approach CMICOT, which is a
further evolution of filter methods with sequential forward selection (SFS) whose
scoring functions are based on conditional mutual information (MI). We state and
study a novel saddle point (max-min) optimization problem to build a scoring
function that is able to identify joint interactions between several features. This
method fills the gap of MI-based SFS techniques with high-order dependencies.
In this high-dimensional case, the estimation of MI has prohibitively high sample
complexity. We mitigate this cost using a greedy approximation and binary representatives what makes our technique able to be effectively used. The superiority of
our approach is demonstrated by comparison with recently proposed interactionaware filters and several interaction-agnostic state-of-the-art ones on ten publicly
available benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Methods of feature selection is an important topic of machine learning [8, 2, 17], since they improve
performance of learning systems while reducing their computational costs. Feature selection methods
are usually grouped into three main categories: wrapper, embedded, and filter methods [8]. Filters are
computationally cheap and are independent of a particular learning model that make them popular
and broadly applicable. In this paper, we focus on most popular filters, which are based on mutual
information (MI) and apply the sequential forward selection (SFS) strategy to obtain an optimal
subset of features [17]. In such applications as web search, features may be highly relevant only
jointly (having a low relevance separately). A challenging task is to account for such interactions [17].
Existing SFS-based filters [18, 3, 24] are able to account for interactions of only up to 3 features.
In this study, we fill the gap in the absence of effective SFS-based filters accounting for feature
dependences of higher orders. A search of t-way interacting features is turned into a novel saddle
point (max-min) optimization problem for MI of the target variable and the candidate feature with
its complementary team conditioned on its opposing team of previously selected features. We show
that, on the one hand, the saddle value of this conditional MI is a low-dimensional approximation
of the CMI score1 and, on the other hand, solving that problem represents two practical challenges:
(a) prohibitively high computational complexity and (b) sample complexity, a larger number of
instances required to accurately estimate the MI. These issues are addressed by two novel techniques:
(a) a two stage greedy search for the approximate solution of the above-mentioned problem whose
computational complexity is O(i) at each i-th SFS iteration; and (b) binary representation of features
that reduces the dimension of the space of joint distributions by a factor of (q/2)2t for q-value
features. Being reasonable and intuitive, these techniques together constitute the main contribution of
our study: a novel SFS method CMICOT that is able to identify joint interactions between multiple
1

The CMI filter is believed to be a “north star" for vast majority of the state-of-the-art filters [2].

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

