Conditional Image Generation with
PixelCNN Decoders
Aäron van den Oord
Google DeepMind
avdnoord@google.com

Nal Kalchbrenner
Google DeepMind
nalk@google.com

Oriol Vinyals
Google DeepMind
vinyals@google.com

Lasse Espeholt
Google DeepMind
espeholt@google.com

Alex Graves
Google DeepMind
gravesa@google.com

Koray Kavukcuoglu
Google DeepMind
korayk@google.com

Abstract
This work explores conditional image generation with a new image density model
based on the PixelCNN architecture. The model can be conditioned on any vector,
including descriptive labels or tags, or latent embeddings created by other networks.
When conditioned on class labels from the ImageNet database, the model is able to
generate diverse, realistic scenes representing distinct animals, objects, landscapes
and structures. When conditioned on an embedding produced by a convolutional
network given a single image of an unseen face, it generates a variety of new
portraits of the same person with different facial expressions, poses and lighting
conditions. We also show that conditional PixelCNN can serve as a powerful
decoder in an image autoencoder. Additionally, the gated convolutional layers in
the proposed model improve the log-likelihood of PixelCNN to match the state-ofthe-art performance of PixelRNN on ImageNet, with greatly reduced computational
cost.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in image modelling with neural networks [30, 26, 20, 10, 9, 28, 6] have made
it feasible to generate diverse natural images that capture the high-level structure of the training
data. While such unconditional models are fascinating in their own right, many of the practical
applications of image modelling require the model to be conditioned on prior information: for
example, an image model used for reinforcement learning planning in a visual environment would
need to predict future scenes given specific states and actions [17]. Similarly image processing
tasks such as denoising, deblurring, inpainting, super-resolution and colorization rely on generating
improved images conditioned on noisy or incomplete data. Neural artwork [18, 5] and content
generation represent potential future uses for conditional generation.
This paper explores the potential for conditional image modelling by adapting and improving a
convolutional variant of the PixelRNN architecture [30]. As well as providing excellent samples,
this network has the advantage of returning explicit probability densities (unlike alternatives such as
generative adversarial networks [6, 3, 19]), making it straightforward to apply in domains such as
compression [32] and probabilistic planning and exploration [2]. The basic idea of the architecture
is to use autoregressive connections to model images pixel by pixel, decomposing the joint image
distribution as a product of conditionals. Two variants were proposed in the original paper: PixelRNN,
where the pixel distributions are modeled with two-dimensional LSTM [7, 26], and PixelCNN, where
they are modelled with convolutional networks. PixelRNNs generally give better performance, but
PixelCNNs are much faster to train because convolutions are inherently easier to parallelize; given
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

