Without-Replacement Sampling
for Stochastic Gradient Methods
Ohad Shamir
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Stochastic gradient methods for machine learning and optimization problems are
usually analyzed assuming data points are sampled with replacement. In contrast, sampling without replacement is far less understood, yet in practice it is
very common, often easier to implement, and usually performs better. In this
paper, we provide competitive convergence guarantees for without-replacement
sampling under several scenarios, focusing on the natural regime of few passes
over the data. Moreover, we describe a useful application of these results in the
context of distributed optimization with randomly-partitioned data, yielding a
nearly-optimal algorithm for regularized least squares (in terms of both communication complexity and runtime complexity) under broad parameter regimes. Our
proof techniques combine ideas from stochastic optimization, adversarial online
learning and transductive learning theory, and can potentially be applied to other
stochastic optimization and learning problems.

1

Introduction

Many canonical machine learning problems boil down to solving a convex empirical risk minimization
problem of the form
m

min F (w) =

w∈W

1 X
fi (w),
m i=1

(1)

where each individual function fi (·) is convex (e.g. the loss on a given example in the training
data), and the set W ⊆ Rd is convex. In large-scale applications, where both m, d can be huge, a
very popular approach is to employ stochastic gradient methods. Generally speaking, these methods
maintain some iterate wt ∈ W, and at each iteration, sample an individual function fi (·), and perform
some update to wt based on ∇fi (wt ). Since the update is with respect to a single function, this
update is usually computationally cheap. Moreover, when the sampling is done independently and
uniformly at random, ∇fi (wt ) is an unbiased estimator of the true gradient ∇F (wt ), which allows
for good convergence guarantees after a reasonable number of iterations (see for instance [18, 15]).
However, in practical implementations of such algorithms, it is actually quite common to use withoutreplacement sampling, or equivalently, pass sequentially over a random shuffling of the functions
fi . Intuitively, this forces the algorithm to process more equally all data points, and often leads to
better empirical performance. Moreover, without-replacement sampling is often easier and faster to
implement, as it requires sequential data access, as opposed to the random data access required by
with-replacement sampling (see for instance [3, 16, 8]).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

