Normalized Spectral Map Synchronization

Yanyao Shen
UT Austin
Austin, TX 78712
shenyanyao@utexas.edu

Qixing Huang
TTI Chicago and UT Austin
Austin, TX 78712
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
nati@ttic.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
UT Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
Estimating maps among large collections of objects (e.g., dense correspondences
across images and 3D shapes) is a fundamental problem across a wide range of
domains. In this paper, we provide theoretical justifications of spectral techniques
for the map synchronization problem, i.e., it takes as input a collection of objects
and noisy maps estimated between pairs of objects along a connected object graph,
and outputs clean maps between all pairs of objects. We show that a simple
normalized spectral method (or NormSpecSync) that projects the blocks of the top
eigenvectors of a data matrix to the map space, exhibits surprisingly good behavior
— NormSpecSync is much more efficient than state-of-the-art convex optimization
techniques, yet still admitting similar exact recovery conditions. We demonstrate
the usefulness of NormSpecSync on both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

The problem of establishing maps (e.g., point correspondences or transformations) among a collection
of objects is connected with a wide range of scientific problems, including fusing partially overlapped
range scans [1], multi-view structure from motion [2], re-assembling fractured objects [3], analyzing
and organizing geometric data collections [4] as well as DNA sequencing and modeling [5]. A
fundamental problem in this domain is the so-called map synchronization, which takes as input noisy
maps computed between pairs of objects, and utilizes the natural constraint that composite maps
along cycles are identity maps to obtain improved maps.
Despite the importance of map synchronization, the algorithmic advancements on this problem remain
limited. Earlier works formulate map synchronization as solving combinatorial optimizations [1, 6, 7,
8]. These formulations are restricted to small-scale problems and are susceptible to local minimums.
Recent works establish the connection between the cycle-consistency constraint and the low-rank
property of the matrix that stores pairwise maps in blocks; they cast map synchronization as low-rank
matrix inference [9, 10, 11]. These techniques exhibit improvements on both the theoretical and
practical sides. In particular, they admit exact recovery conditions (i.e., on the underlying maps can
be recovered from noisy input maps). Yet due to the limitations of convex optimization, all of these
methods do not scale well to large-scale datasets.
In contrast to convex optimizations, we demonstrate that spectral techniques work remarkably well
for map synchronization. We focus on the problem of synchronizing permutations and introduce
a robust and efficient algorithm that consists of two simple steps. The first step computes the top
eigenvectors of a data matrix that encodes the input maps, and the second step rounds each block of
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

