Composing graphical models with neural networks
for structured representations and fast inference
Matthew James Johnson
Harvard University
mattjj@seas.harvard.edu
Alexander B. Wiltschko
Harvard University, Twitter
awiltsch@fas.harvard.edu

David Duvenaud
Harvard University
dduvenaud@seas.harvard.edu

Sandeep R. Datta
Harvard Medical School
srdatta@hms.harvard.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Harvard University, Twitter
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We propose a general modeling and inference framework that combines the complementary strengths of probabilistic graphical models and deep learning methods.
Our model family composes latent graphical models with neural network observation likelihoods. For inference, we use recognition networks to produce local
evidence potentials, then combine them with the model distribution using efficient
message-passing algorithms. All components are trained simultaneously with a
single stochastic variational inference objective. We illustrate this framework by
automatically segmenting and categorizing mouse behavior from raw depth video,
and demonstrate several other example models.

1

Introduction

Modeling often has two goals: first, to learn a flexible representation of complex high-dimensional
data, such as images or speech recordings, and second, to find structure that is interpretable and
generalizes to new tasks. Probabilistic graphical models [1, 2] provide many tools to build structured
representations, but often make rigid assumptions and may require significant feature engineering.
Alternatively, deep learning methods allow flexible data representations to be learned automatically,
but may not directly encode interpretable or tractable probabilistic structure. Here we develop a
general modeling and inference framework that combines these complementary strengths.
Consider learning a generative model for video of a mouse. Learning interpretable representations
for such data, and comparing them as the animal’s genes are edited or its brain chemistry altered,
gives useful behavioral phenotyping tools for neuroscience and for high-throughput drug discovery
[3]. Even though each image is encoded by hundreds of pixels, the data lie near a low-dimensional
nonlinear manifold. A useful generative model must not only learn this manifold but also provide
an interpretable representation of the mouse’s behavioral dynamics. A natural representation from
ethology [3] is that the mouse’s behavior is divided into brief, reused actions, such as darts, rears,
and grooming bouts. Therefore an appropriate model might switch between discrete states, with
each state representing the dynamics of a particular action. These two learning tasks — identifying
an image manifold and a structured dynamics model — are complementary: we want to learn the
image manifold in terms of coordinates in which the structured dynamics fit well. A similar challenge
arises in speech [4], where high-dimensional spectrographic data lie near a low-dimensional manifold
because they are generated by a physical system with relatively few degrees of freedom [5] but also
include the discrete latent dynamical structure of phonemes, words, and grammar [6].
To address these challenges, we propose a new framework to design and learn models that couple
nonlinear likelihoods with structured latent variable representations. Our approach uses graphical
models for representing structured probability distributions while enabling fast exact inference
subroutines, and uses ideas from variational autoencoders [7, 8] for learning not only the nonlinear
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

