Phased LSTM: Accelerating Recurrent Network
Training for Long or Event-based Sequences

Daniel Neil, Michael Pfeiffer, and Shih-Chii Liu
Institute of Neuroinformatics
University of Zurich and ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland 8057
{dneil, pfeiffer, shih}@ini.uzh.ch

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have become the state-of-the-art choice for
extracting patterns from temporal sequences. However, current RNN models are
ill-suited to process irregularly sampled data triggered by events generated in
continuous time by sensors or other neurons. Such data can occur, for example,
when the input comes from novel event-driven artificial sensors that generate
sparse, asynchronous streams of events or from multiple conventional sensors with
different update intervals. In this work, we introduce the Phased LSTM model,
which extends the LSTM unit by adding a new time gate. This gate is controlled
by a parametrized oscillation with a frequency range that produces updates of the
memory cell only during a small percentage of the cycle. Even with the sparse
updates imposed by the oscillation, the Phased LSTM network achieves faster
convergence than regular LSTMs on tasks which require learning of long sequences.
The model naturally integrates inputs from sensors of arbitrary sampling rates,
thereby opening new areas of investigation for processing asynchronous sensory
events that carry timing information. It also greatly improves the performance of
LSTMs in standard RNN applications, and does so with an order-of-magnitude
fewer computes at runtime.

1

Introduction

Interest in recurrent neural networks (RNNs) has greatly increased in recent years, since larger
training databases, more powerful computing resources, and better training algorithms have enabled
breakthroughs in both processing and modeling of temporal sequences. Applications include speech
recognition [13], natural language processing [1, 20], and attention-based models for structured
prediction [5, 29]. RNNs are attractive because they equip neural networks with memories, and
the introduction of gating units such as LSTM and GRU [16, 6] has greatly helped in making the
learning of these networks manageable. RNNs are typically modeled as discrete-time dynamical
systems, thereby implicitly assuming a constant sampling rate of input signals, which also becomes
the update frequency of recurrent and feed-forward units. Although early work such as [25, 10, 4]
has realized the resulting limitations and suggested continuous-time dynamical systems approaches
towards RNNs, the great majority of modern RNN implementations uses fixed time steps.
Although fixed time steps are perfectly suitable for many RNN applications, there are several
important scenarios in which constant update rates impose constraints that affect the precision and
efficiency of RNNs. Many real-world tasks for autonomous vehicles or robots need to integrate input
from a variety of sensors, e.g. for vision, audition, distance measurements, or gyroscopes. Each sensor
may have its own data sampling rate, and short time steps are necessary to deal with sensors with
high sampling frequencies. However, this leads to an unnecessarily higher computational load and
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

