Minimizing Quadratic Functions in Constant Time

Kohei Hayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
hayashi.kohei@gmail.com
Yuichi Yoshida
National Institute of Informatics and Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
A sampling-based optimization method for quadratic functions is proposed.
Our method approximately solves the following n-dimensional quadratic minimization problem in constant time, which is independent of n: z ∗ =
minv∈Rn hv, Avi + nhv, diag(d)vi + nhb, vi, where A ∈ Rn×n is a matrix and
d, b ∈ Rn are vectors. Our theoretical analysis specifies the number of samples
k(δ, ) such that the approximated solution z satisfies |z − z ∗ | = O(n2 ) with
probability 1 − δ. The empirical performance (accuracy and runtime) is positively
confirmed by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

A quadratic function is one of the most important function classes in machine learning, statistics,
and data mining. Many fundamental problems such as linear regression, k-means clustering, principal component analysis, support vector machines, and kernel methods [14] can be formulated as a
minimization problem of a quadratic function.
In some applications, it is sufficient to compute the minimum value of a quadratic function rather
than its solution. For example, Yamada et al. [21] proposed an efficient method for estimating the
Pearson divergence, which provides useful information about data, such as the density ratio [18].
They formulated the estimation problem as the minimization of a squared loss and showed that the
Pearson divergence can be estimated from the minimum value. The least-squares mutual information [19] is another example that can be computed in a similar manner.
Despite its importance, the minimization of a quadratic function has the issue of scalability. Let
n ∈ N be the number of variables (the “dimension” of the problem). In general, such a minimization
problem can be solved by quadratic programming (QP), which requires poly(n) time. If the problem
is convex and there are no constraints, then the problem is reduced to solving a system of linear
equations, which requires O(n3 ) time. Both methods easily become infeasible, even for mediumscale problems, say, n > 10000.
Although several techniques have been proposed to accelerate quadratic function minimization, they
require at least linear time in n. This is problematic when handling problems with an ultrahigh
dimension, for which even linear time is slow or prohibitive. For example, stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) is an optimization method that is widely used for large-scale problems. A nice
property of this method is that, if the objective function is strongly convex, it outputs a point that
is sufficiently close to an optimal solution after a constant number of iterations [5]. Nevertheless,
in each iteration, we need at least O(n) time to access the variables. Another technique is lowrank approximation such as Nyström’s method [20]. The underlying idea is the approximation
of the problem by using a low-rank matrix, and by doing so, we can drastically reduce the time
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

