New Liftable Classes for
First-Order Probabilistic Inference
Seyed Mehran Kazemi
The University of British Columbia
smkazemi@cs.ubc.ca

Angelika Kimmig
KU Leuven
angelika.kimmig@cs.kuleuven.be

Guy Van den Broeck
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

David Poole
The University of British Columbia
poole@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Statistical relational models provide compact encodings of probabilistic dependencies in relational domains, but result in highly intractable graphical models.
The goal of lifted inference is to carry out probabilistic inference without needing to reason about each individual separately, by instead treating exchangeable,
undistinguished objects as a whole. In this paper, we study the domain recursion inference rule, which, despite its central role in early theoretical results on
domain-lifted inference, has later been believed redundant. We show that this
rule is more powerful than expected, and in fact significantly extends the range
of models for which lifted inference runs in time polynomial in the number of
individuals in the domain. This includes an open problem called S4, the symmetric
transitivity model, and a first-order logic encoding of the birthday paradox. We
further identify new classes S 2 FO 2 and S 2 RU of domain-liftable theories, which
respectively subsume FO 2 and recursively unary theories, the largest classes of
domain-liftable theories known so far, and show that using domain recursion can
achieve exponential speedup even in theories that cannot fully be lifted with the
existing set of inference rules.

1

Introduction

Statistical relational learning (SRL) [8] aims at unifying logic and probability for reasoning and
learning in noisy domains, described in terms of individuals (or objects), and the relationships
between them. Statistical relational models [10], or template-based models [18] extend Bayesian and
Markov networks with individuals and relations, and compactly describe probabilistic dependencies
among them. These models encode exchangeability among the objects: individuals that we have the
same information about are treated similarly.
A key challenge with SRL models is the fact that they represent highly intractable, densely connected
graphical models, typically with millions of random variables. The aim of lifted inference [23] is to
carry out probabilistic inference without needing to reason about each individual separately, by instead
treating exchangeable, undistinguished objects as a whole. Over the past decade, a large number of
lifted inference rules have been proposed [5, 9, 11, 14, 20, 22, 28, 30], often providing exponential
speedups for specific SRL models. These basic exact inference techniques have applications in
(tractable) lifted learning [32], where the main task is to efficiently compute partition functions, and
in variational and over-symmetric approximations [29, 33]. Moreover, they provided the foundation
for a rich literature on approximate lifted inference and learning [1, 4, 13, 17, 19, 21, 25, 34].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

