Quantized Random Projections and Non-Linear
Estimation of Cosine Similarity
Ping Li
Rutgers University

Michael Mitzenmacher
Harvard University

Martin Slawski
Rutgers University

pingli@stat.rutgers.edu

michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu

martin.slawski@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Random projections constitute a simple, yet effective technique for dimensionality
reduction with applications in learning and search problems. In the present paper,
we consider the problem of estimating cosine similarities when the projected
data undergo scalar quantization to b bits. We here argue that the maximum
likelihood estimator (MLE) is a principled approach to deal with the non-linearity
resulting from quantization, and subsequently study its computational and statistical
properties. A specific focus is on the on the trade-off between bit depth and the
number of projections given a fixed budget of bits for storage or transmission.
Along the way, we also touch upon the existence of a qualitative counterpart to the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma in the presence of quantization.

1

Introduction

The method of random projections (RPs) is an important approach to linear dimensionality reduction [23]. RPs have established themselves as an alternative to principal components analysis which
is computationally more demanding. Instead of determining an optimal low-dimensional subspace
via a singular value decomposition, the data are projected on a subspace spanned by a set of directions
picked at random (e.g. by sampling from the Gaussian distribution). Despite its simplicity, this
approach comes with a theoretical guarantee: as asserted by the celebrated Johnson-Lindenstrauss
(J-L) lemma [6, 12], k = O(log n/ε2 ) random directions are enough to preserve the squared distances
between all pairs from a data set of size n up to a relative error of ε, irrespective of the dimension d the
data set resides in originally. Inner products are preserved similarly. As a consequence, procedures
only requiring distances or inner products can be approximated in the lower-dimensional space,
thereby achieving substantial reductions in terms of computation and storage, or mitigating the curse
of dimensionality. The idea of RPs has thus been employed in linear learning [7, 19], fast matrix
factorization [24], similarity search [1, 9], clustering [2, 5], statistical testing [18, 22], etc.
The idea of data compression by RPs has been extended to the case where the projected data are
additionally quantized to b bits so as to achieve further reductions in data storage and transmission.
The extreme case of b = 1 is well-studied in the context of locality sensitive hashing [4]. More
recently, b-bit quantized random projections for b ≥ 1 have been considered from different perspectives. The paper [17] studies Hamming distance-based estimation of cosine similarity and linear
classification when using a coding scheme that maps a real value to a binary vector of length 2b . It
is demonstrated that for similarity estimation, taking b > 1 may yield improvements if the target
similarity is high. The paper [10] is dedicated to J-L-type results for quantized RPs, considerably
improving over an earlier result of the same flavor in [15]. The work [15] also discusses the trade-off
between the number of projections k and number of bits b per projection under a given budget of bits
as it also appears in the literature on quantized compressed sensing [11, 14].
In the present paper, all of these aspects and some more are studied for an approach that can be
substantially more accurate for small b (specifically, we focus on 1 ≤ b ≤ 6) than those in [10, 17, 15].
In [10, 15] the non-linearity of quantization is ignored by treating the quantized data as if they had
been observed directly. Such “linear” approach benefits from its simplicity, but it is geared towards
fine quantization, whereas for small b the bias resulting from quantization dominates. By contrast,
the approach proposed herein makes full use of the knowledge about the quantizer. As in [17] we
suppose that the original data set is contained in the unit sphere of Rd , or at least that the Euclidean
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

