Finite Sample Prediction and Recovery Bounds
for Ordinal Embedding
Lalit Jain
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
lalitj@umich.edu

Kevin Jamieson
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
kjamieson@berkeley.edu

Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
The goal of ordinal embedding is to represent items as points in a low-dimensional
Euclidean space given a set of constraints like “item i is closer to item j than
item k”. Ordinal constraints like this often come from human judgments. The
classic approach to solving this problem is known as non-metric multidimensional
scaling. To account for errors and variation in judgments, we consider the noisy
situation in which the given constraints are independently corrupted by reversing
the correct constraint with some probability. The ordinal embedding problem has
been studied for decades, but most past work pays little attention to the question
of whether accurate embedding is possible, apart from empirical studies. This
paper shows that under a generative data model it is possible to learn the correct
embedding from noisy distance comparisons. In establishing this fundamental
result, the paper makes several new contributions. First, we derive prediction error
bounds for embedding from noisy distance comparisons by exploiting the fact
that the rank of a distance matrix of points in Rd is at most d + 2. These bounds
characterize how well a learned embedding predicts new comparative judgments.
Second, we show that the underlying embedding can be recovered by solving a
simple convex optimization. This result is highly non-trivial since we show that
the linear map corresponding to distance comparisons is non-invertible, but there
exists a nonlinear map that is invertible. Third, two new algorithms for ordinal
embedding are proposed and evaluated in experiments.

1

Ordinal Embedding

Ordinal embedding aims to represent items as points in Rd so that the distances between items agree
as well as possible with a given set of ordinal comparisons such as item i is closer to item j than
to item k. In other words, the goal is to find a geometric representation of data that is faithful to
comparative similarity judgments. This problem has been studied and applied for more than 50 years,
dating back to the classic non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) [1, 2] approach, and it is
widely used to gauge and visualize how people perceive similarities.
Despite the widespread application of NMDS and recent algorithmic developments [3, 4, 5, 6, 7],
the fundamental question of whether an embedding can be learned from noisy distance/similarity
comparisons had not been answered. This paper shows that if the data are generated according to
a known probabilistic model, then accurate recovery of the underlying embedding is possible by
solving a simple convex optimization, settling this long-standing open question. In the process of
answering this question, the paper also characterizes how well a learned embedding predicts new
distance comparisons and presents two new computationally efficient algorithms for solving the
optimization problem.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

