Sorting out typicality with the inverse moment matrix
SOS polynomial

Jean-Bernard Lasserre
LAAS-CNRS & IMT
Université de Toulouse
31400 Toulouse, France
lasserre@laas.fr

Edouard Pauwels
IRIT & IMT
Université Toulouse 3 Paul Sabatier
31400 Toulouse, France
edouard.pauwels@irit.fr

Abstract
We study a surprising phenomenon related to the representation of a cloud of data
points using polynomials. We start with the previously unnoticed empirical observation that, given a collection (a cloud) of data points, the sublevel sets of a certain
distinguished polynomial capture the shape of the cloud very accurately. This
distinguished polynomial is a sum-of-squares (SOS) derived in a simple manner
from the inverse of the empirical moment matrix. In fact, this SOS polynomial is
directly related to orthogonal polynomials and the Christoffel function. This allows
to generalize and interpret extremality properties of orthogonal polynomials and to
provide a mathematical rationale for the observed phenomenon. Among diverse
potential applications, we illustrate the relevance of our results on a network intrusion detection task for which we obtain performances similar to existing dedicated
methods reported in the literature.

1

Introduction

Capturing and summarizing the global shape of a cloud of points is at the heart of many data
processing applications such as novelty detection, outlier detection as well as related unsupervised
learning tasks such as clustering and density estimation. One of the main difficulties is to account
for potentially complicated shapes in multidimensional spaces, or equivalently to account for non
standard dependence relations between variables. Such relations become critical in applications, for
example in fraud detection where a fraudulent action may be the dishonest combination of several
actions, each of them being reasonable when considered on their own.
Accounting for complicated shapes is also related to computational geometry and nonlinear algebra
applications, for example integral computation [11] and reconstruction of sets from moments data
[6, 7, 12]. Some of these problems have connections and potential applications in machine learning.
The work presented in this paper brings together ideas from both disciplines, leading to a method
which allows to encode in a simple manner the global shape and spatial concentration of points within
a cloud.
We start with a surprising (and apparently unnoticed) empirical observation. Given a collection of
points, one may build up a distinguished sum-of-squares (SOS) polynomial whose coefficients (or
Gram matrix) is the inverse of the empirical moment matrix (see Section 3). Its degree depends on
how many moments are considered, a choice left to the user. Remarkably its sublevel sets capture
much of the global shape of the cloud as illustrated in Figure 3. This phenomenon is not incidental as
illustrated in many additional examples in Appendix A. To the best of our knowledge, this observation
has remained unnoticed and the purpose of this paper is to report this empirical finding to the machine
learning community and provide first elements toward a mathematical understanding as well as
potential machine learning applications.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

