Supervised Learning with Tensor Networks

E. M. Stoudenmire
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics
Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 2Y5, Canada

David J. Schwab
Department of Physics
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL

Abstract
Tensor networks are approximations of high-order tensors which are efficient to
work with and have been very successful for physics and mathematics applications.
We demonstrate how algorithms for optimizing tensor networks can be adapted to
supervised learning tasks by using matrix product states (tensor trains) to parameterize non-linear kernel learning models. For the MNIST data set we obtain less
than 1% test set classification error. We discuss an interpretation of the additional
structure imparted by the tensor network to the learned model.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been growing appreciation for tensor methods in machine learning. Tensor
decompositions can solve non-convex optimization problems [1, 2] and be used for other important
tasks such as extracting features from input data and parameterizing neural nets [3, 4, 5]. Tensor
methods have also become prominent in the field of physics, especially the use of tensor networks
which accurately capture very high-order tensors while avoiding the the curse of dimensionality
through a particular geometry of low-order contracted tensors [6]. The most successful use of
tensor networks in physics has been to approximate exponentially large vectors arising in quantum
mechanics [7, 8].
Another context where very large vectors arise is non-linear kernel learning, where input vectors x
are mapped into a higher dimensional space via a feature map Φ(x) before being classified by a
decision function
f (x) = W · Φ(x) .
(1)
The feature vector Φ(x) and weight vector W can be exponentially large or even infinite. One
approach to deal with such large vectors is the well-known kernel trick, which only requires working
with scalar products of feature vectors [9].
In what follows we propose a rather different approach. For certain learning tasks and a specific class
of feature map Φ, we find the optimal weight vector W can be approximated as a tensor network—a
contracted sequence of low-order tensors. Representing W as a tensor network and optimizing it
directly (without passing to the dual representation) has many interesting consequences. Training the
model scales only linearly in the training set size; the evaluation cost for a test input is independent
of training set size. Tensor networks are also adaptive: dimensions of tensor indices internal to the
network grow and shrink during training to concentrate resources on the particular correlations within
the data most useful for learning. The tensor network form of W presents opportunities to extract
information hidden within the trained model and to accelerate training by optimizing different internal
tensors in parallel [10]. Finally, the tensor network form is an additional type of regularization beyond
the choice of feature map, and could have interesting consequences for generalization.
One of the best understood types of tensor networks is the matrix product state (MPS) [11, 8], also
known as the tensor train decomposition [12]. Though MPS are best at capturing one-dimensional
correlations, they are powerful enough to be applied to distributions with higher-dimensional correlations as well. MPS have been very useful for studying quantum systems, and have recently
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

