Dual Learning for Machine Translation

Di He1,∗, Yingce Xia2,∗ , Tao Qin3 , Liwei Wang1 , Nenghai Yu2 , Tie-Yan Liu3 , Wei-Ying Ma3
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
University of Science and Technology of China 3 Microsoft Research
1
{dih,wanglw}@cis.pku.edu.cn; 2 xiayingc@mail.ustc.edu.cn; 2 ynh@ustc.edu.cn
3
{taoqin,tie-yan.liu,wyma}@microsoft.com

Abstract
While neural machine translation (NMT) is making good progress in the past
two years, tens of millions of bilingual sentence pairs are needed for its training.
However, human labeling is very costly. To tackle this training data bottleneck, we
develop a dual-learning mechanism, which can enable an NMT system to automatically learn from unlabeled data through a dual-learning game. This mechanism is
inspired by the following observation: any machine translation task has a dual task,
e.g., English-to-French translation (primal) versus French-to-English translation
(dual); the primal and dual tasks can form a closed loop, and generate informative
feedback signals to train the translation models, even if without the involvement of
a human labeler. In the dual-learning mechanism, we use one agent to represent the
model for the primal task and the other agent to represent the model for the dual
task, then ask them to teach each other through a reinforcement learning process.
Based on the feedback signals generated during this process (e.g., the languagemodel likelihood of the output of a model, and the reconstruction error of the
original sentence after the primal and dual translations), we can iteratively update
the two models until convergence (e.g., using the policy gradient methods). We call
the corresponding approach to neural machine translation dual-NMT. Experiments
show that dual-NMT works very well on English↔French translation; especially,
by learning from monolingual data (with 10% bilingual data for warm start), it
achieves a comparable accuracy to NMT trained from the full bilingual data for the
French-to-English translation task.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art machine translation (MT) systems, including both the phrase-based statistical translation approaches [6, 3, 12] and the recently emerged neural networks based translation approaches
[1, 5], heavily rely on aligned parallel training corpora. However, such parallel data are costly to
collect in practice and thus are usually limited in scale, which may constrain the related research and
applications.
Given that there exist almost unlimited monolingual data in the Web, it is very natural to leverage
them to boost the performance of MT systems. Actually different methods have been proposed for this
purpose, which can be roughly classified into two categories. In the first category [2, 4], monolingual
corpora in the target language are used to train a language model, which is then integrated with the
MT models trained from parallel bilingual corpora to improve the translation quality. In the second
category [14, 11], pseudo bilingual sentence pairs are generated from monolingual data by using the
∗
The first two authors contributed equally to this work. This work was conducted when the second author
was visiting Microsoft Research Asia.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

