Optimizing Affinity-Based Binary Hashing
Using Auxiliary Coordinates

Ramin Raziperchikolaei
EECS, University of California, Merced
rraziperchikolaei@ucmerced.edu

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
EECS, University of California, Merced
mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
In supervised binary hashing, one wants to learn a function that maps a highdimensional feature vector to a vector of binary codes, for application to fast image retrieval. This typically results in a difficult optimization problem, nonconvex
and nonsmooth, because of the discrete variables involved. Much work has simply
relaxed the problem during training, solving a continuous optimization, and truncating the codes a posteriori. This gives reasonable results but is quite suboptimal.
Recent work has tried to optimize the objective directly over the binary codes and
achieved better results, but the hash function was still learned a posteriori, which
remains suboptimal. We propose a general framework for learning hash functions
using affinity-based loss functions that uses auxiliary coordinates. This closes the
loop and optimizes jointly over the hash functions and the binary codes so that
they gradually match each other. The resulting algorithm can be seen as an iterated version of the procedure of optimizing first over the codes and then learning
the hash function. Compared to this, our optimization is guaranteed to obtain better hash functions while being not much slower, as demonstrated experimentally
in various supervised datasets. In addition, our framework facilitates the design of
optimization algorithms for arbitrary types of loss and hash functions.
Information retrieval arises in several applications, most obviously web search. For example, in
image retrieval, a user is interested in finding similar images to a query image. Computationally,
this essentially involves defining a high-dimensional feature space where each relevant image is
represented by a vector, and then finding the closest points (nearest neighbors) to the vector for the
query image, according to a suitable distance. For example, one can use features such as SIFT or
GIST [23] and the Euclidean distance for this purpose. Finding nearest neighbors in a dataset of
N images (where N can be millions), each a vector of dimension D (typically in the hundreds)
is slow, since exact algorithms run essentially in time O(N D) and space O(N D) (to store the
image dataset). In practice, this is approximated, and a successful way to do this is binary hashing
[12]. Here, given a high-dimensional vector x ∈ RD , the hash function h maps it to a b-bit vector
z = h(x) ∈ {−1, +1}b, and the nearest neighbor search is then done in the binary space. This
now costs O(N b) time and space, which is orders of magnitude faster because typically b < D
and, crucially, (1) operations with binary vectors (such as computing Hamming distances) are very
fast because of hardware support, and (2) the entire dataset can fit in (fast) memory rather than slow
memory or disk.
The disadvantage is that the results are inexact, since the neighbors in the binary space will not be
identical to the neighbors in the original space. However, the approximation error can be controlled
by using sufficiently many bits and by learning a good hash function. This has been the topic of
much work in recent years. The general approach consists of defining a supervised objective that has
a small value for good hash functions and minimizing it. Ideally, such an objective function should
be minimal when the neighbors of any given image are the same in both original and binary spaces.
Practically, in information retrieval, this is often evaluated using precision and recall. However, this
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

