Fast Distributed Submodular Cover:
Public-Private Data Summarization
Baharan Mirzasoleiman
ETH Zurich

Morteza Zadimoghaddam
Google Research

Amin Karbasi
Yale University

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the public-private framework of data summarization
motivated by privacy concerns in personalized recommender systems and online
social services. Such systems have usually access to massive data generated by a
large pool of users. A major fraction of the data is public and is visible to (and
can be used for) all users. However, each user can also contribute some private
data that should not be shared with other users to ensure her privacy. The goal is to
provide a succinct summary of massive dataset, ideally as small as possible, from
which customized summaries can be built for each user, i.e. it can contain elements
from the public data (for diversity) and users’ private data (for personalization).
To formalize the above challenge, we assume that the scoring function according
to which a user evaluates the utility of her summary satisfies submodularity, a
widely used notion in data summarization applications. Thus, we model the data
summarization targeted to each user as an instance of a submodular cover problem.
However, when the data is massive it is infeasible to use the centralized greedy
algorithm to find a customized summary even for a single user. Moreover, for a
large pool of users, it is too time consuming to find such summaries separately. Instead, we develop a fast distributed algorithm for submodular cover, FAST C OVER,
that provides a succinct summary in one shot and for all users. We show that
the solution provided by FAST C OVER is competitive with that of the centralized
algorithm with the number of rounds that is exponentially smaller than state of the
art results. Moreover, we have implemented FAST C OVER with Spark to demonstrate its practical performance on a number of concrete applications, including
personalized location recommendation, personalized movie recommendation, and
dominating set on tens of millions of data points and varying number of users.

1

Introduction

Data summarization, a central challenge in machine learning, is the task of finding a representative
subset of manageable size out of a large dataset. It has found numerous applications, including image
summarization [1], recommender systems [2], scene summarization [3], clustering [4, 5], active set
selection in non-parametric learning [6], and document and corpus summarization [7, 8], to name a
few. A general recipe to obtain a faithful summary is to define a utility/scoring function that measures
coverage and diversity of the selected subset [1]. In many applications, the choice of utility functions
used for summarization exhibit submodularity, a natural diminishing returns property. In words,
submodularity implies that the added value of any given element from the dataset decreases as we
include more data points to the summary. Thus, the data summarization problem can be naturally
reduced to that of a submodular cover problem where the objective is to find the smallest subset
whose utility achieves a desired fraction of the utility provided by the entire dataset.
It is known that the classical greedy algorithm yields a logarithmic factor approximation to the
optimum summary [9]. It starts with an empty set, and at each iteration adds an element with the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

