Adaptive Neural Compilation

Rudy Bunel∗
University of Oxford
rudy@robots.ox.ac.uk
Pushmeet Kohli
Microsoft Research
pkohli@microsoft.com

Alban Desmaison∗
University of Oxford
alban@robots.ox.ac.uk

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford
pawan@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper proposes an adaptive neural-compilation framework to address the
problem of learning efficient programs. Traditional code optimisation strategies
used in compilers are based on applying pre-specified set of transformations that
make the code faster to execute without changing its semantics. In contrast, our
work involves adapting programs to make them more efficient while considering
correctness only on a target input distribution. Our approach is inspired by the
recent works on differentiable representations of programs. We show that it is
possible to compile programs written in a low-level language to a differentiable
representation. We also show how programs in this representation can be optimised
to make them efficient on a target input distribution. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach enables learning specifically-tuned algorithms for given
data distributions with a high success rate.

1

Introduction

Algorithm design often requires making simplifying assumptions about the input data. Consider, for
instance, the computational problem of accessing an element in a linked list. Without the knowledge
of the input data distribution, one can only specify an algorithm that runs in a time linear in the
number of elements of the list. However, suppose all the linked lists that we encountered in practice
were ordered in memory. Then it would be advantageous to design an algorithm specifically for this
task as it can lead to a constant running time. Unfortunately, the input data distribution of a real world
problem cannot be easily specified as in the above simple example. The best that one can hope for is
to obtain samples drawn from the distribution. A natural question that arises from these observations:
“How can we adapt a generic algorithm for a computational task using samples from an unknown
input data distribution?”
The process of finding the most efficient implementation of an algorithm has received considerable
attention in the theoretical computer science and code optimisation community. Recently, Conditionally Correct Superoptimization [14] was proposed as a method for leveraging samples of the
input data distribution to go beyond semantically equivalent optimisation and towards data-specific
performance improvements. The underlying procedure is based on a stochastic search over the space
of all possible programs. Additionally, they restrict their applications to reasonably small, loop-free
programs, thereby limiting their impact in practice.
In this work, we take inspiration from the recent wave of machine-learning frameworks for estimating
programs. Using recurrent models, Graves et al. [2] introduced a fully differentiable representation of
a program, enabling the use of gradient-based methods to learn a program from examples. Many other
models that have been published recently [3, 5, 6, 8] build and improve on the early work by Graves
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

