A Powerful Generative Model Using Random Weights
for the Deep Image Representation

Kun He∗, Yan Wang †
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
brooklet60@hust.edu.cn, yanwang@hust.edu.cn
John Hopcroft
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University, Ithaca 14850, NY, USA
jeh@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
To what extent is the success of deep visualization due to the training? Could
we do deep visualization using untrained, random weight networks? To address
this issue, we explore new and powerful generative models for three popular deep
visualization tasks using untrained, random weight convolutional neural networks.
First we invert representations in feature spaces and reconstruct images from white
noise inputs. The reconstruction quality is statistically higher than that of the same
method applied on well trained networks with the same architecture. Next we
synthesize textures using scaled correlations of representations in multiple layers
and our results are almost indistinguishable with the original natural texture and
the synthesized textures based on the trained network. Third, by recasting the
content of an image in the style of various artworks, we create artistic images with
high perceptual quality, highly competitive to the prior work of Gatys et al. on
pretrained networks. To our knowledge this is the first demonstration of image
representations using untrained deep neural networks. Our work provides a new
and fascinating tool to study the representation of deep network architecture and
sheds light on new understandings on deep visualization. It may possibly lead to a
way to compare network architectures without training.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), especially Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
have demonstrated highly competitive results on object recognition and image classification [1, 2, 3, 4].
With advances in training, there is a growing trend towards understanding the inner working of these
deep networks. By training on a very large image data set, DNNs develop a representation of images
that makes object information increasingly explicit at various levels of the hierarchical architecture.
Significant visualization techniques have been developed to understand the deep image representations
on trained networks [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
Inversion techniques have been developed to create synthetic images with feature representations
similar to the representations of an original image in one or several layers of the network. Feature
representations are a function Φ of the source image x0 . An approximate inverse Φ−1 is used to
∗
†

The three authors contributing equally.
Corresponding author.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

