β-risk: a New Surrogate Risk for Learning
from Weakly Labeled Data

Valentina Zantedeschi∗

Rémi Emonet

Marc Sebban
firstname.lastname@univ-st-etienne.fr
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School,
Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-ETIENNE, France

Abstract
During the past few years, the machine learning community has paid attention to
developing new methods for learning from weakly labeled data. This field covers
different settings like semi-supervised learning, learning with label proportions,
multi-instance learning, noise-tolerant learning, etc. This paper presents a generic
framework to deal with these weakly labeled scenarios. We introduce the β-risk as
a generalized formulation of the standard empirical risk based on surrogate marginbased loss functions. This risk allows us to express the reliability on the labels and
to derive different kinds of learning algorithms. We specifically focus on SVMs
and propose a soft margin β-SVM algorithm which behaves better that the state of
the art.

1

Introduction

The growing amount of data available nowadays allowed us to increase the confidence in the models
induced by machine learning methods. On the other hand, it also caused several issues, especially in
supervised classification, regarding the availability of labels and their reliability. Because it may be
expensive and tricky to assign a reliable and unique label to each training instance, the data at our
disposal for the application at hand are often weakly labeled. Learning from weak supervision has
received important attention over the past few years [14, 12]. This research field includes different
settings: only a fraction of the labels are known (Semi-Supervised learning [22]); we can access only
the proportions of the classes (Learning with Label Proportions [19] and Multi-Instance Learning [8]);
the labels are uncertain or noisy (Noise-Tolerant Learning [1, 18, 16]); different discording labels are
given to the same instance by different experts (Multi-Expert Learning [21]); labels are completely
unknown (Unsupervised Learning [11]). As a consequence of this statement of fact, the data provided
in all these situations cannot be fully exploited using supervised techniques, at the risk of drastically
reducing the performance of the learned models. To address this issue, numerous machine learning
methods have been developed to deal with each of the previous specific situations. However, all
these weakly labeled learning tasks share common features mainly relying on the confidence in
the labels, opening the door to the development of generic frameworks. Unfortunately, only a few
attempts have tried to address several settings with the same approach. The most interesting one has
been presented in [14] where the authors propose W ELL SVM which is dedicated to deal with three
different weakly labeled learning scenarios: semi-supervised learning, multi-instance learning and
clustering. However, W ELL SVM focuses specifically on Support Vector Machines and it requires to
∗

http://vzantedeschi.com/

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

