Kernel Observers: Systems-Theoretic Modeling and
Inference of Spatiotemporally Evolving Processes

Hassan A. Kingravi
Pindrop
Atlanta, GA 30308
hkingravi@pindrop.com

Harshal Maske and Girish Chowdhary
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
hmaske2@illinois.edu, girishc@illinois.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the latent state of a spatiotemporally evolving continuous function using very few sensor measurements. We show that
layering a dynamical systems prior over temporal evolution of weights of a kernel
model is a valid approach to spatiotemporal modeling, and that it does not require
the design of complex nonstationary kernels. Furthermore, we show that such a
differentially constrained predictive model can be utilized to determine sensing
locations that guarantee that the hidden state of the phenomena can be recovered
with very few measurements. We provide sufficient conditions on the number and
spatial location of samples required to guarantee state recovery, and provide a lower
bound on the minimum number of samples required to robustly infer the hidden
states. Our approach outperforms existing methods in numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Modeling of large-scale stochastic phenomena with both spatial and temporal (spatiotemporal)
evolution is a fundamental problem in the applied sciences and social networks. The spatial and
temporal evolution in such domains is constrained by stochastic partial differential equations, whose
structure and parameters may be time-varying and unknown. While modeling spatiotemporal
phenomena has traditionally been the province of the field of geostatistics, it has in recent years
gained more attention in the machine learning community [2]. The data-driven models developed
through machine learning techniques provide a way to capture complex spatiotemporal phenomena
that are not easily modeled by first-principles alone, such as stochastic partial differential equations.
In the machine learning community, kernel methods represent a class of extremely well-studied and
powerful methods for inference in spatial domains; in these techniques, correlations between the input
variables are encoded through a covariance kernel, and the model is formed through a linear weighted
combination of the kernels [14]. In recent years, kernel methods have been applied to spatiotemporal
modeling with varying degrees of success [2, 14]. Many recent techniques in spatiotemporal modeling
have focused on nonstationary covariance kernel design and associated hyperparameter learning
algorithms [4, 7, 12]. The main benefit of careful design of covariance kernels over approaches that
simply include time as an additional input variable is that they can account for intricate spatiotemporal
couplings. However, there are two key challenges with these approaches: the first is ensuring
the scalability of the model to large scale phenomena, which manifests due to the fact that the
hyperparameter optimization problem is not convex in general, leading to methods that are difficult
to implement, susceptible to local minima, and that can become computationally intractable for
large datasets. In addition to the challenge of modeling spatiotemporally varying processes, we
are interested in addressing the second very important, and widely unaddressed challenge: given a
predictive model of the spatiotemporal phenomena, how can the current latent state of the phenomena
be estimated using as few sensor measurements as possible? This is called the monitoring problem.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

