Scaling Factorial Hidden Markov Models:
Stochastic Variational Inference without Messages

Yin Cheng Ng
Dept. of Statistical Science
University College London
y.ng.12@ucl.ac.uk

Pawel Chilinski
Dept. of Computing Science
University College London
ucabchi@ucl.ac.uk

Ricardo Silva
Dept. of Statistical Science
University College London
r.silva@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Factorial Hidden Markov Models (FHMMs) are powerful models for sequential
data but they do not scale well with long sequences. We propose a scalable inference and learning algorithm for FHMMs that draws on ideas from the stochastic
variational inference, neural network and copula literatures. Unlike existing approaches, the proposed algorithm requires no message passing procedure among
latent variables and can be distributed to a network of computers to speed up learning. Our experiments corroborate that the proposed algorithm does not introduce
further approximation bias compared to the proven structured mean-field algorithm,
and achieves better performance with long sequences and large FHMMs.

1

Introduction

Breakthroughs in modern technology have allowed more sequential data to be collected in higher resolutions. The resulted sequential data sets are often extremely long and high-dimensional, exhibiting
rich structures and long-range dependency that can only be captured by fitting large models to the
sequences, such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) with a large state space. The standard methods
of learning and performing inference in the HMM class of models are the Expectation-Maximization
(EM) and the Forward-Backward algorithms. The Forward-Backward and EM algorithms are prohibitively expensive for long sequences and large models because of their linear and quadratic
computational complexity with respect to sequence length and state space size respectively.
To rein in the computational cost of inference in HMMs, several variational inference algorithms that
trade-off inference accuracy in exchange for lower computational cost have been proposed in the
literatures. Variational inference is a deterministic approximate inference technique that approximates
posterior distribution p by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL(q||p), where q lies in a
family of distributions selected to approximate p as closely as possible while keeping the inference
algorithm computationally tractable [24]. Despite its biased approximation of the actual posteriors,
the variational inference approach has been proven to work well in practice [21].
Variational inference has also been successfully scaled to tackle problems with large data sets
through the use of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms [12]. However, applications of such
techniques to models where the data is dependent (i.e., non-i.i.d.) require much care in the choice of
the approximating family and parameter update schedules to preserve dependency structure in the
data [9]. More recently, developments of stochastic variational inference algorithms to scale models
for non-i.i.d. data to large data sets have been increasingly explored [5, 9].
We propose a stochastic variational inference approach to approximate the posterior of hidden Markov
chains in Factorial Hidden Markov Models (FHMM) with independent chains of bivariate Gaussian
copulas. Unlike existing variational inference algorithms, the proposed approach eliminates the need
for explicit message passing between latent variables and allows computations to be distributed to
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

