On Robustness of Kernel Clustering

Bowei Yan
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin

Purnamrita Sarkar
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Clustering is an important unsupervised learning problem in machine learning
and statistics. Among many existing algorithms, kernel k-means has drawn much
research attention due to its ability to find non-linear cluster boundaries and its
inherent simplicity. There are two main approaches for kernel k-means: SVD
of the kernel matrix and convex relaxations. Despite the attention kernel clustering has received both from theoretical and applied quarters, not much is known
about robustness of the methods. In this paper we first introduce a semidefinite
programming relaxation for the kernel clustering problem, then prove that under a
suitable model specification, both K-SVD and SDP approaches are consistent in
the limit, albeit SDP is strongly consistent, i.e. achieves exact recovery, whereas
K-SVD is weakly consistent, i.e. the fraction of misclassified nodes vanish. Also
the error bounds suggest that SDP is more resilient towards outliers, which we also
demonstrate with experiments.

1

Introduction

Clustering is an important problem which is prevalent in a variety of real world problems. One of the
first and widely applied clustering algorithms is k-means, which was named by James MacQueen [14],
but was proposed by Hugo Steinhaus [21] even before. Despite being half a century old, k-means has
been widely used and analyzed under various settings.
One major drawback of k-means is its incapability to separate clusters that are non-linearly separated.
This can be alleviated by mapping the data to a high dimensional feature space and do clustering on
top of the feature space [19, 9, 12], which is generally called kernel-based methods. For instance,
the widely-used spectral clustering [20, 16] is an algorithm to calculate top eigenvectors of a kernel
matrix of affinities, followed by a k-means on the top r eigenvectors. The consistency of spectral
clustering is analyzed by [22]. [9] shows that spectral clustering is essentially equivalent to a weighted
version of kernel k-means.
The performance guarantee for clustering is often studied under distributional assumptions; usually
a mixture model with well-separated centers suffices to show consistency. [5] uses a Gaussian
mixture model, and proposes a variant of EM algorithm that provably recovers the center of each
Gaussian when the minimum distance between clusters is greater than some multiple of the square
root of dimension. [2] works with a projection based algorithm and shows the separation needs to
be greater than the operator norm and the Frobenius norm of difference between data matrix and its
corresponding center matrix, up to a constant.
Another popular technique is based on semidefinite relaxations. For example [18] proposes a SDP
relaxation for k-means typed clustering. In a very recent work, [15] shows the effectiveness of SDP
relaxation with k-means clustering for subgaussian mixtures, provided the minimum distance between
centers is greater than the variance of the sub-gaussian times the square of the number of clusters r.
On a related note, SDP relaxations have been shown to be consistent for community detection in
networks [1, 3]. In particular, [3] consider “inlier” (these are generated from the underlying clustering
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

