Can Peripheral Representations Improve Clutter
Metrics on Complex Scenes?

Arturo Deza
Dynamical Neuroscience
Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
UC Santa Barbara, CA, USA
deza@dyns.ucsb.edu

Miguel P. Eckstein
Psychological and Brain Sciences
Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
UC Santa Barbara, CA, USA
eckstein@psych.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Previous studies have proposed image-based clutter measures that correlate with
human search times and/or eye movements. However, most models do not take
into account the fact that the effects of clutter interact with the foveated nature of
the human visual system: visual clutter further from the fovea has an increasing
detrimental influence on perception. Here, we introduce a new foveated clutter
model to predict the detrimental effects in target search utilizing a forced fixation
search task. We use Feature Congestion (Rosenholtz et al.) as our non foveated
clutter model, and we stack a peripheral architecture on top of Feature Congestion
for our foveated model. We introduce the Peripheral Integration Feature Congestion
(PIFC) coefficient, as a fundamental ingredient of our model that modulates clutter
as a non-linear gain contingent on eccentricity. We show that Foveated Feature
Congestion (FFC) clutter scores (r(44) = −0.82 ± 0.04, p < 0.0001) correlate
better with target detection (hit rate) than regular Feature Congestion (r(44) =
−0.19 ± 0.13, p = 0.0774) in forced fixation search; and we extend foveation to
other clutter models showing stronger correlations in all cases. Thus, our model
allows us to enrich clutter perception research by computing fixation specific clutter
maps. Code for building peripheral representations is available1 .

1

Introduction

What is clutter? While it seems easy to make sense of a cluttered desk vs an uncluttered desk at a
glance, it is hard to quantify clutter with a number. Is a cluttered desk, one stacked with papers? Or is
an uncluttered desk, one that is more organized irrelevant of number of items? An important goal in
clutter research has been to develop an image based computational model that outputs a quantitative
measure that correlates with human perceptual behavior [19, 12, 24, 21]. Previous studies have
created models that output global or regional metrics to measure clutter perception. Such measures
are aimed to predict the influence of clutter on perception. However, one important aspect of human
visual perception is that it is not space invariant: the fovea processes visual information with high
spatial detail while regions away from the central fovea have access to lower spatial detail. Thus,
the influence of clutter on perception can depend on the retinal location of the stimulus and such
influences will likely interact with the information content in the stimulus.
The goal of the current paper is to develop a foveated clutter model that can successfully predict
the interaction between retinal eccentricity and image content in modulating the influence of clutter
on perceptual behavior. We introduce a foveated mechanism based on the peripheral architecture
proposed by Freeman and Simoncelli [9] and stack it into a current clutter model (Feature Congestion [23, 24]) to generate a clutter map that arises from a calculation of information loss with retinal
eccentricity but is multiplicatively modulated by the original unfoveated clutter score. The new
1

Piranhas Toolkit: https://github.com/ArturoDeza/Piranhas

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

