Estimating Nonlinear Neural Response Functions
using GP Priors and Kronecker Methods

Cristina Savin
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, AT 3400
csavin@ist.ac.at

Gasper Tkačik
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, AT 3400
tkacik@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Jointly characterizing neural responses in terms of several external variables
promises novel insights into circuit function, but remains computationally prohibitive in practice. Here we use gaussian process (GP) priors and exploit recent
advances in fast GP inference and learning based on Kronecker methods, to efficiently estimate multidimensional nonlinear tuning functions. Our estimator
requires considerably less data than traditional methods and further provides principled uncertainty estimates. We apply these tools to hippocampal recordings during
open field exploration and use them to characterize the joint dependence of CA1
responses on the position of the animal and several other variables, including the
animal’s speed, direction of motion, and network oscillations. Our results provide
an unprecedentedly detailed quantification of the tuning of hippocampal neurons.
The model’s generality suggests that our approach can be used to estimate neural
response properties in other brain regions.

1

Introduction

An important facet of neural data analysis concerns characterizing the tuning properties of neurons,
defined as the average firing rate of a cell conditioned on the value of some external variables, for
instance the orientation of an image patch in a V1 cell, or the position of the animal within an
environment for hippocampal cells. As experiments become more complex and more naturalistic, the
number of variables that modulate neural responses increases. These include not only experimentally
targeted inputs but also variables that are no longer under the experimenter’s control but which can
be (to a certain extent) measured, either external (the behavior of the animal) or internal (attentional
level, network oscillations, etc). Characterizing these complex dependencies is very difficult, yet it
could provide important insights into neural circuits computation and function.
Traditional estimates of a cell’s tuning properties often manipulate one variable at the time or consider
simple dependencies between inputs and the neural responses e.g. Generalized Linear Models,
GLM [1, 2]). There is comparatively little work that allows for complex input-output functional
relationships on multidimensional input spaces [3–5]. The reasons for this are twofold. On one hand,
dealing with complex nonlinearities is computationally challenging, on the other hand, constraints
on experimental duration lead to a potentially very sparse sampling of the stimulus space, requiring
additional assumptions for a sensible interpolation. This problem is further exacerbated in experiments
in awake animals where the sampling of the stimulus space is driven by the animal behavior. The
few solutions for nonlinear tuning properties rely on spline-based approximation of one-dimensional
functions (for position on a linear track) [6] or assume a log-Gaussian Cox process generative model
as a way to enforce smoothness of 2D functional maps [3–5]. These methods are usually restricted to
at most two input dimensions (but see [4]).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

