Learning Deep Parsimonious Representations

Renjie Liao1 , Alexander Schwing2 , Richard S. Zemel1,3 , Raquel Urtasun1
University of Toronto1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign2
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research3
{rjliao, zemel, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu, aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper we aim at facilitating generalization for deep networks while supporting interpretability of the learned representations. Towards this goal, we propose a
clustering based regularization that encourages parsimonious representations. Our
k-means style objective is easy to optimize and flexible, supporting various forms
of clustering, such as sample clustering, spatial clustering, as well as co-clustering.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the tasks of unsupervised
learning, classification, fine grained categorization, and zero-shot learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks have been shown to perform extremely well on a variety of
tasks including classification [21], semantic segmentation [13], machine translation [27] and speech
recognition [16]. This has led to their adoption across many areas such as computer vision, natural
language processing and robotics [16, 21, 22, 27]. Three major advances are responsible for the
recent success of neural networks: the increase in available computational resources, access to large
scale data sets, and several algorithmic improvements.
Many of these algorithmic advances are related to regularization, which is key to prevent overfitting
and improve generalization of the learned classifier, as the current trend is to increase the capacity of
neural nets. For example, batch normalization [18] is used to normalize intermediate representations
which can be interpreted as imposing constraints. In contrast, dropout [26] removes a fraction of the
learned representations at random to prevent co-adaptation. Learning of de-correlated activations [6]
shares a similar idea since it explicitly discourages correlation between the units.
In this paper we propose a new type of regularization that encourages the network representations to
form clusters. As a consequence, the learned feature space is compactly representable, facilitating
generalization. Furthermore, clustering supports interpretability of the learned representations. We
formulate our regularization with a k-means style objective which is easy to optimize, and investigate
different types of clusterings, including sample clustering, spatial clustering, and co-clustering.
We demonstrate the generalization performance of our proposed method in several settings: autoencoders trained on the MNIST dataset [23], classification on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 [20], as
well as fine-grained classification and zero-shot learning on the CUB-200-2011 dataset [34]. We
show that our approach leads to significant wins in all these scenarios. In addition, we are able to
demonstrate on the CUB-200-2011 dataset that the network representation captures meaningful part
representations even though it is not explicitly trained to do so.

2

Related Work

Standard neural network regularization involves penalties on the weights based on the norm of the
parameters [29, 30]. Also popular are regularization methods applied to intermediate representations,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

