Deep Learning Games

Dale Schuurmans∗
Google
daes@ualberta.ca

Martin Zinkevich
Google
martinz@google.com

Abstract
We investigate a reduction of supervised learning to game playing that reveals new
connections and learning methods. For convex one-layer problems, we demonstrate
an equivalence between global minimizers of the training problem and Nash
equilibria in a simple game. We then show how the game can be extended to general
acyclic neural networks with differentiable convex gates, establishing a bijection
between the Nash equilibria and critical (or KKT) points of the deep learning
problem. Based on these connections we investigate alternative learning methods,
and find that regret matching can achieve competitive training performance while
producing sparser models than current deep learning strategies.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate a new approach to reducing supervised learning to game playing. Unlike
well known reductions [8, 29, 30], we avoid duality as a necessary component in the reduction,
which allows a more flexible perspective that can be extended to deep models. An interesting finding
is that the no-regret strategies used to solve large-scale games [35] provide effective stochastic
training methods for supervised learning problems. In particular, regret matching [12], a step-size
free algorithm, appears capable of efficient stochastic optimization performance in practice.
A central contribution of this paper is to demonstrate how supervised learning of a directed acyclic
neural network with differentiable convex gates can be expressed as a simultaneous move game with
simple player actions and utilities. For variations of the learning problem (i.e. whether regularization
is considered) we establish connections between the critical points (or KKT points) and Nash
equilibria in the corresponding game. As expected, deep learning games are not simple, since even
approximately training deep models is hard in the worst case [13]. Nevertheless, the reduction reveals
new possibilities for training deep models that have not been previously considered. In particular, we
discover that regret matching with simple initialization can offer competitive training performance
compared to state-of-the-art deep learning heuristics while providing sparser solutions.
Recently, we have become aware of unpublished work [2] that also proposes a reduction of supervised
deep learning to game playing. Although the reduction presented in this paper was developed
independently, we acknowledge that others have also begun to consider the connection between deep
learning and game theory. We compare these two specific reductions in Appendix J, and outline the
distinct advantages of the approach developed in this paper.

2

One-Layer Learning Games

We start by considering the simpler one-layer case, which allows us to introduce the key concepts
that will then be extended to deep models. Consider the standard supervised learning problem where
one is given a set of paired data {(xt , yt )}Tt=1 , such that (xt , yt ) ∈ X × Y, and wishes to learn a
∗

Work performed at Google Brain while on a sabbatical leave from the University of Alberta.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

