Deconvolving Feedback Loops
in Recommender Systems

Ayan Sinha
Purdue University
sinhayan@mit.edu

David F. Gleich
Purdue University
dgleich@purdue.edu

Karthik Ramani
Purdue University
ramani@purdue.edu

Abstract
Collaborative filtering is a popular technique to infer users’ preferences on new
content based on the collective information of all users preferences. Recommender
systems then use this information to make personalized suggestions to users. When
users accept these recommendations it creates a feedback loop in the recommender
system, and these loops iteratively influence the collaborative filtering algorithm’s
predictions over time. We investigate whether it is possible to identify items
affected by these feedback loops. We state sufficient assumptions to deconvolve
the feedback loops while keeping the inverse solution tractable. We furthermore
develop a metric to unravel the recommender system’s influence on the entire
user-item rating matrix. We use this metric on synthetic and real-world datasets
to (1) identify the extent to which the recommender system affects the final rating
matrix, (2) rank frequently recommended items, and (3) distinguish whether a
user’s rated item was recommended or an intrinsic preference. Our results indicate
that it is possible to recover the ratings matrix of intrinsic user preferences using a
single snapshot of the ratings matrix without any temporal information.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been helpful to users for making decisions in diverse domains such
as movies, wines, food, news among others [19, 23]. However, it is well known that the interface
of these systems affect the users’ opinion, and hence, their ratings of items [7, 24].Thus, broadly
speaking, a user’s rating of an item is either his or her intrinsic preference or the influence of the
recommender system (RS) on the user [2]. As these ratings implicitly affect recommendations to other
users through feedback, it is critical to quantify the role of feedback in content personalization [22].
Thus the primary motivating question for this paper is: Given only a user-item rating matrix, is it
possible to infer whether any preference values are influenced by a RS? Secondary questions include:
Which preference values are influenced and to what extent by the RS? Furthermore, how do we
recover the true preference value of an item to a user?
We develop an algorithm to answer these questions using the singular value decomposition (SVD)
of the observed ratings matrix (Section 2). The genesis of this algorithm follows by viewing the
observed ratings at any point of time as union of true ratings and recommendations:
Robs = Rtrue + Rrecom
(1)
where Robs is the observed rating matrix at a given instant of time, Rtrue is the rating matrix due
to users’ true preferences of items (along with any external influences such as ads, friends, and so
on) and Rrecom is the rating matrix which indicates the RS’s contribution to the observed ratings.
Our more formal goal is to recover Rtrue from Robs . But this is impossible without strong modeling
assumptions; any rating is just as likely to be a true rating as due to the system.
Thus, we make strong, but plausible assumptions about a RS. In essence, these assumptions prescribe
a precise model of the recommender and prevent its effects from completely dominating the future.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

