Pairwise Choice Markov Chains

Stephen Ragain
Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
sragain@stanford.edu

Johan Ugander
Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jugander@stanford.edu

Abstract
As datasets capturing human choices grow in richness and scale—particularly in
online domains—there is an increasing need for choice models that escape traditional choice-theoretic axioms such as regularity, stochastic transitivity, and
Luce’s choice axiom. In this work we introduce the Pairwise Choice Markov
Chain (PCMC) model of discrete choice, an inferentially tractable model that does
not assume any of the above axioms while still satisfying the foundational axiom
of uniform expansion, a considerably weaker assumption than Luce’s choice axiom. We show that the PCMC model significantly outperforms both the Multinomial Logit (MNL) model and a mixed MNL (MMNL) model in prediction tasks
on both synthetic and empirical datasets known to exhibit violations of Luce’s
axiom. Our analysis also synthesizes several recent observations connecting the
Multinomial Logit model and Markov chains; the PCMC model retains the Multinomial Logit model as a special case.

1

Introduction

Discrete choice models describe and predict decisions between distinct alternatives. Traditional applications include consumer purchasing decisions, choices of schooling or employment, and commuter choices for modes of transportation among available options. Early models of probabilistic
discrete choice, including the well known Thurstone Case V model [27] and Bradley-Terry-Luce
(BTL) model [7], were developed and refined under diverse strict assumptions about human decision making. As complex individual choices become increasingly mediated by engineered and
learned platforms—from online shopping to web browser clicking to interactions with recommendation systems—there is a pressing need for flexible models capable of describing and predicting
nuanced choice behavior.
Luce’s choice axiom, popularly known as the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA), is arguably the most storied assumption in choice theory [18]. The axiom consists of two statements, applied to each subset of alternatives S within a broader universe U . Let paS = Pr(a chosen from S)
for any S ⊆ U , and in a slight abuse of notation let pab = Pr(a chosen from {a, b}) when there are
only two elements. Luce’s axiom is then that: (i) if pab = 0 then paS = 0 for all S containing a and
b, (ii) the probability of choosing a from U conditioned on the choice lying in S is equal to paS .
The BTL model, which defines pab = γa /(γa + γb ) for latent “quality” parameters γi > 0, satisfies
the axiom while Thurstone’s Case V model does not [1]. Soon after its introduction, the BTL model
was generalized from pairwise choices to choices from larger sets [4]. The resulting Multinomal
Logit (MNL) model again employs quality parameters γi ≥ 0 for each i ∈ U and defines piS , the
probability of choosing i from S ⊆ U , proportional to γi for all i ∈ S. Any model that satisfies
Luce’s choice axiom is equivalent to some MNL model [19].
One consequence of Luce’s choice axiom is strict stochastic transitivity between alternatives: if
pab ≥ 0.5 and pbc ≥ 0.5, then pac ≥ max(pab , pbc ). A possibly undesirable consequence of
strict stochastic transitivity is the necessity of a total order across all elements. But note that strict
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

