Learning Treewidth-Bounded Bayesian Networks
with Thousands of Variables
Mauro Scanagatta
IDSIA∗ , SUPSI† , USI‡
Lugano, Switzerland
mauro@idsia.ch

Giorgio Corani
IDSIA∗ , SUPSI† , USI‡
Lugano, Switzerland
giorgio@idsia.ch

Cassio P. de Campos
Queen’s University Belfast
Northern Ireland, UK
c.decampos@qub.ac.uk

Marco Zaffalon
IDSIA∗
Lugano, Switzerland
zaffalon@idsia.ch

Abstract
We present a method for learning treewidth-bounded Bayesian networks from
data sets containing thousands of variables. Bounding the treewidth of a Bayesian
network greatly reduces the complexity of inferences. Yet, being a global property
of the graph, it considerably increases the difficulty of the learning process. Our
novel algorithm accomplishes this task, scaling both to large domains and to large
treewidths. Our novel approach consistently outperforms the state of the art on
experiments with up to thousands of variables.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of structural learning of Bayesian networks with bounded treewidth,
adopting a score-based approach. Learning the structure of a bounded treewidth Bayesian network is
an NP-hard problem (Korhonen and Parviainen, 2013). Yet learning Bayesian networks with bounded
treewidth is necessary to allow exact tractable inference, since the worst-case inference complexity is
exponential in the treewidth k (under the exponential time hypothesis) (Kwisthout et al., 2010).
A pioneering approach, polynomial in both the number of variables and the treewidth bound, has
been proposed in Elidan and Gould (2009). It incrementally builds the network; at each arc addition
it provides an upper-bound on the treewidth of the learned structure. The limit of this approach is that,
as the number of variables increases, the gap between the bound and the actual treewidth becomes
large, leading to sparse networks. An exact method has been proposed in Korhonen and Parviainen
(2013), which finds the highest-scoring network with the desired treewidth. However, its complexity
increases exponentially with the number of variables n. Thus it has been applied in experiments with
15 variables at most. Parviainen et al. (2014) adopted an anytime integer linear programming (ILP)
approach, called TWILP. If the algorithm is given enough time, it finds the highest-scoring network
with bounded treewidth. Otherwise it returns a sub-optimal DAG with bounded treewidth. The ILP
problem has an exponential number of constraints in the number of variables; this limits its scalability,
even if the constraints can be generated online. Berg et al. (2014) casted the problem of structural
learning with limited treewidth as a problem of weighted partial Maximum Satisfiability. They solved
the problem exactly through a MaxSAT solver and performed experiments with 30 variables at most.
Nie et al. (2014) proposed an efficient anytime ILP approach with a polynomial number of constraints
∗

Istituto Dalle Molle di studi sull’Intelligenza Artificiale (IDSIA)
Scuola universitaria professionale della Svizzera italiana (SUPSI)
‡
Università della Svizzera italiana (USI)
†

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

