Efficient Nonparametric Smoothness Estimation

Shashank Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
sss1@andrew.cmu.edu

Simon S. Du
Carnegie Mellon University
ssdu@cs.cmu.edu

Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Sobolev quantities (norms, inner products, and distances) of probability density
functions are important in the theory of nonparametric statistics, but have rarely
been used in practice, due to a lack of practical estimators. They also include,
as special cases, L2 quantities which are used in many applications. We propose
and analyze a family of estimators for Sobolev quantities of unknown probability
density functions. We bound the finite-sample bias and variance of our estimators,
finding that they are generally minimax rate-optimal. Our estimators are significantly more computationally tractable than previous estimators, and exhibit a
statistical/computational trade-off allowing them to adapt to computational constraints. We also draw theoretical connections to recent work on fast two-sample
testing and empirically validate our estimators on synthetic data.

1

Introduction

L2 quantities (i.e., inner products, norms, and distances) of continuous probability density functions
are important information theoretic quantities with many applications in machine learning and signal
processing. For example, L2 norm estimates can be used for goodness-of-fit testing [7], image
registration and texture classification [12], and parameter estimation in semi-parametric models [36].
L2 inner products estimates can generalize linear or polynomial kernel methods to inputs which are
distributions rather than numerical vectors. [28] L2 distance estimators are used for two-sample
testing [1, 25], transduction learning [30], and machine learning on distributional inputs [27]. [29]
gives applications of L2 quantities to adaptive information filtering, classification, and clustering.
L2 quantities are a special case of less-well-known Sobolev quantities. Sobolev norms measure
global smoothness of a function in terms of integrals of squared derivatives. For example, for a
non-negative integer s and a function f : R → R with an sth derivative f (s) , the s-order Sobolev
2
R
norm k · kH s is given by kf kH s = R f (s) (x) dx (when this quantity is finite). See Section 2 for
more general definitions, and see [21] for an introduction to Sobolev spaces.
Estimation of general Sobolev norms has a long history in nonparametric statistics (e.g., [32, 13, 10,
2]) This line of work was motivated by the role of Sobolev norms in many semi- and non-parametric
problems, including density estimation, density functional estimation, and regression, (see [35],
Section 1.7.1) where they dictate the convergence rates of estimators. Despite this, to our knowledge,
these quantities have never been studied in real data, leaving an important gap between the theory
and practice of nonparametric statistics. We suggest this is in part due a lack of practical estimators
for these quantities. For example, the only one of the above estimators that is statistically minimaxoptimal [2] is extremely difficult to compute in practice, requiring numerical integration over each of
O(n2 ) different kernel density estimates, where n denotes the sample size. We know of no estimators
previously proposed for Sobolev inner products and distances.
The main goal of this paper is to propose and analyze a family of computationally and statistically
efficient estimators for Sobolev inner products, norms, and distances. Our specific contributions are:
1. We propose families of nonparametric estimators for all Sobolev quantities (Section 4).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

