Dynamic Network Surgery for Efficient DNNs

Yiwen Guo∗
Intel Labs China
yiwen.guo@intel.com

Anbang Yao
Intel Labs China
anbang.yao@intel.com

Yurong Chen
Intel Labs China
yurong.chen@intel.com

Abstract
Deep learning has become a ubiquitous technology to improve machine intelligence.
However, most of the existing deep models are structurally very complex, making
them difficult to be deployed on the mobile platforms with limited computational
power. In this paper, we propose a novel network compression method called
dynamic network surgery, which can remarkably reduce the network complexity
by making on-the-fly connection pruning. Unlike the previous methods which
accomplish this task in a greedy way, we properly incorporate connection splicing
into the whole process to avoid incorrect pruning and make it as a continual network
maintenance. The effectiveness of our method is proved with experiments. Without
any accuracy loss, our method can efficiently compress the number of parameters
in LeNet-5 and AlexNet by a factor of 108× and 17.7× respectively, proving that
it outperforms the recent pruning method by considerable margins. Code and some
models are available at https://github.com/yiwenguo/Dynamic-Network-Surgery.

1

Introduction

As a family of brain inspired models, deep neural networks (DNNs) have substantially advanced a
variety of artificial intelligence tasks including image classification [13, 19, 11], natural language
processing, speech recognition and face recognition.
Despite these tremendous successes, recently designed networks tend to have more stacked layers,
and thus more learnable parameters. For instance, AlexNet [13] designed by Krizhevsky et al.
has 61 million parameters to win the ILSVRC 2012 classification competition, which is over 100
times more than that of LeCun’s conventional model [15] (e.g., LeNet-5), let alone the much more
complex models like VGGNet [19]. Since more parameters means more storage requirement and
more floating-point operations (FLOPs), it increases the difficulty of applying DNNs on mobile
platforms with limited memory and processing units. Moreover, the battery capacity can be another
bottleneck [9].
Although DNN models normally require a vast number of parameters to guarantee their superior
performance, significant redundancies have been reported in their parameterizations [4]. Therefore,
with a proper strategy, it is possible to compress these models without significantly losing their
prediction accuracies. Among existing methods, network pruning appears to be an outstanding one
due to its surprising ability of accuracy loss prevention. For instance, Han et al. [9] recently propose to
make "lossless" DNN compression by deleting unimportant parameters and retraining the remaining
ones (as illustrated in Figure 1(b)), somehow similar to a surgery process.
However, due to the complex interconnections among hidden neurons, parameter importance may
change dramatically once the network surgery begins. This leads to two main issues in [9] (and some
other classical methods [16, 10] as well). The first issue is the possibility of irretrievable network
∗
This work was done when Yiwen Guo was an intern at Intel Labs China supervised by Anbang Yao who is
responsible for correspondence.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

