Launch and Iterate: Reducing Prediction Churn

Q. Cormier
ENS Lyon
15 parvis René Descartes
Lyon, France
quentin.cormier@ens-lyon.fr

M. Milani Fard, K. Canini, M. R. Gupta
Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043
{mmilanifard,canini,mayagupta}@google.com

Abstract
Practical applications of machine learning often involve successive training iterations with changes to features and training examples. Ideally, changes in the output
of any new model should only be improvements (wins) over the previous iteration,
but in practice the predictions may change neutrally for many examples, resulting
in extra net-zero wins and losses, referred to as unnecessary churn. These changes
in the predictions are problematic for usability for some applications, and make it
harder and more expensive to measure if a change is statistically significant positive.
In this paper, we formulate the problem and present a stabilization operator to regularize a classifier towards a previous classifier. We use a Markov chain Monte Carlo
stabilization operator to produce a model with more consistent predictions without
adversely affecting accuracy. We investigate the properties of the proposal with
theoretical analysis. Experiments on benchmark datasets for different classification
algorithms demonstrate the method and the resulting reduction in churn.

1

The Curse of Version 2.0

In most practical settings, training and launching an initial machine-learned model is only the first
step: as new and improved features are created, additional training data is gathered, and the model
and learning algorithm are improved, it is natural to launch a series of ever-improving models. Each
new candidate may bring wins, but also unnecessary changes. In practice, it is desirable to minimize
any unnecessary changes for two key reasons. First, unnecessary changes can hinder usability
and debugability as they can be disorienting to users and follow-on system components. Second,
unnecessary changes make it more difficult to measure with statistical confidence whether the change
is truly an improvement. For both these reasons, there is great interest in making only those changes
that are wins, and minimizing any unnecessary changes, while making sure such process does not
hinder the overall accuracy objective.
There is already a large body of work in machine learning that treats the stability of learning
algorithms. These range from the early works of Devroye and Wagner [1] and Vapnik [2, 3] to more
recent studies of learning stability in more general hypothesis spaces [4, 5, 6]. Most of the literature
on this topic focus on stability of the learning algorithm in terms of the risk or loss function and how
such properties translate into uniform generalization with specific convergence rates. We build on
these notions, but the problem treated here is substantively different.
We address the problem of training consecutive classifiers to reduce unnecessary changes in the
presence of realistic evolution of the problem domain and the training sets over time. The main
contributions of this paper include: (I) discussion and formulation of the “churn” metric between
trained models, (II) design of stabilization operators for regularization towards a previous model, (III)
proposing a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) stabilization technique, (VI) theoretical analysis of
the proposed stabilization in terms of churn, and (V) empirical analysis of the proposed methods on
benchmark datasets with different classification algorithms.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

