A Locally Adaptive Normal Distribution

Georgios Arvanitidis, Lars Kai Hansen and Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
DTU Compute, Section for Cognitive Systems
{gear,lkai,sohau}@dtu.dk

Abstract
The multivariate normal density is a monotonic function of the distance to the mean,
and its ellipsoidal shape is due to the underlying Euclidean metric. We suggest to
replace this metric with a locally adaptive, smoothly changing (Riemannian) metric
that favors regions of high local density. The resulting locally adaptive normal
distribution (LAND) is a generalization of the normal distribution to the “manifold”
setting, where data is assumed to lie near a potentially low-dimensional manifold
embedded in RD . The LAND is parametric, depending only on a mean and a
covariance, and is the maximum entropy distribution under the given metric. The
underlying metric is, however, non-parametric. We develop a maximum likelihood
algorithm to infer the distribution parameters that relies on a combination of
gradient descent and Monte Carlo integration. We further extend the LAND to
mixture models, and provide the corresponding EM algorithm. We demonstrate
the efficiency of the LAND to fit non-trivial probability distributions over both
synthetic data, and EEG measurements of human sleep.

1

Introduction

The multivariate normal distribution is a fundamental building block in many machine learning
algorithms, and its well-known density can compactly be written as


1
2
(1)
p(x | µ, Σ) ∝ exp − distΣ (µ, x) ,
2
where dist2Σ (µ, x) denotes the Mahalanobis distance for covariance matrix Σ. This distance measure
corresponds to the length of the straight line connecting µ and x, and consequently the normal
distribution is often used to model linear phenomena. When data lies near a nonlinear manifold
embedded in RD the normal distribution becomes inadequate due to its linear metric. We investigate
if a useful distribution can be constructed by replacing the linear distance function with a nonlinear
counterpart. This is similar in spirit to Isomap [21] that famously replace the linear distance with a
geodesic distance measured over a neighborhood graph spanned by the data, thereby allowing for
a nonlinear model. This is, however, a discrete distance measure that is only well-defined over the
training data. For a generative model, we need a continuously defined metric over the entire RD .
Following Hauberg et al. [9] we learn a smoothly changing metric that favors regions of high density
i.e., geodesics tend to move near the data. Under this metric, the data space is interpreted as a
D-dimensional Riemannian manifold. This “manifold learning” does not change dimensionality, but
merely provides a local description of the data. The Riemannian view-point, however, gives a strong
mathematical foundation upon which the proposed distribution can be developed. Our work, thus,
bridges work on statistics on Riemannian manifolds [15, 23] with manifold learning [21].
We develop a locally adaptive normal distribution (LAND) as follows: First, we construct a metric
that captures the nonlinear structure of the data and enables us to compute geodesics; from this, an
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

