Visual Question Answering with
Question Representation Update (QRU)

Ruiyu Li
Jiaya Jia
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{ryli,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Our method aims at reasoning over natural language questions and visual images.
Given a natural language question about an image, our model updates the question
representation iteratively by selecting image regions relevant to the query and
learns to give the correct answer. Our model contains several reasoning layers,
exploiting complex visual relations in the visual question answering (VQA) task.
The proposed network is end-to-end trainable through back-propagation, where its
weights are initialized using pre-trained convolutional neural network (CNN) and
gated recurrent unit (GRU). Our method is evaluated on challenging datasets of
COCO-QA [19] and VQA [2] and yields state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Visual question answering (VQA) is a new research direction as intersection of computer vision and
natural language processing. Developing stable systems for VQA attracts increasing interests in
multiple communities. Possible applications include bidirectional image-sentence retrieval, human
computer interaction, blind person assistance, etc. It is now still a difficult problem due to many
challenges in visual object recognition and grounding, natural language representation, and common
sense reasoning.
Most recently proposed VQA models are based on image captioning [10, 24, 28]. These methods
have been advanced by the great success of deep learning on building language models [23], image
classification [12] and on visual object detection [6]. Compared with image captioning, where a
plausible description is produced for a given image, VQA requires algorithms to give the correct
answer to a specific human-raised question regarding the content of a given image. It is a more
complex research problem since the method is required to answer different types of questions.
An example related to image content is “What is the color of the dog?”. There are also
questions requiring extra knowledge or commonsense reasoning, such as “Does it appear to be
rainy?".
Properly modeling questions is essential for solving the VQA problem. A commonly employed
strategy is to use a CNN or an RNN to extract semantic vectors. The general issue is that the resulting
question representation lacks detailed information from the given image, which however is vital
for understanding visual content. We take the question and image in Figure 1 as an example. To
answer the original question “What is sitting amongst things have been abandoned?",
one needs to know the target object location. Thus the question can be more specific as “What is
discarded on the side of a building near an old book shelf?".
In this paper, we propose a neural network based reasoning model that is able to update the question
representation iteratively by inferring image information. With this new system, it is now possible
to make questions more specific than the original ones focusing on important image information
automatically. Our approach is based on neural reasoner [18], which has recently shown remarkable
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

