Learning from Rational Behavior:
Predicting Solutions to Unknown Linear Programs
Shahin Jabbari, Ryan Rogers, Aaron Roth, Zhiwei Steven Wu
University of Pennsylvania
{jabbari@cis, ryrogers@sas, aaroth@cis, wuzhiwei@cis}.upenn.edu

Abstract
We define and study the problem of predicting the solution to a linear program (LP)
given only partial information about its objective and constraints. This generalizes
the problem of learning to predict the purchasing behavior of a rational agent who
has an unknown objective function, that has been studied under the name “Learning
from Revealed Preferences". We give mistake bound learning algorithms in two
settings: in the first, the objective of the LP is known to the learner but there is an
arbitrary, fixed set of constraints which are unknown. Each example is defined by
an additional known constraint and the goal of the learner is to predict the optimal
solution of the LP given the union of the known and unknown constraints. This
models the problem of predicting the behavior of a rational agent whose goals
are known, but whose resources are unknown. In the second setting, the objective
of the LP is unknown, and changing in a controlled way. The constraints of the
LP may also change every day, but are known. An example is given by a set of
constraints and partial information about the objective, and the task of the learner
is again to predict the optimal solution of the partially known LP.

1

Introduction

We initiate the systematic study of a general class of multi-dimensional prediction problems, where
the learner wishes to predict the solution to an unknown linear program (LP), given some partial
information about either the set of constraints or the objective. In the special case in which there is a
single known constraint that is changing and the objective that is unknown and fixed, this problem
has been studied under the name learning from revealed preferences [1, 2, 3, 16] and captures the
following scenario: a buyer, with an unknown linear utility function over d goods u : Rd ! R
defined as u(x) = c · x faces a purchasing decision every day. On day t, she observes a set of prices
pt 2 Rd 0 and buys the bundle of goods that maximizes her unknown utility, subject to a budget b:
x(t) = argmax c · x
x

such that pt · x  b

In this problem, the goal of the learner is to predict the bundle that the buyer will buy, given the
prices that she faces. Each example at day t is specified by the vector pt 2 Rd 0 (which fixes the
constraint), and the goal is to accurately predict the purchased bundle x(t) 2 [0, 1]d that is the result
of optimizing the unknown linear objective.
It is also natural to consider the class of problems in which the goal is to predict the outcome to a LP
broadly e.g. suppose the objective c · x is known but there is an unknown set of constraints Ax  b.
An instance is again specified by a changing known constraint (pt , bt ) and the goal is to predict:
x(t) = argmax c · x
x

such that Ax  b and pt · x  bt .

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(1)

