Hardness of Online Sleeping Combinatorial
Optimization Problems

Satyen Kale∗ †
Yahoo Research
satyen@satyenkale.com

Chansoo Lee†
Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor
chansool@umich.edu

Dávid Pál
Yahoo Research
dpal@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
We show that several online combinatorial optimization problems that admit efficient no-regret algorithms become computationally hard in the sleeping setting
where a subset of actions becomes unavailable in each round. Specifically, we
show that the sleeping versions of these problems are at least as hard as PAC learning DNF expressions, a long standing open problem. We show hardness for the
sleeping versions of O NLINE S HORTEST PATHS, O NLINE M INIMUM S PANNING
T REE, O NLINE k-S UBSETS, O NLINE k-T RUNCATED P ERMUTATIONS, O NLINE
M INIMUM C UT, and O NLINE B IPARTITE M ATCHING. The hardness result for
the sleeping version of the Online Shortest Paths problem resolves an open problem presented at COLT 2015 [Koolen et al., 2015].

1

Introduction

Online learning is a sequential decision-making problem where learner repeatedly chooses an action
in response to adversarially chosen losses for the available actions. The goal of the learner is to
minimize the regret, defined as the difference between the total loss of the algorithm and the loss of
the best fixed action in hindsight. In online combinatorial optimization, the actions are subsets of
a ground set of elements (also called components) with some combinatorial structure. The loss of
an action is the sum of the losses of its elements. A particular well-studied instance is the O NLINE
S HORTEST PATH problem [Takimoto and Warmuth, 2003] on a graph, in which the actions are the
paths between two fixed vertices and the elements are the edges.
We study a sleeping variant of online combinatorial optimization where the adversary not only
chooses losses but availability of the elements every round. The unavailable elements are called
sleeping or sabotaged. In O NLINE S ABOTAGED S HORTEST PATH problem, for example, the adversary specifies unavailable edges every round, and consequently the learner cannot choose any
path using those edges. A straightforward application of the sleeping experts algorithm proposed
by Freund et al. [1997] gives a no-regret learner, but it takes exponential time (in the input graph
size) every round. The design of a computationally efficient no-regret algorithm for O NLINE S AB OTAGED S HORTEST PATH problem was presented as an open problem at COLT 2015 by Koolen
et al. [2015].
In this paper, we resolve this open problem and prove that O NLINE S ABOTAGED S HORTEST PATH
problem is computationally hard. Specifically, we show that a polynomial-time low-regret algorithm
for this problem implies a polynomial-time algorithm for PAC learning DNF expressions, which is
a long-standing open problem. The best known algorithm for PAC learning DNF expressions on n
e 1/3
variables has time complexity 2O(n ) [Klivans and Servedio, 2001].
∗
†

Current affiliation: Google Research.
This work was done while the authors were at Yahoo Research.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

