Exponential expressivity in deep neural networks
through transient chaos

Ben Poole1 , Subhaneil Lahiri1 , Maithra Raghu2 , Jascha Sohl-Dickstein2 , Surya Ganguli1
1
Stanford University, 2 Google Brain
{benpoole,sulahiri,sganguli}@stanford.edu, {maithra,jaschasd}@google.com

Abstract
We combine Riemannian geometry with the mean field theory of high dimensional
chaos to study the nature of signal propagation in generic, deep neural networks
with random weights. Our results reveal an order-to-chaos expressivity phase
transition, with networks in the chaotic phase computing nonlinear functions whose
global curvature grows exponentially with depth but not width. We prove this
generic class of deep random functions cannot be efficiently computed by any shallow network, going beyond prior work restricted to the analysis of single functions.
Moreover, we formalize and quantitatively demonstrate the long conjectured idea
that deep networks can disentangle highly curved manifolds in input space into flat
manifolds in hidden space. Our theoretical analysis of the expressive power of deep
networks broadly applies to arbitrary nonlinearities, and provides a quantitative
underpinning for previously abstract notions about the geometry of deep functions.

1

Introduction

Deep feedforward neural networks have achieved remarkable performance across many domains
[1–6]. A key factor thought to underlie their success is their high expressivity. This informal notion
has manifested itself primarily in two forms of intuition. The first is that deep networks can compactly
express highly complex functions over input space in a way that shallow networks with one hidden
layer and the same number of neurons cannot. The second piece of intuition, which has captured
the imagination of machine learning [7] and neuroscience [8] alike, is that deep neural networks can
disentangle highly curved manifolds in input space into flattened manifolds in hidden space. These
intuitions, while attractive, have been difficult to formalize mathematically and thus test rigorously.
For the first intuition, seminal works have exhibited examples of particular functions that can be
computed with a polynomial number of neurons (in the input dimension) in a deep network but
require an exponential number of neurons in a shallow network [9–13]. This raises a central open
question: are such functions merely rare curiosities, or is any function computed by a generic deep
network not efficiently computable by a shallow network? The theoretical techniques employed in
prior work both limited the applicability of theory to specific nonlinearities and dictated the particular
measure of deep functional complexity involved. For example, [9] focused on ReLU nonlinearities
and number of linear regions as a complexity measure, while [10] focused on sum-product networks
and the number of monomials as complexity measure, and [14] focused on Pfaffian nonlinearities and
topological measures of complexity, like the sum of Betti numbers of a decision boundary (however,
see [15] for an interesting analysis of a general class of compositional functions). The limits of
prior theoretical techniques raise another central question: is there a unifying theoretical framework
for deep neural expressivity that is simultaneously applicable to arbitrary nonlinearities, generic
networks, and a natural, general measure of functional complexity?
Code to reproduce all results available at: https://github.com/ganguli-lab/deepchaos
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

