Examples are not Enough, Learn to Criticize!
Criticism for Interpretability
Been Kim⇤
Allen Institute for AI
beenkim@csail.mit.edu

Rajiv Khanna
UT Austin
rajivak@utexas.edu

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
UIUC
sanmi@illinois.edu

Abstract
Example-based explanations are widely used in the effort to improve the interpretability of highly complex distributions. However, prototypes alone are rarely
sufficient to represent the gist of the complexity. In order for users to construct
better mental models and understand complex data distributions, we also need
criticism to explain what are not captured by prototypes. Motivated by the Bayesian
model criticism framework, we develop MMD-critic which efficiently learns prototypes and criticism, designed to aid human interpretability. A human subject pilot
study shows that the MMD-critic selects prototypes and criticism that are useful
to facilitate human understanding and reasoning. We also evaluate the prototypes
selected by MMD-critic via a nearest prototype classifier, showing competitive
performance compared to baselines.

1

Introduction and Related Work

As machine learning (ML) methods have become ubiquitous in human decision making, their
transparency and interpretability have grown in importance (Varshney, 2016). Interpretability is
particularity important in domains where decisions can have significant consequences. For example,
the pneumonia risk prediction case study in Caruana et al. (2015) showed that a more interpretable
model could reveal important but surprising patterns in the data that complex models overlooked.
Studies of human reasoning have shown that the use of examples (prototypes) is fundamental to the
development of effective strategies for tactical decision-making (Newell and Simon, 1972; Cohen
et al., 1996). Example-based explanations are widely used in the effort to improve interpretability.
A popular research program along these lines is case-based reasoning (CBR) (Aamodt and Plaza,
1994), which has been successfully applied to real-world problems (Bichindaritz and Marling, 2006).
More recently, the Bayesian framework has been combined with CBR-based approaches in the
unsupervised-learning setting, leading to improvements in user interpretability (Kim et al., 2014). In
a supervised learning setting, example-based classifiers have been is shown to achieve comparable
performance to non-interpretable methods, while offering a condensed view of a dataset (Bien and
Tibshirani, 2011).
However, examples are not enough. Relying only on examples to explain the models’ behavior
can lead over-generalization and misunderstanding. Examples alone may be sufficient when the
distribution of data points are ‘clean’ – in the sense that there exists a set of prototypical examples
which sufficiently represent the data. However, this is rarely the case in real world data. For instance,
fitting models to complex datasets often requires the use of regularization. While the regularization
adds bias to the model to improve generalization performance, this same bias may conflict with the
distribution of the data. Thus, to maintain interpretability, it is important, along with prototypical
examples, to deliver insights signifying the parts of the input space where prototypical examples
⇤

All authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

