Online Convex Optimization with Unconstrained
Domains and Losses
Kwabena Boahen
Department of Bioengineering
Stanford University
boahen@stanford.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
ashokc@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose an online convex optimization algorithm (RESCALEDEXP) that achieves
optimal regret in the unconstrained setting without prior knowledge of any bounds
on the loss functions. We prove a lower bound showing an exponential separation between the regret of existing algorithms that require a known bound
on the loss functions and any algorithm that does not require such knowledge.
RESCALEDEXP matches this lower bound asymptotically in the number of iterations. RESCALEDEXP is naturally hyperparameter-free and we demonstrate empirically that it matches prior optimization algorithms that require hyperparameter
optimization.

1

Online Convex Optimization

Online Convex Optimization (OCO) [1, 2] provides an elegant framework for modeling noisy,
antagonistic or changing environments. The problem can be stated formally with the help of the
following definitions:
Convex Set: A set W is convex if W is contained in some real vector space and tw + (1 − t)w0 ∈ W
for all w, w0 ∈ W and t ∈ [0, 1].

Convex Function: f : W → R is a convex function if f (tw + (1 − t)w0 ) ≤ tf (w) + (1 − t)f (w0 )
for all w, w0 ∈ W and t ∈ [0, 1].
An OCO problem is a game of repeated rounds in which on round t a learner first chooses an element
wt in some convex space W , then receives a convex loss function `t , and suffers loss `t (wt ). The
regret of the learner with respect to some other u ∈ W is defined by
RT (u) =

T
X
t=1

`t (wt ) − `t (u)

The objective is to design an algorithm that can achieve low regret with respect to any u, even in the
face of adversarially chosen `t .
Many practical problems can be formulated as OCO problems. For example, the stochastic optimization problems found widely throughout machine learning have exactly the same form, but with i.i.d.
loss functions, a subset of the OCO problems. In this setting the goal is to identify a vector w? with
low generalization error (E[`(w? ) − `(u)]). We can solve this by running an OCO algorithm for T
rounds and setting w? to be the average value of wt . By online-to-batch conversion results [3, 4],
the generalization error is bounded by the expectation of the regret over the `t divided by T . Thus,
OCO algorithms can be used to solve stochastic optimization problems while also performing well in
non-i.i.d. settings.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

