Robustness of classifiers:
from adversarial to random noise
Alhussein Fawzi∗, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli∗, Pascal Frossard
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
{alhussein.fawzi, seyed.moosavi, pascal.frossard} at epfl.ch

Abstract
Several recent works have shown that state-of-the-art classifiers are vulnerable to
worst-case (i.e., adversarial) perturbations of the datapoints. On the other hand,
it has been empirically observed that these same classifiers are relatively robust
to random noise. In this paper, we propose to study a semi-random noise regime
that generalizes both the random and worst-case noise regimes. We propose
the first quantitative analysis of the robustness of nonlinear classifiers in this
general noise regime. We establish precise theoretical bounds on the robustness of
classifiers in this general regime, which depend on the curvature of the classifier’s
decision boundary. Our bounds confirm and quantify the empirical observations that
classifiers satisfying curvature constraints are robust to random noise. Moreover,
we quantify the robustness of classifiers in terms of the subspace dimension in
the semi-random noise regime, and show that our bounds remarkably interpolate
between the worst-case and random noise regimes. We perform experiments and
show that the derived bounds provide very accurate estimates when applied to
various state-of-the-art deep neural networks and datasets. This result suggests
bounds on the curvature of the classifiers’ decision boundaries that we support
experimentally, and more generally offers important insights onto the geometry of
high dimensional classification problems.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art classifiers, especially deep networks, have shown impressive classification performance on many challenging benchmarks in visual tasks [9] and speech processing [7]. An equally
important property of a classifier that is often overlooked is its robustness in noisy regimes, when
data samples are perturbed by noise. The robustness of a classifier is especially fundamental when
it is deployed in real-world, uncontrolled, and possibly hostile environments. In these cases, it
is crucial that classifiers exhibit good robustness properties. In other words, a sufficiently small
perturbation of a datapoint should ideally not result in altering the estimated label of a classifier.
State-of-the-art deep neural networks have recently been shown to be very unstable to worst-case
perturbations of the data (or equivalently, adversarial perturbations) [17]. In particular, despite
the excellent classification performances of these classifiers, well-sought perturbations of the data
can easily cause misclassification, since data points often lie very close to the decision boundary
of the classifier. Despite the importance of this result, the worst-case noise regime that is studied
in [17] only represents a very specific type of noise. It furthermore requires the full knowledge of the
classification model, which may be a hard assumption in practice.
In this paper, we precisely quantify the robustness of nonlinear classifiers in two practical noise
regimes, namely random and semi-random noise regimes. In the random noise regime, datapoints are
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

