The Generalized Reparameterization Gradient

Francisco J. R. Ruiz
University of Cambridge
Columbia University

Michalis K. Titsias
Athens University of
Economics and Business

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
The reparameterization gradient has become a widely used method to obtain Monte
Carlo gradients to optimize the variational objective. However, this technique does
not easily apply to commonly used distributions such as beta or gamma without
further approximations, and most practical applications of the reparameterization
gradient fit Gaussian distributions. In this paper, we introduce the generalized reparameterization gradient, a method that extends the reparameterization gradient to a
wider class of variational distributions. Generalized reparameterizations use invertible transformations of the latent variables which lead to transformed distributions
that weakly depend on the variational parameters. This results in new Monte Carlo
gradients that combine reparameterization gradients and score function gradients.
We demonstrate our approach on variational inference for two complex probabilistic
models. The generalized reparameterization is effective: even a single sample from
the variational distribution is enough to obtain a low-variance gradient.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (vi) is a technique for approximating the posterior distribution in probabilistic
models (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright and Jordan, 2008). Given a probabilistic model p.x; z/ of
observed variables x and hidden variables z, the goal of vi is to approximate the posterior p.z j x/,
which is intractable to compute exactly for many models. The idea of vi is to posit a family of
distributions over the latent variables q.zI v/ with free variational parameters v. vi then fits those
parameters to find the member of the family that is closest in Kullback-Leibler (kl) divergence to
the exact posterior, v D arg minv KL.q.zI v/jjp.z j x//. This turns inference into optimization, and
different ways of doing vi amount to different optimization algorithms for solving this problem.
For a certain class of probabilistic models, those where each conditional distribution is in an exponential
family, we can easily use coordinate ascent optimization to minimize the kl divergence (Ghahramani
and Beal, 2001). However, many important models do not fall into this class (e.g., probabilistic neural
networks or Bayesian generalized linear models). This is the scenario that we focus on in this paper.
Much recent research in vi has focused on these difficult settings, seeking effective optimization
algorithms that can be used with any model. This has enabled the application of vi on nonconjugate
probabilistic models (Carbonetto et al., 2009; Paisley et al., 2012; Ranganath et al., 2014; Titsias and
Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014), deep neural networks (Neal, 1992; Hinton et al., 1995; Mnih and Gregor, 2014;
Kingma and Welling, 2014), and probabilistic programming (Wingate and Weber, 2013; Kucukelbir
et al., 2015; van de Meent et al., 2016).
One strategy for vi in nonconjugate models is to obtain Monte Carlo estimates of the gradient of the
variational objective and to use stochastic optimization to fit the variational parameters. Within this
strategy, there have been two main lines of research: black-box variational inference (bbvi) (Ranganath
et al., 2014) and reparameterization gradients (Salimans and Knowles, 2013; Kingma and Welling,
2014). Each enjoys different advantages and limitations.

bbvi expresses the gradient of the variational objective as an expectation with respect to the variational
distribution using the log-derivative trick, also called reinforce or score function method (Glynn,
1990; Williams, 1992). It then takes samples from the variational distribution to calculate noisy
gradients. bbvi is generic—it can be used with any type of latent variables and any model. However,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

