Constraints Based Convex Belief Propagation

Yaniv Tenzer
Department of Statistics
The Hebrew University

Alexander Schwing
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Kevin Gimpel
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Tamir Hazan
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
Inference in Markov random fields subject to consistency structure is a fundamental
problem that arises in many real-life applications. In order to enforce consistency,
classical approaches utilize consistency potentials or encode constraints over feasible instances. Unfortunately this comes at the price of a tremendous computational
burden. In this paper we suggest to tackle consistency by incorporating constraints
on beliefs. This permits derivation of a closed-form message-passing algorithm
which we refer to as the Constraints Based Convex Belief Propagation (CBCBP).
Experiments show that CBCBP outperforms the conventional consistency potential
based approach, while being at least an order of magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

Markov random fields (MRFs) [10] are widely used across different domains from computer vision
and natural language processing to computational biology, because they are a general tool to describe
distributions that involve multiple variables. The dependencies between variables are conveniently
encoded via potentials that define the structure of a graph.
Besides encoding dependencies, in a variety of real-world applications we often want consistent
solutions that are physically plausible, e.g., when jointly reasoning about multiple tasks or when
enforcing geometric constraints in 3D indoor scene understanding applications [18]. Therefore,
various methods [22, 13, 16, 12, 1] enforce consistency structure during inference by imposing
constraints on the feasible instances. This was shown to be effective in practice. However for each
new constraint we may need to design a specifically tailored algorithm. Therefore, the most common
approach to impose consistency is usage of PN-consistency potentials [9]. This permits reuse of
existing message passing solvers, however, at the expense of an additional computational burden, as
real-world applications may involve hundreds of additional factors.
Our goal in this work is to bypass this computational burden while being generally applicable. To
do so, we consider the problem of inference when probabilistic equalities are imposed over the
beliefs of the model rather than its feasible instances. As we show in Sec. 3, the adaptive nature of
message passing algorithms conveniently allows for such probabilistic equality constraints within its
framework. Since our method eliminates potentially many multivariate factors, inference is much
more scalable than using PN-consistency potentials [9].
In this paper, for notational simplicity, we illustrate the belief constraints based message passing rules
using a framework known as convex belief propagation (CBP). We refer to the illustrated algorithm
as constraints based CBP (CBCBP). However we note that the same derivation can be used to obtain,
e.g., a constraints based tree-reweighted message passing algorithm.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

