Spatiotemporal Residual Networks
for Video Action Recognition

Christoph Feichtenhofer
Graz University of Technology

Axel Pinz
Graz University of Technology

Richard P. Wildes
York University, Toronto

feichtenhofer@tugraz.at

axel.pinz@tugraz.at

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
Two-stream Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) have shown strong performance
for human action recognition in videos. Recently, Residual Networks (ResNets)
have arisen as a new technique to train extremely deep architectures. In this paper,
we introduce spatiotemporal ResNets as a combination of these two approaches.
Our novel architecture generalizes ResNets for the spatiotemporal domain by
introducing residual connections in two ways. First, we inject residual connections
between the appearance and motion pathways of a two-stream architecture to
allow spatiotemporal interaction between the two streams. Second, we transform
pretrained image ConvNets into spatiotemporal networks by equipping them with
learnable convolutional filters that are initialized as temporal residual connections
and operate on adjacent feature maps in time. This approach slowly increases the
spatiotemporal receptive field as the depth of the model increases and naturally
integrates image ConvNet design principles. The whole model is trained end-to-end
to allow hierarchical learning of complex spatiotemporal features. We evaluate our
novel spatiotemporal ResNet using two widely used action recognition benchmarks
where it exceeds the previous state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Action recognition in video is an intensively researched area, with many recent approaches focused
on application of Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) to this task, e.g. [13, 20, 26]. As actions can
be understood as spatiotemporal objects, researchers have investigated carrying spatial recognition
principles over to the temporal domain by learning local spatiotemporal filters [13, 25, 26]. However,
since the temporal domain arguably is fundamentally different from the spatial one, different treatment
of these dimensions has been considered, e.g. by incorporating optical flow networks [20], or
modelling temporal sequences in recurrent architectures [4, 18, 19].
Since the introduction of the “AlexNet” architecture [14] in the 2012 ImageNet competition, ConvNets
have dominated state-of-the-art performance across a variety of computer vision tasks, including
object-detection, image segmentation, image classification, face recognition, human pose estimation
and tracking. In conjunction with these advances as well as the evolution of network architectures,
several design best practices have emerged [8, 21, 23, 24]. First, information bottlenecks should be
avoided and the representation size should gently decrease from the input to the output as the number
of feature channels increases with the depth of the network. Second, the receptive field at the end of
the network should be large enough that the processing units can base operations on larger regions of
the input. This functionality can be achieved by stacking many small filters or using large filters in the
network; notably, the first choice can be implemented with fewer operations (faster, fewer parameters)
and also allows inclusion of more nonlinearities. Third, dimensionality reduction (1×1 convolutions)
before spatially aggregating filters (e.g. 3×3) is supported by the fact that outputs of neighbouring
filters are highly correlated and therefore these activations can be reduced before aggregation [23].
Fourth, spatial factorization into asymmetric filters can even further reduce computational cost and
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

