Binarized Neural Networks
Itay Hubara1 *
itayh@technion.ac.il

Matthieu Courbariaux2 *
matthieu.courbariaux@gmail.com

Ran El-Yaniv1
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Daniel Soudry3
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Yoshua Bengio2,4
yoshua.umontreal@gmail.com

(1) Technion, Israel Institute of Technology.
(3) Columbia University.
(*) Indicates equal contribution.

(2) Université de Montréal.
(4) CIFAR Senior Fellow.

Abstract
We introduce a method to train Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) - neural
networks with binary weights and activations at run-time. At train-time the binary
weights and activations are used for computing the parameter gradients. During the
forward pass, BNNs drastically reduce memory size and accesses, and replace most
arithmetic operations with bit-wise operations, which is expected to substantially
improve power-efficiency. To validate the effectiveness of BNNs, we conducted
two sets of experiments on the Torch7 and Theano frameworks. On both, BNNs
achieved nearly state-of-the-art results over the MNIST, CIFAR-10 and SVHN
datasets. We also report our preliminary results on the challenging ImageNet
dataset. Last but not least, we wrote a binary matrix multiplication GPU kernel
with which it is possible to run our MNIST BNN 7 times faster than with an
unoptimized GPU kernel, without suffering any loss in classification accuracy. The
code for training and running our BNNs is available on-line.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have substantially pushed Artificial Intelligence (AI) limits in a wide
range of tasks (LeCun et al., 2015). Today, DNNs are almost exclusively trained on one or many very
fast and power-hungry Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) (Coates et al., 2013). As a result, it is often
a challenge to run DNNs on target low-power devices, and substantial research efforts are invested in
speeding up DNNs at run-time on both general-purpose (Gong et al., 2014; Han et al., 2015b) and
specialized computer hardware (Chen et al., 2014; Esser et al., 2015).
This paper makes the following contributions:
• We introduce a method to train Binarized-Neural-Networks (BNNs), neural networks with binary
weights and activations, at run-time, and when computing the parameter gradients at train-time
(see Section 1).
• We conduct two sets of experiments, each implemented on a different framework, namely Torch7
and Theano, which show that it is possible to train BNNs on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and SVHN and
achieve near state-of-the-art results (see Section 2). Moreover, we report preliminary results on the
challenging ImageNet dataset
• We show that during the forward pass (both at run-time and train-time), BNNs drastically reduce
memory consumption (size and number of accesses), and replace most arithmetic operations with
bit-wise operations, which potentially lead to a substantial increase in power-efficiency (see Section
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

