Sequential Neural Models with Stochastic Layers

Marco Fraccaro†

Søren Kaae Sønderby‡
Ulrich Paquet*
†
Technical University of Denmark
‡
University of Copenhagen
*
Google DeepMind

Ole Winther†‡

Abstract
How can we efficiently propagate uncertainty in a latent state representation with
recurrent neural networks? This paper introduces stochastic recurrent neural
networks which glue a deterministic recurrent neural network and a state space
model together to form a stochastic and sequential neural generative model. The
clear separation of deterministic and stochastic layers allows a structured variational
inference network to track the factorization of the model’s posterior distribution.
By retaining both the nonlinear recursive structure of a recurrent neural network
and averaging over the uncertainty in a latent path, like a state space model, we
improve the state of the art results on the Blizzard and TIMIT speech modeling data
sets by a large margin, while achieving comparable performances to competing
methods on polyphonic music modeling.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are able to represent long-term dependencies in sequential data,
by adapting and propagating a deterministic hidden (or latent) state [5, 16]. There is recent evidence
that when complex sequences such as speech and music are modeled, the performances of RNNs can
be dramatically improved when uncertainty is included in their hidden states [3, 4, 7, 11, 12, 15]. In
this paper we add a new direction to the explorer’s map of treating the hidden RNN states as uncertain
paths, by including the world of state space models (SSMs) as an RNN layer. By cleanly delineating
a SSM layer, certain independence properties of variables arise, which are beneficial for making
efficient posterior inferences. The result is a generative model for sequential data, with a matching
inference network that has its roots in variational auto-encoders (VAEs).
SSMs can be viewed as a probabilistic extension of RNNs, where the hidden states are assumed to
be random variables. Although SSMs have an illustrious history [24], their stochasticity has limited
their widespread use in the deep learning community, as inference can only be exact for two relatively
simple classes of SSMs, namely hidden Markov models and linear Gaussian models, neither of
which are well-suited to modeling long-term dependencies and complex probability distributions
over high-dimensional sequences. On the other hand, modern RNNs rely on gated nonlinearities
such as long short-term memory (LSTM) [16] cells or gated recurrent units (GRUs) [6], that let the
deterministic hidden state of the RNN act as an internal memory for the model. This internal memory
seems fundamental to capturing complex relationships in the data through a statistical model.
This paper introduces the stochastic recurrent neural network (SRNN) in Section 3. SRNNs combine
the gated activation mechanism of RNNs with the stochastic states of SSMs, and are formed by
stacking a RNN and a nonlinear SSM. The state transitions of the SSM are nonlinear and are
parameterized by a neural network that also depends on the corresponding RNN hidden state. The
SSM can therefore utilize long-term information captured by the RNN.
We use recent advances in variational inference to efficiently approximate the intractable posterior
distribution over the latent states with an inference network [19, 23]. The form of our variational
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

