Deep Learning for Predicting
Human Strategic Behavior
Jason Hartford, James R. Wright, Kevin Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
{jasonhar, jrwright, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Predicting the behavior of human participants in strategic settings is an important
problem in many domains. Most existing work either assumes that participants
are perfectly rational, or attempts to directly model each participant’s cognitive
processes based on insights from cognitive psychology and experimental economics.
In this work, we present an alternative, a deep learning approach that automatically
performs cognitive modeling without relying on such expert knowledge. We
introduce a novel architecture that allows a single network to generalize across
different input and output dimensions by using matrix units rather than scalar units,
and show that its performance significantly outperforms that of the previous state
of the art, which relies on expert-constructed features.

1

Introduction

Game theory provides a powerful framework for the design and analysis of multiagent systems
that involve strategic interactions [see, e.g., 16]. Prominent examples of such systems include
search engines, which use advertising auctions to generate a significant portion of their revenues
and rely on game theoretic reasoning to analyze and optimize these mechanisms [6, 20]; spectrum
auctions, which rely on game theoretic analysis to carefully design the “rules of the game” in order to
coordinate the reallocation of valuable radio spectrum [13]; and security systems, which analyze the
allocation of security personnel as a game between rational adversaries in order to optimize their use
of scarce resources [19]. In such applications, system designers optimize their choices with respect
to assumptions about the preferences, beliefs and capabilities of human players [14]. A standard
game theoretic approach is to assume that players are perfectly rational expected utility maximizers
and indeed, that they have common knowledge of this. In some applications, such as the high-stakes
spectrum auctions just mentioned, this assumption is probably reasonable, as participants are typically
large companies that hire consultants to optimize their decision making. In other scenarios that
allow less time for planning or involve less sophisticated participants, however, the perfect rationality
assumption may lead to suboptimal system designs. For example, Yang et al. [24] were able to
improve the performance of systems that defend against adversaries in security games by relaxing the
perfect rationality assumption. Of course, relaxing this assumption means finding something else to
replace it with: an accurate model of boundedly rational human behavior.
The behavioral game theory literature has developed a wide range of models for predicting human behavior in strategic settings by incorporating cognitive biases and limitations derived from
observations of play and insights from cognitive psychology [2]. Like much previous work, we
study the unrepeated, simultaneous-move setting, for two reasons. First, the setting is conceptually
straightforward: games can be represented in a so-called “normal form”, simply by listing the utilities
to each player in for each combination of their actions (e.g., see Figure 1). Second, the setting is
surprisingly general: auctions, security systems, and many other interactions can be modeled naturally
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

