Incremental Variational Sparse Gaussian Process
Regression

Ching-An Cheng
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
cacheng@gatech.edu

Byron Boots
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
bboots@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Recent work on scaling up Gaussian process regression (GPR) to large datasets has
primarily focused on sparse GPR, which leverages a small set of basis functions
to approximate the full Gaussian process during inference. However, the majority
of these approaches are batch methods that operate on the entire training dataset
at once, precluding the use of datasets that are streaming or too large to fit into
memory. Although previous work has considered incrementally solving variational
sparse GPR, most algorithms fail to update the basis functions and therefore
perform suboptimally. We propose a novel incremental learning algorithm for
variational sparse GPR based on stochastic mirror ascent of probability densities
in reproducing kernel Hilbert space. This new formulation allows our algorithm
to update basis functions online in accordance with the manifold structure of
probability densities for fast convergence. We conduct several experiments and
show that our proposed approach achieves better empirical performance in terms of
prediction error than the recent state-of-the-art incremental solutions to variational
sparse GPR.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are nonparametric statistical models widely used for probabilistic reasoning
about functions. Gaussian process regression (GPR) can be used to infer the distribution of a latent
function f from data. The merit of GPR is that it finds the maximum a posteriori estimate of
the function while providing the profile of the remaining uncertainty. However, GPR also has
drawbacks: like most nonparametric learning techniques the time and space complexity of GPR
scale polynomially with the amount of training data. Given N observations, inference of GPR
involves inverting an N × N covariance matrix which requires O(N 3 ) operations and O(N 2 ) storage.
Therefore, GPR for large N is infeasible in practice.
Sparse Gaussian process regression is a pragmatic solution that trades accuracy against computational complexity. Instead of parameterizing the posterior using all N observations, the idea is
to approximate the full GP using the statistics of finite M  N function values and leverage the
induced low-rank structure to reduce the complexity to O(M 2 N + M 3 ) and the memory to O(M 2 ).
Often sparse GPRs are expressed in terms of the distribution of f (x̃i ), where X̃ = {x̃i ∈ X }M
i=1 are
called inducing points or pseudo-inputs [21, 23, 18, 26]. A more general representation leverages the
information about the inducing function (Li f )(x̃i ) defined by indirect measurement of f through a
bounded linear operator Li (e.g. integral) to more compactly capture the full GP [27, 8]. In this work,
we embrace the general notion of inducing functions, which trivially includes f (x̃i ) by choosing Li
to be identity. With abuse of notation, we reuse the term inducing points X̃ to denote the parameters
that define the inducing functions.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

