Domain Separation Networks

Konstantinos Bousmalis∗
Google Brain
Mountain View, CA
konstantinos@google.com
Nathan Silberman
Google Research
New York, NY
nsilberman@google.com

George Trigeorgis∗ †
Imperial College London
London, UK
g.trigeorgis@imperial.ac.uk

Dilip Krishnan
Google Research
Cambridge, MA
dilipkay@google.com

Dumitru Erhan
Google Brain
Mountain View, CA
dumitru@google.com

Abstract
The cost of large scale data collection and annotation often makes the application
of machine learning algorithms to new tasks or datasets prohibitively expensive.
One approach circumventing this cost is training models on synthetic data where
annotations are provided automatically. Despite their appeal, such models often
fail to generalize from synthetic to real images, necessitating domain adaptation
algorithms to manipulate these models before they can be successfully applied.
Existing approaches focus either on mapping representations from one domain to
the other, or on learning to extract features that are invariant to the domain from
which they were extracted. However, by focusing only on creating a mapping
or shared representation between the two domains, they ignore the individual
characteristics of each domain. We hypothesize that explicitly modeling what is
unique to each domain can improve a model’s ability to extract domain-invariant
features. Inspired by work on private-shared component analysis, we explicitly
learn to extract image representations that are partitioned into two subspaces: one
component which is private to each domain and one which is shared across domains.
Our model is trained to not only perform the task we care about in the source
domain, but also to use the partitioned representation to reconstruct the images
from both domains. Our novel architecture results in a model that outperforms
the state-of-the-art on a range of unsupervised domain adaptation scenarios and
additionally produces visualizations of the private and shared representations
enabling interpretation of the domain adaptation process.

1

Introduction

The recent success of supervised learning algorithms has been partially attributed to the large-scale
datasets [16, 22] on which they are trained. Unfortunately, collecting, annotating, and curating such
datasets is an extremely expensive and time-consuming process. An alternative would be creating
large-scale datasets in non-realistic but inexpensive settings, such as computer generated scenes.
While such approaches offer the promise of effectively unlimited amounts of labeled data, models
trained in such settings do not generalize well to realistic domains. Motivated by this, we examine the
problem of learning representations that are domain–invariant in scenarios where the data distributions
during training and testing are different. In this setting, the source data is labeled for a particular task
and we would like to transfer knowledge from the source to the target domain for which we have no
ground truth labels.
In this work, we focus on the tasks of object classification and pose estimation, where the object of
interest is in the foreground of a given image, for both source and target domains. The source and
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
This work was completed while George Trigeorgis was at Google Brain in Mountain View, CA.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

