On Valid Optimal Assignment Kernels and
Applications to Graph Classification

Nils M. Kriege
Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund, Germany
nils.kriege@tu-dortmund.de

Pierre-Louis Giscard
Department of Computer Science
University of York, UK
pierre-louis.giscard@york.ac.uk

Richard C. Wilson
Department of Computer Science
University of York, UK
richard.wilson@york.ac.uk

Abstract
The success of kernel methods has initiated the design of novel positive semidefinite functions, in particular for structured data. A leading design paradigm for
this is the convolution kernel, which decomposes structured objects into their parts
and sums over all pairs of parts. Assignment kernels, in contrast, are obtained
from an optimal bijection between parts, which can provide a more valid notion
of similarity. In general however, optimal assignments yield indefinite functions,
which complicates their use in kernel methods. We characterize a class of base
kernels used to compare parts that guarantees positive semidefinite optimal assignment kernels. These base kernels give rise to hierarchies from which the optimal
assignment kernels are computed in linear time by histogram intersection. We
apply these results by developing the Weisfeiler-Lehman optimal assignment kernel
for graphs. It provides high classification accuracy on widely-used benchmark data
sets improving over the original Weisfeiler-Lehman kernel.

1

Introduction

The various existing kernel methods can conveniently be applied to any type of data, for which a
kernel is available that adequately measures the similarity between any two data objects. This includes
structured data like images [2, 5, 11], 3d shapes [1], chemical compounds [8] and proteins [4], which
are often represented by graphs. Most kernels for structured data decompose both objects and add up
the pairwise similarities between their parts following the seminal concept of convolution kernels
proposed by Haussler [12]. In fact, many graph kernels can be seen as instances of convolution
kernels under different decompositions [23].
A fundamentally different approach with good prospects is to assign the parts of one objects to the
parts of the other, such that the total similarity between the assigned parts is maximum possible.
Finding such a bijection is known as assignment problem and well-studied in combinatorial optimization [6]. This approach has been successfully applied to graph comparison, e.g., in general graph
matching [9, 17] as well as in kernel-based classification [8, 18, 1]. In contrast to convolution kernels,
assignments establish structural correspondences and thereby alleviate the problem of diagonal
dominance at the same time. However, the similarities derived in this way are not necessarily positive
semidefinite (p.s.d.) [22, 23] and hence do not give rise to valid kernels, severely limiting their use in
kernel methods.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

