Stochastic Gradient Richardson-Romberg
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Alain Durmus1 , Umut Şimşekli1 , Éric Moulines2 , Roland Badeau1 , Gaël Richard1
1: LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013, Paris, France
2: Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées, UMR 7641, École Polytechnique, France

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) algorithms have become increasingly popular for Bayesian inference in large-scale applications. Even
though these methods have proved useful in several scenarios, their performance is
often limited by their bias. In this study, we propose a novel sampling algorithm
that aims to reduce the bias of SG-MCMC while keeping the variance at a reasonable level. Our approach is based on a numerical sequence acceleration method,
namely the Richardson-Romberg extrapolation, which simply boils down to running almost the same SG-MCMC algorithm twice in parallel with different step
sizes. We illustrate our framework on the popular Stochastic Gradient Langevin
Dynamics (SGLD) algorithm and propose a novel SG-MCMC algorithm referred to
as Stochastic Gradient Richardson-Romberg Langevin Dynamics (SGRRLD). We
provide formal theoretical analysis and show that SGRRLD is asymptotically consistent, satisfies a central limit theorem, and its non-asymptotic bias and the mean
squared-error can be bounded. Our results show that SGRRLD attains higher rates
of convergence than SGLD in both finite-time and asymptotically, and it achieves
the theoretical accuracy of the methods that are based on higher-order integrators.
We support our findings using both synthetic and real data experiments.

1

Introduction

Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques are one of the most popular family of algorithms in
Bayesian machine learning. Recently, novel MCMC schemes that are based on stochastic optimization have been proposed for scaling up Bayesian inference to large-scale applications. These so-called
Stochastic Gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC) methods provide a fruitful framework for Bayesian inference, well adapted to massively parallel and distributed architecture. In this domain, a first and
important attempt was made by Welling and Teh [1], where the authors combined ideas from the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) [2] and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [3]. They proposed
a scalable MCMC framework referred to as Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD). Unlike
conventional batch MCMC methods, SGLD uses subsamples of the data per iteration similar to SGD.
Several extensions of SGLD have been proposed [4–12]. Recently, in [10] it has been shown that
under certain assumptions and with sufficiently large number of iterations, the bias and the meansquared-error (MSE) of a general class of SG-MCMC methods can be bounded as O(γ) and O(γ 2 ),
respectively, where γ is the step size of the Euler-Maruyama integrator. The authors have also shown
that these bounds can be improved by making use of higher-order integrators.
In this paper, we propose a novel SG-MCMC algorithm, called Stochastic Gradient RichardsonRomberg Langevin Dynamics (SGRRLD) that aims to reduce the bias of SGLD by applying a
numerical sequence acceleration method, namely the Richardson-Romberg (RR) extrapolation, which
requires running two chains with different step sizes in parallel. While reducing the bias, SGRRLD
also keeps the variance of the estimator at a reasonable level by using correlated Brownian motions.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

