The Sound of APALM Clapping: Faster Nonsmooth
Nonconvex Optimization with Stochastic
Asynchronous PALM

Damek Davis and Madeleine Udell
Cornell University
{dsd95,mru8}@cornell.edu

Brent Edmunds
University of California, Los Angeles
brent.edmunds@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Stochastic Asynchronous Proximal Alternating Linearized Minimization (SAPALM) method, a block coordinate stochastic proximal-gradient
method for solving nonconvex, nonsmooth optimization problems. SAPALM is the
first asynchronous parallel optimization method that provably converges on a large
class of nonconvex, nonsmooth problems. We prove that SAPALM matches the
best known rates of convergence — among synchronous or asynchronous methods
— on this problem class. We provide upper bounds on the number of workers
for which we can expect to see a linear speedup, which match the best bounds
known for less complex problems, and show that in practice SAPALM achieves
this linear speedup. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on several matrix
factorization problems.

1

Introduction

Parallel optimization algorithms often feature synchronization steps: all processors wait for the last to
finish before moving on to the next major iteration. Unfortunately, the distribution of finish times is
heavy tailed. Hence as the number of processors increases, most processors waste most of their time
waiting. A natural solution is to remove any synchronization steps: instead, allow each idle processor
to update the global state of the algorithm and continue, ignoring read and write conflicts whenever
they occur. Occasionally one processor will erase the work of another; the hope is that the gain from
allowing processors to work at their own paces offsets the loss from a sloppy division of labor.
These asynchronous parallel optimization methods can work quite well in practice, but it is difficult
to tune their parameters: lock-free code is notoriously hard to debug. For these problems, there
is nothing as practical as a good theory, which might explain how to set these parameters so as to
guarantee convergence.
In this paper, we propose a theoretical framework guaranteeing convergence of a class of asynchronous
algorithms for problems of the form
minimize

(x1 ,...,xm )∈H1 ×...×Hm

f (x1 , . . . , xm ) +

m
X

rj (xj ),

(1)

j=1

where f is a continuously differentiable (C 1 ) function with an L-Lipschitz gradient, each rj is a lower
semicontinuous (not necessarily convex or differentiable) function, and the sets Hj are Euclidean
spaces (i.e., Hj = Rnj for some nj ∈ N). This problem class includes many (convex and nonconvex)
signal recovery problems, matrix factorization problems, and, more generally, any generalized low
rank model [20]. Following terminology from these domains, we view f as a loss function and each
rj as a regularizer. For example, f might encode the misfit between the observations and the model,
while the regularizers rj encode structural constraints on the model such as sparsity or nonnegativity.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

