Anchor-Free Correlated Topic Modeling:
Identifiability and Algorithm

Kejun Huang∗
Xiao Fu∗
Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
huang663@umn.edu xfu@umn.edu nikos@ece.umn.edu

Abstract
In topic modeling, many algorithms that guarantee identifiability of the topics have
been developed under the premise that there exist anchor words – i.e., words that
only appear (with positive probability) in one topic. Follow-up work has resorted
to three or higher-order statistics of the data corpus to relax the anchor word
assumption. Reliable estimates of higher-order statistics are hard to obtain, however,
and the identification of topics under those models hinges on uncorrelatedness of
the topics, which can be unrealistic. This paper revisits topic modeling based on
second-order moments, and proposes an anchor-free topic mining framework. The
proposed approach guarantees the identification of the topics under a much milder
condition compared to the anchor-word assumption, thereby exhibiting much
better robustness in practice. The associated algorithm only involves one eigendecomposition and a few small linear programs. This makes it easy to implement
and scale up to very large problem instances. Experiments using the TDT2 and
Reuters-21578 corpus demonstrate that the proposed anchor-free approach exhibits
very favorable performance (measured using coherence, similarity count, and
clustering accuracy metrics) compared to the prior art.

1

Introduction

Given a large collection of text data, e.g., documents, tweets, or Facebook posts, a natural question is
what are the prominent topics in these data. Mining topics from a text corpus is motivated by a number
of applications, from commercial design, news recommendation, document classification, content
summarization, and information retrieval, to national security. Topic mining, or topic modeling, has
attracted significant attention in the broader machine learning and data mining community [1].
In 2003, Blei et al. proposed a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model for topic mining [2], where
the topics are modeled as probability mass functions (PMFs) over a vocabulary and each document
is a mixture of the PMFs. Therefore, a word-document text data corpus can be viewed as a matrix
factorization model. Under this model, posterior inference-based methods and approximations were
proposed [2, 3], but identifiability issues – i.e., whether the matrix factors are unique – were not
considered. Identifiability, however, is essential for topic modeling since it prevents the mixing of
topics that confounds interpretation.
In recent years, considerable effort has been invested in designing identifiable models and estimation
criteria as well as polynomial time solvable algorithms for topic modeling [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
Essentially, these algorithms are based on the so-called separable nonnegative matrix factorization
(NMF) model [12]. The key assumption is that every topic has an ‘anchor word’ that only appears
in that particular topic. Based on this assumption, two classes of algorithms are usually employed,
namely linear programming based methods [5, 7] and greedy pursuit approaches [11, 6, 8, 10]. The
∗

These authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

