Operator Variational Inference

Rajesh Ranganath
Princeton University

Jaan Altosaar
Princeton University

Dustin Tran
Columbia University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
Variational inference is an umbrella term for algorithms which cast Bayesian inference as optimization. Classically, variational inference uses the Kullback-Leibler
divergence to define the optimization. Though this divergence has been widely
used, the resultant posterior approximation can suffer from undesirable statistical
properties. To address this, we reexamine variational inference from its roots as
an optimization problem. We use operators, or functions of functions, to design
variational objectives. As one example, we design a variational objective with a
Langevin-Stein operator. We develop a black box algorithm, operator variational
inference (opvi), for optimizing any operator objective. Importantly, operators enable us to make explicit the statistical and computational tradeoffs for variational
inference. We can characterize different properties of variational objectives, such
as objectives that admit data subsampling—allowing inference to scale to massive
data—as well as objectives that admit variational programs—a rich class of posterior approximations that does not require a tractable density. We illustrate the
benefits of opvi on a mixture model and a generative model of images.

1

Introduction

Variational inference is an umbrella term for algorithms that cast Bayesian inference as optimization [10]. Originally developed in the 1990s, recent advances in variational inference have scaled
Bayesian computation to massive data [7], provided black box strategies for generic inference in
many models [19], and enabled more accurate approximations of a model’s posterior without sacrificing efficiency [21, 20]. These innovations have both scaled Bayesian analysis and removed the
analytic burdens that have traditionally taxed its practice.
Given a model of latent and observed variables p.x; z/, variational inference posits a family of distributions over its latent variables and then finds the member of that family closest to the posterior,
p.z j x/. This is typically formalized as minimizing a Kullback-Leibler (kl) divergence from the
approximating family q./ to the posterior p./. However, while the kl.q k p/ objective offers many
beneficial computational properties, it is ultimately designed for convenience; it sacrifices many desirable statistical properties of the resultant approximation.
When optimizing kl, there are two issues with the posterior approximation that we highlight. First,
it typically underestimates the variance of the posterior. Second, it can result in degenerate solutions
that zero out the probability of certain configurations of the latent variables. While both of these issues can be partially circumvented by using more expressive approximating families, they ultimately
stem from the choice of the objective. Under the kl divergence, we pay a large price when q./ is
big where p./ is tiny; this price becomes infinite when q./ has larger support than p./.
In this paper, we revisit variational inference from its core principle as an optimization problem. We
use operators—mappings from functions to functions—to design variational objectives, explicitly
trading off computational properties of the optimization with statistical properties of the approximation. We use operators to formalize the basic properties needed for variational inference algorithms.
We further outline how to use them to define new variational objectives; as one example, we design
a variational objective using a Langevin-Stein operator.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

