Noise-Tolerant Life-Long Matrix Completion via
Adaptive Sampling

Maria-Florina Balcan
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Hongyang Zhang
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
hongyanz@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of recovering an incomplete m × n matrix of rank r with
columns arriving online over time. This is known as the problem of life-long
matrix completion, and is widely applied to recommendation system, computer
vision, system identification, etc. The challenge is to design provable algorithms
tolerant to a large amount of noises, with small sample complexity. In this work,
we give algorithms achieving strong guarantee under two realistic noise models. In
bounded deterministic noise, an adversary can add any bounded yet unstructured
noise to each column. For this problem, we present an algorithm that returns a
matrix of a small error, with sample complexity almost as small as the best prior
results in the noiseless case. For sparse random noise, where the corrupted columns
are sparse and drawn randomly, we give an algorithm that exactly recovers an
µ0 -incoherent matrix by probability at least 1 − δ with sample complexity as small
as O (µ0 rn log(r/δ)). This result advances the state-of-the-art work and matches
the lower bound in a worst case. We also study the scenario where the hidden
matrix lies on a mixture of subspaces and show that the sample complexity can
be even smaller. Our proposed algorithms perform well experimentally in both
synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Life-long learning is an emerging object of study in machine learning, statistics, and many other
domains [2, 11]. In machine learning, study of such a framework has led to significant advances
in learning systems that continually learn many tasks over time and improve their ability to learn
as they do so, like humans [15]. A natural approach to achieve this goal is to exploit information
from previously-learned tasks under the belief that some commonalities exist across the tasks [2,
24]. The focus of this work is to apply this idea of life-long learning to the matrix completion
problem. That is, given columns of a matrix that arrive online over time with missing entries, how to
approximately/exactly recover the underlying matrix by exploiting the low-rank commonality across
each column.
Our study is motivated by several promising applications where life-long matrix completion is
applicable. In recommendation systems, the column of the hidden matrix consists of ratings by
multiple users to a specific movie/news; The news or movies are updated online over time but usually
only a few ratings are submitted by those users. In computer vision, inferring camera motion from a
sequence of online arriving images with missing pixels has received significant attention in recent
years, known as the structure-from-motion problem; Recovering those missing pixels from those
partial measurements is an important preprocessing step. Other examples where our technique is
applicable include system identification, multi-class learning, global positioning of sensors, etc.
Despite a large amount of applications of life-long matrix completion, many fundamental questions remain unresolved. One of the long-standing challenges is designing noise-tolerant, life-long
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

