Learning Influence Functions from Incomplete
Observations
Xinran He
Ke Xu
David Kempe
Yan Liu
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
{xinranhe, xuk, dkempe, yanliu.cs}@usc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning influence functions under incomplete observations of node activations. Incomplete observations are a major concern as most
(online and real-world) social networks are not fully observable. We establish
both proper and improper PAC learnability of influence functions under randomly
missing observations. Proper PAC learnability under the Discrete-Time Linear
Threshold (DLT) and Discrete-Time Independent Cascade (DIC) models is established by reducing incomplete observations to complete observations in a modified
graph. Our improper PAC learnability result applies for the DLT and DIC models
as well as the Continuous-Time Independent Cascade (CIC) model. It is based
on a parametrization in terms of reachability features, and also gives rise to an
efficient and practical heuristic. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate the ability of our method to compensate even for a fairly large fraction
of missing observations.

1

Introduction

Many social phenomena, such as the spread of diseases, behaviors, technologies, or products, can
naturally be modeled as the diffusion of a contagion across a network. Owing to the potentially high
social or economic value of accelerating or inhibiting such diffusions, the goal of understanding
the flow of information and predicting information cascades has been an active area of research
[10, 7, 9, 14, 1, 20]. A key task here is learning influence functions, mapping sets of initial adopters
to the individuals who will be influenced (also called active) by the end of the diffusion process [10].
Many methods have been developed to solve the influence function learning problem [9, 7, 5, 8, 3,
16, 18, 24, 25]. Most approaches are based on fitting the parameters of a diffusion model based on
observations, e.g., [8, 7, 18, 9, 16]. Recently, Du et al. [3] proposed a model-free approach to learn
influence functions as coverage functions; Narasimhan et al. [16] establish proper PAC learnability of
influence functions under several widely-used diffusion models.
All existing approaches rely on the assumption that the observations in the training dataset are
complete, in the sense that all active nodes are observed as being active. However, this assumption
fails to hold in virtually all practical applications [15, 6, 2, 21]. For example, social media data are
usually collected through crawlers or acquired with public APIs provided by social media platforms,
such as Twitter or Facebook. Due to non-technical reasons and established restrictions on the APIs, it
is often impossible to obtain a complete set of observations even for a short period of time. In turn,
the existence of unobserved nodes, links, or activations may lead to a significant misestimation of the
diffusion model’s parameters [19, 15].
We take a step towards addressing the problem of learning influence functions from incomplete
observations. Missing data are a complicated phenomenon, but to address it meaningfully and
rigorously, one must make at least some assumptions about the process resulting in the loss of data.
We focus on random loss of observations: for each activated node independently, the node’s activation
is observed only with probability r, the retention rate, and fails to be observed with probability
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

