Relevant sparse codes with variational information
bottleneck
Matthew Chalk
IST Austria
Am Campus 1
A - 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria

Olivier Marre
Institut de la Vision
17, Rue Moreau
75012, Paris, France

Gasper Tkacik
IST Austria
Am Campus 1
A - 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria

Abstract
In many applications, it is desirable to extract only the relevant aspects of data.
A principled way to do this is the information bottleneck (IB) method, where
one seeks a code that maximizes information about a ‘relevance’ variable, Y ,
while constraining the information encoded about the original data, X. Unfortunately however, the IB method is computationally demanding when data are
high-dimensional and/or non-gaussian. Here we propose an approximate variational scheme for maximizing a lower bound on the IB objective, analogous to
variational EM. Using this method, we derive an IB algorithm to recover features
that are both relevant and sparse. Finally, we demonstrate how kernelized versions
of the algorithm can be used to address a broad range of problems with non-linear
relation between X and Y .

1

Introduction

An important problem, for both humans and machines, is to extract relevant information from complex
data. To do so, one must be able to define which aspects of data are relevant and which should be
discarded. The ‘information bottleneck’ (IB) approach, developed by Tishby and colleagues [1],
provides a principled way to approach this problem. The idea behind the IB approach is to use
additional ‘variables of interest’ to determine which aspects of a signal are relevant. For example, for
speech signals, variables of interest could be the words being pronounced, or alternatively, the speaker
identity. One then seeks a coding scheme that retains maximal information about these variables of
interest, constrained on the information encoded about the input.
The IB approach has been used to tackle a wide variety of problems, including filtering, prediction and
learning [2-5]. However, it quickly becomes intractable with high-dimensional and/or non-gaussian
data. Consequently, previous research has primarily focussed on tractable cases, where the data
comprises a countably small number of discrete states [1-5], or is gaussian [6].
Here, we extend the IB algorithm of Tishby et al. [1] using a variational approximation. The algorithm
maximizes a lower bound on the IB objective function, and is closely related to variational EM.
Using this approach, we derive an IB algorithm that can be effectively applied to ‘sparse’ data in
which input and relevance variables are generated by sparsely occurring latent features. The resulting
solutions share many properties with previous sparse coding models, used to model early sensory
processing [7]. However, unlike these sparse coding models, the learned representation depends on:
(i) the relation between the input and variable of interest; (ii) the trade-off between encoding quality
and compression. Finally, we present a kernelized version of the algorithm, that can be applied to a
large range of problems with non-linear relation between the input data and variables of interest.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

