Stochastic Structured Prediction
under Bandit Feedback
Artem Sokolov,∗, Julia Kreutzer∗ , Christopher Lo†,∗ , Stefan Riezler‡,∗
∗
Computational Linguistics & ‡ IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
{sokolov,kreutzer,riezler}@cl.uni-heidelberg.de
†

Department of Mathematics, Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA
chris.aa.lo@gmail.com


Amazon Development Center, Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Stochastic structured prediction under bandit feedback follows a learning protocol
where on each of a sequence of iterations, the learner receives an input, predicts
an output structure, and receives partial feedback in form of a task loss evaluation
of the predicted structure. We present applications of this learning scenario to
convex and non-convex objectives for structured prediction and analyze them as
stochastic first-order methods. We present an experimental evaluation on problems
of natural language processing over exponential output spaces, and compare convergence speed across different objectives under the practical criterion of optimal
task performance on development data and the optimization-theoretic criterion of
minimal squared gradient norm. Best results under both criteria are obtained for a
non-convex objective for pairwise preference learning under bandit feedback.

1

Introduction

We present algorithms for stochastic structured prediction under bandit feedback that obey the
following learning protocol: On each of a sequence of iterations, the learner receives an input,
predicts an output structure, and receives partial feedback in form of a task loss evaluation of the
predicted structure. In contrast to the full-information batch learning scenario, the gradient cannot
be averaged over the complete input set. Furthermore, in contrast to standard stochastic learning,
the correct output structure is not revealed to the learner. We present algorithms that use this
feedback to “banditize” expected loss minimization approaches to structured prediction [18, 25]. The
algorithms follow the structure of performing simultaneous exploration/exploitation by sampling
output structures from a log-linear probability model, receiving feedback to the sampled structure, and
conducting an update in the negative direction of an unbiased estimate of the gradient of the respective
full information objective. The algorithms apply to situations where learning proceeds online on a
sequence of inputs for which gold standard structures are not available, but feedback to predicted
structures can be elicited from users. A practical example is interactive machine translation where
instead of human generated reference translations only translation quality judgments on predicted
translations are used for learning [20]. The example of machine translation showcases the complexity
of the problem: For each input sentence, we receive feedback for only a single predicted translation
out of a space that is exponential in sentence length, while the goal is to learn to predict the translation
with the smallest loss under a complex evaluation metric.
[19] showed that partial feedback is indeed sufficient for optimization of feature-rich linear structured
prediction over large output spaces in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Their
experiments follow the standard online-to-batch conversion practice in NLP applications where the
∗

The work for this paper was done while the authors were at Heidelberg University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

