Training and Evaluating Multimodal Word
Embeddings with Large-scale Web Annotated Images

Junhua Mao1
Jiajing Xu2
Yushi Jing2
Alan Yuille1,3
2
3
University of California, Los Angeles
Pinterest Inc.
Johns Hopkins University
mjhustc@ucla.edu, {jiajing,jing}@pinterest.com, alan.l.yuille@gmail.com
1

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on training and evaluating effective word embeddings with
both text and visual information. More specifically, we introduce a large-scale
dataset with 300 million sentences describing over 40 million images crawled and
downloaded from publicly available Pins (i.e. an image with sentence descriptions
uploaded by users) on Pinterest [2]. This dataset is more than 200 times larger than
MS COCO [22], the standard large-scale image dataset with sentence descriptions.
In addition, we construct an evaluation dataset to directly assess the effectiveness
of word embeddings in terms of finding semantically similar or related words
and phrases. The word/phrase pairs in this evaluation dataset are collected from
the click data with millions of users in an image search system, thus contain
rich semantic relationships. Based on these datasets, we propose and compare
several Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) based multimodal (text and image)
models. Experiments show that our model benefits from incorporating the visual
information into the word embeddings, and a weight sharing strategy is crucial for
learning such multimodal embeddings. The project page is: http://www.stat.
ucla.edu/~junhua.mao/multimodal_embedding.html1 .

1

Introduction

Word embeddings are dense vector representations of words with semantic and relational information.
In this vector space, semantically related or similar words should be close to each other. A large-scale
training dataset with billions of words is crucial to train effective word embedding models. The
trained word embeddings are very useful in various tasks and real-world applications that involve
searching for semantically similar or related words and phrases.
A large proportion of the state-of-the-art word embedding models are trained on pure text data only.
Since one of the most important functions of language is to describe the visual world, we argue that
the effective word embeddings should contain rich visual semantics. Previous work has shown that
visual information is important for training effective embedding models. However, due to the lack
of large training datasets of the same scale as the pure text dataset, the models are either trained on
relatively small datasets (e.g. [13]), or the visual contraints are only applied to limited number of
pre-defined visual concepts (e.g. [21]). Therefore, such work did not fully explore the potential of
visual information in learning word embeddings.
In this paper, we introduce a large-scale dataset with both text descriptions and images, crawled and
collected from Pinterest, one of the largest database of annotated web images. On Pinterest, users
save web images onto their boards (i.e. image collectors) and supply their descriptions of the images.
More descriptions are collected when the same images are saved and commented by other users.
Compared to MS COCO (i.e. the image benchmark with sentences descriptions [22]), our dataset is
much larger (40 million images with 300 million sentences compared to 0.2 million images and 1
million sentences in the current release of MS COCO) and is at the same scale as the standard pure
1

The datasets introduced in this work will be gradually released on the project page.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

