Approximate maximum entropy principles via
Goemans-Williamson with applications to provable
variational methods
Yuanzhi Li
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, 08450
yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu

Andrej Risteski
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, 08450
risteski@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
The well known maximum-entropy principle due to Jaynes, which states that
given mean parameters, the maximum entropy distribution matching them is in an
exponential family has been very popular in machine learning due to its “Occam’s
razor” interpretation. Unfortunately, calculating the potentials in the maximumentropy distribution is intractable [BGS14]. We provide computationally efficient
versions of this principle when the mean parameters are pairwise moments: we
design distributions that approximately match given pairwise moments, while
having entropy which is comparable to the maximum entropy distribution matching
those moments.
We additionally provide surprising applications of the approximate maximum
entropy principle to designing provable variational methods for partition function
calculations for Ising models without any assumptions on the potentials of the
model. More precisely, we show that we can get approximation guarantees for the
log-partition function comparable to those in the low-temperature limit, which is
the setting of optimization of quadratic forms over the hypercube. ([AN06])

1

Introduction

Maximum entropy principle The maximum entropy principle [Jay57] states that given mean parameters, i.e. Eµ [φt (x)] for a family of functionals φt (x), t ∈ [1, T ], where µ is distribution over the
hypercube {−1, 1}n , the entropy-maximizing distribution µ is an exponential family distribution,
PT
i.e. µ(x) ∝ exp( t=1 Jt φt (x)) for some potentials Jt , t ∈ [1, T ]. 1 This principle has been one
of the reasons for the popularity of graphical models in machine learning: the “maximum entropy”
assumption is interpreted as “minimal assumptions” on the distribution other than what is known
about it.
However, this principle is problematic from a computational point of view. Due to results of
[BGS14, SV14], the potentials Jt of the Ising model, in many cases, are impossible to estimate well
in polynomial time, unless NP = RP – so merely getting the description of the maximum entropy
distribution is already hard. Moreover, in order to extract useful information about this distribution,
usually we would also like to at least be able to sample efficiently from this distribution – which is
typically NP-hard or even #P-hard.
1

There is a more general way to state this principle over an arbitrary domain, not just the hypercube, but for
clarity in this paper we will focus on the hypercube only.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

