Causal Bandits: Learning Good Interventions via
Causal Inference
Finnian Lattimore
Australian National University and Data61/NICTA
finn.lattimore@gmail.com

Tor Lattimore
Indiana University, Bloomington
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

Mark D. Reid
Australian National University and Data61/NICTA
mark.reid@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We study the problem of using causal models to improve the rate at which good
interventions can be learned online in a stochastic environment. Our formalism
combines multi-arm bandits and causal inference to model a novel type of bandit
feedback that is not exploited by existing approaches. We propose a new algorithm
that exploits the causal feedback and prove a bound on its simple regret that is
strictly better (in all quantities) than algorithms that do not use the additional causal
information.

1

Introduction

Medical drug testing, policy setting, and other scientific processes are commonly framed and analysed
in the language of sequential experimental design and, in special cases, as bandit problems (Robbins,
1952; Chernoff, 1959). In this framework, single actions (also referred to as interventions) from a
pre-determined set are repeatedly performed in order to evaluate their effectiveness via feedback from
a single, real-valued reward signal. We propose a generalisation of the standard model by assuming
that, in addition to the reward signal, the learner observes the values of a number of covariates drawn
from a probabilistic causal model (Pearl, 2000). Causal models are commonly used in disciplines
where explicit experimentation may be difficult such as social science, demography and economics.
For example, when predicting the effect of changes to childcare subsidies on workforce participation,
or school choice on grades. Results from causal inference relate observational distributions to
interventional ones, allowing the outcome of an intervention to be predicted without explicitly
performing it. By exploiting the causal information we show, theoretically and empirically, how
non-interventional observations can be used to improve the rate at which high-reward actions can be
identified.
The type of problem we are concerned with is best illustrated with an example. Consider a farmer
wishing to optimise the yield of her crop. She knows that crop yield is only affected by temperature,
a particular soil nutrient, and moisture level but the precise effect of their combination is unknown.
In each season the farmer has enough time and money to intervene and control at most one of these
variables: deploying shade or heat lamps will set the temperature to be low or high; the nutrient
can be added or removed through a choice of fertilizer; and irrigation or rain-proof covers will keep
the soil wet or dry. When not intervened upon, the temperature, soil, and moisture vary naturally
from season to season due to weather conditions and these are all observed along with the final crop
yield at the end of each season. How might the farmer best experiment to identify the single, highest
yielding intervention in a limited number of seasons?
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

