Learning to Poke by Poking: Experiential Learning of
Intuitive Physics

Pulkit Agrawal∗

Ashvin Nair∗
Pieter Abbeel
Jitendra Malik
Sergey Levine
Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory (BAIR)
University of California Berkeley
{pulkitag,anair17,pabbeel,malik,svlevine}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We investigate an experiential learning paradigm for acquiring an internal model of
intuitive physics. Our model is evaluated on a real-world robotic manipulation task
that requires displacing objects to target locations by poking. The robot gathered
over 400 hours of experience by executing more than 100K pokes on different
objects. We propose a novel approach based on deep neural networks for modeling
the dynamics of robot’s interactions directly from images, by jointly estimating
forward and inverse models of dynamics. The inverse model objective provides
supervision to construct informative visual features, which the forward model can
then predict and in turn regularize the feature space for the inverse model. The
interplay between these two objectives creates useful, accurate models that can
then be used for multi-step decision making. This formulation has the additional
benefit that it is possible to learn forward models in an abstract feature space and
thus alleviate the need of predicting pixels. Our experiments show that this joint
modeling approach outperforms alternative methods.

1

Introduction

Humans can effortlessly manipulate previously unseen objects in novel ways. For example, if a
hammer is not available, a human might use a piece of rock or back of a screwdriver to hit a nail.
What enables humans to easily perform such tasks that machines struggle with? One possibility is that
humans possess an internal model of physics (i.e. “intuitive physics” (Michotte, 1963; McCloskey,
1983)) that allows them to reason about physical properties of objects and forecast their dynamics
under the effect of applied forces. Such models can be used to transform a given task into a search
problem in a manner similar to how moves can be planned in a game of chess or tic-tac-toe by
searching through the game tree. Because the search algorithm is independent of task semantics,
solutions to different and possibly new tasks can be determined using the same mechanism.
In human development, it is well known that infants spend years worth of time playing with objects
in a seemingly random manner with no specific end goal (Smith & Gasser, 2005; Gopnik et al., 1999).
One hypothesis is that infants distill this experience into intuitive physics models that predict how
their actions effect the motion of objects. Once learnt, these models could be used for planning
actions for achieving novel goals later in life. Inspired by this hypothesis, in this work we investigate
whether a robot can use it’s own experience to learn an intuitive model of physics that is also effective
for planning actions. In our setup (see Figure 1), a Baxter robot interacts with objects kept on a table
in front of it by randomly poking them. The robot records the visual state of the world before and
after it executes a poke in order to learn a mapping between its actions and the accompanying change
in visual state caused by object motion. To date our robot has interacted with objects for more than
400 hours and in process collected more than 100K pokes on 16 distinct objects.
∗

equal contribution, authors are listed in alphabetical order.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

