How Deep is the Feature Analysis underlying Rapid
Visual Categorization?

Sven Eberhardt∗
Jonah Cader∗
Thomas Serre
Department of Cognitive Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
Brown Institute for Brain Sciences
Brown University
Providence, RI 02818
{sven2,jonah_cader,thomas_serre}@brown.edu

Abstract
Rapid categorization paradigms have a long history in experimental psychology:
Characterized by short presentation times and speeded behavioral responses, these
tasks highlight the efficiency with which our visual system processes natural object
categories. Previous studies have shown that feed-forward hierarchical models
of the visual cortex provide a good fit to human visual decisions. At the same
time, recent work in computer vision has demonstrated significant gains in object
recognition accuracy with increasingly deep hierarchical architectures. But it is
unclear how well these models account for human visual decisions and what they
may reveal about the underlying brain processes.
We have conducted a large-scale psychophysics study to assess the correlation
between computational models and human behavioral responses on a rapid animal
vs. non-animal categorization task. We considered visual representations of varying
complexity by analyzing the output of different stages of processing in three stateof-the-art deep networks. We found that recognition accuracy increases with
higher stages of visual processing (higher level stages indeed outperforming human
participants on the same task) but that human decisions agree best with predictions
from intermediate stages.
Overall, these results suggest that human participants may rely on visual features of
intermediate complexity and that the complexity of visual representations afforded
by modern deep network models may exceed the complexity of those used by
human participants during rapid categorization.

1

Introduction

Our visual system is remarkably fast and accurate. The past decades of research in visual neuroscience
have demonstrated that visual categorization is possible for complex natural scenes viewed in
rapid presentations. Participants can reliably detect and later remember visual scenes embedded in
continuous streams of images with exposure times as low as 100 ms [see 15, for review]. Observers
can also reliably categorize animal vs. non-animal images (and other classes of objects) even when
flashed for 20 ms or less [see 6, for review].
Unlike normal everyday vision which involves eye movements and shifts of attention, rapid visual
categorization is assumed to involve a single feedforward sweep of visual information [see 19, for
review] and engages our core object recognition system [reviewed in 5]. Interestingly, incorrect
responses during rapid categorization tasks are not uniformly distributed across stimuli (as one would
∗

These authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

