Convolutional Neural Fabrics
Shreyas Saxena
Jakob Verbeek
INRIA Grenoble – Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann

Abstract
Despite the success of CNNs, selecting the optimal architecture for a given task
remains an open problem. Instead of aiming to select a single optimal architecture,
we propose a “fabric” that embeds an exponentially large number of architectures.
The fabric consists of a 3D trellis that connects response maps at different layers,
scales, and channels with a sparse homogeneous local connectivity pattern. The
only hyper-parameters of a fabric are the number of channels and layers. While
individual architectures can be recovered as paths, the fabric can in addition
ensemble all embedded architectures together, sharing their weights where their
paths overlap. Parameters can be learned using standard methods based on backpropagation, at a cost that scales linearly in the fabric size. We present benchmark
results competitive with the state of the art for image classification on MNIST and
CIFAR10, and for semantic segmentation on the Part Labels dataset.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15] have proven extremely successful for a wide range
of computer vision problems and other applications. In particular, the results of Krizhevsky et
al . [13] have caused a major paradigm shift in computer vision from models relying in part on
hand-crafted features, to end-to-end trainable systems from the pixels upwards. One of the main
problems that holds back further progress using CNNs, as well as deconvolutional variants [24, 26]
used for semantic segmentation, is the lack of efficient systematic ways to explore the discrete and
exponentially large architecture space. To appreciate the number of possible architectures, consider a
standard chain-structured CNN architecture for image classification. The architecture is determined
by the following hyper-parameters: (i) number of layers, (ii) number of channels per layer, (iii) filter
size per layer, (iv) stride per layer, (v) number of pooling vs. convolutional layers, (vi) type of pooling
operator per layer, (vii) size of the pooling regions, (viii) ordering of pooling and convolutional layers,
(ix) channel connectivity pattern between layers, and (x) type of activation, e.g. ReLU or MaxOut, per
layer. The number of resulting architectures clearly does not allow for (near) exhaustive exploration.
We show that all network architectures that can be obtained for various choices of the above ten
hyper-parameters are embedded in a “fabric” of convolution and pooling operators. Concretely,
the fabric is a three-dimensional trellis of response maps of various resolutions, with only local
connections across neighboring layers, scales, and channels. See Figure 1 for a schematic illustration
of how fabrics embed different architectures. Each activation in a fabric is computed as a linear
function followed by a non-linearity from a multi-dimensional neighborhood (spatial/temporal input
dimensions, a scale dimension and a channel dimension) in the previous layer. Setting the only two
hyper-parameters, number of layers and channels, is not ciritical as long as they are large enough. We
also consider two variants, one in which the channels are fully connected instead of sparsely, and
another in which the number of channels doubles if we move to a coarser scale. The latter allows for
one to two orders of magnitude more channels, while increasing memory requirements by only 50%.
All chain-structured network architectures embedded in the fabric can be recovered by appropriately
setting certain connections to zero, so that only a single processing path is active between input and
output. General, non-path, weight settings correspond to ensembling many architectures together,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

