A Posteriori Error Bounds for Joint Matrix
Decomposition Problems

Nicolò Colombo
Department of Statistical Science
University College London
nicolo.colombo@ucl.ac.uk

Nikos Vlassis
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA
vlassis@adobe.com

Abstract
Joint matrix triangularization is often used for estimating the joint eigenstructure
of a set M of matrices, with applications in signal processing and machine learning.
We consider the problem of approximate joint matrix triangularization when the
matrices in M are jointly diagonalizable and real, but we only observe a set M’
of noise perturbed versions of the matrices in M. Our main result is a first-order
upper bound on the distance between any approximate joint triangularizer of the
matrices in M’ and any exact joint triangularizer of the matrices in M. The bound
depends only on the observable matrices in M’ and the noise level. In particular, it
does not depend on optimization specific properties of the triangularizer, such as its
proximity to critical points, that are typical of existing bounds in the literature. To
our knowledge, this is the first a posteriori bound for joint matrix decomposition.
We demonstrate the bound on synthetic data for which the ground truth is known.

1

Introduction

Joint matrix decomposition problems appear frequently in signal processing and machine learning,
with notable applications in independent component analysis [7], canonical correlation analysis [20],
and latent variable model estimation [5, 4]. Most of these applications reduce to some instance of
a tensor decomposition problem, and the growing interest in joint matrix decomposition is largely
motivated by such reductions. In particular, in the past decade several ‘matricization’ methods have
been proposed for factorizing tensors by computing the joint decomposition of sets of matrices
extracted from slices of the tensor (see, e.g., [10, 22, 17, 8]).
In this work we address a standard joint matrix decomposition problem, in which we assume a set of
jointly diagonalizable ground-truth (unobserved) matrices
M◦ = {Mn = V diag([Λn1 , . . . , Λnd ])V −1 , V ∈ Rd×d , Λ ∈ RN ×d }N
n=1 ,

(1)

which have been corrupted by noise and we observe their noisy versions:
Mσ = {M̂n = Mn + σRn , Mn ∈ M◦ , Rn ∈ Rd×d , kRn k ≤ 1}N
n=1 .

(2)

The matrices M̂n ∈ Mσ are the only observed quantities. The scalar σ > 0 is the noise level, and
the matrices Rn are arbitrary noise matrices with Frobenius norm kRn k ≤ 1. The key problem
is to estimate from the observed matrices in Mσ the joint eigenstructure V, Λ of the ground-truth
matrices in M◦ . One way to address this estimation problem is by trying to approximately jointly
diagonalize the observed matrices in Mσ , for instance by directly searching for an invertible matrix
that approximates V in (1). This approach is known as nonorthogonal joint diagonalization [23, 15,
18], and is often motivated by applications that reduce to nonsymmetric CP tensor decomposition
(see, e.g., [20]).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

