Orthogonal Random Features
Felix Xinnan Yu Ananda Theertha Suresh Krzysztof Choromanski
Daniel Holtmann-Rice Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York
{felixyu, theertha, kchoro, dhr, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
We present an intriguing discovery related to Random Fourier Features: in Gaussian
kernel approximation, replacing the random Gaussian matrix by a properly scaled
random orthogonal matrix significantly decreases kernel approximation error. We
call this technique Orthogonal Random Features (ORF), and provide theoretical
and empirical justification for this behavior. Motivated by this discovery, we further
propose Structured Orthogonal Random Features (SORF), which uses a class of
structured discrete orthogonal matrices to speed up the computation. The method
reduces the time cost from O(d2 ) to O(d log d), where d is the data dimensionality,
with almost no compromise in kernel approximation quality compared to ORF.
Experiments on several datasets verify the effectiveness of ORF and SORF over the
existing methods. We also provide discussions on using the same type of discrete
orthogonal structure for a broader range of applications.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods are widely used in nonlinear learning [8], but they are computationally expensive for
large datasets. Kernel approximation is a powerful technique to make kernel methods scalable, by
mapping input features into a new space where dot products approximate the kernel well [19]. With
accurate kernel approximation, efficient linear classifiers can be trained in the transformed space
while retaining the expressive power of nonlinear methods [10, 21].
Formally, given a kernel K(·, ·) : Rd ⇥ Rd ! R, kernel approximation methods seek to find a
0
nonlinear transformation (·) : Rd ! Rd such that, for any x, y 2 Rd
K(x, y) ⇡ K̂(x, y) = (x)T (y).
Random Fourier Features [19] are used widely in approximating smooth, shift-invariant kernels. This
technique requires the kernel to exhibit two properties: 1) shift-invariance, i.e. K(x, y) = K( )
where = x y; and 2) positive semi-definiteness of K( ) on Rd . The second property guarantees
that the Fourier transform of K( ) is a nonnegative function [3]. Let p(w) be the Fourier transform
of K(z). Then,
Z
T
K(x y) =
p(w)ejw (x y) dw.
Rd

This means that one can treat p(w) as a density function and use Monte-Carlo sampling to derive the
following nonlinear map for a real-valued kernel:
p
⇥
⇤T
T
T
(x) = 1/D sin(w1T x), · · · , sin(wD
x), cos(w1T x), · · · , cos(wD
x) ,

where wi is sampled i.i.d. from a probability distribution with density p(w). Let W =
⇥
⇤T
w1 , · · · , wD . The linear transformation Wx is central to the above computation since,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

