Adversarial Multiclass Classification:
A Risk Minimization Perspective

Rizal Fathony

Anqi Liu
Kaiser Asif
Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{rfatho2, aliu33, kasif2, bziebart}@uic.edu

Abstract
Recently proposed adversarial classification methods have shown promising results
for cost sensitive and multivariate losses. In contrast with empirical risk minimization (ERM) methods, which use convex surrogate losses to approximate the
desired non-convex target loss function, adversarial methods minimize non-convex
losses by treating the properties of the training data as being uncertain and worst
case within a minimax game. Despite this difference in formulation, we recast
adversarial classification under zero-one loss as an ERM method with a novel
prescribed loss function. We demonstrate a number of theoretical and practical
advantages over the very closely related hinge loss ERM methods. This establishes
adversarial classification under the zero-one loss as a method that fills the long
standing gap in multiclass hinge loss classification, simultaneously guaranteeing
Fisher consistency and universal consistency, while also providing dual parameter
sparsity and high accuracy predictions in practice.

1

Introduction

A common goal for standard classification problems in machine learning is to find a classifier that
minimizes the zero-one loss. Since directly minimizing this loss over training data via empirical
risk minimization (ERM) [1] is generally NP-hard [2], convex surrogate losses are employed to
approximate the zero-one loss. For example, the logarithmic loss is minimized by the logistic
regression classifier [3] and the hinge loss is minimized by the support vector machine (SVM) [4, 5].
Both are Fisher consistent [6, 7] and universally consistent [8, 9] for binary classification, meaning
they minimize the zero-one loss and are Bayes-optimal classifiers when they learn from any true
distribution of data using a rich feature representation. SVMs provide the additional advantage of dual
parameter sparsity so that when combined with kernel methods, extremely rich feature representations
can be efficiently considered. Unfortunately, generalizing the hinge loss to classification tasks with
more than two labels is challenging and existing multiclass convex surrogates [10–12] tend to lose
their consistency guarantees [13–15] or produce low accuracy predictions in practice [15].
Adversarial classification [16, 17] uses a different approach to tackle non-convex losses like the
zero-one loss. Instead of approximating the desired loss function and evaluating over the training
data, it adversarially approximates the available training data within a minimax game formulation
with game payoffs defined by the desired (zero-one) loss function [18, 19]. This provides promising
empirical results for cost-sensitive losses [16] and multivariate losses such as the F-measure and
the precision-at-k [17]. Conceptually, parameter optimization for the adversarial method forces the
adversary to “behave like” certain properties of the training data sample, making labels easier to
predict within the minimax prediction game. However, a key bottleneck for these methods has been
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

