Deep Exploration via Bootstrapped DQN
Ian Osband1,2 , Charles Blundell2 , Alexander Pritzel2 , Benjamin Van Roy1
1
Stanford University, 2 Google DeepMind
{iosband, cblundell, apritzel}@google.com, bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
Efficient exploration remains a major challenge for reinforcement learning
(RL). Common dithering strategies for exploration, such as ‘-greedy, do
not carry out temporally-extended (or deep) exploration; this can lead
to exponentially larger data requirements. However, most algorithms for
statistically efficient RL are not computationally tractable in complex environments. Randomized value functions offer a promising approach to
efficient exploration with generalization, but existing algorithms are not
compatible with nonlinearly parameterized value functions. As a first step
towards addressing such contexts we develop bootstrapped DQN. We demonstrate that bootstrapped DQN can combine deep exploration with deep
neural networks for exponentially faster learning than any dithering strategy. In the Arcade Learning Environment bootstrapped DQN substantially
improves learning speed and cumulative performance across most games.

1

Introduction

We study the reinforcement learning (RL) problem where an agent interacts with an unknown
environment. The agent takes a sequence of actions in order to maximize cumulative rewards.
Unlike standard planning problems, an RL agent does not begin with perfect knowledge
of the environment, but learns through experience. This leads to a fundamental trade-off
of exploration versus exploitation; the agent may improve its future rewards by exploring
poorly understood states and actions, but this may require sacrificing immediate rewards. To
learn efficiently an agent should explore only when there are valuable learning opportunities.
Further, since any action may have long term consequences, the agent should reason about
the informational value of possible observation sequences. Without this sort of temporally
extended (deep) exploration, learning times can worsen by an exponential factor.
The theoretical RL literature offers a variety of provably-efficient approaches to deep exploration [9]. However, most of these are designed for Markov decision processes (MDPs) with
small finite state spaces, while others require solving computationally intractable planning
tasks [8]. These algorithms are not practical in complex environments where an agent must
generalize to operate effectively. For this reason, large-scale applications of RL have relied
upon statistically inefficient strategies for exploration [12] or even no exploration at all [23].
We review related literature in more detail in Section 4.
Common dithering strategies, such as ‘-greedy, approximate the value of an action by
a single number. Most of the time they pick the action with the highest estimate, but
sometimes they choose another action at random. In this paper, we consider an alternative
approach to efficient exploration inspired by Thompson sampling. These algorithms have
some notion of uncertainty and instead maintain a distribution over possible values. They
explore by randomly select a policy according to the probability it is the optimal policy.
Recent work has shown that randomized value functions can implement something similar
to Thompson sampling without the need for an intractable exact posterior update. However,
this work is restricted to linearly-parameterized value functions [16]. We present a natural
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

