Safe Policy Improvement by Minimizing Robust
Baseline Regret

Marek Petrik
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Adobe Research & INRIA Lille
ghavamza@adobe.com

Yinlam Chow
Stanford University
ychow@stanford.edu

Abstract
An important problem in sequential decision-making under uncertainty is to use
limited data to compute a safe policy, which is guaranteed to outperform a given
baseline strategy. In this paper, we develop and analyze a new model-based
approach that computes a safe policy, given an inaccurate model of the system’s
dynamics and guarantees on the accuracy of this model. The new robust method
uses this model to directly minimize the (negative) regret w.r.t. the baseline policy.
Contrary to existing approaches, minimizing the regret allows one to improve
the baseline policy in states with accurate dynamics and to seamlessly fall back
to the baseline policy, otherwise. We show that our formulation is NP-hard and
propose a simple approximate algorithm. Our empirical results on several domains
further show that even the simple approximate algorithm can outperform standard
approaches.

1

Introduction

Many problems in science and engineering can be formulated as a sequential decision-making
problem under uncertainty. A common scenario in such problems that occurs in many different fields,
such as online marketing, inventory control, health informatics, and computational finance, is to find
a good or an optimal strategy/policy, given a batch of data generated by the current strategy of the
company (hospital, investor). Although there are many techniques to find a good policy given a batch
of data, only a few of them guarantee that the obtained policy will perform well, when it is deployed.
Since deploying an untested policy can be risky for the business, the product (hospital, investment)
manager does not usually allow it to happen, unless we provide her/him with some performance
guarantees of the obtained strategy, in comparison to the baseline policy (for example the policy that
is currently in use).
In this paper, we focus on the model-based approach to this fundamental problem in the context
of infinite-horizon discounted Markov decision processes (MDPs). In this approach, we use the
batch of data and build a model or a simulator that approximates the true behavior of the dynamical
system, together with an error function that captures the accuracy of the model at each state of the
system. Our goal is to compute a safe policy, i.e., a policy that is guaranteed to perform at least
as well as the baseline strategy, using the simulator and error function. Most of the work on this
topic has been in the model-free setting, where safe policies are computed directly from the batch of
data, without building an explicit model of the system [Thomas et al., 2015b,a]. Another class of
model-free algorithms are those that use a batch of data generated by the current policy and return a
policy that is guaranteed to perform better. They optimize for the policy by repeating this process
until convergence [Kakade and Langford, 2002; Pirotta et al., 2013].
A major limitation of the existing methods for computing safe policies is that they either adopt a
newly learned policy with provable improvements or do not make any improvement at all by returning
the baseline policy. These approaches may be quite limiting when model uncertainties are not uniform
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

