Batched Gaussian Process Bandit Optimization via
Determinantal Point Processes
Tarun Kathuria, Amit Deshpande, Pushmeet Kohli
Microsoft Research
t-takat@microsoft.com, amitdesh@microsoft.com, pkohli@microsoft.com

Abstract
Gaussian Process bandit optimization has emerged as a powerful tool for optimizing
noisy black box functions. One example in machine learning is hyper-parameter
optimization where each evaluation of the target function may require training
a model which may involve days or even weeks of computation. Most methods
for this so-called “Bayesian optimization” only allow sequential exploration of
the parameter space. However, it is often desirable to propose batches or sets
of parameter values to explore simultaneously, especially when there are large
parallel processing facilities at our disposal. Batch methods require modeling the
interaction between the different evaluations in the batch, which can be expensive
in complex scenarios. In this paper, we propose a new approach for parallelizing
Bayesian optimization by modeling the diversity of a batch via Determinantal
point processes (DPPs) whose kernels are learned automatically. This allows us
to generalize a previous result as well as prove better regret bounds based on
DPP sampling. Our experiments on a variety of synthetic and real-world robotics
and hyper-parameter optimization tasks indicate that our DPP-based methods,
especially those based on DPP sampling, outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The optimization of an unknown function based on noisy observations is a fundamental problem
in various real world domains, e.g., engineering design [33], finance [36] and hyper-parameter
optimization [29]. In recent years, an increasingly popular direction has been to model smoothness
assumptions about the function via a Gaussian Process (GP), which provides an easy way to compute
the posterior distribution of the unknown function, and thereby uncertainty estimates that help to
decide where to evaluate the function next, in search of an optima. This Bayesian optimization (BO)
framework has received considerable attention in tuning of hyper-parameters for complex models
and algorithms in Machine Learning, Robotics and Computer Vision [16, 31, 29, 12].
Apart from a few notable exceptions [9, 8, 11], most methods for Bayesian optimization work by
exploring one parameter value at a time. However, in many applications, it may be possible and,
moreover, desirable to run multiple function evaluations in parallel. A case in point is when the
underlying function corresponds to a laboratory experiment where multiple experimental setups are
available or when the underlying function is the result of a costly computer simulation and multiple
simulations can be run across different processors in parallel. By parallelizing the experiments,
substantially more information can be gathered in the same time-frame; however, future actions must
be chosen without the benefit of intermediate results. One might conceptualize these problems as
choosing “batches” of experiments to run simultaneously. The key challenge is to assemble batches
(out of a combinatorially large set of batches) of experiments that both explore the function and
exploit by focusing on regions with high estimated value.
Our Contributions Given that functions sampled from GPs usually have some degree of smoothness,
in the so-called batch Bayesian optimization (BBO) methods, it is desirable to choose batches which
are diverse. Indeed, this is the motivation behind many popular BBO methods like the BUCB [9],
UCB-PE [8] and Local Penalization [11]. Motivated by this long line of work in BBO, we propose
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

