Deep Learning without Poor Local Minima

Kenji Kawaguchi
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
kawaguch@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we prove a conjecture published in 1989 and also partially address
an open problem announced at the Conference on Learning Theory (COLT) 2015.
With no unrealistic assumption, we first prove the following statements for the
squared loss function of deep linear neural networks with any depth and any
widths: 1) the function is non-convex and non-concave, 2) every local minimum is
a global minimum, 3) every critical point that is not a global minimum is a saddle
point, and 4) there exist “bad” saddle points (where the Hessian has no negative
eigenvalue) for the deeper networks (with more than three layers), whereas there
is no bad saddle point for the shallow networks (with three layers). Moreover, for
deep nonlinear neural networks, we prove the same four statements via a reduction
to a deep linear model under the independence assumption adopted from recent
work. As a result, we present an instance, for which we can answer the following
question: how difficult is it to directly train a deep model in theory? It is more difficult than the classical machine learning models (because of the non-convexity),
but not too difficult (because of the nonexistence of poor local minima). Furthermore, the mathematically proven existence of bad saddle points for deeper models
would suggest a possible open problem. We note that even though we have advanced the theoretical foundations of deep learning and non-convex optimization,
there is still a gap between theory and practice.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been a great practical success in many fields, including the fields of computer
vision, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. In addition to its practical success, theoretical
results have shown that deep learning is attractive in terms of its generalization properties (Livni
et al., 2014; Mhaskar et al., 2016). That is, deep learning introduces good function classes that
may have a low capacity in the VC sense while being able to represent target functions of interest
well. However, deep learning requires us to deal with seemingly intractable optimization problems.
Typically, training of a deep model is conducted via non-convex optimization. Because finding a
global minimum of a general non-convex function is an NP-complete problem (Murty & Kabadi,
1987), a hope is that a function induced by a deep model has some structure that makes the nonconvex optimization tractable. Unfortunately, it was shown in 1992 that training a very simple
neural network is indeed NP-hard (Blum & Rivest, 1992). In the past, such theoretical concerns in
optimization played a major role in shrinking the field of deep learning. That is, many researchers
instead favored classical machining learning models (with or without a kernel approach) that require
only convex optimization. While the recent great practical successes have revived the field, we do
not yet know what makes optimization in deep learning tractable in theory.
In this paper, as a step toward establishing the optimization theory for deep learning, we prove a
conjecture noted in (Goodfellow et al., 2016) for deep linear networks, and also address an open
problem announced in (Choromanska et al., 2015b) for deep nonlinear networks. Moreover, for
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

