Improved Error Bounds for Tree Representations of
Metric Spaces

Samir Chowdhury
Department of Mathematics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
chowdhury.57@osu.edu

Facundo Mémoli
Department of Mathematics
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
memoli@math.osu.edu

Zane Smith
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
smith.9911@osu.edu

Abstract
Estimating optimal phylogenetic trees or hierarchical clustering trees from metric
data is an important problem in evolutionary biology and data analysis. Intuitively,
the goodness-of-fit of a metric space to a tree depends on its inherent treeness, as
well as other metric properties such as intrinsic dimension. Existing algorithms for
embedding metric spaces into tree metrics provide distortion bounds depending on
cardinality. Because cardinality is a simple property of any set, we argue that such
bounds do not fully capture the rich structure endowed by the metric. We consider
an embedding of a metric space into a tree proposed by Gromov. By proving a
stability result, we obtain an improved additive distortion bound depending only on
the hyperbolicity and doubling dimension of the metric. We observe that Gromov’s
method is dual to the well-known single linkage hierarchical clustering (SLHC)
method. By means of this duality, we are able to transport our results to the setting
of SLHC, where such additive distortion bounds were previously unknown.

1

Introduction

Numerous problems in data analysis are formulated as the question of embedding high-dimensional
metric spaces into “simpler" spaces, typically of lower dimension. In classical multidimensional
scaling (MDS) techniques [18], the goal is to embed a space into two or three dimensional Euclidean
space while preserving interpoint distances. Classical MDS is helpful in exploratory data analysis,
because it allows one to find hidden groupings in amorphous data by simple visual inspection.
Generalizations of MDS exist for which the target space can be a tree metric space—see [13] for a
summary of some of these approaches, written from the point of view of metric embeddings. The
metric embeddings literature, which grew out of MDS, typically highlights the algorithmic gains
made possible by embedding a complicated metric space into a simpler one [13].
The special case of MDS where the target space is a tree has been of interest in phylogenetics for
quite some time [19, 5]; the numerical taxonomy problem (NTP) is that of finding an optimal tree
embedding for a given metric space (X, dX ), i.e. a tree (X, tX ) such that the additive distortion,
defined as kdX − tX k`∞ (X×X) , is minimal over all possible tree metrics on X. This problem turns
out to be NP-hard [3]; however, a 3-approximation algorithm exists [3], and a variant of this problem,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

