Understanding Probabilistic Sparse
Gaussian Process Approximations

Matthias Bauer†‡
Mark van der Wilk†
Carl Edward Rasmussen†
†
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
‡
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{msb55, mv310, cer54}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Good sparse approximations are essential for practical inference in Gaussian
Processes as the computational cost of exact methods is prohibitive for large
datasets. The Fully Independent Training Conditional (FITC) and the Variational
Free Energy (VFE) approximations are two recent popular methods. Despite
superficial similarities, these approximations have surprisingly different theoretical
properties and behave differently in practice. We thoroughly investigate the two
methods for regression both analytically and through illustrative examples, and
draw conclusions to guide practical application.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) [1] are a flexible class of probabilistic models. Perhaps the most prominent
practical limitation of GPs is that the computational requirement of an exact implementation scales
as O(N 3 ) time, and as O(N 2 ) memory, where N is the number of training cases. Fortunately,
recent progress has been made in developing sparse approximations, which retain the favourable
properties of GPs but at a lower computational cost, typically O(N M 2 ) time and O(N M ) memory
for some chosen M < N . All sparse approximations rely on focussing inference on a small number
of quantities, which represent approximately the entire posterior over functions. These quantities
can be chosen differently, e.g., function values at certain input locations, properties of the spectral
representations [2], or more abstract representations [3]. Similar ideas are used in random feature
expansions [4, 5].
Here we focus on methods that represent the approximate posterior using the function value at a set of
M inducing inputs (also known as pseudo-inputs). These methods include the Deterministic Training
Conditional (DTC) [6] and the Fully Independent Training Conditional (FITC) [7], see [8] for a
review, as well as the Variational Free Energy (VFE) approximation [9]. The methods differ both in
terms of the theoretical approach in deriving the approximation, and in terms of how the inducing
inputs are handled. Broadly speaking, inducing inputs can either be chosen from the training set
(e.g. at random) or be optimised over. In this paper we consider the latter, as this will generally allow
for the best trade-off between accuracy and computational requirements. Training the GP entails
jointly optimizing over inducing inputs and hyperparameters.
In this work, we aim to thoroughly investigate and characterise the difference in behaviour of the FITC
and VFE approximations. We investigate the biases of the bounds when learning hyperparameters,
where each method allocates its modelling capacity, and the optimisation behaviour. In Section 2
we briefly introduce inducing point methods and state the two algorithms using a unifying notation.
In Section 3 we discuss properties of the two approaches, both theoretical and practical. Our aim is
to understand the approximations in detail in order to know under which conditions each method is
likely to succeed or fail in practice. We highlight issues that may arise in practical situations and how
to diagnose and possibly avoid them. Some of the properties of the methods have been previously
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

