Feature selection in functional data classification with
recursive maxima hunting

José L. Torrecilla
Computer Science Department
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
28049 Madrid, Spain
joseluis.torrecilla@uam.es

Alberto Suárez
Computer Science Department
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
28049 Madrid, Spain
alberto.suarez@uam.es

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction is one of the key issues in the design of effective machine
learning methods for automatic induction. In this work, we introduce recursive
maxima hunting (RMH) for variable selection in classification problems with functional data. In this context, variable selection techniques are especially attractive
because they reduce the dimensionality, facilitate the interpretation and can improve the accuracy of the predictive models. The method, which is a recursive
extension of maxima hunting (MH), performs variable selection by identifying the
maxima of a relevance function, which measures the strength of the correlation of
the predictor functional variable with the class label. At each stage, the information
associated with the selected variable is removed by subtracting the conditional
expectation of the process. The results of an extensive empirical evaluation are
used to illustrate that, in the problems investigated, RMH has comparable or higher
predictive accuracy than standard dimensionality reduction techniques, such as
PCA and PLS, and state-of-the-art feature selection methods for functional data,
such as maxima hunting.

1

Introduction

In many important prediction problems from different areas of application (medicine, environmental
monitoring, etc.) the data are characterized by a function, instead of by a vector of attributes, as is
commonly assumed in standard machine learning problems. Some examples of these types of data
are functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Grosenick et al., 2008) and near-infrared spectra
(NIR) (Xiaobo et al., 2010). Therefore, it is important to develop methods for automatic induction
that take into account the functional structure of the data (infinite dimension, high redundancy, etc.)
(Ramsay and Silverman, 2005; Ferraty and Vieu, 2006). In this work, the problem of classification
of functional data is addressed. For simplicity, we focus on binary classification problems (Baı́llo
et al., 2011). Nonetheless, the proposed method can be readily extended to a multiclass setting. Let
X(t), t ∈ [0, 1] be a continuous stochastic process in a probability space (Ω, F, P). A functional
train
datum Xn (t) is a realization of this process (a trajectory). Let {Xn (t), Yn }N
n=1 , t ∈ [0, 1] be a
set of trajectories labeled by the dichotomous variable Yn ∈ {0, 1}. These trajectories come from
one of two different populations; either P0 , when the label is Yn = 0, or P1 , when the label is
Yn = 1. For instance, the data could be the ECG’s from either healthy or sick persons (P0 and P1 ,
respectively). The classification problem consist in deciding to which population a new unlabeled
observation X test (t) belongs (e.g., to decide from his or her ECG whether a person is healthy or
not). Specifically, we are interested in the problem of dimensionality reduction for functional data
classification. The goal is to achieve the optimal discrimination performance using only a finite, small
set of values from the trajectory as input to a standard classifier (in our work, k-nearest neighbors).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

