RETAIN: An Interpretable Predictive Model for
Healthcare using Reverse Time Attention Mechanism
Edward Choi⇤ , Mohammad Taha Bahadori⇤ , Joshua A. Kulas⇤ ,
Andy Schuetz† , Walter F. Stewart† , Jimeng Sun⇤
⇤
†
Georgia Institute of Technology
Sutter Health
{mp2893,bahadori,jkulas3}@gatech.edu,
{schueta1,stewarwf}@sutterhealth.org, jsun@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Accuracy and interpretability are two dominant features of successful predictive
models. Typically, a choice must be made in favor of complex black box models
such as recurrent neural networks (RNN) for accuracy versus less accurate but
more interpretable traditional models such as logistic regression. This tradeoff
poses challenges in medicine where both accuracy and interpretability are important. We addressed this challenge by developing the REverse Time AttentIoN
model (RETAIN) for application to Electronic Health Records (EHR) data. RETAIN
achieves high accuracy while remaining clinically interpretable and is based on
a two-level neural attention model that detects influential past visits and significant clinical variables within those visits (e.g. key diagnoses). RETAIN mimics
physician practice by attending the EHR data in a reverse time order so that recent
clinical visits are likely to receive higher attention. RETAIN was tested on a large
health system EHR dataset with 14 million visits completed by 263K patients over
an 8 year period and demonstrated predictive accuracy and computational scalability comparable to state-of-the-art methods such as RNN, and ease of interpretability
comparable to traditional models.

1

Introduction

The broad adoption of Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems has opened the possibility of
applying clinical predictive models to improve the quality of clinical care. Several systematic reviews
have underlined the care quality improvement using predictive analysis [7, 25, 5, 20]. EHR data
can be represented as temporal sequences of high-dimensional clinical variables (e.g., diagnoses,
medications and procedures), where the sequence ensemble represents the documented content of
medical visits from a single patient. Traditional machine learning tools summarize this ensemble into
aggregate features, ignoring the temporal and sequence relationships among the feature elements.
The opportunity to improve both predictive accuracy and interpretability is likely to derive from
effectively modeling temporality and high-dimensionality of these event sequences.
Accuracy and interpretability are two dominant features of successful predictive models. There is a
common belief that one has to trade accuracy for interpretability using one of three types of traditional
models [6]: 1) identifying a set of rules (e.g. via decision trees [27]), 2) case-based reasoning by
finding similar patients (e.g. via k-nearest neighbors [18] and distance metric learning [36]), and 3)
identifying a list of risk factors (e.g. via LASSO coefficients [15]). While interpretable, all of these
models rely on aggregated features, ignoring the temporal relation among features inherent to EHR
data. As a consequence, model accuracy is sub-optimal. Latent-variable time-series models, such as
[34, 35], account for temporality, but often have limited interpretation due to abstract state variables.
Recently, recurrent neural networks (RNN) have been successfully applied in modeling sequential
EHR data to predict diagnoses [30] and disease progression [11, 14]. But, the gain in accuracy from
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

