The Parallel Knowledge Gradient Method
for Batch Bayesian Optimization

Jian Wu, Peter I. Frazier
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, 14853
{jw926, pf98}@cornell.edu

Abstract
In many applications of black-box optimization, one can evaluate multiple points
simultaneously, e.g. when evaluating the performances of several different neural
networks in a parallel computing environment. In this paper, we develop a novel
batch Bayesian optimization algorithm — the parallel knowledge gradient method.
By construction, this method provides the one-step Bayes optimal batch of points
to sample. We provide an efficient strategy for computing this Bayes-optimal
batch of points, and we demonstrate that the parallel knowledge gradient method
finds global optima significantly faster than previous batch Bayesian optimization
algorithms on both synthetic test functions and when tuning hyperparameters of
practical machine learning algorithms, especially when function evaluations are
noisy.

1

Introduction

In Bayesian optimization [19] (BO), we wish to optimize a derivative-free expensive-to-evaluate
function f with feasible domain A ⊆ Rd ,
min f (x),
x∈A

with as few function evaluations as possible. In this paper, we assume that membership in the domain
A is easy to evaluate and we can evaluate f only at points in A. We assume that evaluations of f are
either noise-free, or have additive independent normally distributed noise. We consider the parallel
setting, in which we perform more than one simultaneous evaluation of f .
BO typically puts a Gaussian process prior distribution on the function f , updating this prior
distribution with each new observation of f , and choosing the next point or points to evaluate
by maximizing an acquisition function that quantifies the benefit of evaluating the objective as a
function of where it is evaluated. In comparison with other global optimization algorithms, BO often
finds “near optimal” function values with fewer evaluations [19]. As a consequence, BO is useful
when function evaluation is time-consuming, such as when training and testing complex machine
learning algorithms (e.g. deep neural networks) or tuning algorithms on large-scale dataset (e.g.
ImageNet) [4]. Recently, BO has become popular in machine learning as it is highly effective in
tuning hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms [8, 9, 19, 22].
Most previous work in BO assumes that we evaluate the objective function sequentially [13], though a
few recent papers have considered parallel evaluations [3, 5, 18, 25]. While in practice, we can often
evaluate several different choices in parallel, such as multiple machines can simultaneously train the
machine learning algorithm with different sets of hyperparameters. In this paper, we assume that
we can access q ≥ 1 evaluations simultaneously at each iteration. Then we develop a new parallel
acquisition function to guide where to evaluate next based on the decision-theoretical analysis.
Our Contributions. We propose a novel batch BO method which measures the information gain
of evaluating q points via a new acquisition function, the parallel knowledge gradient (q-KG). This
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

