Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Residual
Transfer Networks
Mingsheng Long† , Han Zhu† , Jianmin Wang† , and Michael I. Jordan]
†
KLiss, MOE; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
]
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
{mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuhan10@gmail.com, jordan@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The recent success of deep neural networks relies on massive amounts of labeled
data. For a target task where labeled data is unavailable, domain adaptation can
transfer a learner from a different source domain. In this paper, we propose a new
approach to domain adaptation in deep networks that can jointly learn adaptive
classifiers and transferable features from labeled data in the source domain and
unlabeled data in the target domain. We relax a shared-classifier assumption made
by previous methods and assume that the source classifier and target classifier
differ by a residual function. We enable classifier adaptation by plugging several
layers into deep network to explicitly learn the residual function with reference
to the target classifier. We fuse features of multiple layers with tensor product
and embed them into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces to match distributions for
feature adaptation. The adaptation can be achieved in most feed-forward models by
extending them with new residual layers and loss functions, which can be trained
efficiently via back-propagation. Empirical evidence shows that the new approach
outperforms state of the art methods on standard domain adaptation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have significantly improved the state of the art for a wide variety of machine-learning
problems and applications. Unfortunately, these impressive gains in performance come only when
massive amounts of labeled data are available for supervised training. Since manual labeling of
sufficient training data for diverse application domains on-the-fly is often prohibitive, for problems
short of labeled data, there is strong incentive to establishing effective algorithms to reduce the
labeling consumption, typically by leveraging off-the-shelf labeled data from a different but related
source domain. However, this learning paradigm suffers from the shift in data distributions across
different domains, which poses a major obstacle in adapting predictive models for the target task [1].
Domain adaptation [1] is machine learning under the shift between training and test distributions. A
rich line of approaches to domain adaptation aim to bridge the source and target domains by learning
domain-invariant feature representations without using target labels, so that the classifier learned from
the source domain can be applied to the target domain. Recent studies have shown that deep networks
can learn more transferable features for domain adaptation [2, 3], by disentangling explanatory factors
of variations behind domains. Latest advances have been achieved by embedding domain adaptation
in the pipeline of deep feature learning which can extract domain-invariant representations [4, 5, 6, 7].
The previous deep domain adaptation methods work under the assumption that the source classifier can
be directly transferred to the target domain upon the learned domain-invariant feature representations.
This assumption is rather strong as in practical applications, it is often infeasible to check whether
the source classifier and target classifier can be shared or not. Hence we focus in this paper on a more
general, and safe, domain adaptation scenario in which the source classifier and target classifier differ
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

