Online and Differentially-Private Tensor Decomposition
Animashree Anandkumar
Department of EECS
University of California, Irvine
a.anandkumar@uci.edu

Yining Wang
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
yiningwa@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is an important tool for big data analysis. In this paper,
we resolve many of the key algorithmic questions regarding robustness, memory
efficiency, and differential privacy of tensor decomposition. We propose simple
variants of the tensor power method which enjoy these strong properties. We present
the first guarantees for online tensor power method which has a linear memory
requirement. Moreover, we present a noise calibrated tensor power method with
efficient privacy guarantees. At the heart of all these guarantees lies a careful
perturbation analysis derived in this paper which improves up on the existing
results significantly.
Keywords: Tensor decomposition, tensor power method, online methods, streaming, differential privacy, perturbation analysis.

1

Introduction

In recent years, tensor decomposition has emerged as a powerful tool to solve many challenging
problems in unsupervised [1], supervised [18] and reinforcement learning [4]. Tensors are higher
order extensions of matrices which can reveal far greater information compared to matrices, while
retaining most of the efficiencies of matrix operations [1].
A central task in tensor analysis is the process of decomposing the tensor into its rank-1 components,
which is usually referred to as CP (Candecomp/Parafac) decomposition in the literature. While
decomposition of arbitrary tensors is NP-hard [13], it becomes tractable for the class of tensors
with linearly independent components. Through a simple whitening procedure, such tensors can
be converted to orthogonally decomposable tensors. Tensor power method is a popular method for
computing the decomposition of an orthogonal tensor. It is simple and efficient to implement, and a
natural extension of the matrix power method.
In the absence of noise, the tensor power method correctly recovers the components under a random
initialization followed by deflation. On the other hand, perturbation analysis of tensor power method is
much more delicate compared to the matrix case. This is because the problem of tensor decomposition
is NP-hard, and if a large amount of arbitrary noise is added to an orthogonal tensor, the decomposition
can again become intractable. In [1], guaranteed recovery of components was proven under bounded
noise, and the bound was improved in [2]. In this paper, we significantly improve upon the noise
requirements, i.e. the extent of noise that can be withstood by the tensor power method.
In order for tensor methods to be deployed in large-scale systems, we require fast, parallelizable
and scalable algorithms. To achieve this, we need to avoid the exponential increase in computation
and memory requirements with the order of the tensor; i.e. a naive implementation on a 3rd-order
d-dimensional tensor would require O(d3 ) computation and memory. Instead, we analyze the online
tensor power method that requires only linear (in d) memory and does not form the entire tensor. This
is achieved in settings, where the tensor is an empirical higher order moment, computed from the
stream of data samples. We can avoid explicit construction of the tensor by running online tensor
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

