Kernel Bayesian Inference with
Posterior Regularization

Yang Song† , Jun Zhu‡∗, Yong Ren‡
Dept. of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab; Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu; {dcszj@, renyong15@mails}.tsinghua.edu.cn
†

Abstract
We propose a vector-valued regression problem whose solution is equivalent to the
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) embedding of the Bayesian posterior
distribution. This equivalence provides a new understanding of kernel Bayesian
inference. Moreover, the optimization problem induces a new regularization for the
posterior embedding estimator, which is faster and has comparable performance
to the squared regularization in kernel Bayes’ rule. This regularization coincides
with a former thresholding approach used in kernel POMDPs whose consistency
remains to be established. Our theoretical work solves this open problem and
provides consistency analysis in regression settings. Based on our optimizational
formulation, we propose a flexible Bayesian posterior regularization framework
which for the first time enables us to put regularization at the distribution level.
We apply this method to nonparametric state-space filtering tasks with extremely
nonlinear dynamics and show performance gains over all other baselines.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods have long been effective in generalizing linear statistical approaches to nonlinear
cases by embedding a sample to the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) [1]. In recent years,
the idea has been generalized to embedding probability distributions [2, 3]. Such embeddings of
probability measures are usually called kernel embeddings (a.k.a. kernel means). Moreover, [4, 5, 6]
show that statistical operations of distributions can be realized in RKHS by manipulating kernel
embeddings via linear operators. This approach has been applied to various statistical inference and
learning problems, including training hidden Markov models (HMM) [7], belief propagation (BP)
in tree graphical models [8], planning Markov decision processes (MDP) [9] and partially observed
Markov decision processes (POMDP) [10].
One of the key workhorses in the above applications is the kernel Bayes’ rule [5], which establishes
the relation among the RKHS representations of the priors, likelihood functions and posterior
distributions. Despite empirical success, the characterization of kernel Bayes’ rule remains largely
incomplete. For example, it is unclear how the estimators of the posterior distribution embeddings
relate to optimizers of some loss functions, though the vanilla Bayes’ rule has a nice connection [11].
This makes generalizing the results especially difficult and hinters the intuitive understanding of
kernel Bayes’ rule.
To alleviate this weakness, we propose a vector-valued regression [12] problem whose optimizer
is the posterior distribution embedding. This new formulation is inspired by the progress in two
fields: 1) the alternative characterization of conditional embeddings as regressors [13], and 2) the
∗

Corresponding author.

