“Short-Dot”: Computing Large Linear Transforms
Distributedly Using Coded Short Dot Products

Sanghamitra Dutta
Carnegie Mellon University
sanghamd@andrew.cmu.edu

Viveck Cadambe
Pennsylvania State University
viveck@engr.psu.edu

Pulkit Grover
Carnegie Mellon University
pgrover@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Faced with saturation of Moore’s law and increasing size and dimension of data,
system designers have increasingly resorted to parallel and distributed computing
to reduce computation time of machine-learning algorithms. However, distributed
computing is often bottle necked by a small fraction of slow processors called
“stragglers” that reduce the speed of computation because the fusion node has
to wait for all processors to complete their processing. To combat the effect
of stragglers, recent literature proposes introducing redundancy in computations
across processors, e.g., using repetition-based strategies or erasure codes. The
fusion node can exploit this redundancy by completing the computation using
outputs from only a subset of the processors, ignoring the stragglers. In this paper,
we propose a novel technique – that we call “Short-Dot” – to introduce redundant
computations in a coding theory inspired fashion, for computing linear transforms
of long vectors. Instead of computing long dot products as required in the original
linear transform, we construct a larger number of redundant and short dot products
that can be computed more efficiently at individual processors. Further, only a
subset of these short dot products are required at the fusion node to finish the
computation successfully. We demonstrate through probabilistic analysis as well
as experiments on computing clusters that Short-Dot offers significant speed-up
compared to existing techniques. We also derive trade-offs between the length of
the dot-products and the resilience to stragglers (number of processors required to
finish), for any such strategy and compare it to that achieved by our strategy.

1

Introduction

This work proposes a coding-theory inspired computation technique for speeding up computing
linear transforms of high-dimensional data by distributing it across multiple processing units that
compute shorter dot products. Our main focus is on addressing the “straggler effect,” i.e., the problem
of delays caused by a few slow processors that bottleneck the entire computation. To address this
problem, we provide techniques (building on [1] [2] [3] [4] [5]) that introduce redundancy in the
computation by designing a novel error-correction mechanism that allows the size of individual dot
products computed at each processor to be shorter than the length of the input.
The problem of computing linear transforms of high-dimensional vectors is “the" critical step [6] in
several machine learning and signal processing applications. Dimensionality reduction techniques
such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), taking random
projections, require the computation of short and fat linear transforms on high-dimensional data.
Linear transforms are the building blocks of solutions to various machine learning problems, e.g.,
regression and classification etc., and are also used in acquiring and pre-processing the data through
Fourier transforms, wavelet transforms, filtering, etc. Fast and reliable computation of linear transforms are thus a necessity for low-latency inference [6]. Due to saturation of Moore’s law, increasing
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

