Towards Unifying Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
and Slice Sampling
Yizhe Zhang, Xiangyu Wang, Changyou Chen, Ricardo Henao, Kai Fan, Lawrence Carin
Duke University
Durham, NC, 27708
{yz196,xw56,changyou.chen, ricardo.henao, kf96 , lcarin} @duke.edu

Abstract
We unify slice sampling and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) sampling, demonstrating their connection via the Hamiltonian-Jacobi equation from Hamiltonian
mechanics. This insight enables extension of HMC and slice sampling to a broader
family of samplers, called Monomial Gamma Samplers (MGS). We provide a
theoretical analysis of the mixing performance of such samplers, proving that in
the limit of a single parameter, the MGS draws decorrelated samples from the
desired target distribution. We further show that as this parameter tends toward this
limit, performance gains are achieved at a cost of increasing numerical difficulty
and some practical convergence issues. Our theoretical results are validated with
synthetic data and real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling [1] stands as a fundamental approach for probabilistic
inference in many computational statistical problems. In MCMC one typically seeks to design
methods to efficiently draw samples from an unnormalized density function. Two popular auxiliaryvariable sampling schemes for this task are Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [2, 3] and the slice
sampler [4]. HMC exploits gradient information to propose samples along a trajectory that follows
Hamiltonian dynamics [3], introducing momentum as an auxiliary variable. Extending the random
proposal associated with Metropolis-Hastings sampling [4], HMC is often able to propose large
moves with acceptance rates close to one [2]. Recent attempts toward improving HMC have leveraged
geometric manifold information [5] and have used better numerical integrators [6]. Limitations of
HMC include being sensitive to parameter tuning and being restricted to continuous distributions.
These issues can be partially solved by using adaptive approaches [7, 8], and by transforming sampling
from discrete distributions into sampling from continuous ones [9, 10].
Seemingly distinct from HMC, the slice sampler [4] alternates between drawing conditional samples
based on a target distribution and a uniformly distributed slice variable (the auxiliary variable). One
problem with the slice sampler is the difficulty of solving for the slice interval, i.e., the domain of
the uniform distribution, especially in high dimensions. As a consequence, adaptive methods are
often applied [4]. Alternatively, one recent attempt to perform efficient slice sampling on latent
Gaussian models samples from a high-dimensional elliptical curve parameterized by a single scalar
[11]. It has been shown that in some cases slice sampling is more efficient than Gibbs sampling and
Metropolis-Hastings, due to the adaptability of the sampler to the scale of the region currently being
sampled [4].
Despite the success of slice sampling and HMC, little research has been performed to investigate
their connections. In this paper we use the Hamilton-Jacobi equation from classical mechanics to
show that slice sampling is equivalent to HMC with a (simply) generalized kinetic function. Further,
we also show that different settings of the HMC kinetic function correspond to generalized slice
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

