A Comprehensive Linear Speedup Analysis for
Asynchronous Stochastic Parallel Optimization from
Zeroth-Order to First-Order
Xiangru Lian* , Huan Zhang† , Cho-Jui Hsieh‡ , Yijun Huang* , and Ji Liu*
∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, USA
†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, USA
xiangru@yandex.com, victzhang@gmail.com, chohsieh@ucdavis.edu,
huangyj0@gmail.com, ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Abstract
Asynchronous parallel optimization received substantial successes and extensive
attention recently. One of core theoretical questions is how much speedup (or
benefit) the asynchronous parallelization can bring to us. This paper provides a
comprehensive and generic analysis to study the speedup property for a broad
range of asynchronous parallel stochastic algorithms from the zeroth order to the
first order methods. Our result recovers or improves existing analysis on special
cases, provides more insights for understanding the asynchronous parallel behaviors, and suggests a novel asynchronous parallel zeroth order method for the first
time. Our experiments provide novel applications of the proposed asynchronous
parallel zeroth order method on hyper parameter tuning and model blending problems.

1

Introduction

Asynchronous parallel optimization received substantial successes and extensive attention recently,
for example, [5, 25, 31, 33, 34, 37]. It has been used to solve various machine learning problems,
such as deep learning [4, 7, 26, 36], matrix completion [25, 28, 34], SVM [15], linear systems [3, 21],
PCA [10], and linear programming [32]. Its main advantage over the synchronous parallel optimization is avoiding the synchronization cost, so it minimizes the system overheads and maximizes the
efficiency of all computation workers.
One of core theoretical questions is how much speedup (or benefit) the asynchronous parallelization
can bring to us, that is, how much time can we save by employing more computation resources?
More precisely, people are interested in the running time speedup (RTS) with T workers:
RTS(T ) =

running time using a single worker
.
running time using T workers

Since in the asynchronous parallelism all workers keep busy, RTS can be measured roughly by the
computational complexity speedup (CCS) with T workers1
CCS(T ) =

total computational complexity using a single worker
× T.
total computational complexity using T workers

In this paper, we are mainly interested in the conditions to ensure the linear speedup property. More
specifically, what is the upper bound on T to ensure CCS(T ) = Θ(T )?
Existing studies on special cases, such as asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (ASGD) and
asynchronous stochastic coordinate descent (ASCD), have revealed some clues for what factors can
1

For simplicity, we assume that the communication cost is not dominant throughout this paper.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

