MoCap-guided Data Augmentation
for 3D Pose Estimation in the Wild
Grégory Rogez
Cordelia Schmid
Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, France

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D human pose estimation in the wild. A significant challenge is the lack of training data, i.e., 2D images of humans annotated
with 3D poses. Such data is necessary to train state-of-the-art CNN architectures.
Here, we propose a solution to generate a large set of photorealistic synthetic images of humans with 3D pose annotations. We introduce an image-based synthesis
engine that artificially augments a dataset of real images with 2D human pose
annotations using 3D Motion Capture (MoCap) data. Given a candidate 3D pose
our algorithm selects for each joint an image whose 2D pose locally matches the
projected 3D pose. The selected images are then combined to generate a new
synthetic image by stitching local image patches in a kinematically constrained
manner. The resulting images are used to train an end-to-end CNN for full-body
3D pose estimation. We cluster the training data into a large number of pose classes
and tackle pose estimation as a K-way classification problem. Such an approach is
viable only with large training sets such as ours. Our method outperforms the state
of the art in terms of 3D pose estimation in controlled environments (Human3.6M)
and shows promising results for in-the-wild images (LSP). This demonstrates that
CNNs trained on artificial images generalize well to real images.

1

Introduction

Convolutionnal Neural Networks (CNN) have been very successful for many different tasks in
computer vision. However, training these deep architectures requires large scale datasets which are
not always available or easily collectable. This is particularly the case for 3D human pose estimation,
for which an accurate annotation of 3D articulated poses in large collections of real images is nontrivial: annotating 2D images with 3D pose information is impractical [6] while large scale 3D pose
capture is only available through marker-based systems in constrained environments [13]. The images
captured in such conditions do not match well real environments. This has limited the development
of end-to-end CNN architectures for in-the-wild 3D pose understanding.
Learning architectures usually augment existing training data by applying synthetic perturbations
to the original images, e.g. jittering exemplars or applying more complex affine or perspective
transformations [15]. Such data augmentation has proven to be a crucial stage, especially for training
deep architectures. Recent work [14, 23, 34, 40] has introduced the use of data synthesis as a solution
to train CNNs when only limited data is available. Synthesis can potentially provide infinite training
data by rendering 3D CAD models from any camera viewpoint [23, 34, 40]. Fisher et al [8] generate
a synthetic “Flying Chairs” dataset to learn optical flow with a CNN and show that networks trained
on this unrealistic data still generalize very well to existing datasets. In the context of scene text
recognition, Jaderberg et al. [14] trained solely on data produced by a synthetic text generation
engine. In this case, the synthetic data is highly realistic and sufficient to replace real data. Although
synthesis seems like an appealing solution, there often exists a large domain shift from synthetic to
real data [23]. Integrating a human 3D model in a given background in a realistic way is not trivial.
Rendering a collection of photo-realistic images (in terms of color, texture, context, shadow) that
would cover the variations in pose, body shape, clothing and scenes is a challenging task.
Instead of rendering a human 3D model, we propose an image-based synthesis approach that makes
use of Motion Capture (MoCap) data to augment an existing dataset of real images with 2D pose

