Scaling Memory-Augmented Neural Networks with
Sparse Reads and Writes
Jack W Rae⇤
jwrae

Jonathan J Hunt⇤
jjhunt

Greg Wayne
gregwayne

Tim Harley
tharley

Alex Graves
gravesa

Ivo Danihelka
danihelka

Andrew Senior
andrewsenior

Timothy P Lillicrap
countzero

Google DeepMind
@google.com

Abstract
Neural networks augmented with external memory have the ability to learn algorithmic solutions to complex tasks. These models appear promising for applications
such as language modeling and machine translation. However, they scale poorly in
both space and time as the amount of memory grows — limiting their applicability
to real-world domains. Here, we present an end-to-end differentiable memory
access scheme, which we call Sparse Access Memory (SAM), that retains the
representational power of the original approaches whilst training efficiently with
very large memories. We show that SAM achieves asymptotic lower bounds in
space and time complexity, and find that an implementation runs 1,000⇥ faster
and with 3,000⇥ less physical memory than non-sparse models. SAM learns with
comparable data efficiency to existing models on a range of synthetic tasks and
one-shot Omniglot character recognition, and can scale to tasks requiring 100,000s
of time steps and memories. As well, we show how our approach can be adapted
for models that maintain temporal associations between memories, as with the
recently introduced Differentiable Neural Computer.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks, such as the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [11], have proven to be
powerful sequence learning models [6, 18]. However, one limitation of the LSTM architecture is
that the number of parameters grows proportionally to the square of the size of the memory, making
them unsuitable for problems requiring large amounts of long-term memory. Recent approaches,
such as Neural Turing Machines (NTMs) [7] and Memory Networks [21], have addressed this issue
by decoupling the memory capacity from the number of model parameters. We refer to this class
of models as memory augmented neural networks (MANNs). External memory allows MANNs to
learn algorithmic solutions to problems that have eluded the capabilities of traditional LSTMs, and to
generalize to longer sequence lengths. Nonetheless, MANNs have had limited success in real world
application.
A significant difficulty in training these models results from their smooth read and write operations,
which incur linear computational overhead on the number of memories stored per time step of
training. Even worse, they require duplication of the entire memory at each time step to perform
backpropagation through time (BPTT). To deal with sufficiently complex problems, such as processing
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

