CRF-CNN: Modeling Structured Information in
Human Pose Estimation
Xiao Chu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xchu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Wanli Ouyang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
wlouyang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Hongsheng Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Xiaogang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved great success. On
the other hand, modeling structural information has been proved critical in many
vision problems. It is of great interest to integrate them effectively. In a classical
neural network, there is no message passing between neurons in the same layer. In
this paper, we propose a CRF-CNN framework which can simultaneously model
structural information in both output and hidden feature layers in a probabilistic way,
and it is applied to human pose estimation. A message passing scheme is proposed,
so that in various layers each body joint receives messages from all the others
in an efficient way. Such message passing can be implemented with convolution
between features maps in the same layer, and it is also integrated with feedforward
propagation in neural networks. Finally, a neural network implementation of endto-end learning CRF-CNN is provided. Its effectiveness is demonstrated through
experiments on two benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

A lot of efforts have been devoted to structure design of convolutional neural network (CNN). They
can be divided into two groups. One is to achieve higher expressive power by making CNN deeper
[19, 10, 20]. The other is to model structures among features and outputs, either as post processing
[6, 2] or as extra information to guide the learning of CNN [29, 22, 24]. They are complementary.
Human pose estimation is to estimate body joint locations from 2D images, which could be applied to
assist other tasks such as [4, 14, 26] The very first attempt adopting CNN for human pose estimation
is DeepPose [23]. It used CNN to regress joint locations repeatedly without directly modeling the
output structure. However, the prediction of body joint locations relies both on their own appearance
scores and the prediction of other joints. Hence, the output space for human pose estimation is
structured. Later, Chen and Yuille [2] used a graphical model for the spatial relationship between
body joints and used it as post processing after CNN. Learning CNN features and structured output
together was proposed in [22, 21, 24]. Researchers were also aware of the importance of introducing
structures at the feature level [3]. However, the design of CNN for structured output and structured
features was heuristic, without principled guidance on how information should be passed. As deep
models are shown effective for many practical applications, researchers on statistical learning and
deep learning try to use probabilistic models to illustrate the ideas behind deep models [9, 7, 29].
Motivated by these works, we provide a CRF framework that models structures in both output and
hidden feature layers in CNN, called CRF-CNN. It provides us with a principled illustration on how
to model structured information at various levels in a probabilistic way and what are the assumptions
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

