Avoiding Imposters and Delinquents: Adversarial
Crowdsourcing and Peer Prediction

Jacob Steinhardt
Stanford University

Gregory Valiant
Stanford University

Moses Charikar
Stanford University

Abstract
We consider a crowdsourcing model in which n workers are asked to rate the quality
of n items previously generated by other workers. An unknown set of αn workers
generate reliable ratings, while the remaining workers may behave arbitrarily and
possibly adversarially. The manager of the experiment can also manually evaluate
the quality of a small number of items, and wishes to curate together almost all
of the high-quality items with at most an  fraction of low-quality items. Perhaps
surprisingly, we show that this is possible with an amount of work required of the
manager,
 and each
 worker, that does not scale
 with
 n: the dataset can be curated
1
1
with Õ βα3 4 ratings per worker, and Õ β2 ratings by the manager, where β
is the fraction of high-quality items. Our results extend to the more general setting
of peer prediction, including peer grading in online classrooms.

1

Introduction

How can we reliably obtain information from humans, given that the humans themselves are unreliable, and might even have incentives to mislead us? Versions of this question arise in crowdsourcing
(Vuurens et al., 2011), collaborative knowledge generation (Priedhorsky et al., 2007), peer grading
in online classrooms (Piech et al., 2013; Kulkarni et al., 2015), aggregation of customer reviews
(Harmon, 2004), and the generation/curation of large datasets (Deng et al., 2009). A key challenge
is to ensure high information quality despite the fact that many people interacting with the system
may be unreliable or even adversarial. This is particularly relevant when raters have an incentive to
collude and cheat as in the setting of peer grading, as well as for reviews on sites like Amazon and
Yelp, where artists and firms are incentivized to manufacture positive reviews for their own products
and negative reviews for their rivals (Harmon, 2004; Mayzlin et al., 2012).
One approach to ensuring quality is to use gold sets — questions where the answer is known, which
can be used to assess reliability on unknown questions. However, this is overly constraining — it
does not make sense for open-ended tasks such as knowledge generation on wikipedia, nor even for
crowdsourcing tasks such as “translate this paragraph” or “draw an interesting picture” where there
are different equally good answers. This approach may also fail in settings, such as peer grading in
massive online open courses, where students might collude to inflate their grades.
In this work, we consider the challenge of using crowdsourced human ratings to accurately and
efficiently evaluate a large dataset of content. In some settings, such as peer grading, the end goal
is to obtain the accurate evaluation of each datum; in other settings, such as the curation of a large
dataset, accurate evaluations could be leveraged to select a high-quality subset of a larger set of
variable-quality (perhaps crowd-generated) data.
There are several confounding difficulties that arise in extracting accurate evaluations. First, many
raters may be unreliable and give evaluations that are uncorrelated with the actual item quality;
second, some reliable raters might be harsher or more lenient than others; third, some items may be
harder to evaluate than others and so error rates could vary from item to item, even among reliable
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

