Tree-Structured Reinforcement Learning for
Sequential Object Localization

Zequn Jie1 , Xiaodan Liang2 , Jiashi Feng1 , Xiaojie Jin1 , Wen Feng Lu1 , Shuicheng Yan1
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Abstract
Existing object proposal algorithms usually search for possible object regions over
multiple locations and scales separately, which ignore the interdependency among
different objects and deviate from the human perception procedure. To incorporate
global interdependency between objects into object localization, we propose an effective Tree-structured Reinforcement Learning (Tree-RL) approach to sequentially
search for objects by fully exploiting both the current observation and historical
search paths. The Tree-RL approach learns multiple searching policies through
maximizing the long-term reward that reflects localization accuracies over all the
objects. Starting with taking the entire image as a proposal, the Tree-RL approach
allows the agent to sequentially discover multiple objects via a tree-structured
traversing scheme. Allowing multiple near-optimal policies, Tree-RL offers more
diversity in search paths and is able to find multiple objects with a single feedforward pass. Therefore, Tree-RL can better cover different objects with various
scales which is quite appealing in the context of object proposal. Experiments on
PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 validate the effectiveness of the Tree-RL, which can
achieve comparable recalls with current object proposal algorithms via much fewer
candidate windows.

1

Introduction

Modern state-of-the-art object detection systems [1, 2] usually adopt a two-step pipeline: extract
a set of class-independent object proposals at first and then classify these object proposals with a
pre-trained classifier. Existing object proposal algorithms usually search for possible object regions
over dense locations and scales separately [3, 4, 5]. However, the critical correlation cues among
different proposals (e.g., relative spatial layouts or semantic correlations) are often ignored. This
in fact deviates from the human perception process — as claimed in [6], humans do not search
for objects within each local image patch separately, but start with perceiving the whole scene and
successively explore a small number of regions of interest via sequential attention patterns. Inspired
by this observation, extracting one object proposal should incorporate the global dependencies of
proposals by considering the cues from the previous predicted proposals and future possible proposals
jointly.
In this paper, in order to fully exploit global interdependency among objects, we propose a novel
Tree-structured Reinforcement Learning (Tree-RL) approach that learns to localize multiple objects
sequentially based on both the current observation and historical search paths. Starting from the
entire image, the Tree-RL approach sequentially acts on the current search window either to refine
the object location prediction or discover new objects by following a learned policy. In particular,
the localization agent is trained by deep RL to learn the policy that maximizes a long-term reward
for localizing all the objects, providing better global reasoning. For better training the agent, we
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

