An Online Sequence-to-Sequence Model Using Partial
Conditioning

Navdeep Jaitly
Google Brain
ndjaitly@google.com

David Sussillo
Google Brain
sussillo@google.com

Oriol Vinyals
Google DeepMind
vinyals@google.com

Ilya Sutskever
Open AI∗
ilyasu@openai.com

Quoc V. Le
Google Brain
qvl@google.com
Samy Bengio
Google Brain
bengio@google.com

Abstract
Sequence-to-sequence models have achieved impressive results on various tasks.
However, they are unsuitable for tasks that require incremental predictions to be
made as more data arrives or tasks that have long input sequences and output
sequences. This is because they generate an output sequence conditioned on an
entire input sequence. In this paper, we present a Neural Transducer that can make
incremental predictions as more input arrives, without redoing the entire computation. Unlike sequence-to-sequence models, the Neural Transducer computes the
next-step distribution conditioned on the partially observed input sequence and
the partially generated sequence. At each time step, the transducer can decide to
emit zero to many output symbols. The data can be processed using an encoder
and presented as input to the transducer. The discrete decision to emit a symbol
at every time step makes it difficult to learn with conventional backpropagation.
It is however possible to train the transducer by using a dynamic programming
algorithm to generate target discrete decisions. Our experiments show that the
Neural Transducer works well in settings where it is required to produce output
predictions as data come in. We also find that the Neural Transducer performs well
for long sequences even when attention mechanisms are not used.

1

Introduction

The recently introduced sequence-to-sequence model has shown success in many tasks that map
sequences to sequences, e.g., translation, speech recognition, image captioning and dialogue modeling [17, 4, 1, 6, 3, 20, 18, 15, 19]. However, this method is unsuitable for tasks where it is important
to produce outputs as the input sequence arrives. Speech recognition is an example of such an online
task – users prefer seeing an ongoing transcription of speech over receiving it at the “end” of an
utterance. Similarly, instant translation systems would be much more effective if audio was translated
online, rather than after entire utterances. This limitation of the sequence-to-sequence model is due
to the fact that output predictions are conditioned on the entire input sequence.
In this paper, we present a Neural Transducer, a more general class of sequence-to-sequence learning
models. Neural Transducer can produce chunks of outputs (possibly of zero length) as blocks of inputs
arrive - thus satisfying the condition of being “online” (see Figure 1(b) for an overview). The model
generates outputs for each block by using a transducer RNN that implements a sequence-to-sequence
model. The inputs to the transducer RNN come from two sources: the encoder RNN and its own
∗

Work done at Google Brain

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

