Data Programming:
Creating Large Training Sets, Quickly

Alexander Ratner, Christopher De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, Christopher Ré
Stanford University
{ajratner,cdesa,senwu,dselsam,chrismre}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Large labeled training sets are the critical building blocks of supervised learning
methods and are key enablers of deep learning techniques. For some applications,
creating labeled training sets is the most time-consuming and expensive part of
applying machine learning. We therefore propose a paradigm for the programmatic
creation of training sets called data programming in which users express weak
supervision strategies or domain heuristics as labeling functions, which are programs that label subsets of the data, but that are noisy and may conflict. We show
that by explicitly representing this training set labeling process as a generative
model, we can “denoise” the generated training set, and establish theoretically
that we can recover the parameters of these generative models in a handful of
settings. We then show how to modify a discriminative loss function to make it
noise-aware, and demonstrate our method over a range of discriminative models
including logistic regression and LSTMs. Experimentally, on the 2014 TAC-KBP
Slot Filling challenge, we show that data programming would have led to a new
winning score, and also show that applying data programming to an LSTM model
leads to a TAC-KBP score almost 6 F1 points over a state-of-the-art LSTM baseline
(and into second place in the competition). Additionally, in initial user studies we
observed that data programming may be an easier way for non-experts to create
machine learning models when training data is limited or unavailable.

1

Introduction

Many of the major machine learning breakthroughs of the last decade have been catalyzed by the
release of a new labeled training dataset.1 Supervised learning approaches that use such datasets have
increasingly become key building blocks of applications throughout science and industry. This trend
has also been fueled by the recent empirical success of automated feature generation approaches,
notably deep learning methods such as long short term memory (LSTM) networks [14], which ameliorate the burden of feature engineering given large enough labeled training sets. For many real-world
applications, however, large hand-labeled training sets do not exist, and are prohibitively expensive to create due to requirements that labelers be experts in the application domain. Furthermore,
applications’ needs often change, necessitating new or modified training sets.
To help reduce the cost of training set creation, we propose data programming, a paradigm for the
programmatic creation and modeling of training datasets. Data programming provides a simple,
unifying framework for weak supervision, in which training labels are noisy and may be from
multiple, potentially overlapping sources. In data programming, users encode this weak supervision
in the form of labeling functions, which are user-defined programs that each provide a label for
some subset of the data, and collectively generate a large but potentially overlapping set of training
labels. Many different weak supervision approaches can be expressed as labeling functions, such
1

http://www.spacemachine.net/views/2016/3/datasets-over-algorithms

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

