Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Dylan Hadfield-Menell∗

Anca Dragan

Pieter Abbeel

Stuart Russell

Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94709

Abstract
For an autonomous system to be helpful to humans and to pose no unwarranted
risks, it needs to align its values with those of the humans in its environment in
such a way that its actions contribute to the maximization of value for the humans.
We propose a formal definition of the value alignment problem as cooperative
inverse reinforcement learning (CIRL). A CIRL problem is a cooperative, partialinformation game with two agents, human and robot; both are rewarded according
to the human’s reward function, but the robot does not initially know what this
is. In contrast to classical IRL, where the human is assumed to act optimally in
isolation, optimal CIRL solutions produce behaviors such as active teaching, active
learning, and communicative actions that are more effective in achieving value
alignment. We show that computing optimal joint policies in CIRL games can be
reduced to solving a POMDP, prove that optimality in isolation is suboptimal in
CIRL, and derive an approximate CIRL algorithm.

1

Introduction

“If we use, to achieve our purposes, a mechanical agency with whose operation we cannot interfere
effectively . . . we had better be quite sure that the purpose put into the machine is the purpose which
we really desire.” So wrote Norbert Wiener (1960) in one of the earliest explanations of the problems
that arise when a powerful autonomous system operates with an incorrect objective. This value
alignment problem is far from trivial. Humans are prone to mis-stating their objectives, which can
lead to unexpected implementations. In the myth of King Midas, the main character learns that
wishing for ‘everything he touches to turn to gold’ leads to disaster. In a reinforcement learning
context, Russell & Norvig (2010) describe a seemingly reasonable, but incorrect, reward function for
a vacuum robot: if we reward the action of cleaning up dirt, the optimal policy causes the robot to
repeatedly dump and clean up the same dirt.
A solution to the value alignment problem has long-term implications for the future of AI and its
relationship to humanity (Bostrom, 2014) and short-term utility for the design of usable AI systems.
Giving robots the right objectives and enabling them to make the right trade-offs is crucial for
self-driving cars, personal assistants, and human–robot interaction more broadly.
The field of inverse reinforcement learning or IRL (Russell, 1998; Ng & Russell, 2000; Abbeel
& Ng, 2004) is certainly relevant to the value alignment problem. An IRL algorithm infers the
reward function of an agent from observations of the agent’s behavior, which is assumed to be
optimal (or approximately so). One might imagine that IRL provides a simple solution to the value
alignment problem: the robot observes human behavior, learns the human reward function, and
behaves according to that function. This simple idea has two flaws. The first flaw is obvious: we
don’t want the robot to adopt the human reward function as its own. For example, human behavior
(especially in the morning) often conveys a desire for coffee, and the robot can learn this with IRL,
but we don’t want the robot to want coffee! This flaw is easily fixed: we need to formulate the value
∗

{dhm, anca, pabbeel, russell}@cs.berkeley.edu

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

