Conditional Generative Moment-Matching Networks
Yong Ren, Jialian Li, Yucen Luo, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab; Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{renyong15, luoyc15, jl12}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) has been successfully applied to learn deep
generative models for characterizing a joint distribution of variables via kernel
mean embedding. In this paper, we present conditional generative momentmatching networks (CGMMN), which learn a conditional distribution given some
input variables based on a conditional maximum mean discrepancy (CMMD) criterion. The learning is performed by stochastic gradient descent with the gradient calculated by back-propagation. We evaluate CGMMN on a wide range of
tasks, including predictive modeling, contextual generation, and Bayesian dark
knowledge, which distills knowledge from a Bayesian model by learning a relatively small CGMMN student network. Our results demonstrate competitive performance in all the tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models (DGMs) characterize the distribution of observations with a multilayered
structure of hidden variables under nonlinear transformations. Among various deep learning methods, DGMs are natural choice for those tasks that require probabilistic reasoning and uncertainty
estimation, such as image generation [1], multimodal learning [30], and missing data imputation.
Recently, the predictive power, which was often shown inferior to pure recognition networks (e.g.,
deep convolutional networks), has also been significantly improved by employing the discriminative
max-margin learning [18].
For the arguably more challenging unsupervised learning, [5] presents a generative adversarial network (GAN), which adopts a game-theoretical min-max optimization formalism. GAN has been
extended with success in various tasks [21, 1]. However, the min-max formalism is often hard to
solve. The recent work [19, 3] presents generative moment matching networks (GMMN), which has
a simpler objective function than GAN while retaining the advantages of deep learning. GMMN defines a generative model by sampling from some simple distribution (e.g., uniform) followed through
a parametric deep network. To learn the parameters, GMMN adopts maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) [7], a moment matching criterion where kernel mean embedding techniques are used to
avoid unnecessary assumptions of the distributions. Back-propagation can be used to calculate the
gradient as long as the kernel function is smooth.
A GMMN network estimates the joint distribution of a set of variables. However, we are more
interested in a conditional distribution in many cases, including (1) predictive modeling: compared
to a generative model that defines the joint distribution p(x, y) of input data x and response variable
y, a conditional model p(y|x) is often more direct without unnecessary assumptions on modeling x,
and leads to better performance with fewer training examples [23, 16]; (2) contextual generation: in
some cases, we are interested in generating samples based on some context, such as class labels [21],
visual attributes [32] or the input information in cross-modal generation (e.g., from image to text [31]
∗

Corresponding author

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

