Weight Normalization: A Simple Reparameterization
to Accelerate Training of Deep Neural Networks

Tim Salimans
OpenAI
tim@openai.com

Diederik P. Kingma
OpenAI
dpkingma@openai.com

Abstract
We present weight normalization: a reparameterization of the weight vectors
in a neural network that decouples the length of those weight vectors from their
direction. By reparameterizing the weights in this way we improve the conditioning
of the optimization problem and we speed up convergence of stochastic gradient
descent. Our reparameterization is inspired by batch normalization but does not
introduce any dependencies between the examples in a minibatch. This means
that our method can also be applied successfully to recurrent models such as
LSTMs and to noise-sensitive applications such as deep reinforcement learning
or generative models, for which batch normalization is less well suited. Although
our method is much simpler, it still provides much of the speed-up of full batch
normalization. In addition, the computational overhead of our method is lower,
permitting more optimization steps to be taken in the same amount of time. We
demonstrate the usefulness of our method on applications in supervised image
recognition, generative modelling, and deep reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Recent successes in deep learning have shown that neural networks trained by first-order gradient
based optimization are capable of achieving amazing results in diverse domains like computer vision,
speech recognition, and language modelling [7]. However, it is also well known that the practical
success of first-order gradient based optimization is highly dependent on the curvature of the objective
that is optimized. If the condition number of the Hessian matrix of the objective at the optimum is
low, the problem is said to exhibit pathological curvature, and first-order gradient descent will have
trouble making progress [22, 32]. The amount of curvature, and thus the success of our optimization,
is not invariant to reparameterization [1]: there may be multiple equivalent ways of parameterizing
the same model, some of which are much easier to optimize than others. Finding good ways of
parameterizing neural networks is thus an important problem in deep learning.
While the architectures of neural networks differ widely across applications, they are typically mostly
composed of conceptually simple computational building blocks sometimes called neurons: each such
neuron computes a weighted sum over its inputs and adds a bias term, followed by the application of
an elementwise nonlinear transformation. Improving the general optimizability of deep networks is a
challenging task [6], but since many neural architectures share these basic building blocks, improving
these building blocks improves the performance of a very wide range of model architectures and
could thus be very useful.
Several authors have recently developed methods to improve the conditioning of the cost gradient for
general neural network architectures. One approach is to explicitly left multiply the cost gradient
with an approximate inverse of the Fisher information matrix, thereby obtaining an approximately
whitened natural gradient. Such an approximate inverse can for example be obtained by using a
Kronecker factored approximation to the Fisher matrix and inverting it (KFAC, [23]), by using an
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

