Edge-exchangeable graphs and sparsity

Diana Cai
Dept. of Statistics, U. Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
dcai@uchicago.edu

Trevor Campbell
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
tdjc@mit.edu

Tamara Broderick
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
tbroderick@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Many popular network models rely on the assumption of (vertex) exchangeability,
in which the distribution of the graph is invariant to relabelings of the vertices.
However, the Aldous-Hoover theorem guarantees that these graphs are dense or
empty with probability one, whereas many real-world graphs are sparse. We
present an alternative notion of exchangeability for random graphs, which we call
edge exchangeability, in which the distribution of a graph sequence is invariant
to the order of the edges. We demonstrate that edge-exchangeable models, unlike
models that are traditionally vertex exchangeable, can exhibit sparsity. To do
so, we outline a general framework for graph generative models; by contrast to
the pioneering work of Caron and Fox [12], models within our framework are
stationary across steps of the graph sequence. In particular, our model grows the
graph by instantiating more latent atoms of a single random measure as the dataset
size increases, rather than adding new atoms to the measure.

1

Introduction

In recent years, network data have appeared in a growing number of applications, such as online
social networks, biological networks, and networks representing communication patterns. As a result,
there is growing interest in developing models for such data and studying their properties. Crucially,
individual network data sets also continue to increase in size; we typically assume that the number of
vertices is unbounded as time progresses. We say a graph sequence is dense if the number of edges
grows quadratically in the number of vertices, and a graph sequence is sparse if the number of edges
grows sub-quadratically as a function of the number of vertices. Sparse graph sequences are more
representative of real-world graph behavior. However, many popular network models (see, e.g., Lloyd
et al. [19] for an extensive list) share the undesirable scaling property that they yield dense sequences
of graphs with probability one. The poor scaling properties of these models can be traced back to a
seemingly innocent assumption: that the vertices in the model are exchangeable, that is, any finite
permutation of the rows and columns of the graph adjacency matrix does not change the distribution
of the graph. Under this assumption, the Aldous-Hoover theorem [1, 16] implies that such models
generate dense or empty graphs with probability one [20].
This fundamental model misspecification motivates the development of new models that can achieve
sparsity. One recent focus has been on models in which an additional parameter is employed to
uniformly decrease the probabilities of edges as the network grows (e.g., Bollobás et al. [3], Borgs
et al. [4, 5], Wolfe and Olhede [24]). While these models allow sparse graph sequences, the sequences
are no longer projective. In projective sequences, vertices and edges are added to a graph as a
graph sequence progresses—whereas in the models above, there is not generally any strict subgraph
relationship between earlier graphs and later graphs in the sequence. Projectivity is natural in
streaming modeling. For instance, we may wish to capture new users joining a social network and
new connections being made among existing users—or new employees joining a company and new
communications between existing employees.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

