“Congruent” and “Opposite” Neurons: Sisters for
Multisensory Integration and Segregation

Wen-Hao Zhang1,2 ∗ , He Wang1 , K. Y. Michael Wong1 , Si Wu2
wenhaoz@ust.hk, hwangaa@connect.ust.hk, phkywong@ust.hk, wusi@bnu.edu.cn
1
Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong.
2
State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, and
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, China.

Abstract
Experiments reveal that in the dorsal medial superior temporal (MSTd) and the
ventral intraparietal (VIP) areas, where visual and vestibular cues are integrated
to infer heading direction, there are two types of neurons with roughly the same
number. One is “congruent" cells, whose preferred heading directions are similar in
response to visual and vestibular cues; and the other is “opposite" cells, whose preferred heading directions are nearly “opposite" (with an offset of 180◦ ) in response
to visual vs. vestibular cues. Congruent neurons are known to be responsible for
cue integration, but the computational role of opposite neurons remains largely
unknown. Here, we propose that opposite neurons may serve to encode the disparity information between cues necessary for multisensory segregation. We build
a computational model composed of two reciprocally coupled modules, MSTd
and VIP, and each module consists of groups of congruent and opposite neurons.
In the model, congruent neurons in two modules are reciprocally connected with
each other in the congruent manner, whereas opposite neurons are reciprocally
connected in the opposite manner. Mimicking the experimental protocol, our model
reproduces the characteristics of congruent and opposite neurons, and demonstrates
that in each module, the sisters of congruent and opposite neurons can jointly
achieve optimal multisensory information integration and segregation. This study
sheds light on our understanding of how the brain implements optimal multisensory
integration and segregation concurrently in a distributed manner.

1

Introduction

Our brain perceives the external world with multiple sensory modalities, including vision, audition,
olfaction, tactile, vestibular perception and so on. These sensory systems extract information
about the environment via different physical means, and they generate complementary cues (neural
representations) about external objects to the multisensory areas. Over the past years, a large volume
of experimental and theoretical studies have focused on investigating how the brain integrates multiple
sensory cues originated from the same object in order to perceive the object reliably in an ambiguous
environment, the so-called multisensory integration. They found that the brain can integrate multiple
cues optimally in a manner close to Bayesian inference, e.g., integrating visual and vestibular cues to
infer heading direction [1] and so on [2–4]. Neural circuit models underlying optimal multisensory
integration have been proposed, including a centralized model in which a dedicated processor receives
and integrates all sensory cues [5, 6], and a decentralized model in which multiple local processors
exchange cue information via reciprocal connections, so that optimal cue integration is achieved at
each local processor [7].
∗

Current address: Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Carnegie Mellon University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

