Active Learning from Imperfect Labelers

Songbai Yan
University of California, San Diego
yansongbai@eng.ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California, San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Tara Javidi
University of California, San Diego
tjavidi@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study active learning where the labeler can not only return incorrect labels but
also abstain from labeling. We consider different noise and abstention conditions
of the labeler. We propose an algorithm which utilizes abstention responses,
and analyze its statistical consistency and query complexity under fairly natural
assumptions on the noise and abstention rate of the labeler. This algorithm is
adaptive in a sense that it can automatically request less queries with a more
informed or less noisy labeler. We couple our algorithm with lower bounds to show
that under some technical conditions, it achieves nearly optimal query complexity.

1

Introduction

In active learning, the learner is given an input space X , a label space L, and a hypothesis class H
such that one of the hypotheses in the class generates ground truth labels. Additionally, the learner
has at its disposal a labeler to which it can pose interactive queries about the labels of examples in
the input space. Note that the labeler may output a noisy version of the ground truth label (a flipped
label). The goal of the learner is to learn a hypothesis in H which is close to the hypothesis that
generates the ground truth labels.
There has been a significant amount of literature on active learning, both theoretical and practical.
Previous theoretical work on active learning has mostly focused on the above basic setting [2, 4,
7, 10, 25] and has developed algorithms under a number of different models of label noise. A
handful of exceptions include [3] which allows class conditional queries, [5] which allows requesting
counterexamples to current version spaces, and [23, 26] where the learner has access to a strong
labeler and one or more weak labelers.
In this paper, we consider a more general setting where, in addition to providing a possibly noisy
label, the labeler can sometimes abstain from labeling. This scenario arises naturally in difficult
labeling tasks and has been considered in computer vision by [11, 15]. Our goal in this paper is to
investigate this problem from a foundational perspective, and explore what kind of conditions are
needed, and how an abstaining labeler can affect properties such as consistency and query complexity
of active learning algorithms.
The setting of active learning with an abstaining noisy labeler was first considered by [24], who
looked at learning binary threshold classifiers based on queries to an labeler whose abstention rate is
higher closer to the decision boundary. They primarily looked at the case when the abstention rate at a
distance ∆ from the decision boundary is less than 1 − Θ(∆α ), and the rate of label flips at the same
distance is less than 12 − Θ(∆β ); under these conditions, they provided an active learning algorithm
that given parameters α and β, outputs a classifier with error ǫ using Õ(ǫ−α−2β ) queries to the labeler.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

