Learning What and Where to Draw

Scott Reed1,∗
reedscot@google.com

Zeynep Akata2
akata@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Santosh Mohan1
santoshm@umich.edu

Samuel Tenka1
samtenka@umich.edu

Bernt Schiele2
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Honglak Lee1
honglak@umich.edu

1

2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have recently demonstrated the capability to synthesize compelling real-world images, such as room interiors, album
covers, manga, faces, birds, and flowers. While existing models can synthesize
images based on global constraints such as a class label or caption, they do not
provide control over pose or object location. We propose a new model, the Generative Adversarial What-Where Network (GAWWN), that synthesizes images
given instructions describing what content to draw in which location. We show
high-quality 128 × 128 image synthesis on the Caltech-UCSD Birds dataset, conditioned on both informal text descriptions and also object location. Our system
exposes control over both the bounding box around the bird and its constituent
parts. By modeling the conditional distributions over part locations, our system
also enables conditioning on arbitrary subsets of parts (e.g. only the beak and tail),
yielding an efficient interface for picking part locations.

1

Introduction

Generating realistic images from informal descriptions would have a wide range of applications.
Modern computer graphics can already generate remarkably realistic scenes, but it still requires the
substantial effort of human designers and developers to bridge the gap between high-level concepts
and the end product of pixel-level details. Fully automating this creative process is currently out of
reach, but deep networks have shown a rapidly-improving ability for controllable image synthesis.
In order for the image-generating system to be useful, it should support high-level control over the
contents of the scene to be generated. For example, a user might provide the category of image to be
generated, e.g. “bird”. In the more general case, the user could provide a textual description like “a
yellow bird with a black head”.
Compelling image synthesis with this level of control has already been demonstrated using convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Radford et al., 2016].
Variational Autoencoders also show some promise for conditional image synthesis, in particular
recurrent versions such as DRAW [Gregor et al., 2015, Mansimov et al., 2016]. However, current
approaches have so far only used simple conditioning variables such as a class label or a non-localized
caption [Reed et al., 2016b], and did not allow for controlling where objects appear in the scene.
To generate more realistic and complex scenes, image synthesis models can benefit from incorporating
a notion of localizable objects. The same types of objects can appear in many locations in different
scales, poses and configurations. This fact can be exploited by separating the questions of “what”
∗

Majority of this work was done while first author was at U. Michigan, but completed while at DeepMind.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

