Designing smoothing functions for improved
worst-case competitive ratio in online optimization

Reza Eghbali
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
eghbali@uw.edu

Maryam Fazel
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mfazel@uw.edu

Abstract
Online optimization covers problems such as online resource allocation, online
bipartite matching, adwords (a central problem in e-commerce and advertising),
and adwords with separable concave returns. We analyze the worst case competitive ratio of two primal-dual algorithms for a class of online convex (conic)
optimization problems that contains the previous examples as special cases defined
on the positive orthant. We derive a sufficient condition on the objective function
that guarantees a constant worst case competitive ratio (greater than or equal to
1
2 ) for monotone objective functions. We provide new examples of online problems on the positive orthant that satisfy the sufficient condition. We show how
smoothing can improve the competitive ratio of these algorithms, and in particular
for separable functions, we show that the optimal smoothing can be derived by
solving a convex optimization problem. This result allows us to directly optimize
the competitive ratio bound over a class of smoothing functions, and hence design
effective smoothing customized for a given cost function.

1

Introduction

Given a proper convex cone K ⊂ Rn , let ψ : K 7→ R be an upper semi-continuous concave function.
Consider the optimization problem
Pm
maximize
ψ ( t=1 At xt )
(1)
subject to
xt ∈ Ft ,
∀t ∈ [m],
where for all t ∈ [m] := {1, 2, . . . , m}, xt ∈ Rl are the optimization variables and Ft are compact
convex constraint sets. We assume At ∈ Rn×l maps Ft to K; for example, when K = Rn+ and
Ft ⊂ Rl+ , this assumption is satisfied if At has nonnegative entries. We consider problem (1) in the
online setting, where it can be viewed as a sequential game between a player (online algorithm) and
an adversary. At each step t, the adversary reveals At , Ft and the algorithm chooses x̂t ∈ Ft . The
performance of the algorithm is measured by its competitive ratio, i.e., the ratio of objective value
at x̂1 , . . . , x̂m to the offline optimum. Problem (1) covers (convex relaxations of) various online
combinatorial problems including online bipartite matching [14], the “adwords” problem [16], and
the secretary problem [15]. More generally, it covers online linear programming (LP) [6], online
packing/covering with convex cost [3, 4, 7], and generalization of adwords [8]. In this paper, we
study the case where ∂ψ(u) ⊂ K ∗ for all u ∈ K, i.e., ψ is monotone with respect to the cone K.
The competitive performance of online algorithms has been studied mainly under the worst-case
model (e.g., in [16]) or stochastic models (e.g., in [15]). In the worst-case model one is interested
in lower bounds on the competitive ratio that hold for any (A1 , F1 ), . . . , (Am , Fm ). In stochastic models, adversary choses a probability distribution from a family of distributions to generate

