Exploiting Tradeoffs for Exact Recovery in
Heterogeneous Stochastic Block Models

Qiyang Han
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
royhan@uw.edu

Amin Jalali
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
amjalali@uw.edu
Ioana Dumitriu
Department of Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
dumitriu@uw.edu

Maryam Fazel
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mfazel@uw.edu

Abstract
The Stochastic Block Model (SBM) is a widely used random graph model for
networks with communities. Despite the recent burst of interest in community
detection under the SBM from statistical and computational points of view, there
are still gaps in understanding the fundamental limits of recovery. In this paper,
we consider the SBM in its full generality, where there is no restriction on the
number and sizes of communities or how they grow with the number of nodes, as
well as on the connectivity probabilities inside or across communities. For such
stochastic block models, we provide guarantees for exact recovery via a semidefinite program as well as upper and lower bounds on SBM parameters for exact
recoverability. Our results exploit the tradeoffs among the various parameters
of heterogenous SBM and provide recovery guarantees for many new interesting
SBM configurations.

1 Introduction
A fundamental problem in network science and machine learning is to discover structures in large,
complex networks (e.g., biological, social, or information networks). Community or cluster detection underlies many decision tasks, as a basic step that uses pairwise relations between data points
in order to understand more global structures in the data. Applications include recommendation
systems [27], image segmentation [24, 20], learning gene network structures in bioinformatics, e.g.,
in protein detection [9] and population genetics [17].
In spite of a long history of heuristic algorithms (see, e.g., [18] for an empirical overview), as well as
strong research interest in recent years on the theoretical side as briefly reviewed in the sequel, there
are still gaps in understanding the fundamental information theoretic limits of recoverability (i.e., if
there is enough information to reveal the communities) and computational tractability (if there are
efficient algorithms to recover them). This is particularly true in the case of sparse graphs (that test
the limits of recoverability), graphs with heterogeneous communities (communities varying greatly
in size and connectivity), graphs with a number of communities that grows with the number of nodes,
and partially observed graphs (with various observation models).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

