Variational Bayes on Monte Carlo Steroids

Aditya Grover, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{adityag,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Variational approaches are often used to approximate intractable posteriors or normalization constants in hierarchical latent variable models. While often effective
in practice, it is known that the approximation error can be arbitrarily large. We
propose a new class of bounds on the marginal log-likelihood of directed latent
variable models. Our approach relies on random projections to simplify the posterior. In contrast to standard variational methods, our bounds are guaranteed to be
tight with high probability. We provide a new approach for learning latent variable
models based on optimizing our new bounds on the log-likelihood. We demonstrate
empirical improvements on benchmark datasets in vision and language for sigmoid
belief networks, where a neural network is used to approximate the posterior.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical models with multiple layers of latent variables are emerging as a powerful class of
generative models of data in a range of domains, ranging from images to text [1, 18]. The great
expressive power of these models, however, comes at a significant computational cost. Inference and
learning are typically very difficult, often involving intractable posteriors or normalization constants.
The key challenge in learning latent variable models is to evaluate the marginal log-likelihood
of the data and optimize it over the parameters. The marginal log-likelihood is generally nonconvex and intractable to compute, as it requires marginalizing over the unobserved variables.
Existing approaches rely on Monte Carlo [12] or variational methods [2] to approximate this integral.
Variational approximations are particularly suitable for directed models, because they directly provide
tractable lower bounds on the marginal log-likelihood.
Variational Bayes approaches use variational lower bounds as a tractable proxy for the true marginal
log-likelihood. While optimizing a lower bound is a reasonable strategy, the true marginal loglikelihood of the data is not necessarily guaranteed to improve. In fact, it is well known that
variational bounds can be arbitrarily loose. Intuitively, difficulties arise when the approximating
family of tractable distributions is too simple and cannot capture the complexity of the (intractable)
posterior, no matter how well the variational parameters are chosen.
In this paper, we propose a new class of marginal log-likelihood approximations for directed latent
variable models with discrete latent units that are guaranteed to be tight, assuming an optimal choice
for the variational parameters. Our approach uses a recently introduced class of random projections
[7, 15] to improve the approximation achieved by a standard variational approximation such as
mean-field. Intuitively, our approach relies on a sequence of random projections to simplify the
posterior, without losing too much information at each step, until it becomes easy to approximate
with a mean-field distribution.
We provide a novel learning framework for directed, discrete latent variable models based on
optimizing this new lower bound. Our approach jointly optimizes the parameters of the generative
model and the variational parameters of the approximating model using stochastic gradient descent
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

