A Non-parametric Learning Method for Confidently
Estimating Patient’s Clinical State and Dynamics

William Hoiles
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of California Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024
whoiles@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of California Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024
mihaela@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Estimating patient’s clinical state from multiple concurrent physiological streams
plays an important role in determining if a therapeutic intervention is necessary and
for triaging patients in the hospital. In this paper we construct a non-parametric
learning algorithm to estimate the clinical state of a patient. The algorithm addresses several known challenges with clinical state estimation such as eliminating
the bias introduced by therapeutic intervention censoring, increasing the timeliness
of state estimation while ensuring a sufficient accuracy, and the ability to detect
anomalous clinical states. These benefits are obtained by combining the tools of
non-parametric Bayesian inference, permutation testing, and generalizations of the
empirical Bernstein inequality. The algorithm is validated using real-world data
from a cancer ward in a large academic hospital.

1

Introduction

Timely clinical state estimation can significantly improve the quality of care for patient’s by informing
clinicians of patient’s that have entered a high-risk clinical state. This is a challenging problem as the
patient’s clinical state is not directly observable and must be inferred from the patient’s vital signs
and the clinician’s domain-knowledge. Several methods exist for estimating the patient’s clinical
state including clinical guidelines and risk scores [21, 18]. The limitation with these population
based methods is that they are not personalized (e.g. patient models are not unique), can not
detect anomalous patient dynamics, and most importantly, are biased due to therapeutic intervention
censoring [16]. Therapeutic intervention censoring occurs when a patient’s physiological signals are
misclassified in the training data as a result of the effects caused by therapeutic interventions. To
improve the quality of patient care, new methods are needed to overcome these limitations.
In this paper we develop an algorithm for estimating a patient’s clinical state based on previously
recorded electronic health record (EHR) data. A schematic of the algorithm is provided in Fig.1 which
contains three primary components: a) learning the patient’s stochastic model, b) using statistical
techniques to evaluate the quality of the estimated stochastic model, and c) performing clinical state
estimation for new patients based on their estimated models. The works by Fox et al. [10, 9] and
Saria et al. [19] for temporal segmentation are the most related to our algorithm. However [10, 19]
do not apply formal statistical techniques to validate and iteratively update the hyper-parameters
of the non-parametric Bayesian inference, are not personalized, do not remove the bias caused
by therapeutic intervention censoring, and do not utilize clinician domain knowledge for clinical
state estimation. Additionally, applying fully Bayesian methods [9] for clinical state estimation are
computationally prohibitive as the computational complexity of constructing the stochastic model of
all patients grows polynomially with the number of samples and maximum number of possible states
of all patients. The computational complexity of our algorithm is only polynomial in the number
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

