Measuring Neural Net Robustness with Constraints

Osbert Bastani
Stanford University
obastani@cs.stanford.edu

Yani Ioannou
University of Cambridge
yai20@cam.ac.uk

Leonidas Lampropoulos
University of Pennsylvania
llamp@seas.upenn.edu

Dimitrios Vytiniotis
Microsoft Research
dimitris@microsoft.com

Aditya V. Nori
Microsoft Research
adityan@microsoft.com

Antonio Criminisi
Microsoft Research
antcrim@microsoft.com

Abstract
Despite having high accuracy, neural nets have been shown to be susceptible to
adversarial examples, where a small perturbation to an input can cause it to become
mislabeled. We propose metrics for measuring the robustness of a neural net and
devise a novel algorithm for approximating these metrics based on an encoding of
robustness as a linear program. We show how our metrics can be used to evaluate
the robustness of deep neural nets with experiments on the MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets. Our algorithm generates more informative estimates of robustness metrics
compared to estimates based on existing algorithms. Furthermore, we show how
existing approaches to improving robustness “overfit” to adversarial examples
generated using a specific algorithm. Finally, we show that our techniques can be
used to additionally improve neural net robustness both according to the metrics
that we propose, but also according to previously proposed metrics.

1

Introduction

Recent work [21] shows that it is often possible to construct an input mislabeled by a neural net
by perturbing a correctly labeled input by a tiny amount in a carefully chosen direction. Lack of
robustness can be problematic in a variety of settings, such as changing camera lens or lighting
conditions, successive frames in a video, or adversarial attacks in security-critical applications [18].
A number of approaches have since been proposed to improve robustness [6, 5, 1, 7, 20]. However,
work in this direction has been handicapped by the lack of objective measures of robustness. A typical
approach to improving the robustness of a neural net f is to use an algorithm A to find adversarial
examples, augment the training set with these examples, and train a new neural net f 0 [5]. Robustness
is then evaluated by using the same algorithm A to find adversarial examples for f 0 —if A discovers
fewer adversarial examples for f 0 than for f , then f 0 is concluded to be more robust than f . However,
f 0 may have overfit to adversarial examples generated by A—in particular, a different algorithm A0
may find as many adversarial examples for f 0 as for f . Having an objective robustness measure is
vital not only to reliably compare different algorithms, but also to understand robustness of production
neural nets—e.g., when deploying a login system based on face recognition, a security team may
need to evaluate the risk of an attack using adversarial examples.
In this paper, we study the problem of measuring robustness. We propose to use two statistics of
the robustness ρ(f, x∗ ) of f at point x∗ (i.e., the L∞ distance from x∗ to the nearest adversarial
example) [21]. The first one measures the frequency with which adversarial examples occur; the
other measures the severity of such adversarial examples. Both statistics depend on a parameter ,
which intuitively specifies the threshold below which adversarial examples should not exist (i.e.,
points x with L∞ distance to x∗ less than  should be assigned the same label as x∗ ).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

