An Ensemble Diversity Approach
to Supervised Binary Hashing

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
EECS, University of California, Merced
mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Ramin Raziperchikolaei
EECS, University of California, Merced
rraziperchikolaei@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Binary hashing is a well-known approach for fast approximate nearest-neighbor
search in information retrieval. Much work has focused on affinity-based objective
functions involving the hash functions or binary codes. These objective functions
encode neighborhood information between data points and are often inspired by
manifold learning algorithms. They ensure that the hash functions differ from each
other through constraints or penalty terms that encourage codes to be orthogonal
or dissimilar across bits, but this couples the binary variables and complicates the
already difficult optimization. We propose a much simpler approach: we train
each hash function (or bit) independently from each other, but introduce diversity
among them using techniques from classifier ensembles. Surprisingly, we find
that not only is this faster and trivially parallelizable, but it also improves over the
more complex, coupled objective function, and achieves state-of-the-art precision
and recall in experiments with image retrieval.
Information retrieval tasks such as searching for a query image or document in a database are essentially a nearest-neighbor search [33]. When the dimensionality of the query and the size of the
database is large, approximate search is necessary. We focus on binary hashing [17], where the query
and database are mapped onto low-dimensional binary vectors, where the search is performed. This
has two speedups: computing Hamming distances (with hardware support) is much faster than computing distances between high-dimensional floating-point vectors; and the entire database becomes
much smaller, so it may reside in fast memory rather than disk (for example, a database of 1 billion
real vectors of dimension 500 takes 2 TB in floating point but 8 GB as 64-bit codes).
Constructing hash functions that do well in retrieval measures such as precision and recall is usually
done by optimizing an affinity-based objective function that relates Hamming distances to supervised neighborhood information in a training set. Many such objective functions have the form of a
sum of pairwise terms that indicate whether the training points xn and xm are neighbors:
PN
minh L(h) = n,m=1 L(zn , zm ; ynm ) where zm = h(xm ), zn = h(xn ).
Here, X = (x1 , . . . , xN ) is the dataset of high-dimensional feature vectors (e.g., SIFT features of
an image), h: RD → {−1, +1}b are b binary hash functions and z = h(x) is the b-bit code vector
for input x ∈ RD , minh means minimizing over the parameters of the hash function h (e.g. over
the weights of a linear SVM), and L(·) is a loss function that compares the codes for two images
(often through their Hamming distance kzn − zm k) with the ground-truth value ynm that measures
the affinity in the original space between the two images xn and xm (distance, similarity or other
measure of neighborhood). The sum is often restricted to a subset of image pairs (n, m) (for example,
within the k nearest neighbors of each other in the original space), to keep the runtime low. The
output of the algorithm is the hash function h and the binary codes Z = (z1 , . . . , zN ) for the training
points, where zn = h(xn ) for n = 1, . . . , N . Examples of these objective functions are Supervised
Hashing with Kernels (KSH) [28], Binary Reconstructive Embeddings (BRE) [21] and the binary
Laplacian loss (an extension of the Laplacian Eigenmaps objective; [2]) where L(zn , zm ; ynm ) is:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

