GAP Safe Screening Rules for Sparse-Group Lasso

Eugene Ndiaye, Olivier Fercoq, Alexandre Gramfort, Joseph Salmon
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris-Saclay
75013 Paris, France
first.last@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
For statistical learning in high dimension, sparse regularizations have proven useful
to boost both computational and statistical efficiency. In some contexts, it is natural
to handle more refined structures than pure sparsity, such as for instance group
sparsity. Sparse-Group Lasso has recently been introduced in the context of linear
regression to enforce sparsity both at the feature and at the group level. We propose
the first (provably) safe screening rules for Sparse-Group Lasso, i.e., rules that allow
to discard early in the solver features/groups that are inactive at optimal solution.
Thanks to efficient dual gap computations relying on the geometric properties of
-norm, safe screening rules for Sparse-Group Lasso lead to significant gains in
term of computing time for our coordinate descent implementation.

1

Introduction

Sparsity is a critical property for the success of regression methods, especially in high dimension.
Often, group (or block) sparsity is helpful when a known group structure needs to be enforced. This
is for instance the case in multi-task learning [1] or multinomial logistic regression [5, Chapter 3]. In
the multi-task setting, the group structure appears natural since one aims at jointly recovering signals
whose supports are shared. In this context, sparsity and group sparsity are generally obtained by
adding a regularization term to the data-fitting: `1 norm for sparsity and `1,2 norm for group sparsity.
Along with recent works on hierarchical regularization [12, 17] have focused on a specific case:
the Sparse-Group Lasso. This method is the solution of a (convex) optimization program with a
regularization term that is a convex combination of the two aforementioned norms, enforcing sparsity
and group sparsity at the same time.
With such advanced regularizations, the computational burden can be particularly heavy in high
dimension. Yet, it can be significantly reduced if one can exploit the known sparsity of the solution
in the optimization. Following the seminal paper on “safe screening rules” [9], many contributions
have investigated such strategies [21, 20, 3]. These so called safe screening rules compute some
tests on dual feasible points to eliminate primal variables whose coefficients are guaranteed to be
zero in the exact solution. Still, the computation of a dual feasible point can be challenging when
the regularization is more complex than `1 or `1,2 norms. This is the case for the Sparse-Group
Lasso as it is not straightforward to characterize if a dual point is feasible or not [20]. Here, we
propose an efficient computation of the associated dual norm. It is all the more crucial since the naive
implementation computes the Sparse-Group Lasso dual norm with a quadratic complexity w.r.t the
groups dimensions.
We propose here efficient safe screening rules for the Sparse-Group Lasso that combine sequential
rules (i.e., rules that perform screening thanks to solutions obtained for a previously processed tuning
parameter) and dynamic rules (i.e., rules that perform screening as the algorithm proceeds) in a
unified way. We elaborate on GAP safe rules, a strategy relying on dual gap computations introduced
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

