Regret of Queueing Bandits
Subhashini Krishnasamy
University of Texas at Austin

Rajat Sen
University of Texas at Austin

Ramesh Johari
Stanford University

Sanjay Shakkottai
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
We consider a variant of the multiarmed bandit problem where jobs queue for service, and service rates of different servers may be unknown. We study algorithms
that minimize queue-regret: the (expected) difference between the queue-lengths
obtained by the algorithm, and those obtained by a “genie”-aided matching algorithm that knows exact service rates. A naive view of this problem would suggest
that queue-regret should grow logarithmically: since queue-regret cannot be larger
than classical regret, results for the standard MAB problem give algorithms that ensure queue-regret increases no more than logarithmically in time. Our paper shows
surprisingly more complex behavior. In particular, the naive intuition is correct
as long as the bandit algorithm’s queues have relatively long regenerative cycles:
in this case queue-regret is similar to cumulative regret, and scales (essentially)
logarithmically. However, we show that this “early stage” of the queueing bandit
eventually gives way to a “late stage”, where the optimal queue-regret scaling is
O(1/t). We demonstrate an algorithm that (order-wise) achieves this asymptotic
queue-regret, and also exhibits close to optimal switching time from the early stage
to the late stage.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB) have a rich history in sequential decision making [1, 2, 3].
In its simplest form, a collection of K arms are present, each having a binary reward (Bernoulli
random variable over {0, 1}) with an unknown success probability1 (and different across arms). At
each (discrete) time, a single arm is chosen by the bandit algorithm, and a (binary-valued) reward is
accrued. The MAB problem is to determine which arm to choose at each time in order to minimize
the cumulative expected regret, namely, the cumulative loss of reward when compared to a genie that
has knowledge of the arm success probabilities.
In this paper, we consider the variant of this problem motivated by queueing applications. Formally,
suppose that arms are pulled upon arrivals of jobs; each arm is now a server that can serve the arriving
job. In this model, the stochastic reward described above is equivalent to service. In other words,
if the arm (server) that is chosen results in positive reward, the job is successfully completed and
departs the system. However, this basic model fails to capture an essential feature of service in many
settings: in a queueing system, jobs wait until they complete service. Such systems are stateful: when
the chosen arm results in zero reward, the job being served remains in the queue, and over time the
model must track the remaining jobs waiting to be served. The difference between the cumulative
number of arrivals and departures, or the queue length, is the most common measure of the quality of
the service strategy being employed.
1

Here, the success probability of an arm is the probability that the reward equals ’1’.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

