What Makes Objects Similar:
A Unified Multi-Metric Learning Approach

Han-Jia Ye

De-Chuan Zhan
Xue-Min Si
Yuan Jiang
Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{yehj,zhandc,sixm,jiangy,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Linkages are essentially determined by similarity measures that may be derived
from multiple perspectives. For example, spatial linkages are usually generated
based on localities of heterogeneous data, whereas semantic linkages can come
from various properties, such as different physical meanings behind social relations. Many existing metric learning models focus on spatial linkages, but leave
the rich semantic factors unconsidered. Similarities based on these models are
usually overdetermined on linkages. We propose a Unified Multi-Metric Learning (U M2 L) framework to exploit multiple types of metrics. In U M2 L, a type of
combination operator is introduced for distance characterization from multiple perspectives, and thus can introduce flexibilities for representing and utilizing both
spatial and semantic linkages. Besides, we propose a uniform solver for U M2 L
which is guaranteed to converge. Extensive experiments on diverse applications
exhibit the superior classification performance and comprehensibility of U M2 L.
Visualization results also validate its ability on physical meanings discovery.

1

Introduction

Similarities measure the closeness of connections between objects and usually are reflected by distances. Distance Metric Learning (D ML) aims to learn appropriate metric that can figure out the
underlying linkages or connections, thus can greatly improve the performance of similarity-based
classifiers, such as kNN.
Objects are linked with each other for different reasons. Global D ML methods consider the deterministic single metric which measures similarities between all object pairs. Recently, investigations
on local D ML have considered locality specific approaches, and consequently multiple metrics are
learned. These metrics are either in charge of different spatial areas [15, 20] or responsible for each
specific instance [7, 22]. Both global and local D ML methods emphasize the linkage constraints
(including must-link and cannot-link) in localities with univocal semantic meaning, e.g., the side
information of class. However, there can be many different reasons for two instances to be similar
in real world applications [3, 9].
Linkages between objects can be with multiple latent semantics. For example, in a social network,
friendship linkages may lie on different hobbies of users. Although a user has many friends, their
common hobbies could be different and as a consequence, one can be friends with others for different reasons. Another concrete example is, for articles on “A. Feature Learning” which are closely
related to both “B. Feature Selection” and “C. Subspace Models”, their connections are different in
semantics. The linkage between A and B emphasizes “picking up some helpful features”, while the
common semantic between A and C is about “extracting subspaces” or “ feature transformation”.
These phenomena clearly indicate ambiguities rather than a single meaning in linkage generation.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

