Fast Active Set Methods for
Online Spike Inference from Calcium Imaging

1

Johannes Friedrich1,2 , Liam Paninski1
Grossman Center and Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY
2
Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA
j.friedrich@columbia.edu, liam@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
Fluorescent calcium indicators are a popular means for observing the spiking activity of large neuronal populations. Unfortunately, extracting the spike train of
each neuron from raw fluorescence calcium imaging data is a nontrivial problem.
We present a fast online active set method to solve this sparse nonnegative deconvolution problem. Importantly, the algorithm progresses through each time series
sequentially from beginning to end, thus enabling real-time online spike inference
during the imaging session. Our algorithm is a generalization of the pool adjacent
violators algorithm (PAVA) for isotonic regression and inherits its linear-time computational complexity. We gain remarkable increases in processing speed: more
than one order of magnitude compared to currently employed state of the art convex
solvers relying on interior point methods. Our method can exploit warm starts;
therefore optimizing model hyperparameters only requires a handful of passes
through the data. The algorithm enables real-time simultaneous deconvolution of
O(105 ) traces of whole-brain zebrafish imaging data on a laptop.

1

Introduction

Calcium imaging has become one of the most widely used techniques for recording activity from
neural populations in vivo [1]. The basic principle of calcium imaging is that neural action potentials
(or spikes), the point process signal of interest, each induce an optically measurable transient response
in calcium dynamics. The nontrivial problem to extract the spike train of each neuron from a raw
fluorescence trace has been addressed with several different approaches, including template matching
[2] and linear deconvolution [3, 4], which are outperformed by sparse nonnegative deconvolution
[5]. The latter can be interpreted as the MAP estimate under a generative model (linear convolution
plus noise; Fig. 1), whereas fully Bayesian methods [6, 7] can provide some further improvements,
but are more computationally expensive. Supervised methods trained on simultaneously-recorded
electrophysiological and imaging data [8, 9] have also recently achieved state of the art results, but
are more black-box in nature.
The methods above are typically applied to imaging data offline, after the experiment is complete;
however, there is a need for accurate and fast real-time processing to enable closed-loop experiments, a
powerful strategy for causal investigation of neural circuitry [10]. In particular, observing and feeding
back the effects of circuit interventions on physiologically relevant timescales will be valuable for
directly testing whether inferred models of dynamics, connectivity, and causation are accurate in vivo,
and recent experimental advances [11, 12] are now enabling work in this direction. Brain-computer
interfaces (BCIs) also rely on real-time estimates of neural activity. Whereas most BCI systems rely
on electrical recordings, BCIs have been driven by optical signals too [13], providing new insight
into how neurons change their activity during learning on a finer spatial scale than possible with
intracortical electrodes. Finally, adaptive experimental design approaches [14, 15, 16] also rely on
online estimates of neural activity.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

