FPNN: Field Probing Neural Networks for 3D Data

Yangyan Li1,2
1

Sören Pirk1

Hao Su1

Stanford University, USA

Charles R. Qi1
2

Leonidas J. Guibas1

Shandong University, China

Abstract
Building discriminative representations for 3D data has been an important task in
computer graphics and computer vision research. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have shown to operate on 2D images with great success for a variety
of tasks. Lifting convolution operators to 3D (3DCNNs) seems like a plausible
and promising next step. Unfortunately, the computational complexity of 3D
CNNs grows cubically with respect to voxel resolution. Moreover, since most 3D
geometry representations are boundary based, occupied regions do not increase
proportionately with the size of the discretization, resulting in wasted computation.
In this work, we represent 3D spaces as volumetric fields, and propose a novel
design that employs field probing filters to efficiently extract features from them.
Each field probing filter is a set of probing points — sensors that perceive the
space. Our learning algorithm optimizes not only the weights associated with the
probing points, but also their locations, which deforms the shape of the probing
filters and adaptively distributes them in 3D space. The optimized probing points
sense the 3D space “intelligently”, rather than operating blindly over the entire
domain. We show that field probing is significantly more efficient than 3DCNNs,
while providing state-of-the-art performance, on classification tasks for 3D object
recognition benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Rapid advances in 3D sensing technology have
made 3D data ubiquitous and easily accessible,
rendering them an important data source for high
10.41%
5.09%
2.41%
level semantic understanding in a variety of enFigure 1: The sparsity characteristic of 3D data
vironments. The semantic understanding probin occupancy grid representation. 3D occupancy
lem, however, remains very challenging for 3D
grids in resolution 30, 64 and 128 are shown in
data as it is hard to find an effective scheme for
this figure, together with their density, defined as
converting input data into informative features #occupied grid
#total grid . It is clear that 3D occupancy grid
for further processing by machine learning algospace
gets sparser and sparser as the fidelity of the
rithms. For semantic understanding problems in
surface
approximation increases.
2D images, deep CNNs [15] have been widely
used and have achieved great success, where the convolutional layers play an essential role. They
provide a set of 2D filters, which when convolved with input data, transform the data to informative
features for higher level inference.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of learning a 3D shape representation by a deep neural network.
We keep two goals in mind when designing the network: the shape features should be discriminative
for shape recognition and efficient for extraction at runtime. However, existing 3D CNN pipelines that
simply replace the conventional 2D filters by 3D ones [31, 19], have difficulty in capturing geometric
structures with sufficient efficiency. The input to these 3D CNNs are voxelized shapes represented
by occupancy grids, in direct analogy to pixel array representation for images. We observe that
the computational cost of 3D convolution is quite high, since convolving 3D voxels has cubical
complexity with respect to spatial resolution, one order higher than the 2D case. Due to this high
computational cost, researchers typically choose 30 × 30 × 30 resolution to voxelize shapes [31, 19],
which is significantly lower than the widely adopted resolution 227 × 227 for processing images [24].
We suspect that the strong artifacts introduced at this level of quantization (see Figure 1) hinder the
process of learning effective 3D convolutional filters.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

