Online Pricing with Strategic and Patient Buyers
Michal Feldman
Tel-Aviv University and MSR Herzliya
michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il
Roi Livni⇤
Princeton University
rlivni@cs.princeton.edu

Yishay Mansour⇤
Tel-Aviv University
mansour@tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren⇤
Google Brain
tkoren@google.com
Aviv Zohar⇤
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
avivz@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We consider a seller with an unlimited supply of a single good, who is faced with
a stream of T buyers. Each buyer has a window of time in which she would like
to purchase, and would buy at the lowest price in that window, provided that this
price is lower than her private value (and otherwise, would not buy at all). In this
setting, we give an algorithm that attains O(T 2/3 ) regret over any sequence of T
buyers with respect to the best fixed price in hindsight, and prove that no algorithm
can perform better in the worst case.

1

Introduction

Perhaps the most common way to sell items is using a “posted price” mechanism in which the seller
publishes the price of an item in advance, and buyers that wish to obtain the item decide whether to
acquire it at the given price or to forgo the purchase. Such mechanisms are extremely appealing. The
decision made by the buyer in a single-shot interaction is simple: if it values the item by more than
the offering price, it should buy, and if its valuation is lower, it should decline. The seller on the other
hand needs to determine the price at which she wishes to sell goods. In order to set prices, additive
regret can be minimized using, for example, a multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithm in which arms
correspond to a different prices, and rewards correspond to the revenue obtained by the seller.
Things become much more complicated when the buyers who are facing the mechanism are patient
and can choose to wait for the price to drop. The simplicity of posted price mechanisms is then
tainted by strategic considerations, as buyers attempt to guess whether or not the seller will lower
the price in the future. The direct application of MABs is no longer adequate, as prices set by such
algorithms may fluctuate at every time period. Strategic buyers can make use of this fact to gain
the item at a lower price, which lowers the revenue of the seller and, more crucially, changes the
seller’s feedback for a given price. With patient buyers, the revenue from sales is no longer a result
of the price at the current period alone, but rather the combined outcome of prices that were set in
surrounding time periods, and of the expectation of buyers regarding future prices.
In this paper, we focus on strategic buyers that may delay their purchase in hopes of obtaining a
better deal. We assume that each buyer has a valuation for the item, and a “patience level” which
represents the length of the time-window during which it is willing to wait in order to purchase the
item. Buyers wish to minimize the price during this period. Note that such buyers may interfere with
naïve attempts to minimize regret, as consecutive days at which different prices are set are no longer
independent.
⇤ Parts of this work were done while the author was at Microsoft Research, Herzliya.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

