Improved Regret Bounds for Oracle-Based
Adversarial Contextual Bandits
Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Haipeng Luo
Microsoft Research
haipeng@microsoft.com

Akshay Krishnamurthy
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
akshay@cs.umass.edu

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a new oracle-based algorithm, BISTRO+, for the adversarial contextual bandit problem, where either contexts are drawn i.i.d. or the sequence
of contexts is known a priori, but where the losses are picked adversarially. Our
algorithm is computationally efficient, assuming access to an offline optimization
2
1
oracle, and enjoys a regret of order O((KT ) 3 (log N ) 3 ), where K is the number
of actions, T is the number of iterations, and N is the number of baseline policies.
3
Our result is the first to break the O(T 4 ) barrier achieved by recent algorithms,
which was left as a major open problem. Our analysis employs the recent relaxation
framework of Rakhlin and Sridharan [7].

1

Introduction

We study online decision making problems where a learner chooses an action based on some side
information (context) and incurs some cost for that action with a goal of incurring minimal cost over
a sequence of rounds. These contextual online learning settings form a powerful framework for
modeling many important decision-making scenarios with applications ranging from personalized
health care to content recommendation and targeted advertising. Many of these applications also
involve a partial feedback component, wherein costs for alternative actions are unobserved, and are
typically modeled as contextual bandits.
The contextual information present in these problems enables learning of a much richer policy
for choosing actions based on context. In the literature, the typical goal for the learner is to have
cumulative cost that is not much higher than the best policy π in a large policy class Π. This is
formalized by the notion of regret, which is the learner’s cumulative cost minus the cumulative cost
of the best fixed policy π in hindsight.
Naively, one can view the contextual problem as a standard online learning problem where the set
of possible “actions” available at each iteration is the set of policies. This perspective is fruitful, as
classical algorithms,
such as Hedge [5, 3] and Exp4 [2],
p
p give information theoretically optimal regret
bounds of O( T log(N )) in full-information and O( T K log(N ) in the bandit setting, where T is
the number of rounds, K is the number of actions, and N is number of policies. However, naively
lifting standard online learning algorithms to the contextual setting leads to a running time that is
linear in the number of policies. Given that the optimal regret is only logarithmic in N and that our
high-level goal is to learn a very rich policy, we want to capture policy classes that are exponentially
large. When we use a large policy class, existing algorithms are no longer computationally tractable.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

