DeepMath - Deep Sequence Models for Premise
Selection
Alexander A. Alemi ∗
Google Inc.
alemi@google.com
Geoffrey Irving ∗
Google Inc.
geoffreyi@google.com

François Chollet ∗
Google Inc.
fchollet@google.com
Christian Szegedy ∗
Google Inc.
szegedy@google.com

Niklas Een ∗
Google Inc.
een@google.com

Josef Urban ∗†
Czech Technical University in Prague
josef.urban@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the effectiveness of neural sequence models for premise selection in
automated theorem proving, one of the main bottlenecks in the formalization of
mathematics. We propose a two stage approach for this task that yields good
results for the premise selection task on the Mizar corpus while avoiding the handengineered features of existing state-of-the-art models. To our knowledge, this is
the first time deep learning has been applied to theorem proving on a large scale.

1

Introduction

Mathematics underpins all scientific disciplines. Machine learning itself rests on measure and
probability theory, calculus, linear algebra, functional analysis, and information theory. Complex
mathematics underlies computer chips, transit systems, communication systems, and financial infrastructure – thus the correctness of many of these systems can be reduced to mathematical proofs.
Unfortunately, these correctness proofs are often impractical to produce without automation, and
present-day computers have only limited ability to assist humans in developing mathematical proofs
and formally verifying human proofs. There are two main bottlenecks: (1) lack of automated methods
for semantic or formal parsing of informal mathematical texts (autoformalization), and (2) lack of
strong automated reasoning methods to fill in the gaps in already formalized human-written proofs.
The two bottlenecks are related. Strong automated reasoning can act as a semantic filter for autoformalization, and successful autoformalization would provide a large corpus of computer-understandable
facts, proofs, and theory developments. Such a corpus would serve as both background knowledge to
fill in gaps in human-level proofs and as a training set to guide automated reasoning. Such guidance
is crucial: exhaustive deductive reasoning tools such as today’s resolution/superposition automated
theorem provers (ATPs) quickly hit combinatorial explosion, and are unusable when reasoning with a
very large number of facts without careful selection [4].
In this work, we focus on the latter bottleneck. We develop deep neural networks that learn from a
large repository of manually formalized computer-understandable proofs. We learn the task that is
essential for making today’s ATPs usable over large formal corpora: the selection of a limited number
of most relevant facts for proving a new conjecture. This is known as premise selection.
The main contributions of this work are:
∗
†

Authors listed alphabetically. All contributions are considered equal.
Supported by ERC Consolidator grant nr. 649043 AI4REASON.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

