Nested Mini-Batch K-Means
François Fleuret
Idiap Research Institue & EPFL
francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

James Newling
Idiap Research Institue & EPFL
james.newling@idiap.ch

Abstract
A new algorithm is proposed which accelerates the mini-batch k-means algorithm
of Sculley (2010) by using the distance bounding approach of Elkan (2003). We
argue that, when incorporating distance bounds into a mini-batch algorithm, already used data should preferentially be reused. To this end we propose using
nested mini-batches, whereby data in a mini-batch at iteration t is automatically
reused at iteration t + 1.
Using nested mini-batches presents two difficulties. The first is that unbalanced
use of data can bias estimates, which we resolve by ensuring that each data sample
contributes exactly once to centroids. The second is in choosing mini-batch sizes,
which we address by balancing premature fine-tuning of centroids with redundancy induced slow-down. Experiments show that the resulting nmbatch algorithm is very effective, often arriving within 1% of the empirical minimum 100×
earlier than the standard mini-batch algorithm.

1

Introduction

The k-means problem is to find k centroids to minimise the mean distance between samples and
their nearest centroids. Specifically, given N training samples X = {x(1), . . . , x(N )} in vector
space V, one must find C = {c(1), . . . , c(k)} in V to minimise energy E defined by,
N

E(C) =

1 X
kx(i) − c(a(i))k2 ,
N i=1

(1)

where a(i) = arg minj∈{1,...,k} kx(i) − c(j)k. In general the k-means problem is NP-hard, and so
a trade off must be made between low energy and low run time. The k-means problem arises in data
compression, classification, density estimation, and many other areas.
A popular algorithm for k-means is Lloyd’s algorithm, henceforth lloyd. It relies on a two-step
iterative refinement technique. In the assignment step, each sample is assigned to the cluster whose
centroid is nearest. In the update step, cluster centroids are updated in accordance with assigned
samples. lloyd is also referred to as the exact algorithm, which can lead to confusion as it does
not solve the k-means problem exactly. Similarly, approximate k-means algorithms often refer to
algorithms which perform an approximation in either the assignment or the update step of lloyd.
1.1

Previous works on accelerating the exact algorithm

Several approaches for accelerating lloyd have been proposed, where the required computation is
reduced without changing the final clustering. Hamerly (2010) shows that approaches relying on
triangle inequality based distance bounds (Phillips, 2002; Elkan, 2003; Hamerly, 2010) always provide greater speed-ups than those based on spatial data structures (Pelleg and Moore, 1999; Kanungo
et al., 2002). Improving bounding based methods remains an active area of research (Drake, 2013;
Ding et al., 2015). We discuss the bounding based approach in § 2.1.
1

