Hypothesis Testing in Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation with Applications in Alzheimer’s Disease

Hao Henry Zhou†
Sathya N. Ravi†
Vamsi K. Ithapu†
§,†
†
Sterling C. Johnson
Grace Wahba
Vikas Singh†
§
†
William S. Middleton Memorial VA Hospital
University of Wisconsin–Madison

Abstract
Consider samples from two different data sources {xis } ∼ Psource and {xit } ∼
Ptarget . We only observe their transformed versions h(xis ) and g(xit ), for some
known function class h(·) and g(·). Our goal is to perform a statistical test checking
if Psource = Ptarget while removing the distortions induced by the transformations.
This problem is closely related to domain adaptation, and in our case, is motivated
by the need to combine clinical and imaging based biomarkers from multiple sites
and/or batches – a fairly common impediment in conducting analyses with much
larger sample sizes. We address this problem using ideas from hypothesis testing
on the transformed measurements, wherein the distortions need to be estimated in
tandem with the testing. We derive a simple algorithm and study its convergence
and consistency properties in detail, and provide lower-bound strategies based on
recent work in continuous optimization. On a dataset of individuals at risk for
Alzheimer’s disease, our framework is competitive with alternative procedures that
are twice as expensive and in some cases operationally infeasible to implement.

1

Introduction

A first order requirement in many estimation tasks is that the training and testing samples are from
the same underlying distribution and the associated features are directly comparable. But in many
real world datasets, training/testing (or source/target) samples may come from different “domains”:
they may be variously represented and involve different marginal distributions [8, 32]. “Domain
adaptation” (DA) algorithms [24, 27] are often used to address such problems. For example, in
vision, not accounting for systematic source/target variations in images due to commodity versus
professional camera equipment yields poor accuracy for visual recognition; here, these schemes
can be used to match the source/target distributions or identify intermediate latent representations
[12, 1, 9], often yielding superior performance [29, 12, 1, 9]. Such success has lead to specialized
formulations, for instance, when target annotations are absent (unsupervised) [11, 13] or minimally
available (semi-supervised) [7, 22]. With a mapping to compensate for this domain shift, we know
that the normalized (or transformed) features are sufficiently invariant and reliable in practice.
In numerous DA applications, the interest is in seamlessly translating a classifier across domains —
consequently, the model’s test/target predictive performance serves the intended goals. However, in
many areas of science, issues concerning the statistical power of the experiment, the sample sizes
needed to achieve this power and whether we can derive p-values for the estimated domain adaptation
model are equally, if not, more important. For instance, the differences in instrument calibration and
reagents in wet lab experiments are potential DA applications except that the downstream analysis may
involve little to no discrimination performance measures per se. Separately, in multi-site population
studies [17, 18, 21], where due to operational reasons, recruitment and data acquisition is distributed
over multiple sites (even countries) — site-specific shifts in measurements and missing covariates
are common [17, 18, 21]. The need to harmonize such data requires some form of DA. While good
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

