Gaussian Processes for Survival Analysis

Tamara Fernández
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford.
Oxford, UK.
fernandez@stats.ox.ac.uk

Nicolás Rivera
Department of Informatics,
King’s College London.
London, UK.
nicolas.rivera@kcl.ac.uk

Yee Whye Teh
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford.
Oxford, UK.
y.w.teh@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a semi-parametric Bayesian model for survival analysis. The model
is centred on a parametric baseline hazard, and uses a Gaussian process to model
variations away from it nonparametrically, as well as dependence on covariates.
As opposed to many other methods in survival analysis, our framework does not
impose unnecessary constraints in the hazard rate or in the survival function. Furthermore, our model handles left, right and interval censoring mechanisms common
in survival analysis. We propose a MCMC algorithm to perform inference and an
approximation scheme based on random Fourier features to make computations
faster. We report experimental results on synthetic and real data, showing that our
model performs better than competing models such as Cox proportional hazards,
ANOVA-DDP and random survival forests.

1

Introduction

Survival analysis is a branch of statistics focused on the study of time-to-event data, usually called
survival times. This type of data appears in a wide range of applications such as failure times
in mechanical systems, death times of patients in a clinical trial or duration of unemployment in
a population. One of the main objectives of survival analysis is the estimation of the so-called
survival function and the hazard function. If a random variable has density function f and cumulative
distribution function F , then its survival function S is 1 − F , and its hazard λ is f /S. While the
survival function S(t) gives us the probability a patient survives up to time t, the hazard function
λ(t) is the instant probability of death given that she has survived until t.
Due to the nature of the studies in survival analysis, the data contains several aspects that make
inference and prediction hard. One important characteristic of survival data is the presence of many
covariates. Another distinctive flavour of survival data is the presence of censoring. A survival time
is censored when it is not fully observable but we have an upper or lower bound of it. For instance,
this happens in clinical trials when a patient drops out the study.
There are many methods for modelling this type of data. Arguably, the most popular is the KaplanMeier estimator [13]. The Kaplan-Meier estimator is a very simple, nonparametric estimator of the
survival function. It is very flexible and easy to compute, it handles censored times and requires
no-prior knowledge of the nature of the data. Nevertheless, it cannot handle covariates naturally and
no prior knowledge can be incorporated. A well-known method that incorporates covariates is the
Cox proportional hazard model [3]. Although this method is very popular and useful in applications,
a drawback of it, is that it imposes the strong assumption that the hazard curves are proportional and
non-crossing, which is very unlikely for some data sets.
There is a vast literature of Bayesian nonparametric methods for survival analysis [9]. Some examples
include the so-called Neutral-to-the-right priors [5], which models survival curves as e−µ̃((0,t]) , where
µ̃ is a completely random measure on R+ . Two common choices for µ̃ are the Dirichlet process
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

