High-Rank Matrix Completion and Clustering
under Self-Expressive Models

E. Elhamifar∗
College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We propose efficient algorithms for simultaneous clustering and completion of
incomplete high-dimensional data that lie in a union of low-dimensional subspaces.
We cast the problem as finding a completion of the data matrix so that each point
can be reconstructed as a linear or affine combination of a few data points. Since the
problem is NP-hard, we propose a lifting framework and reformulate the problem
as a group-sparse recovery of each incomplete data point in a dictionary built using
incomplete data, subject to rank-one constraints. To solve the problem efficiently,
we propose a rank pursuit algorithm and a convex relaxation. The solution of our
algorithms recover missing entries and provides a similarity matrix for clustering.
Our algorithms can deal with both low-rank and high-rank matrices, does not suffer
from initialization, does not need to know dimensions of subspaces and can work
with a small number of data points. By extensive experiments on synthetic data
and real problems of video motion segmentation and completion of motion capture
data, we show that when the data matrix is low-rank, our algorithm performs on
par with or better than low-rank matrix completion methods, while for high-rank
data matrices, our method significantly outperforms existing algorithms.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional data, which are ubiquitous in computer vision, image processing, bioinformatics
and social networks, often lie in low-dimensional subspaces corresponding to different categories
they belong to [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Clustering and finding low-dimensional representations of data are
important unsupervised learning problems with numerous applications, including data compression
and visualization, image/video/costumer segmentation, collaborative filtering and more.
A major challenge in real problems is dealing with missing entries in data, due to sensor failure,
ad-hoc data collection, or partial knowledge of relationships in a dataset. For instance, in estimating
object motions in videos, the tracking algorithm may loose the track of features in some video frames
[7]; in the image inpainting problem, intensity values of some pixels are missing due to sensor failure
[8]; or in recommender systems, each user provides ratings for a limited number of products [9].
Prior Work. Existing algorithms that deal with missing entries in high-dimensional data can be
divided into two main categories. The first group of algorithms assume that data lie in a single
low-dimensional subspace. Probabilistic PCA (PPCA) [10] and Factor Analysis (FA) [11] optimize
a non-convex function using Expectation Maximization (EM), estimating low-dimensional model
parameters and missing entries of data in an iterative framework. However, their performance depends
∗
E. Elhamifar is an Assistant Professor in the College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern
University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

