Adaptive Smoothed Online Multi-Task Learning

Keerthiram Murugesan∗
Carnegie Mellon University
kmuruges@cs.cmu.edu

Hanxiao Liu∗
Carnegie Mellon University
hanxiaol@cs.cmu.edu

Jaime Carbonell
Carnegie Mellon University
jgc@cs.cmu.edu

Yiming Yang
Carnegie Mellon University
yiming@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of jointly learning both the per-task model
parameters and the inter-task relationships in a multi-task online learning setting.
The proposed algorithm features probabilistic interpretation, efficient updating
rules and flexible modulation on whether learners focus on their specific task or
on jointly address all tasks. The paper also proves a sub-linear regret bound as
compared to the best linear predictor in hindsight. Experiments over three multitask learning benchmark datasets show advantageous performance of the proposed
approach over several state-of-the-art online multi-task learning baselines.

1

Introduction

The power of joint learning in multiple tasks arises from the transfer of relevant knowledge across
said tasks, especially from information-rich tasks to information-poor ones. Instead of learning
individual models, multi-task methods leverage the relationships between tasks to jointly build
a better model for each task. Most existing work in multi-task learning focuses on how to take
advantage of these task relationships, either to share data directly [1] or to learn model parameters via
cross-task regularization techniques [2, 3, 4]. In a broad sense, there are two settings to learn these
task relationships 1) batch learning, in which an entire training set is available to the learner 2) online
learning, in which the learner sees the data in a sequential fashion. In recent years, online multi-task
learning has attracted extensive research attention [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
Following the online setting, particularly from [6, 7], at each round t, the learner receives a set of K
observations from K tasks and predicts the output label for each of these observations. Subsequently,
the learner receives the true labels and updates the model(s) as necessary. This sequence is repeated
over the entire data, simulating a data stream. Our approach follows an error-driven update rule in
which the model for a given task is updated only when the prediction for that task is in error. The goal
of an online learner is to minimize errors compared to the full hindsight learner. The key challenge
in online learning with large number of tasks is to adaptively learn the model parameters and the
task relationships, which potentially change over time. Without manageable efficient updates at each
round, learning the task relationship matrix automatically may impose a severe computational burden.
In other words, we need to make predictions and update the models in an efficient real time manner.
We propose an online learning framework that efficiently learns multiple related tasks by estimating
the task relationship matrix from the data, along with the model parameters for each task. We learn
the model for each task by sharing data from related task directly. Our model provides a natural
way to specify the trade-off between learning the hypothesis from each task’s own (possibly quite
∗

Both student authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

