Minimax Optimal Alternating Minimization
for Kernel Nonparametric Tensor Learning

∗,†

Taiji Suzuki∗ , Heishiro Kanagawa†
Department of Mathematical and Computing Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology
∗
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency
∗
Center for Advanced Integrated Intelligence Research, RIKEN
s-taiji@is.titech.ac.jp, kanagawa.h.ab@m.titech.ac.jp
Hayato Kobayash, Nobuyuki Shimizu, Yukihiro Tagami
Yahoo Japan Corporation
{ hakobaya, nobushim, yutagami } @yahoo-corp.jp

Abstract
We investigate the statistical performance and computational efficiency of the
alternating minimization procedure for nonparametric tensor learning. Tensor
modeling has been widely used for capturing the higher order relations between
multimodal data sources. In addition to a linear model, a nonlinear tensor model has
been received much attention recently because of its high flexibility. We consider
an alternating minimization procedure for a general nonlinear model where the true
function consists of components in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS).
In this paper, we show that the alternating minimization method achieves linear
convergence as an optimization algorithm and that the generalization error of the
resultant estimator yields the minimax optimality. We apply our algorithm to some
multitask learning problems and show that the method actually shows favorable
performances.

1

Introduction

Tensor modeling is widely used for capturing the higher order relations between several data sources.
For example, it has been applied to spatiotemporal data analysis [19], multitask learning [20, 2, 14]
and collaborative filtering [15]. The success of tensor modeling is usually based on the low-rank
property of the target parameter. As in the matrix, the low-rank decomposition of tensors, e.g.,
canonical polyadic (CP) decomposition [10, 11] and Tucker decomposition [31], reduces the effective
dimension of the statistical model, improves the generalization error, and gives a better understanding
of the model based on an condensed representation of the target system.
Among several tensor models, linear models have been extensively studied from both theoretical
and practical points of views [16]. A difficulty of the tensor model analysis is that typical tensor
analysis problems usually fall under a non-convex problem and it is difficult to solve the problem.
To overcome the computational difficulty, several authors have proposed convex relaxation methods
[18, 23, 9, 30, 29]. Unfortunately, however, convex relaxation methods lose statistical optimality in
favor of computational efficiency [28].
Another promising approach is the alternating minimization procedure which alternately updates
each component of the tensor with the other fixed components. The method has shown a nice
performance in practice. Moreover, its theoretical analysis has also been given by several authors
[1, 13, 6, 3, 21, 36, 27, 37]. These theoretical analyses indicate that the estimator given by the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

