Faster Projection-free Convex Optimization over the
Spectrahedron
Dan Garber
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
dgarber@ttic.edu

Abstract
Minimizing a convex function over the spectrahedron, i.e., the set of all d ⇥ d
positive semidefinite matrices with unit trace, is an important optimization task
with many applications in optimization, machine learning, and signal processing. It
is also notoriously difficult to solve in large-scale since standard techniques require
to compute expensive matrix decompositions. An alternative is the conditional
gradient method (aka Frank-Wolfe algorithm) that regained much interest in recent
years, mostly due to its application to this specific setting. The key benefit of the
CG method is that it avoids expensive matrix decompositions all together, and
simply requires a single eigenvector computation per iteration, which is much more
efficient. On the downside, the CG method, in general, converges with an inferior
rate. The error for minimizing a -smooth function after t iterations scales like /t.
This rate does not improve even if the function is also strongly convex. In this work
we present a modification of the CG method tailored for the spectrahedron. The
per-iteration complexity of the method is essentially identical to that of the standard
CG method: only a single eigenvector computation is required. For minimizing an
↵-strongly convex and -smooth function, the expected error of the method after t
iterations is:
0
1
!4/3 ✓
p
◆2
⇤)
rank(X
O @min{ ,
, p
}A ,
t
↵ min (X⇤ )t
↵1/4 t
where rank(X⇤ ), min (X⇤ ) are the rank of the optimal solution and smallest nonzero eigenvalue, respectively. Beyond the significant improvement in convergence
rate, it also follows that when the optimum is low-rank, our method provides better
accuracy-rank tradeoff than the standard CG method. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first result that attains provably faster convergence rates for a CG variant
for optimization over the spectrahedron. We also present encouraging preliminary
empirical results.

1

Introduction

Minimizing a convex function over the set of positive semidefinite matrices with unit trace, aka
the spectrahedron, is an important optimization task which lies at the heart of many optimization,
machine learning, and signal processing tasks such as matrix completion [1, 13], metric learning
[21, 22], kernel matrix learning [16, 9], multiclass classification [2, 23], and more.
Since modern applications are mostly of very large scale, first-order methods are the obvious choice to
deal with this optimization problem. However, even these are notoriously difficult to apply, since most
of the popular gradient schemes require the computation of an orthogonal projection on each iteration
to enforce feasibility, which for the spectraheron, amounts to computing a full eigen-decomposition
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

