Automated scalable segmentation of neurons from
multispectral images

Uygar Sümbül
Grossman Center for the Statistics of Mind
and Dept. of Statistics, Columbia University

Douglas Roossien Jr.
University of Michigan Medical School

Fei Chen
MIT Media Lab and McGovern Institute

Nicholas Barry
MIT Media Lab and McGovern Institute

Edward S. Boyden
MIT Media Lab and McGovern Institute

Dawen Cai
University of Michigan Medical School

John P. Cunningham
Grossman Center for the Statistics of Mind
and Dept. of Statistics, Columbia University

Liam Paninski
Grossman Center for the Statistics of Mind
and Dept. of Statistics, Columbia University

Abstract
Reconstruction of neuroanatomy is a fundamental problem in neuroscience.
Stochastic expression of colors in individual cells is a promising tool, although its
use in the nervous system has been limited due to various sources of variability in
expression. Moreover, the intermingled anatomy of neuronal trees is challenging
for existing segmentation algorithms. Here, we propose a method to automate the
segmentation of neurons in such (potentially pseudo-colored) images. The method
uses spatio-color relations between the voxels, generates supervoxels to reduce
the problem size by four orders of magnitude before the final segmentation, and is
parallelizable over the supervoxels. To quantify performance and gain insight, we
generate simulated images, where the noise level and characteristics, the density
of expression, and the number of fluorophore types are variable. We also present
segmentations of real Brainbow images of the mouse hippocampus, which reveal
many of the dendritic segments.

1

Introduction

Studying the anatomy of individual neurons and the circuits they form is a classical approach
to understanding how nervous systems function since Ramón y Cajal’s founding work. Despite
a century of research, the problem remains open due to a lack of technological tools: mapping
neuronal structures requires a large field of view, a high resolution, a robust labeling technique, and
computational methods to sort the data. Stochastic labeling methods have been developed to endow
individual neurons with color tags [1, 2]. This approach to neural circuit mapping can utilize the
light microscope, provides a high-throughput and the potential to monitor the circuits over time, and
complements the dense, small scale connectomic studies using electron microscopy [3] with its large
field-of-view. However, its use has been limited due to its reliance on manual segmentation.
The initial stochastic, spectral labeling (Brainbow) method had a number of limitations for neuroscience applications including incomplete filling of neuronal arbors, disproportionate expression
of the nonrecombined fluorescent proteins in the transgene, suboptimal fluorescence intensity, and
color shift during imaging. Many of these limitations have since improved [4] and developments
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

