More Supervision, Less Computation:
Statistical-Computational Tradeoffs in Weakly
Supervised Learning

Xinyang Yi†∗

Zhaoran Wang‡∗ Zhuoran Yang‡∗ Constantine Caramanis† Han Liu‡
†
‡
The University of Texas at Austin
Princeton University
†
‡
{yixy,constantine}@utexas.edu
{zhaoran,zy6,hanliu}@princeton.edu
{∗: equal contribution}

Abstract
We consider the weakly supervised binary classiﬁcation problem where the labels
are randomly ﬂipped with probability 1 − α. Although there exist numerous algorithms for this problem, it remains theoretically unexplored how the statistical
accuracies and computational efﬁciency of these algorithms depend on the degree
of supervision, which is quantiﬁed by α. In this paper, we characterize the effect of
α by establishing the information-theoretic and computational boundaries, namely,
the minimax-optimal statistical accuracy that can be achieved by all algorithms,
and polynomial-time algorithms under an oracle computational model. For small
α, our result shows a gap between these two boundaries, which represents the computational price of achieving the information-theoretic boundary due to the lack of
supervision. Interestingly, we also show that this gap narrows as α increases. In
other words, having more supervision, i.e., more correct labels, not only improves
the optimal statistical accuracy as expected, but also enhances the computational
efﬁciency for achieving such accuracy.

1

Introduction

Practical classiﬁcation problems usually involve corrupted labels. Speciﬁcally, let {(xi , zi )}ni=1 be
n independent data points, where xi ∈ Rd is the covariate vector and zi ∈ {0, 1} is the uncorrupted
label. Instead of observing {(xi , zi )}ni=1 , we observe {(xi , yi )}ni=1 in which yi is the corrupted label.
In detail, with probability (1 − α), yi is chosen uniformly at random over {0, 1}, and with probability
α, yi = zi . Here α ∈ [0, 1] quantiﬁes the degree of supervision: a larger α indicates more supervision
since we have more uncorrupted labels in this case. In this paper, we are particularly interested in the
effect of α on the statistical accuracy and computational efﬁciency for parameter estimation in this
problem, particularly in the high dimensional settings where the dimension d is much larger than the
sample size n.
There exists a vast body of literature on binary classiﬁcation problems with corrupted labels. In
particular, the study of randomly perturbed labels dates back to [1] in the context of random classiﬁcation noise model. See, e.g., [12, 20] for a survey. Also, classiﬁcation problems with missing
labels are also extensively studied in the context of semi-supervised or weakly supervised learning
by [14, 17, 21], among others. Despite the extensive study on this problem, its information-theoretic
and computational boundaries remain unexplored in terms of theory. In a nutshell, the informationtheoretic boundary refers to the optimal statistical accuracy achievable by any algorithms, while the
computational boundary refers to the optimal statistical accuracy achievable by the algorithms under
a computational budget that has a polynomial dependence on the problem scale (d, n). Moreover,
it remains unclear how these two boundaries vary along with α. One interesting question to ask is
29th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

