Probing the Compositionality of Intuitive Functions

Eric Schulz
University College London
e.schulz@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Maarten Speekenbrink
University College London
m.speekenbrink@ucl.ac.uk

David Duvenaud
University of Toronto
duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu

Samuel J. Gershman
Harvard University
gershman@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
How do people learn about complex functional structure? Taking inspiration from
other areas of cognitive science, we propose that this is accomplished by harnessing
compositionality: complex structure is decomposed into simpler building blocks.
We formalize this idea within the framework of Bayesian regression using a grammar over Gaussian process kernels. We show that participants prefer compositional
over non-compositional function extrapolations, that samples from the human prior
over functions are best described by a compositional model, and that people perceive compositional functions as more predictable than their non-compositional but
otherwise similar counterparts. We argue that the compositional nature of intuitive
functions is consistent with broad principles of human cognition.

1

Introduction

Function learning underlies many intuitive judgments, such as the perception of time, space and
number. All of these tasks require the construction of mental representations that map inputs to
outputs. Since the space of such mappings is infinite, inductive biases are necessary to constrain the
plausible inferences. What is the nature of human inductive biases over functions?
It has been suggested that Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a good characterization of these inductive
biases [15]. As we describe more formally below, GPs are distributions over functions that can encode
properties such as smoothness, linearity, periodicity, and other inductive biases indicated by research
on human function learning [5, 3]. Lucas et al. [15] showed how Bayesian inference with GP priors
can unify previous rule-based and exemplar-based theories of function learning [18].
A major unresolved question is how people deal with complex functions that are not easily captured
by any simple GP. Insight into this question is provided by the observation that many complex
functions encountered in the real world can be broken down into compositions of simpler functions
[6, 11]. We pursue this idea theoretically and experimentally, by first defining a hypothetical
compositional grammar for intuitive functions (based on [6]) and then investigating whether this
grammar quantitatively predicts human function learning performance. We compare the compositional
model to a flexible non-compositional model (the spectral mixture representation proposed by [21]).
Both models use Bayesian inference to reason about functions, but differ in their inductive biases.
We show that (a) participants prefer compositional pattern extrapolations in both forced choice
and manual drawing tasks; (b) samples elicited from participants’ priors over functions are more
consistent with the compositional grammar; and (c) participants perceive compositional functions as
more predictable than non-compositional ones. Taken together, these findings provide support for the
compositional nature of intuitive functions.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

