Convex Two-Layer Modeling with Latent Structure

Vignesh Ganapathiraman† ,
Xinhua Zhang† ,
Yaoliang Yu∗ ,
Junfeng Wen]
†
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
∗
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, ] University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
{vganap2, zhangx}@uic.edu, yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca, junfengwen@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of structured predictors has been a long standing pursuit
in machine learning. Recently a conditional random field auto-encoder has been
proposed in a two-layer setting, allowing latent structured representation to be
automatically inferred. Aside from being nonconvex, it also requires the demanding
inference of normalization. In this paper, we develop a convex relaxation of
two-layer conditional model which captures latent structure and estimates model
parameters, jointly and optimally. We further expand its applicability by resorting
to a weaker form of inference—maximum a-posteriori. The flexibility of the model
is demonstrated on two structures based on total unimodularity—graph matching
and linear chain. Experimental results confirm the promise of the method.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade deep learning has achieved significant advances in many application areas [1].
By automating the acquisition of latent descriptive and predictive representation, they provide highly
effective models to capture the relationships between observed variables. Recently more refined deep
models have been proposed for structured output prediction, where several random variables for
prediction are statistically correlated [2–4]. Improved performance has been achieved in applications
such as image recognition and segmentation [5] and natural language parsing [6], amongst others.
So far, most deep models for structured output are designed for supervised learning where structured
labels are available. Recently an extension has been made to the unsupervised learning. [7] proposed
a conditional random field auto-encoder (CRF-AE)—a two-layer conditional model—where given
the observed data x, the latent structure y is first generated based on p(y|x), and then applied to
reconstruct the observations using p(x|y). The motivation is to find the predictive and discriminative
(rather than common but irrelevant) latent structure in the data. Along similar lines, several other
discriminative unsupervised learning methods are also available [8–11].
Extending auto-encoders X → Y → X to general two-layer models X → Y → Z is not hard. [12, 13]
addressed transliteration between two languages, where Z is the observed binary label indicating if
two words match, and higher accuracy can be achieved if we faithfully recover a letter-wise matching
represented by the unobserved structure Y . In essence, their model optimizes p(z|arg maxy p(y|x)),
uncovering the latent y via its mode under the first layer model. This is known as bi-level optimization
because the arg max of inner optimization is used. A soft variant adopts the mean of y [14]. In
general, conditional models yield more accurate predictions than generative models X −Y −Z (e.g.
multi-wing harmoniums/RBMs), unless the latter is trained in a discriminative fashion [15].
In computation, all methods require certain forms of tractability in inference. CRF-AE leverages
marginal inference on p(y|x)p(x|y) (over y) for EM. Contrastive divergence, instead, samples
from p(y|x) [11]. For some structures like graph matching, neither of them is tractable [16, 17]
(unless assuming first-order Markovian). In single-layer models, this challenge has been resolved
by max-margin estimation, which relies only on the MAP of p(y|x) [18]. This oracle is much less
demanding than sampling or normalization, as finding the most likely state can be much easier than
summarizing over all possible y. For example, MAP for graph matching can be solved by max-flow.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

