Solving Marginal MAP Problems with NP Oracles
and Parity Constraints

Yexiang Xue
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
yexiang@cs.cornell.edu
Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Zhiyuan Li∗
Institute of Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
lizhiyuan13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Carla P. Gomes, Bart Selman
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
{gomes,selman}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Arising from many applications at the intersection of decision-making and machine
learning, Marginal Maximum A Posteriori (Marginal MAP) problems unify the
two main classes of inference, namely maximization (optimization) and marginal
inference (counting), and are believed to have higher complexity than both of
them. We propose XOR_MMAP, a novel approach to solve the Marginal MAP
problem, which represents the intractable counting subproblem with queries to
NP oracles, subject to additional parity constraints. XOR_MMAP provides a constant
factor approximation to the Marginal MAP problem, by encoding it as a single
optimization in a polynomial size of the original problem. We evaluate our approach
in several machine learning and decision-making applications, and show that our
approach outperforms several state-of-the-art Marginal MAP solvers.

1

Introduction

Typical inference queries to make predictions and learn probabilistic models from data include the
maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference task, which computes the most likely assignment of a set
of variables, as well as the marginal inference task, which computes the probability of an event
according to the model. Another common query is the Marginal MAP (MMAP) problem, which
involves both maximization (optimization over a set of variables) and marginal inference (averaging
over another set of variables).
Marginal MAP problems arise naturally in many machine learning applications. For example, learning
latent variable models can be formulated as a MMAP inference problem, where the goal is to optimize
over the model’s parameters while marginalizing all the hidden variables. MMAP problems also arise
naturally in the context of decision-making under uncertainty, where the goal is to find a decision
(optimization) that performs well on average across multiple probabilistic scenarios (averaging).
The Marginal MAP problem is known to be NPPP -complete [18], which is commonly believed to be
harder than both MAP inference (NP-hard) and marginal inference (#P-complete). As supporting
evidence, MMAP problems are NP-hard even on tree structured probabilistic graphical models
[13]. Aside from attempts to solve MMAP problems exactly [17, 15, 14, 16], previous approximate
approaches fall into two categories, in general. The core idea of approaches in both categories is
∗

This research was done when Zhiyuan Li was an exchange student at Cornell University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

