A Constant-Factor Bi-Criteria Approximation
Guarantee for k-means++
Dennis Wei
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
dwei@us.ibm.com

Abstract
This paper studies the k-means++ algorithm for clustering as well as the class of D`
sampling algorithms to which k-means++ belongs. It is shown that for any constant
factor β > 1, selecting βk cluster centers by D` sampling yields a constant-factor
approximation to the optimal clustering with k centers, in expectation and without
conditions on the dataset. This result extends the previously known O(log k)
guarantee for the case β = 1 to the constant-factor bi-criteria regime. It also
improves upon an existing constant-factor bi-criteria result that holds only with
constant probability.

1

Introduction

The k-means problem and its variants constitute one of the most popular paradigms for clustering
[15]. Given a set of n data points, the task is to group them into k clusters, each defined by a cluster
center, such that the sum of distances from points to cluster centers (raised to a power `) is minimized.
Optimal clustering in this sense is known to be NP-hard [11, 3, 20, 6]. In practice, the most widely
used algorithm remains Lloyd’s [19] (often referred to as the k-means algorithm), which alternates
between updating centers given cluster assignments and re-assigning points to clusters.
In this paper, we study an enhancement to Lloyd’s algorithm known as k-means++ [4] and the more
general class of D` sampling algorithms to which k-means++ belongs. These algorithms select
cluster centers randomly from the given data points with probabilities proportional to their current
costs. The clustering can then be refined using Lloyd’s algorithm. D` sampling is attractive for
two reasons: First, it is guaranteed to yield an expected O(log k) approximation to the optimal
clustering with k centers [4]. Second, it is as simple as Lloyd’s algorithm, both conceptually as well
as computationally with O(nkd) running time in d dimensions.
The particular focus of this paper is on the setting where an optimal k-clustering remains the
benchmark but more than k cluster centers can be sampled to improve the approximation. Specifically,
it is shown that for any constant factor β > 1, if βk centers are chosen by D` sampling, then a
constant-factor approximation to the optimal k-clustering is obtained. This guarantee holds in
expectation and for all datasets, like the one in [4], and improves upon the O(log k) factor therein.
Such a result is known as a constant-factor bi-criteria approximation since both the optimal cost and
the relevant degrees of freedom (k in this case) are exceeded but only by constant factors.
In the context of clustering, bi-criteria approximation guarantees can be valuable because an appropriate number of clusters k is almost never known or pre-specified in practice. Approaches to
determining k from the data are ideally based on knowing how the optimal cost decreases as k
increases, but obtaining this optimal trade-off between cost and k is NP-hard as mentioned earlier.
Alternatively, a simpler algorithm (like k-means++) that has a constant-factor bi-criteria guarantee
would ensure that the trade-off curve generated by this algorithm deviates by no more than constant
factors along both axes from the optimal curve. This may be more appealing than a deviation along
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

