SEBOOST – Boosting Stochastic Learning Using
Subspace Optimization Techniques

Elad Richardson*1 Rom Herskovitz*1 Boris Ginsburg2 Michael Zibulevsky1
1
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 2 Nvidia INC
{eladrich,mzib}@cs.technion.ac.il {fornoch,boris.ginsburg}@gmail.com

Abstract
We present SEBOOST, a technique for boosting the performance of existing stochastic optimization methods. SEBOOST applies a secondary optimization process
in the subspace spanned by the last steps and descent directions. The method
was inspired by the SESOP optimization method, and has been adapted for the
stochastic learning. It can be applied on top of any existing optimization method
with no need to tweak the internal algorithm. We show that the method is able
to boost the performance of different algorithms, and make them more robust to
changes in their hyper-parameters. As the boosting steps of SEBOOST are applied
between large sets of descent steps, the additional subspace optimization hardly
increases the overall computational burden. We introduce hyper-parameters that
control the balance between the baseline method and the secondary optimization
process. The method was evaluated on several deep learning tasks, demonstrating
significant improvement in performance. Video presentation is given in [15]

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) based optimization methods are widely used for many different
learning problems. Given some objective function that we want to optimize, a vanilla gradient
descent method would simply take some fixed step in the direction of the current gradient. In
many learning problems the objective, or loss, function is averaged over the set of given training
examples. In that scenario calculating the loss over the entire training set would be expensive, and is
therefore approximated on a small batch, resulting in a stochastic algorithm that requires relatively
few calculations per step. The simplicity and efficiency of SGD algorithms have made them a
standard choice for many learning tasks, and specifically for deep learning [9, 6, 5, 10] . Although
the vanilla SGD has no memory of previous steps, they are usually utilized in some way, for example
using momentum [13]. Alternatively, the AdaGrad method uses the previous gradients in order to
normalize each component in the new gradient adaptively [3], while the ADAM method uses them to
estimate an adaptive moment [8]. In this work we utilize the knowledge of previous steps in spirit
of the Sequential Subspace Optimization (SESOP) framework [11]. The nature of SESOP allows
it to be easily merged with existing algorithms. Several such extensions were introduced over the
years to different fields, such as PCD-SESOP and SSF-SESOP, showing state-of-the-art results in
their matching fields [4, 17, 16].
The core idea of our method is as follows. At every outer iteration we first perform several steps
of a baseline stochastic optimization algorithm which are then summed up as an inner cumulative
stochastic step. Afterwards, we minimize the objective function over the affine subspace spanned
by the cumulative stochastic step, several previous outer steps and optional other directions. The
subspace optimization boosts the performance of the baseline algorithm, therefore our method is
called the Sequential Subspace Optimization Boosting method (SEBOOST).
*Equal contribution
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

