Value Iteration Networks
Aviv Tamar, Yi Wu, Garrett Thomas, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley

Abstract
We introduce the value iteration network (VIN): a fully differentiable neural network with a ‘planning module’ embedded within. VINs can learn to plan, and are
suitable for predicting outcomes that involve planning-based reasoning, such as
policies for reinforcement learning. Key to our approach is a novel differentiable
approximation of the value-iteration algorithm, which can be represented as a convolutional neural network, and trained end-to-end using standard backpropagation.
We evaluate VIN based policies on discrete and continuous path-planning domains,
and on a natural-language based search task. We show that by learning an explicit
planning computation, VIN policies generalize better to new, unseen domains.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have revolutionized supervised
learning for tasks such as object recognition, action recognition, and semantic segmentation [3, 15, 6,
19]. Recently, CNNs have been applied to reinforcement learning (RL) tasks with visual observations
such as Atari games [21], robotic manipulation [18], and imitation learning (IL) [9]. In these tasks, a
neural network (NN) is trained to represent a policy – a mapping from an observation of the system’s
state to an action, with the goal of representing a control strategy that has good long-term behavior,
typically quantified as the minimization of a sequence of time-dependent costs.
The sequential nature of decision making in RL is inherently different than the one-step decisions
in supervised learning, and in general requires some form of planning [2]. However, most recent
deep RL works [21, 18, 9] employed NN architectures that are very similar to the standard networks
used in supervised learning tasks, which typically consist of CNNs for feature extraction, and fully
connected layers that map the features to a probability distribution over actions. Such networks are
inherently reactive, and in particular, lack explicit planning computation. The success of reactive
policies in sequential problems is due to the learning algorithm, which essentially trains a reactive
policy to select actions that have good long-term consequences in its training domain.
To understand why planning can nevertheless be an important ingredient in a policy, consider the
grid-world navigation task depicted in Figure 1 (left), in which the agent can observe a map of its
domain, and is required to navigate between some obstacles to a target position. One hopes that after
training a policy to solve several instances of this problem with different obstacle configurations, the
policy would generalize to solve a different, unseen domain, as in Figure 1 (right). However, as we
show in our experiments, while standard CNN-based networks can be easily trained to solve a set of
such maps, they do not generalize well to new tasks outside this set, because they do not understand
the goal-directed nature of the behavior. This observation suggests that the computation learned by
reactive policies is different from planning, which is required to solve a new task1 .
1

In principle, with enough training data that covers all possible task configurations, and a rich enough policy
representation, a reactive policy can learn to map each task to its optimal policy. In practice, this is often
too expensive, and we offer a more data-efficient approach by exploiting a flexible prior about the planning
computation underlying the behavior.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

