Proximal Deep Structured Models

Shenlong Wang
University of Toronto
slwang@cs.toronto.edu

Sanja Fidler
University of Toronto
fidler@cs.toronto.edu

Raquel Urtasun
University of Toronto
urtasun@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Many problems in real-world applications involve predicting continuous-valued
random variables that are statistically related. In this paper, we propose a powerful
deep structured model that is able to learn complex non-linear functions which
encode the dependencies between continuous output variables. We show that
inference in our model using proximal methods can be efficiently solved as a feedfoward pass of a special type of deep recurrent neural network. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in the tasks of image denoising, depth refinement
and optical flow estimation.

1

Introduction

Many problems in real-world applications involve predicting a collection of random variables that
are statistically related. Over the past two decades, graphical models have been widely exploited
to encode these interactions in domains such as computer vision, natural language processing and
computational biology. However, these models are shallow and only a log linear combination of
hand-crafted features is learned [34]. This limits the ability to learn complex patterns, which is
particularly important nowadays as large amounts of data are available, facilitating learning.
In contrast, deep learning approaches learn complex data abstractions by compositing simple nonlinear transformations. In recent years, they have produced state-of-the-art results in many applications such as speech recognition [17], object recognition [21], stereo estimation [38], and machine
translation [33]. In some tasks, they have been shown to outperform humans, e.g., fine grained
categorization [7] and object classification [15].
Deep neural networks are typically trained using simple loss functions. Cross entropy or hinge
loss are used when dealing with discrete outputs, and squared loss when the outputs are continuous.
Multi-task approaches are popular, where the hope is that dependencies of the output will be captured
by sharing intermediate layers among tasks [9].
Deep structured models attempt to learn complex features by taking into account the dependencies
between the output variables. A variety of methods have been developed in the context of predicting
discrete outputs [7, 3, 31, 39]. Several techniques unroll inference and show how the forward
and backward passes of these deep structured models can be expressed as a set of standard layers
[1, 14, 31, 39]. This allows for fast end-to-end training on GPUs.
However, little to no attention has been given to deep structured models with continuous valued
output variables. One of the main reasons is that inference (even in the shallow model) is much less
well studied, and very few solutions exist. An exception are Markov random fields (MRFs) with
Gaussian potentials, where exact inference is possible (via message-passing) if the precision matrix is
positive semi-definite and satisfies the spectral radius condition [36]. A family of popular approaches
convert the continuous inference problem into a discrete task using particle methods [18, 32]. Specific
solvers have also been designed for certain types of potentials, e.g. polynomials [35] and piecewise
convex functions [37].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

