Exact Recovery of Hard Thresholding Pursuit

Xiao-Tong Yuan
B-DAT Lab
Nanjing University of Info. Sci.&Tech.
Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210044, China
xtyuan@nuist.edu.cn

Ping Li†‡ Tong Zhang†
†Depart. of Statistics and ‡Depart. of CS
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA
{pingli,tzhang}@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
The Hard Thresholding Pursuit (HTP) is a class of truncated gradient descent
methods for finding sparse solutions of ℓ0 -constrained loss minimization problems. The HTP-style methods have been shown to have strong approximation
guarantee and impressive numerical performance in high dimensional statistical
learning applications. However, the current theoretical treatment of these methods has traditionally been restricted to the analysis of parameter estimation consistency. It remains an open problem to analyze the support recovery performance
(a.k.a., sparsistency) of this type of methods for recovering the global minimizer
of the original NP-hard problem. In this paper, we bridge this gap by showing,
for the first time, that exact recovery of the global sparse minimizer is possible
for HTP-style methods under restricted strong condition number bounding conditions. We further show that HTP-style methods are able to recover the support
of certain relaxed sparse solutions without assuming bounded restricted strong
condition number. Numerical results on simulated data confirms our theoretical
predictions.

1

Introduction

In modern high dimensional data analysis tasks, a routinely faced challenge is that the number of
collected samples is substantially smaller than the dimensionality of features. In order to achieve
consistent estimation in such small-sample-large-feature settings, additional assumptions need to
be imposed on the model. Among others, the low-dimensional structure prior is the most popular
assumption made in high dimensional analysis. This structure can often be captured by imposing
sparsity constraint on model space, leading to the following ℓ0 -constrained minimization problem:
min f (x),

x∈Rp

s.t. ∥x∥0 ≤ k,

(1)

where f : Rp 7→ R is a smooth convex loss function and ∥x∥0 denotes the number of nonzero
entries in x. Due to the cardinality constraint, Problem (1) is not only non-convex, but also NP-hard
in general (Natarajan, 1995). Thus, it is desirable to develop efficient computational procedures to
approximately solve this problem.
When the loss function is squared regression error, Problem (1) reduces to the compressive sensing
problem (Donoho, 2006) for which a vast body of greedy selection algorithms have been proposed
including orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) (Pati et al., 1993), compressed sampling matching
pursuit (CoSaMP) (Needell & Tropp, 2009), hard thresholding pursuit (HTP) (Foucart, 2011) and iterative hard thresholding (IHT) (Blumensath & Davies, 2009) to name a few. The greedy algorithms
designed for compressive sensing can usually be generalized to minimize non-quadratic loss functions (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2010; Yuan & Yan, 2013; Bahmani et al., 2013). Comparing to those
convex-relaxation-based methods (Beck & Teboulle, 2009; Agarwal et al., 2010), these greedy se30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

