Integrated Perception with Recurrent Multi-Task
Neural Networks
Hakan Bilen
Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{hbilen,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Modern discriminative predictors have been shown to match natural intelligences in
specific perceptual tasks in image classification, object and part detection, boundary
extraction, etc. However, a major advantage that natural intelligences still have is
that they work well for all perceptual problems together, solving them efficiently
and coherently in an integrated manner. In order to capture some of these advantages in machine perception, we ask two questions: whether deep neural networks
can learn universal image representations, useful not only for a single task but for
all of them, and how the solutions to the different tasks can be integrated in this
framework. We answer by proposing a new architecture, which we call multinet, in
which not only deep image features are shared between tasks, but where tasks can
interact in a recurrent manner by encoding the results of their analysis in a common
shared representation of the data. In this manner, we show that the performance of
individual tasks in standard benchmarks can be improved first by sharing features
between them and then, more significantly, by integrating their solutions in the
common representation.

1

Introduction

Natural perception can extract complete interpretations of sensory data in a coherent and efficient
manner. By contrast, machine perception remains a collection of disjoint algorithms, each solving
specific information extraction sub-problems. Recent advances such as modern convolutional neural
networks have dramatically improved the performance of machines in individual perceptual tasks,
but it remains unclear how these could be integrated in the same seamless way as natural perception
does.
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning data representations for integrated perception. The
first question we ask is whether it is possible to learn universal data representations that can be used
to solve all sub-problems of interest. In computer vision, fine-tuning or retraining has been show
to be an effective method to transfer deep convolutional networks between different tasks [9, 29].
Here we show that, in fact, it is possible to learn a single, shared representation that performs well on
several sub-problems simultaneously, often as well or even better than specialised ones.
A second question, complementary to the one of feature sharing, is how different perceptual subtasks
should be combined. Since each subtask extracts a partial interpretation of the data, the problem
is to form a coherent picture of the data as a whole. We consider an incremental interpretation
scenario, where subtasks collaborate in parallel or sequentially in order to gradually enrich a shared
interpretation of the data, each contributing its own “dimension” to it. Informally, many computer
vision systems operate in this stratified manner, with different modules running in parallel or in
sequence (e.g. object detection followed by instance segmentation). The question is how this can be
done end-to-end and systematically.
In this paper, we develop an architecture, multinet (fig. 1), that provides an answer to such questions.
Multinet builds on the idea of a shared representation, called an integration space, which reflects both
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

