Attend, Infer, Repeat:
Fast Scene Understanding with Generative Models
S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa,
David Szepesvari, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Geoffrey E. Hinton
{aeslami,heess,theophane,tassa,dsz,korayk,geoffhinton}@google.com
Google DeepMind, London, UK

Abstract
We present a framework for efficient inference in structured image models that explicitly reason about objects. We achieve this by performing probabilistic inference
using a recurrent neural network that attends to scene elements and processes them
one at a time. Crucially, the model itself learns to choose the appropriate number
of inference steps. We use this scheme to learn to perform inference in partially
specified 2D models (variable-sized variational auto-encoders) and fully specified
3D models (probabilistic renderers). We show that such models learn to identify
multiple objects – counting, locating and classifying the elements of a scene –
without any supervision, e.g., decomposing 3D images with various numbers of
objects in a single forward pass of a neural network at unprecedented speed. We
further show that the networks produce accurate inferences when compared to
supervised counterparts, and that their structure leads to improved generalization.

1

Introduction

The human percept of a visual scene is highly structured. Scenes naturally decompose into objects
that are arranged in space, have visual and physical properties, and are in functional relationships with
each other. Artificial systems that interpret images in this way are desirable, as accurate detection of
objects and inference of their attributes is thought to be fundamental for many problems of interest.
Consider a robot whose task is to clear a table after dinner. To plan its actions it will need to determine
which objects are present, what classes they belong to and where each one is located on the table.
The notion of using structured models for image understanding has a long history (e.g., ‘vision
as inverse graphics’ [4]), however in practice it has been difficult to define models that are: (a)
expressive enough to capture the complexity of natural scenes, and (b) amenable to tractable inference.
Meanwhile, advances in deep learning have shown how neural networks can be used to make
sophisticated predictions from images using little interpretable structure (e.g., [10]). Here we explore
the intersection of structured probabilistic models and deep networks. Prior work on deep generative
methods (e.g., VAEs [9]) have been mostly unstructured, therefore despite producing impressive
samples and likelihood scores their representations have lacked interpretable meaning. On the other
hand, structured generative methods have largely been incompatible with deep learning, and therefore
inference has been hard and slow (e.g., via MCMC).
Our proposed framework achieves scene interpretation via learned, amortized inference, and it
imposes structure on its representation through appropriate partly- or fully-specified generative
models, rather than supervision from labels. It is important to stress that by training generative
models, the aim is not primarily to obtain good reconstructions, but to produce good representations,
in other words to understand scenes. We show experimentally that by incorporating the right kinds of
structures, our models produce representations that are more useful for downstream tasks than those
produced by VAEs or state-of-the-art generative models such as DRAW [3].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

