Multivariate tests of association based on univariate
tests
Ruth Heller
Department of Statistics and Operations Research
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, Israel 6997801
ruheller@gmail.com

Yair Heller
heller.yair@gmail.com

Abstract
For testing two vector random variables for independence, we propose testing
whether the distance of one vector from an arbitrary center point is independent
from the distance of the other vector from another arbitrary center point by a
univariate test. We prove that under minimal assumptions, it is enough to have
a consistent univariate independence test on the distances, to guarantee that the
power to detect dependence between the random vectors increases to one with
sample size. If the univariate test is distribution-free, the multivariate test will
also be distribution-free. If we consider multiple center points and aggregate
the center-specific univariate tests, the power may be further improved, and the
resulting multivariate test may have a distribution-free critical value for specific
aggregation methods (if the univariate test is distribution free). We show that certain
multivariate tests recently proposed in the literature can be viewed as instances
of this general approach. Moreover, we show in experiments that novel tests
constructed using our approach can have better power and computational time than
competing approaches.

1

Introduction

Let X ∈ <p and Y ∈ <q be random vectors, where p and q are positive integers. The null hypothesis
of independence is H0 : FXY = FX FY , where the joint distribution of (X, Y ) is denoted by FXY ,
and the distributions of X and Y , respectively, by FX and FY . If X is a categorical variable with K
categories, then the null hypothesis of independence is the null hypothesis in the K-sample problem,
H0 : F1 = . . . = FK , where Fk , k ∈ {1, . . . , K} is the distribution of Y in category k.
The problem of testing for independence of random vectors, as well as the K-sample problem on a
multivariate Y , against the general alternative H1 : FXY 6= FX FY , has received increased attention
in recent years. The most common approach is based on pairwise distances or similarity measures.
See (26), (6), (24), and (12) for consistent tests of independence, and (10), (25), (1), (22), (5), and (8)
for recent K-sample tests. Earlier tests based on nearest neighbours include (23) and (13). For the
K-sample problem, the practice of comparing multivariate distributions based on pairwise distances is
justified by the fact that, under mild conditions, the distributions differ if and only if the distributions
of within and between pairwise distances differ (19). Other innovative approaches have also been
considered in recent years. In (4) and (28), the authors suggest to reduce the multivariate data to
a lower dimensional sub-space by (random) projections. Recently, in (3) another approach was
introduced for the two sample problem, which is based on distances between analytic functions
representing each of the distributions. Their novel tests are almost surely consistent when randomly
selecting locations or frequencies and are fast to compute.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

