Stochastic Three-Composite Convex Minimization
Alp Yurtsever, B`ăng Công Vũ, and Volkan Cevher
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS)
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
alp.yurtsever@epfl.ch, bang.vu@epfl.ch, volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a stochastic optimization method for the minimization of the sum of
three convex functions, one of which has Lipschitz continuous gradient as well
as restricted strong convexity. Our approach is most suitable in the setting where
it is computationally advantageous to process smooth term in the decomposition
with its stochastic gradient estimate and the other two functions separately with
their proximal operators, such as doubly regularized empirical risk minimization
problems. We prove the convergence characterization of the proposed algorithm in
expectation under the standard assumptions for the stochastic gradient estimate of
the smooth term. Our method operates in the primal space and can be considered as
a stochastic extension of the three-operator splitting method. Numerical evidence
supports the effectiveness of our method in real-world problems.

1

Introduction

We propose a stochastic optimization method for the three-composite minimization problem:
minimize f (x) + g(x) + h(x),
x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R and g : Rd → R are proper, lower semicontinuous convex functions that admit
tractable proximal operators, and h : Rd → R is a smooth function with restricted strong convexity.
We assume that we have access to unbiased, stochastic estimates of the gradient of h in the sequel,
which is key to scale up optimization and to address streaming settings where data arrive in time.
Template (1) covers a large number of applications in machine learning, statistics, and signal processing by appropriately choosing the individual terms. Operator splitting methods are powerful in this
setting, since they reduce the complex problem (1) into smaller subproblems. These algorithms are
easy to implement, and they typically exhibit state-of-the-art performance.
To our knowledge, there is no operator splitting framework that can currently tackle template (1)
using stochastic gradient of h and the proximal operators of f and g separately, which is critical to
the scalability of the methods. This paper specifically bridges this gap.
Our basic framework is closely related to the deterministic three operator splitting method proposed
in [11], but we avoid the computation of the gradient ∇h and instead work with its unbiased estimates.
We provide rigorous convergence guarantees for our approach and provide guidance in selecting the
learning rate under different scenarios.
Road map. Section 2 introduces the basic optimization background. Section 3 then presents the
main algorithm and provides its convergence characterization. Section 4 places our contributions in
light of the existing work. Numerical evidence that illustrates our theory appears in Section 5. We
relegate the technical proofs to the supplementary material.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

