Mutual information for symmetric rank-one matrix
estimation: A proof of the replica formula

Jean Barbier, Mohamad Dia and Nicolas Macris
Laboratoire de Théorie des Communications, Faculté Informatique et Communications,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015, Suisse.
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch
Florent Krzakala
Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, CNRS, PSL Universités et Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Sorbonne Universités et Université Pierre & Marie Curie, 75005, Paris, France.
florent.krzakala@ens.fr
Thibault Lesieur and Lenka Zdeborová
Institut de Physique Théorique, CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
lesieur.thibault@gmail.com,lenka.zdeborova@gmail.com

Abstract
Factorizing low-rank matrices has many applications in machine learning and statistics. For probabilistic models in the Bayes optimal setting, a general expression
for the mutual information has been proposed using heuristic statistical physics
computations, and proven in few specific cases. Here, we show how to rigorously
prove the conjectured formula for the symmetric rank-one case. This allows to
express the minimal mean-square-error and to characterize the detectability phase
transitions in a large set of estimation problems ranging from community detection to sparse PCA. We also show that for a large set of parameters, an iterative
algorithm called approximate message-passing is Bayes optimal. There exists,
however, a gap between what currently known polynomial algorithms can do and
what is expected information theoretically. Additionally, the proof technique has
an interest of its own and exploits three essential ingredients: the interpolation
method introduced in statistical physics by Guerra, the analysis of the approximate
message-passing algorithm and the theory of spatial coupling and threshold saturation in coding. Our approach is generic and applicable to other open problems in
statistical estimation where heuristic statistical physics predictions are available.
Consider the following probabilistic rank-one matrix estimation problem: one has access to
noisy observations w = (wij )ni,j=1 of the pair-wise product of the components of a vector
s = (s1 , . . . , sn )| ∈ Rn with i.i.d components distributed as Si ∼ P0 , i = 1, . . . , n. The entries
of w are observed
√ through a noisy element-wise (possibly non-linear) output probabilistic channel
Pout (wij |si sj / n). The goal is to estimate the vector s from w assuming that both P0 and Pout are
known and independent of n (noise is symmetric so that wij = wji ). Many important problems in
statistics and machine learning can be expressed in this way, such as sparse PCA [1], the Wigner
spiked model [2, 3], community detection [4] or matrix completion [5].
Proving a result initially derived by a heuristic method from statistical physics, we give an explicit
expression for the mutual information (MI) and the information theoretic minimal mean-square-error
(MMSE) in the asymptotic n → ∞ limit. Our results imply that for a large region of parameters,
the posterior marginal expectations of the underlying signal components (often assumed intractable
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

