Learning Sparse Gaussian Graphical Models with
Overlapping Blocks

1

Mohammad Javad Hosseini1
Su-In Lee1,2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle
2
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle
{hosseini, suinlee}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We present a novel framework, called GRAB (GRaphical models with overlApping
Blocks), to capture densely connected components in a network estimate. GRAB
takes as input a data matrix of p variables and n samples and jointly learns both
a network of the p variables and densely connected groups of variables (called
‘blocks’). GRAB has four major novelties as compared to existing network estimation methods: 1) It does not require blocks to be given a priori. 2) Blocks
can overlap. 3) It can jointly learn a network structure and overlapping blocks. 4)
It solves a joint optimization problem with the block coordinate descent method
that is convex in each step. We show that GRAB reveals the underlying network
structure substantially better than four state-of-the-art competitors on synthetic data.
When applied to cancer gene expression data, GRAB outperforms its competitors
in revealing known functional gene sets and potentially novel cancer driver genes.

1

Introduction

Many real-world networks contain subsets of variables densely connected to one another, a property
called modularity (Fig 1A); however, standard network inference methods do not incorporate this
property. As an example, biologists are increasingly interested in understanding how thousands of
genes interact with each other on the basis of gene expression data that measure expression levels of
p genes across n samples. This has stimulated considerable research into the structure estimation
of a network from high-dimensional data (p
n). It is well-known that the network structure
corresponds to the non-zero pattern of the inverse covariance matrix, ⌃ 1 [1]. Thus, obtaining a
sparse estimate of ⌃ 1 by using `1 penalty has been a standard approach to inferring a network, a
method called graphical lasso [2]. However, applying an `1 penalty to each edge fails to reflect the
fact that genes involved in similar functions are more likely to be connected with each other and that
how genes are organized into functional modules are often not known.
We present a novel structural prior, called GRAB prior, which encourages the network estimate to
be dense within a block (i.e, a subset of variables) and sparse between blocks, where blocks are not
given a priori. Fig 1B illustrates the effectiveness of the GRAB prior (bottom) in a high-dimensional
setting (p = 200 and n = 100), where it is difficult to reveal the true underlying network by using
the graphical lasso (GLasso) (top). The major novelty of GRAB is four-fold:
First, unlike previous work [3, 4, 5], GRAB allows each variable to belong to more than one block,
which is an important property of many real-world networks. For example, genes important in disease
processes are often involved in multiple functional modules [6], and identifying such genes would be
of great scientific interest (Section 4.2). Although existing methods to learn non-overlapping blocks
allow edges between different blocks, they use stronger regularization parameters for between-block
edges, which decreases the power to detect variables associated with multiple blocks.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

