High resolution neural connectivity from incomplete
tracing data using nonnegative spline regression

Kameron Decker Harris
Applied Mathematics, U. of Washington
kamdh@uw.edu

Stefan Mihalas
Allen Institute for Brain Science
Applied Mathematics, U. of Washington
stefanm@alleninstitute.org

Eric Shea-Brown
Applied Mathematics, U. of Washington
Allen Institute for Brain Science
etsb@uw.edu

Abstract
Whole-brain neural connectivity data are now available from viral tracing experiments, which reveal the connections between a source injection site and elsewhere
in the brain. These hold the promise of revealing spatial patterns of connectivity
throughout the mammalian brain. To achieve this goal, we seek to fit a weighted,
nonnegative adjacency matrix among 100 µm brain “voxels” using viral tracer data.
Despite a multi-year experimental effort, injections provide incomplete coverage,
and the number of voxels in our data is orders of magnitude larger than the number
of injections, making the problem severely underdetermined. Furthermore, projection data are missing within the injection site because local connections there are
not separable from the injection signal.
We use a novel machine-learning algorithm to meet these challenges and develop a
spatially explicit, voxel-scale connectivity map of the mouse visual system. Our
method combines three features: a matrix completion loss for missing data, a
smoothing spline penalty to regularize the problem, and (optionally) a low rank
factorization. We demonstrate the consistency of our estimator using synthetic data
and then apply it to newly available Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas data for
the visual system. Our algorithm is significantly more predictive than current state
of the art approaches which assume regions to be homogeneous. We demonstrate
the efficacy of a low rank version on visual cortex data and discuss the possibility
of extending this to a whole-brain connectivity matrix at the voxel scale.

1

Introduction

Although the study of neural connectivity is over a century old, starting with pioneering neuroscientists
who identified the importance of networks for determining brain function, most knowledge of
anatomical neural network structure is limited to either detailed description of small subsystems
[2, 9, 14, 26] or to averaged connectivity between larger regions [7, 21]. We focus our attention
on spatial, structural connectivity at the mesoscale: a coarser scale than that of single neurons or
cortical columns but finer than whole brain regions. Thanks to the development of new tracing
techniques, image processing algorithms, and high-throughput methods, data at this resolution are
now accessible in animals such as the fly [12, 19] and mouse [15, 18]. We present a novel regression
technique tailored to the challenges of learning spatially refined mesoscale connectivity from neural
tracing experiments. We have designed this technique with neural data in mind and will use this
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

