Geometric Dirichlet Means algorithm
for topic inference

Mikhail Yurochkin
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
moonfolk@umich.edu

XuanLong Nguyen
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
xuanlong@umich.edu

Abstract
We propose a geometric algorithm for topic learning and inference that is built on
the convex geometry of topics arising from the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
model and its nonparametric extensions. To this end we study the optimization of a
geometric loss function, which is a surrogate to the LDA’s likelihood. Our method
involves a fast optimization based weighted clustering procedure augmented with
geometric corrections, which overcomes the computational and statistical inefficiencies encountered by other techniques based on Gibbs sampling and variational
inference, while achieving the accuracy comparable to that of a Gibbs sampler. The
topic estimates produced by our method are shown to be statistically consistent
under some conditions. The algorithm is evaluated with extensive experiments on
simulated and real data.

1

Introduction

Most learning and inference algorithms in the probabilistic topic modeling literature can be delineated
along two major lines: the variational approximation popularized in the seminal paper of Blei et al.
(2003), and the sampling based approach studied by Pritchard et al. (2000) and other authors. Both
classes of inference algorithms, their virtues notwithstanding, are known to exhibit certain deficiencies,
which can be traced back to the need for approximating or sampling from the posterior distributions
of the latent variables representing the topic labels. Since these latent variables are not geometrically
intrinsic — any permutation of the labels yields the same likelihood — the manipulation of these
redundant quantities tend to slow down the computation, and compromise with the learning accuracy.
In this paper we take a convex geometric perspective of the Latent Dirichlet Allocation, which may
be obtained by integrating out the latent topic label variables. As a result, topic learning and inference
may be formulated as a convex geometric problem: the observed documents correspond to points
randomly drawn from a topic polytope, a convex set whose vertices represent the topics to be inferred.
The original paper of Blei et al. (2003) (see also Hofmann (1999)) contains early hints about a convex
geometric viewpoint, which is left unexplored. This viewpoint had laid dormant for quite some time,
until studied in depth in the work of Nguyen and co-workers, who investigated posterior contraction
behaviors for the LDA both theoretically and practically (Nguyen, 2015; Tang et al., 2014).
Another fruitful perspective on topic modeling can be obtained by partially stripping away the
distributional properties of the probabilistic model and turning the estimation problem into a form
of matrix factorization (Deerwester et al., 1990; Xu et al., 2003; Anandkumar et al., 2012; Arora
et al., 2012). We call this the linear subspace viewpoint. For instance, the Latent Semantic Analysis
approach (Deerwester et al., 1990), which can be viewed as a precursor of the LDA model, looks
to find a latent subspace via singular-value decomposition, but has no topic structure. Notably, the
RecoverKL by Arora et al. (2012) is one of the recent fast algorithms with provable guarantees
coming from the linear subspace perspective.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

