End-to-End Kernel Learning with
Supervised Convolutional Kernel Networks

Julien Mairal
Inria∗
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new image representation based on a multilayer kernel
machine. Unlike traditional kernel methods where data representation is decoupled
from the prediction task, we learn how to shape the kernel with supervision. We
proceed by first proposing improvements of the recently-introduced convolutional
kernel networks (CKNs) in the context of unsupervised learning; then, we derive
backpropagation rules to take advantage of labeled training data. The resulting
model is a new type of convolutional neural network, where optimizing the filters
at each layer is equivalent to learning a linear subspace in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS). We show that our method achieves reasonably competitive
performance for image classification on some standard “deep learning” datasets
such as CIFAR-10 and SVHN, and also for image super-resolution, demonstrating
the applicability of our approach to a large variety of image-related tasks.

1

Introduction

In the past years, deep neural networks such as convolutional or recurrent ones have become highly
popular for solving various prediction problems, notably in computer vision and natural language
processing. Conceptually close to approaches that were developed several decades ago (see, [13]),
they greatly benefit from the large amounts of labeled data that have been made available recently,
allowing to learn huge numbers of model parameters without worrying too much about overfitting.
Among other reasons explaining their success, the engineering effort of the deep learning community
and various methodological improvements have made it possible to learn in a day on a GPU complex
models that would have required weeks of computations on a traditional CPU (see, e.g., [10, 12, 23]).
Before the resurgence of neural networks, non-parametric models based on positive definite kernels
were one of the most dominant topics in machine learning [22]. These approaches are still widely
used today because of several attractive features. Kernel methods are indeed versatile; as long as a
positive definite kernel is specified for the type of data considered—e.g., vectors, sequences, graphs,
or sets—a large class of machine learning algorithms originally defined for linear models may be
used. This family include supervised formulations such as support vector machines and unsupervised
ones such as principal or canonical component analysis, or K-means and spectral clustering. The
problem of data representation is thus decoupled from that of learning theory and algorithms. Kernel
methods also admit natural mechanisms to control the learning capacity and reduce overfitting [22].
On the other hand, traditional kernel methods suffer from several drawbacks. The first one is their
computational complexity, which grows quadratically with the sample size due to the computation of
the Gram matrix. Fortunately, significant progress has been achieved to solve the scalability issue,
either by exploiting low-rank approximations of the kernel matrix [28, 31], or with random sampling
techniques for shift-invariant kernels [21]. The second disadvantage is more critical; by decoupling
∗

Thoth team, Inria Grenoble, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

