Structured Sparse Regression via Greedy
Hard-thresholding
Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research India

Nikhil Rao
Technicolor

Inderjit Dhillon
UT Austin

Abstract
Several learning applications require solving high-dimensional regression problems
where the relevant features belong to a small number of (overlapping) groups. For
very large datasets and under standard sparsity constraints, hard thresholding
methods have proven to be extremely efficient, but such methods require NP hard
projections when dealing with overlapping groups. In this paper, we show that
such NP-hard projections can not only be avoided by appealing to submodular
optimization, but such methods come with strong theoretical guarantees even
in the presence of poorly conditioned data (i.e. say when two features have
correlation 0.99), which existing analyses cannot handle. These methods exhibit
an interesting computation-accuracy trade-off and can be extended to significantly
harder problems such as sparse overlapping groups. Experiments on both real and
synthetic data validate our claims and demonstrate that the proposed methods are
orders of magnitude faster than other greedy and convex relaxation techniques for
learning with group-structured sparsity.

1

Introduction

High dimensional problems where the regressor belongs to a small number of groups play a critical
role in many machine learning and signal processing applications, such as computational biology and
multitask learning. In most of these cases, the groups overlap, i.e., the same feature can belong to
multiple groups. For example, gene pathways overlap in computational biology applications, and
parent-child pairs of wavelet transform coefficients overlap in signal processing applications.
The existing state-of-the-art methods for solving such group sparsity structured regression problems
can be categorized into two broad classes: a) convex relaxation based methods , b) iterative hard
thresholding (IHT) or greedy methods. In practice, IHT methods tend to be significantly more
scalable than the (group-)lasso style methods that solve a convex program. But, these methods
require a certain projection operator which in general is NP-hard to compute and often certain simple
heuristics are used with relatively weak theoretical guarantees. Moreover, existing guarantees for
both classes of methods require relatively restrictive assumptions on the data, like Restricted Isometry
Property or variants thereof [2, 7, 16], that are unlikely to hold in most common applications. In fact,
even under such settings, the group sparsity based convex programs offer at most polylogarithmic
gains over standard sparsity based methods [16].
Concretely, let us consider the following linear model:
y = Xw⇤ + ,

(1)

where ⇠ N (0, 2 I), X 2 Rn⇥p , each row of X is sampled i.i.d. s.t. xi ⇠ N (0, ⌃), 1  i  n,
and w⇤ is a k ⇤ -group sparse vector i.e. w⇤ can be expressed in terms of only k ⇤ groups, Gj ✓ [p].

The existing analyses for both convex as well as hard thresholding based methods require  =
1 / p  c, where c is an absolute constant (like say 3) and i is the i-th largest eigenvalue of ⌃.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

