Sampling for Bayesian Program Learning

Kevin Ellis
Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
ellisk@mit.edu

Armando Solar-Lezama
CSAIL
MIT
asolar@csail.mit.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Towards learning programs from data, we introduce the problem of sampling
programs from posterior distributions conditioned on that data. Within this setting,
we propose an algorithm that uses a symbolic solver to efficiently sample programs.
The proposal combines constraint-based program synthesis with sampling via
random parity constraints. We give theoretical guarantees on how well the samples
approximate the true posterior, and have empirical results showing the algorithm is
efficient in practice, evaluating our approach on 22 program learning problems in
the domains of text editing and computer-aided programming.

1

Introduction

Learning programs from examples is a central problem in artificial intelligence, and many recent
approaches draw on techniques from machine learning. Connectionist approaches, like the Neural
Turing Machine [1, 2] and symbolic approaches, like Hierarchical Bayesian Program Learning [3,
4, 5], couple a probabilistic learning framework with either gradient- or sampling-based search
procedures. In this work, we consider the problem of Bayesian inference over program spaces. We
combine solver-based program synthesis [6] and sampling via random projections [7], showing how
to sample from posterior distributions over programs where the samples come from a distribution
provably arbitrarily close to the true posterior. The new approach is implemented in a system called
P ROGRAM S AMPLE and evaluated on a set of program induction problems that include list and string
manipulation routines.
1.1

Motivation and problem statement

Consider the problem of learning string edit programs, a well studied domain for programming
by example. Often end users provide these examples and are unwilling to give more than one
instance, which leaves the target program highly
ambiguous. We model this ambiguity by sampling string edit programs, allowing us to learn
from very few examples (Figure 1) and offer
different plausible solutions. Our sampler also
incorporates a description-length prior to bias
us towards simpler programs.

Input
“1/21/2001”

Output
“01”

substr(pos(’0’,-1),-1)
const(’01’)
substr(-2,-1)

“last 0 til end”
“output 01”
“take last two”

Figure 1: Learning string manipulation programs
by example (top input/output pair). Our system receives data like that shown above and then sampled
the programs shown below.

Another program learning domain comes from computer-aided programming, where the goal is
to synthesize algorithms from either examples or formal specifications. This problem can be ill
posed because many programs may satisfy the specification or examples. When this ambiguity
arises, P ROGRAM S AMPLE proposes multiple implementations with a bias towards shorter or simpler
ones. The samples can also be used to efficiently approximate the posterior predictive distribution,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

