Active Learning with Oracle Epiphany

Tzu-Kuo Huang ∗
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
Pittsburgh, PA 15201
Ara Vartanian
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison, WI 53706

Saleema Amershi
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052

Lihong Li
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
Xiaojin Zhu
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison, WI 53706

Abstract
We present a theoretical analysis of active learning with more realistic interactions
with human oracles. Previous empirical studies have shown oracles abstaining on
difficult queries until accumulating enough information to make label decisions.
We formalize this phenomenon with an “oracle epiphany model” and analyze active
learning query complexity under such oracles for both the realizable and the agnostic cases. Our analysis shows that active learning is possible with oracle epiphany,
but incurs an additional cost depending on when the epiphany happens. Our results
suggest new, principled active learning approaches with realistic oracles.

1

Introduction

There is currently a wide gap between theory and practice of active learning with oracle interaction.
Theoretical active learning assumes an omniscient oracle. Given a query x, the oracle simply
answers its label y by drawing from the conditional distribution p(y | x). This oracle model is
motivated largely by its convenience for analysis. However, there is mounting empirical evidence
from psychology and human-computer interaction research that humans behave in far more complex
ways. The oracle may abstain on some queries [Donmez and Carbonell, 2008] (note this is distinct
from classifier abstention [Zhang and Chaudhuri, 2014, El-Yaniv and Wiener, 2010]), or their answers
can be influenced by the identity and order of previous queries [Newell and Ruths, 2016, Sarkar et al.,
2016, Kulesza et al., 2014] and by incentives [Shah and Zhou, 2015]. Theoretical active learning
has yet to account for such richness in human behaviors, which are critical to designing principled
algorithms to effectively learn from human annotators.
This paper takes a step toward bridging this gap. Specifically, we formalize and analyze the phenomenon of “oracle epiphany.” Consider active learning from a human oracle to build a webpage
classifier on basketball sport vs. others. It is well-known in practice that no matter how simple
the task looks, the oracle can encounter difficult queries. The oracle may easily answer webpage
queries that are obviously about basketball or obviously not about the sport, until she encounters
a webpage on basketball jerseys. Here, the oracle cannot immediately decide how to label (“Does
this jersey webpage qualify as a webpage about basketball?”). One solution is to allow the oracle
to abstain by answering with a special I-don’t-know label [Donmez and Carbonell, 2008]. More
interestingly, Kulesza et al. [2014] demonstrated that with proper user interface support, the oracle
may temporarily abstain on similar queries but then have an “epiphany”: she may suddenly decide
how to label all basketball apparel-related webpages. Empirical evidence in [Kulesza et al., 2014]
suggests that epiphany may be induced by the accumulative effect of seeing multiple similar queries.
If a future basketball-jersey webpage query arrives, the oracle will no longer abstain but will answer
∗

Part of this work was done while the author was with Microsoft Research.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

