Convergence guarantees for kernel-based quadrature
rules in misspecified settings
Motonobu Kanagawa∗ , Bharath K Sriperumbudur† , Kenji Fukumizu∗
∗
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
†
Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
kanagawa@ism.ac.jp, bks18@psu.edu, fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
Kernel-based quadrature rules are
√ becoming important in machine learning and
statistics, as they achieve super- n convergence rates in numerical integration,
and thus provide alternatives to Monte Carlo integration in challenging settings
where integrands are expensive to evaluate or where integrands are high dimensional. These rules are based on the assumption that the integrand has a certain
degree of smoothness, which is expressed as that the integrand belongs to a certain reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). However, this assumption can be
violated in practice (e.g., when the integrand is a black box function), and no general theory has been established for the convergence of kernel quadratures in such
misspecified settings. Our contribution is in proving that kernel quadratures can
be consistent even when the integrand does not belong to the assumed RKHS,
i.e., when the integrand is less smooth than assumed. Specifically, we derive convergence rates that depend on the (unknown) lesser smoothness of the integrand,
where the degree of smoothness is expressed via powers of RKHSs or via Sobolev
spaces.

1

Introduction

Numerical integration, or quadrature, is a fundamental task in the construction of various statistical
and machine learning algorithms. For instance, in Bayesian learning, numerical integration is generally required for the computation of marginal likelihood in model selection, and for the marginalization of parameters in fully Bayesian prediction, etc [20]. It also offers flexibility to probabilistic
modeling, since, e.g., it enables us to use a prior that is not conjugate with a likelihood function.
Let P be a (known) probability
distribution on a measurable space X and f be an integrand on X .
∫
Suppose that the integral f (x)dP (x) has no closed form solution. One standard form of numerical
integration is to approximate the integral as a weighted sum of function values f (X1 ), . . . , f (Xn )
by appropriately choosing the points X1 , . . . , Xn ∈ X and weights w1 , . . . , wn ∈ R:
∫
n
∑
wi f (Xi ) ≈ f (x)dP (x).
(1)
i=1

For example, the simplest Monte Carlo method generates the points X1 , . . . , Xn as an i.i.d. sample
from P and uses equal weights w1 = · · · = wn = 1/n. Convergence rates of such Monte Carlo
methods are of the form n−1/2 , which can be slow for practical purposes. For instance, in situations
where the evaluation of the integrand requires heavy computations, n should be small and Monte
Carlo would perform poorly; such situations typically appear in modern scientific and engineering
applications, and thus quadratures with faster convergence rates are desirable [18].
One way of achieving faster rates is to exploit one’s prior knowledge or assumption about the integrand (e.g. the degree of smoothness) in the construction of a weighted point set {(wi , Xi )}ni=1 .
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

