Boosting with Abstention
Corinna Cortes
Google Research
New York, NY 10011

Giulia DeSalvo
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google
New York, NY 10012

corinna@google.com

desalvo@cims.nyu.edu

mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present a new boosting algorithm for the key scenario of binary classification
with abstention where the algorithm can abstain from predicting the label of a point,
at the price of a fixed cost. At each round, our algorithm selects a pair of functions,
a base predictor and a base abstention function. We define convex upper bounds
for the natural loss function associated to this problem, which we prove to be
calibrated with respect to the Bayes solution. Our algorithm benefits from general
margin-based learning guarantees which we derive for ensembles of pairs of base
predictor and abstention functions, in terms of the Rademacher complexities of the
corresponding function classes. We give convergence guarantees for our algorithm
along with a linear-time weak-learning algorithm for abstention stumps. We also
report the results of several experiments suggesting that our algorithm provides a
significant improvement in practice over two confidence-based algorithms.

1

Introduction

Classification with abstention is a key learning scenario where the algorithm can abstain from making
a prediction, at the price of incurring a fixed cost. This is the natural scenario in a variety of common
and important applications. An example is spoken-dialog applications where the system can redirect
a call to an operator to avoid the cost of incorrectly assigning a category to a spoken utterance and
misguiding the dialog manager. This requires the availability of an operator, which incurs a fixed and
predefined price. Other examples arise in the design of a search engine or an information extraction
system, where, rather than taking the risk of displaying an irrelevant document, the system can resort
to the help of a more sophisticated, but more time-consuming classifier. More generally, this learning
scenario arises in a wide range of applications including health, bioinformatics, astronomical event
detection, active learning, and many others, where abstention is an acceptable option with some cost.
Classification with abstention is thus a highly relevant problem.
The standard approach for tackling this problem is via confidence-based abstention: a real-valued
function h is learned for the classification problem and the points x for which its magnitude |h(x)| is
smaller than some threshold are rejected. Bartlett and Wegkamp [1] gave a theoretical analysis of
this approach based on consistency. They introduced a discontinuous loss function taking into account
the cost for rejection, upper-bounded that loss by a convex and continuous Double Hinge Loss (DHL)
surrogate, and derived an algorithm based on that convex surrogate loss. Their work inspired a series
of follow-up papers that developed both the theory and practice behind confidence-based abstention
[32, 15, 31]. Further related works can be found in Appendix A.
In this paper, we present a solution to the problem of classification with abstention that radically
departs from the confidence-based approach. We introduce a general model where a pair (h, r)
for a classifier h and rejection function r are learned simultaneously. Under this novel framework,
we present a Boosting-style algorithm with Abstention, BA, that learns accurately the classifier
and abstention functions. Note that the terminology of “boosting with abstention” was used by
Schapire and Singer [26] to refer to a scenario where a base classifier is allowed to abstain, but
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

