Scalable Adaptive Stochastic Optimization Using
Random Projections

Gabriel Krummenacher♦ ∗
gabriel.krummenacher@inf.ethz.ch
Yannic Kilcher♦
yannic.kilcher@inf.ethz.ch

Brian McWilliams♥ ∗
brian@disneyresearch.com
Joachim M. Buhmann♦
jbuhmann@inf.ethz.ch

Nicolai Meinshausen♣
meinshausen@stat.math.ethz.ch
♦

Institute for Machine Learning, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
♣
Seminar for Statistics, Department of Mathematics, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
♥
Disney Research, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
Adaptive stochastic gradient methods such as A DAG RAD have gained popularity in
particular for training deep neural networks. The most commonly used and studied
variant maintains a diagonal matrix approximation to second order information
by accumulating past gradients which are used to tune the step size adaptively. In
certain situations the full-matrix variant of A DAG RAD is expected to attain better
performance, however in high dimensions it is computationally impractical. We
present A DA - LR and R ADAG RAD two computationally efficient approximations
to full-matrix A DAG RAD based on randomized dimensionality reduction. They are
able to capture dependencies between features and achieve similar performance to
full-matrix A DAG RAD but at a much smaller computational cost. We show that the
regret of A DA - LR is close to the regret of full-matrix A DAG RAD which can have
an up-to exponentially smaller dependence on the dimension than the diagonal
variant. Empirically, we show that A DA - LR and R ADAG RAD perform similarly to
full-matrix A DAG RAD. On the task of training convolutional neural networks as
well as recurrent neural networks, R ADAG RAD achieves faster convergence than
diagonal A DAG RAD.

1

Introduction

Recently, so-called adaptive stochastic optimization algorithms have gained popularity for large-scale
convex and non-convex optimization problems. Among these, A DAG RAD [9] and its variants [21]
have received particular attention and have proven among the most successful algorithms for training
deep networks. Although these problems are inherently highly non-convex, recent work has begun to
explain the success of such algorithms [3].
A DAG RAD adaptively sets the learning rate for each dimension by means of a time-varying proximal
regularizer. The most commonly studied and utilised version considers only a diagonal matrix
proximal term. As such it incurs almost no additional computational cost over standard stochastic
∗

Authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

