A Probabilistic Model of Social Decision Making
based on Reward Maximization
Koosha Khalvati
Department of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
koosha@cs.washington.edu

Seongmin A. Park
CNRS UMR 5229
Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Jeannerod
Lyon, France
park@isc.cnrs.fr

Jean-Claude Dreher
CNRS UMR 5229
Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Jeannerod
Lyon, France
dreher@isc.cnrs.fr

Rajesh P. N. Rao
Department of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
rao@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
A fundamental problem in cognitive neuroscience is how humans make decisions,
act, and behave in relation to other humans. Here we adopt the hypothesis that when
we are in an interactive social setting, our brains perform Bayesian inference of the
intentions and cooperativeness of others using probabilistic representations. We employ the framework of partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
to model human decision making in a social context, focusing specifically on the
volunteer’s dilemma in a version of the classic Public Goods Game. We show that
the POMDP model explains both the behavior of subjects as well as neural activity
recorded using fMRI during the game. The decisions of subjects can be modeled
across all trials using two interpretable parameters. Furthermore, the expected
reward predicted by the model for each subject was correlated with the activation of
brain areas related to reward expectation in social interactions. Our results suggest
a probabilistic basis for human social decision making within the framework of
expected reward maximization.

1

Introduction

A long tradition of research in social psychology recognizes volunteering as the hallmark of human
altruistic action, aimed at improving the survival of a group of individuals living together [15].
Volunteering entails a dilemma wherein the optimal decision maximizing an individual’s utility
differs from the strategy which maximizes benefits to the group to which the individual belongs. The
"volunteer’s dilemma" characterizes everyday group decision-making whereby one or few volunteers
are enough to bring common goods to the group [1, 6]. Examples of such volunteering include
vigilance duty, serving on school boards or town councils, and donating blood. The fact that makes
the volunteer’s dilemma challenging is not only that a lack of enough volunteers would lead to no
common goods being produced, but also that resources would be wasted if more than the required
number of group members volunteer. As a result, to achieve maximum utility in the volunteer’s
dilemma, each member must have a very good sense of others’ intentions in the absence of any
This work was supported by LABEX ANR-11-LABEX-0042, ANR-11-IDEX-0007, NSF-ANR ’Social_POMDP’ and ANR BrainCHOICE n◦ 14-CE13-0006 to JC. D, NSF grants EEC-1028725 and 1318733,
ONR grant N000141310817, and CRCNS/NIMH grant 1R01MH112166-01.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

