Minimizing Regret on Reflexive Banach Spaces and
Nash Equilibria in Continuous Zero-Sum Games

Maximilian Balandat, Walid Krichene, Claire Tomlin, Alexandre Bayen
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
[balandat,walid,tomlin]@eecs.berkeley.edu, bayen@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study a general adversarial online learning problem, in which we are given a
decision set X in a reflexive Banach space X and a sequence of reward vectors
in the dual space of X. At each iteration, we choose an action from X , based on
the observed sequence of previous rewards. Our goal is to minimize regret. Using
results from infinite dimensional convex analysis, we generalize the method of
Dual Averaging to our setting and obtain upper bounds on the worst-case regret that
generalize many previous results. Under the assumption of uniformly continuous
rewards, we obtain explicit regret bounds in a setting where the decision set is the
set of probability distributions on a compact metric space S. Importantly, we make
no convexity assumptions on either S or the reward functions. We also prove a
general lower bound on the worst-case regret for any online algorithm. We then
apply these results to the problem of learning in repeated two-player zero-sum
games on compact metric spaces. In doing so, we first prove that if both players play
a Hannan-consistent strategy, then with probability 1 the empirical distributions
of play weakly converge to the set of Nash equilibria of the game. We then show
that, under mild assumptions, Dual Averaging on the (infinite-dimensional) space
of probability distributions indeed achieves Hannan-consistency.

1

Introduction

Regret analysis is a general technique for designing and analyzing algorithms for sequential decision
problems in adversarial or stochastic settings (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012). Online learning algorithms have applications in machine learning (Xiao, 2010), portfolio
optimization (Cover, 1991), online convex optimization (Hazan et al., 2007) and other areas. Regret
analysis also plays an important role in the study of repeated play of finite games (Hart and MasColell, 2001). It is well known, for example, that in a two-player zero-sum finite game, if both
players play according to a Hannan-consistent strategy (Hannan, 1957), their (marginal) empirical
distributions of play almost surely converge to the set of Nash equilibria of the game (Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi, 2006). Moreover, it can be shown that playing a strategy that achieves sublinear regret
almost surely guarantees Hannan-consistency.
A natural question then is whether a similar result holds for games with infinite action sets. In this
article we provide a positive answer. In particular, we prove that in a continuous two-player zero sum
game over compact (not necessarily convex) metric spaces, if both players follow a Hannan-consistent
strategy, then with probability 1 their empirical distributions of play weakly converge to the set of
Nash equilibria of the game. This in turn raises another important question: Do algorithms that
ensure Hannan-consistency exist in such a setting? More generally, can one develop algorithms that
guarantee sub-linear growth of the worst-case regret? We answer these questions affirmatively as well.
To this end, we develop a general framework to study the Dual Averaging (or Follow the Regularized
Leader) method on reflexive Banach spaces. This framework generalizes a wide range of existing
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

