Select-and-Sample for Spike-and-Slab Sparse Coding
Abdul-Saboor Sheikh
Technical University of Berlin, Germany,
and Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all
University of Oldenburg, Germany,
and SAP Innovation Center Network, Berlin
sheikh.abdulsaboor@gmail.com

Jörg Lücke
Research Center Neurosensory Science
and Cluster of Excellence Hearing4all
and Dept. of Medical Physics and Acoustics
University of Oldenburg, Germany
joerg.luecke@uol.de

Abstract
Probabilistic inference serves as a popular model for neural processing. It is
still unclear, however, how approximate probabilistic inference can be accurate
and scalable to very high-dimensional continuous latent spaces. Especially as
typical posteriors for sensory data can be expected to exhibit complex latent
dependencies including multiple modes. Here, we study an approach that can
efﬁciently be scaled while maintaining a richly structured posterior approximation
under these conditions. As example model we use spike-and-slab sparse coding for
V1 processing, and combine latent subspace selection with Gibbs sampling (selectand-sample). Unlike factored variational approaches, the method can maintain
large numbers of posterior modes and complex latent dependencies. Unlike pure
sampling, the method is scalable to very high-dimensional latent spaces. Among all
sparse coding approaches with non-trivial posterior approximations (MAP or ICAlike models), we report the largest-scale results. In applications we ﬁrstly verify the
approach by showing competitiveness in standard denoising benchmarks. Secondly,
we use its scalability to, for the ﬁrst time, study highly-overcomplete settings for
V1 encoding using sophisticated posterior representations. More generally, our
study shows that very accurate probabilistic inference for multi-modal posteriors
with complex dependencies is tractable, functionally desirable and consistent with
models for neural inference.

1

Introduction

The sensory data that enters our brain through our sensors has a high intrinsic dimensionality and
it is complex and ambiguous. Image patches or small snippets of sound, for instance, often do
not contain sufﬁcient information to identify edges or phonemes with high degrees of certainty.
Probabilistic models are therefore very well suited to maintain uncertainty encodings. Given an
image patch, for instance, high probabilities for an edge in one location impacts the probabilities
for other components resulting in complex dependencies commonly known as "explaining-away"
effects. Such dependencies in general include (anti-)correlations, higher-order dependencies and
multiple posterior modes (i.e., alternative interpretations of a patch). Furthermore, sensory data
is typically composed of many different elementary constituents (e.g., an image patch contains
some of a potentially very large number of components) resulting in sparse coding models aiming
at increasing overcompleteness [1]. If sensory data gives rise to complex posterior dependencies
and has high intrinsic dimensionality, how can we study inference and learning in such settings?
To date most studies, e.g. of V1 encoding models, have avoided the treatment of complex latent
dependencies by assuming standard sparse models with Laplace priors [2, 3, 1]; high-dimensional
problems can then be addressed by applying maximum a-posteriori (MAP) approximations for the
resulting mono-modal posteriors. Other scalable approaches such as independent component analysis
(ICA) or singular value decomposition (K-SVD) [4, 5] do not encode for data uncertainty, which
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

