C YCLADES:
Conflict-free Asynchronous Machine Learning
Xinghao Pan⇤, Maximilian Lam⇤, Stephen Tu⇤, Dimitris Papailiopoulos⇤,
Ce Zhang†, Michael I. Jordan⇤,‡ Kannan Ramchandran⇤, Chris Re†, Benjamin Recht⇤‡

Abstract
We present C YCLADES, a general framework for parallelizing stochastic optimization algorithms in a shared memory setting. C YCLADES is asynchronous during
model updates, and requires no memory locking mechanisms, similar to H OG WILD !-type algorithms. Unlike H OGWILD !, C YCLADES introduces no conflicts
during parallel execution, and offers a black-box analysis for provable speedups
across a large family of algorithms. Due to its inherent cache locality and conflictfree nature, our multi-core implementation of C YCLADES consistently outperforms
H OGWILD !-type algorithms on sufficiently sparse datasets, leading to up to 40%
speedup gains compared to H OGWILD !, and up to 5⇥ gains over asynchronous
implementations of variance reduction algorithms.

1

Introduction

Following the seminal work of H OGWILD ! [17], many studies have demonstrated that near linear
speedups are achievable on several machine learning tasks via asynchronous, lock-free implementations [25, 13, 8, 16]. In all of these studies, classic algorithms are parallelized by simply running
parallel and asynchronous model updates without locks. These lock-free, asynchronous algorithms
exhibit speedups even when applied to large, non-convex problems, as demonstrated by deep learning systems such as Google’s Downpour SGD [6] and Microsoft’s Project Adam [4]. While these
techniques have been remarkably successful, many of the above papers require delicate and tailored
analyses to quantify the benefits of asynchrony for each particular learning task. Moreover, in
non-convex settings, we currently have little quantitative insight into how much speedup is gained
from asynchrony.
In this work, we present C YCLADES, a general framework for lock-free, asynchronous machine
learning algorithms that obviates the need for specialized analyses. C YCLADES runs asynchronously
and maintains serial equivalence, i.e., it produces the same outcome as the serial algorithm. Since
it returns the same output as a serial implementation, any algorithm parallelized by our framework
inherits the correctness proof of the serial counterpart without modifications. Additionally, if a
particular serially run heuristic is popular, but does not have a rigorous analysis, C YCLADES still
guarantees that its execution will return a serially equivalent output.
C YCLADES achieves serial equivalence by partitioning updates among cores, in a way that ensures
that there are no conflicts across partitions. Such a partition can always be found efficiently by
leveraging a powerful result on graph phase transitions [12]. When applied to our setting, this result
guarantees that a sufficiently small sample of updates will have only a logarithmic number of conflicts.
This allows us to evenly partition model updates across cores, with the guarantee that all conflicts are
localized within each core. Given enough problem sparsity, C YCLADES guarantees a nearly linear
⇤

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
‡
Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
†

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

