Budgeted stream-based active learning
via adaptive submodular maximization

Kaito Fujii
Kyoto University
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
fujii@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Hisashi Kashima
Kyoto University
kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Active learning enables us to reduce the annotation cost by adaptively selecting
unlabeled instances to be labeled. For pool-based active learning, several effective methods with theoretical guarantees have been developed through maximizing some utility function satisfying adaptive submodularity. In contrast, there have
been few methods for stream-based active learning based on adaptive submodularity. In this paper, we propose a new class of utility functions, policy-adaptive
submodular functions, which includes many existing adaptive submodular functions appearing in real world problems. We provide a general framework based
on policy-adaptive submodularity that makes it possible to convert existing poolbased methods to stream-based methods and give theoretical guarantees on their
performance. In addition we empirically demonstrate their effectiveness by comparing with existing heuristics on common benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Active learning is a problem setting for sequentially selecting unlabeled instances to be labeled, and
it has been studied with much practical interest as an efficient way to reduce the annotation cost. One
of the most popular settings of active learning is the pool-based one, in which the learner is given
the entire set of unlabeled instances in advance, and iteratively selects an instance to be labeled next.
The stream-based setting, which we deal with in this paper, is another important setting of active
learning, in which the entire set of unlabeled instances are hidden initially, and presented one by one
to the learner. This setting also has many real world applications, for example, sentiment analysis of
web stream data [26], spam filtering [25], part-of-speech tagging [10], and video surveillance [23].
Adaptive submodularity [19] is an adaptive extension of submodularity, a natural diminishing return
condition. It provides a framework for designing effective algorithms for several adaptive problems
including pool-based active learning. For instance, the ones for noiseless active learning [19, 21]
and the ones for noisy active learning [20, 9, 8] have been developed in recent years. Not only they
have strong theoretical guarantees on their performance, but they perform well in practice compared
with existing widely-used heuristics.
In spite of its considerable success in the pool-based setting, little is known about benefits of adaptive
submodularity in the stream-based setting. This paper answers the question: is it possible to construct algorithms for stream-based active learning based on adaptive submodularity? We propose a
general framework for creating stream-based algorithms from existing pool-based algorithms.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of stream-based active learning with a limited budget for making
queries. The goal is collecting an informative set of labeled instances from a data stream of a
certain length. The stream-based active learning problem has been typically studied in two settings:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

