Homotopy Smoothing for Non-Smooth Problems
with Lower Complexity than O(1/)

Yi Xu†∗, Yan Yan‡∗, Qihang Lin\ , Tianbao Yang )†
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242
‡
QCIS, University of Technology Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
\
Department of Management Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242
{yi-xu, qihang-lin, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, yan.yan-3@student.uts.edu.au
†

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a novel homotopy smoothing (HOPS) algorithm for
solving a family of non-smooth problems that is composed of a non-smooth
term with an explicit max-structure and a smooth term or a simple non-smooth
term whose proximal mapping is easy to compute. The best known iteration
complexity for solving such non-smooth optimization problems is O(1/) without
any assumption on the strong convexity. In this work, we will show that the
proposed HOPS achieved a lower iteration complexity of Õ(1/1−θ ) 1 with θ ∈
(0, 1] capturing the local sharpness of the objective function around the optimal
solutions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the lowest iteration complexity
achieved so far for the considered non-smooth optimization problems without
strong convexity assumption. The HOPS algorithm employs Nesterov’s smoothing
technique and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method and runs in stages, which
gradually decreases the smoothing parameter in a stage-wise manner until it yields
a sufficiently good approximation of the original function. We show that HOPS
enjoys a linear convergence for many well-known non-smooth problems (e.g.,
empirical risk minimization with a piece-wise linear loss function and `1 norm
regularizer, finding a point in a polyhedron, cone programming, etc). Experimental
results verify the effectiveness of HOPS in comparison with Nesterov’s smoothing
algorithm and the primal-dual style of first-order methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following optimization problem:
min F (x) , f (x) + g(x)

x∈Ω1

(1)

where g(x) is a convex (but not necessarily smooth) function, Ω1 is a closed convex set and f (x) is a
convex but non-smooth function which can be explicitly written as
f (x) = max hAx, ui − φ(u)
u∈Ω2

(2)

where Ω2 ⊂ Rm is a closed convex bounded set, A ∈ Rm×d and φ(u) is a convex function, and h·, ·i
is scalar product. This family of non-smooth optimization problems has applications in numerous
domains, e.g., machine learning and statistics [7], image processing [6], cone programming [11],
and etc. Several first-order methods have been developed for solving such non-smooth optimization
∗

The first two authors make equal contributions. The work of Y. Yan was done when he was a visiting student
at Department of Computer Science of the University of Iowa.
1
Õ() suppresses a logarithmic factor.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

