Unified Methods for Exploiting
Piecewise Linear Structure in Convex Optimization

Tyler B. Johnson
University of Washington, Seattle
tbjohns@washington.edu

Carlos Guestrin
University of Washington, Seattle
guestrin@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We develop methods for rapidly identifying important components of a convex
optimization problem for the purpose of achieving fast convergence times. By
considering a novel problem formulation—the minimization of a sum of piecewise
functions—we describe a principled and general mechanism for exploiting piecewise linear structure in convex optimization. This result leads to a theoretically
justified working set algorithm and a novel screening test, which generalize and
improve upon many prior results on exploiting structure in convex optimization.
In empirical comparisons, we study the scalability of our methods. We find that
screening scales surprisingly poorly with the size of the problem, while our working
set algorithm convincingly outperforms alternative approaches.

1

Introduction

Scalable optimization methods are critical for many machine learning applications. Due to tractable
properties of convexity, many optimization tasks are formulated as convex problems, many of which
exhibit useful structure at their solutions. For example, when training a support vector machine, the
optimal model is uninfluenced by easy-to-classify training instances. For sparse regression problems,
the optimal model makes predictions using a subset of features, ignoring its remaining inputs.
In these examples and others, the problem’s “structure” can be exploited to perform optimization
efficiently. Specifically, given the important components of a problem (for example the relevant
training examples or features) we could instead optimize a simpler objective that results in the same
solution. In practice, since the important components are unknown prior to optimization, we focus on
methods that rapidly discover the relevant components as progress is made toward convergence.
One principled method for exploiting structure in optimization is screening, a technique that identifies
components of a problem guaranteed to be irrelevant to the solution. First proposed by [1], screening
rules have been derived for many objectives in recent years. These approaches are specialized to
particular objectives, so screening tests do not readily translate between optimization tasks. Prior
works have separately considered screening irrelevant features [1–8], training examples [9, 10], or
constraints [11]. No screening test applies to all of these applications.
Working set algorithms are a second approach to exploiting structure in optimization. By minimizing
a sequence of simplified objectives, working set algorithms quickly converge to the problem’s global
solution. Perhaps the most prominent working set algorithms for machine learning are those of the
LIBLINEAR library [12]. As is common with working set approaches, there is little theoretical
understanding of these algorithms. Recently a working set algorithm with some theoretical guarantees
was proposed [11]. This work fundamentally relies on the objective being a constrained function,
however, making it unclear how to use this algorithm for other problems with structure.
The purpose of this work is to both unify and improve upon prior ideas for exploiting structure in
convex optimization. We begin by formalizing the concept of “structure” using a novel problem
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

