Consistent Kernel Mean Estimation
for Functions of Random Variables
Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel⇤ , Adam Ścibior⇤,† , Ilya Tolstikhin, Bernhard Schölkopf
Department of Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Spemanstraße 38, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
⇤
joint first authors; † also with: Engineering Department, Cambridge University
cjsimon@, adam.scibior@, ilya@, bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We provide a theoretical foundation for non-parametric estimation of functions of
random variables using kernel mean embeddings. We show that for any continuous
function f , consistent estimators of the mean embedding of a random variable X
lead to consistent estimators of the mean embedding of f (X). For Matérn kernels
and sufficiently smooth functions we also provide rates of convergence.
Our results extend to functions of multiple random variables. If the variables
are dependent, we require an estimator of the mean embedding of their joint
distribution as a starting point; if they are independent, it is sufficient to have
separate estimators of the mean embeddings of their marginal distributions. In
either case, our results cover both mean embeddings based on i.i.d. samples as well
as “reduced set” expansions in terms of dependent expansion points. The latter
serves as a justification for using such expansions to limit memory resources when
applying the approach as a basis for probabilistic programming.

1

Introduction

A common task in probabilistic modelling is to compute the distribution of f (X), given a measurable
function f and a random variable X. In fact, the earliest instances of this problem date back at least
to Poisson (1837). Sometimes this can be done analytically. For example, if f is linear and X is
Gaussian, that is f (x) = ax + b and X ⇠ N (µ; ), we have f (X) ⇠ N (aµ + b; a ). There exist
various methods for obtaining such analytical expressions (Mathai, 1973), but outside a small subset
of distributions and functions the formulae are either not available or too complicated to be practical.
An alternative to the analytical approach is numerical approximation, ideally implemented as a
flexible software library. The need for such tools is recognised in the general programming languages
community (McKinley, 2016), but no standards were established so far. The main challenge is in
finding a good approximate representation for random variables.
Distributions on integers, for example, are usually represented as lists of (xi , p(xi )) pairs. For real
valued distributions, integral transforms (Springer, 1979), mixtures of Gaussians (Milios, 2009), Laguerre polynomials (Williamson, 1989), and Chebyshev polynomials (Korzeń and Jaroszewicz, 2014)
were proposed as convenient representations for numerical computation. For strings, probabilistic
finite automata are often used. All those approaches have their merits, but they only work with a
specific input type.
There is an alternative, based on Monte Carlo sampling (Kalos and Whitlock, 2008), which is to
represent X by a (possibly weighted) sample {(xi , wi )}ni=1 (with wi 0). This representation has
several advantages: (i) it works for any input type, (ii) the sample size controls the time-accuracy
trade-off, and (iii) applying functions to random variables reduces to applying the functions pointwise
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

