Learned Region Sparsity and Diversity
Also Predict Visual Attention
Zijun Wei1∗ ,

Hossein Adeli2∗ ,

Gregory Zelinsky1,2 ,

Minh Hoai1 ,

Dimitris Samaras1

1. Department of Computer Science 2. Department of Psychology – Stony Brook University
1.{zijwei, minhhoai, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu
2.{hossein.adelijelodar, gregory.zelinsky}@stonybrook.edu
*. Both authors contributed equally to this work

Abstract
Learned region sparsity has achieved state-of-the-art performance in classification
tasks by exploiting and integrating a sparse set of local information into global
decisions. The underlying mechanism resembles how people sample information
from an image with their eye movements when making similar decisions. In this
paper we incorporate the biologically plausible mechanism of Inhibition of Return
into the learned region sparsity model, thereby imposing diversity on the selected
regions. We investigate how these mechanisms of sparsity and diversity relate to
visual attention by testing our model on three different types of visual search tasks.
We report state-of-the-art results in predicting the locations of human gaze fixations,
even though our model is trained only on image-level labels without object location
annotations. Notably, the classification performance of the extended model remains
the same as the original. This work suggests a new computational perspective
on visual attention mechanisms, and shows how the inclusion of attention-based
mechanisms can improve computer vision techniques.

1

Introduction

Visual spatial attention refers to the narrowing of processing in the brain to particular objects in
particular locations so as to mediate everyday tasks. A widely used paradigm for studying visual
spatial attention is visual search, where a desired object must be located and recognized in a typically
cluttered environment. Visual search is accompanied by observable estimates—in the form of
gaze fixations—of how attention samples information from a scene while searching for a target.
Efficient visual search requires prioritizing the locations of features of the target object class over
features at locations offering less evidence for the target [31]. Computational models of visual search
typically estimate and plot goal directed prioritization of visual space as priority maps for directing
attention [32]. This form of target directed prioritization is different from the saliency modeling
literature, where bottom-up feature contrast in an image is used to predict fixation behavior during
the free-viewing of scenes [16].
The field of fixation prediction is highly active and growing [2], although it was not until fairly
recently that attention researchers have begun using the sophisticated object detection techniques
developed in the computer vision literature [8, 18, 31]. The dominant method used in the visual
search literature to generate priority maps for detection has been the exhaustive detection mechanism
[8, 18]. Using this method, an object detector is applied to an image to provide bounding boxes
that are then combined, weighted by their detection scores, to generate a priority map [8]. While
these models have had success in predicting behavior, training these detectors requires human labeled
bounding boxes, which are expensive and laborious to collect, and also prone to individual annotator
differences.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

