Dual Decomposed Learning with Factorwise Oracles
for Structural SVMs of Large Output Domain

Ian E.H. Yen † Xiangru Huang ‡
Pradeep Ravikumar †
†
Carnegie Mellon University

Kai Zhong ‡ Ruohan Zhang ‡
Inderjit S. Dhillon ‡
‡
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Many applications of machine learning involve structured outputs with large domains, where learning of a structured predictor is prohibitive due to repetitive
calls to an expensive inference oracle. In this work, we show that by decomposing
training of a Structural Support Vector Machine (SVM) into a series of multiclass
SVM problems connected through messages, one can replace an expensive structured oracle with Factorwise Maximization Oracles (FMOs) that allow efficient
implementation of complexity sublinear to the factor domain. A Greedy Direction
Method of Multiplier (GDMM) algorithm is then proposed to exploit the sparsity
of messages while guarantees convergence to  sub-optimality after O(log(1/))
passes of FMOs over every factor. We conduct experiments on chain-structured
and fully-connected problems of large output domains, where the proposed approach is orders-of-magnitude faster than current state-of-the-art algorithms for
training Structural SVMs.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction has become prevalent with wide applications in Natural Language Processing (NLP), Computer Vision, and Bioinformatics to name a few, where one is interested in outputs
of strong interdependence. Although many dependency structures yield intractable inference problems, approximation techniques such as convex relaxations with theoretical guarantees [10, 14, 7]
have been developed. However, solving the relaxed problems (LP, QP, SDP, etc.) is computationally
expensive for factor graphs of large output domain and results in prohibitive training time when embedded into a learning algorithm relying on inference oracles [9, 6]. For instance, many applications
in NLP such as Machine Translation [3], Speech Recognition [21], and Semantic Parsing [1] have
output domains as large as the size of vocabulary, for which the prediction of even a single sentence
takes considerable time.
One approach to avoid inference during training is by introducing a loss function conditioned on
the given labels of neighboring output variables [15]. However, it also introduces more variance
to the estimation of model and could degrade testing performance significantly. Another thread of
research aims to formulate parameter learning and output inference as a joint optimization problem
that avoids treating inference as a subroutine [12, 11]. In this appraoch, the structured hinge loss
is reformulated via dual decomposition, so both messages between factors and model parameters
are treated as first-class variables. The new formulation, however, does not yield computational advantage due to the constraints entangling the two types of variables. In particular, [11] employs a
hybrid method (DLPW) that alternatingly optimizes model parameters and messages, but the algorithm is not significantly faster than directly performing stochastic gradient on the structured hinge
loss. More recently, [12] proposes an approximate objective for structural SVMs that leads to an
algorithm considerably faster than DLPW on problems requiring expensive inference. However, the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

