Adaptive Skills Adaptive Partitions (ASAP)

Daniel J. Mankowitz, Timothy A. Mann∗ and Shie Mannor
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel
danielm@tx.technion.ac.il, mann.timothy@acm.org, shie@ee.technion.ac.il
∗

Timothy Mann now works at Google Deepmind.

Abstract
We introduce the Adaptive Skills, Adaptive Partitions (ASAP) framework that (1)
learns skills (i.e., temporally extended actions or options) as well as (2) where to
apply them. We believe that both (1) and (2) are necessary for a truly general skill
learning framework, which is a key building block needed to scale up to lifelong
learning agents. The ASAP framework can also solve related new tasks simply by
adapting where it applies its existing learned skills. We prove that ASAP converges
to a local optimum under natural conditions. Finally, our experimental results,
which include a RoboCup domain, demonstrate the ability of ASAP to learn where
to reuse skills as well as solve multiple tasks with considerably less experience
than solving each task from scratch.

1

Introduction

Human-decision making involves decomposing a task into a course of action. The course of action is
typically composed of abstract, high-level actions that may execute over different timescales (e.g.,
walk to the door or make a cup of coffee). The decision-maker chooses actions to execute to solve
the task. These actions may need to be reused at different points in the task. In addition, the actions
may need to be used across multiple, related tasks.
Consider, for example, the task of building a city. The course of action to building a city may involve
building the foundations, laying down sewage pipes as well as building houses and shopping malls.
Each action operates over multiple timescales and certain actions (such as building a house) may need
to be reused if additional units are required. In addition, these actions can be reused if a neighboring
city needs to be developed (multi-task scenario).
Reinforcement Learning (RL) represents actions that last for multiple timescales as Temporally
Extended Actions (TEAs) (Sutton et al., 1999), also referred to as options, skills (Konidaris & Barto,
2009) or macro-actions (Hauskrecht, 1998). It has been shown both experimentally (Precup & Sutton,
1997; Sutton et al., 1999; Silver & Ciosek, 2012; Mankowitz et al., 2014) and theoretically (Mann &
Mannor, 2014) that TEAs speed up the convergence rates of RL planning algorithms. TEAs are seen
as a potentially viable solution to making RL truly scalable. TEAs in RL have become popular in
many domains including RoboCup soccer (Bai et al., 2012), video games (Mann et al., 2015) and
Robotics (Fu et al., 2015). Here, decomposing the domains into temporally extended courses of
action (strategies in RoboCup, move combinations in video games and skill controllers in Robotics
for example) has generated impressive solutions. From here on in, we will refer to TEAs as skills.
A course of action is defined by a policy. A policy is a solution to a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
and is defined as a mapping from states to a probability distribution over actions. That is, it tells the
RL agent which action to perform given the agent’s current state. We will refer to an inter-skill policy
as being a policy that tells the agent which skill to execute, given the current state.
A truly general skill learning framework must (1) learn skills as well as (2) automatically compose
them together (as stated by Bacon & Precup (2015)) and determine where each skill should be
executed (the inter-skill policy). This framework should also determine (3) where skills can be reused
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

