Learning Bayesian networks
with ancestral constraints
Eunice Yuh-Jie Chen and Yujia Shen and Arthur Choi and Adnan Darwiche
Computer Science Department
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
{eyjchen,yujias,aychoi,darwiche}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning Bayesian networks optimally, when subject
to background knowledge in the form of ancestral constraints. Our approach is
based on a recently proposed framework for optimal structure learning based on
non-decomposable scores, which is general enough to accommodate ancestral
constraints. The proposed framework exploits oracles for learning structures using
decomposable scores, which cannot accommodate ancestral constraints since they
are non-decomposable. We show how to empower these oracles by passing them
decomposable constraints that they can handle, which are inferred from ancestral
constraints that they cannot handle. Empirically, we demonstrate that our approach
can be orders-of-magnitude more efficient than alternative frameworks, such as
those based on integer linear programming.

1

Introduction

Bayesian networks learned from data are broadly used for classification, clustering, feature selection,
and to determine associations and dependencies between random variables, in addition to discovering
causes and effects; see, e.g., [Darwiche, 2009, Koller and Friedman, 2009, Murphy, 2012].
In this paper, we consider the task of learning Bayesian networks optimally, subject to background
knowledge in the form of ancestral constraints. Such constraints are important in practice as they
allow one to assert direct or indirect cause-and-effect relationships (or lack thereof) between random
variables. Further, one expects that their presence should improve the efficiency of the learning
process as they reduce the size of the search space. However, nearly all mainstream approaches for
optimal structure learning make a fundamental assumption, that the scoring function (i.e., the prior
and likelihood) is decomposable. This in turn limits their ability to integrate ancestral constraints,
which are non-decomposable. Such approaches only support structure-modular constraints such
as the presence or absence of edges, or order-modular constraints such as pairwise constraints on
topological orderings; see, e.g., [Koivisto and Sood, 2004, Parviainen and Koivisto, 2013].
Recently, a new framework has been proposed for optimal Bayesian network structure learning [Chen
et al., 2015], but with non-decomposable priors and scores. This approach is based on navigating the
seemingly intractable search space over all network structures (i.e., all DAGs). This intractability can
be mitigated however by leveraging an omniscient oracle that can optimally learn structures with
decomposable scores. This approach led to the first system for finding optimal DAGs (i.e., model
selection) given order-modular priors (a type of non-decomposable prior) [Chen et al., 2015]. The
approach was also applied towards the enumeration of the k-best structures [Chen et al., 2015, 2016],
where it was orders-of-magnitude more efficient than the existing state-of-the-art [Tian et al., 2010,
Cussens et al., 2013, Chen and Tian, 2014].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

