Phased Exploration with Greedy Exploitation in
Stochastic Combinatorial Partial Monitoring Games

Sougata Chaudhuri
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan Ann Arbor
sougata@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics and Department of EECS
University of Michigan Ann Arbor
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Partial monitoring games are repeated games where the learner receives feedback
that might be different from adversary’s move or even the reward gained by the
learner. Recently, a general model of combinatorial partial monitoring (CPM)
games was proposed [1], where the learner’s action space can be exponentially
large and adversary samples its moves from a bounded, continuous space, according
to a fixed distribution. The paper gave a confidence bound based algorithm (GCB)
that achieves O(T 2/3 log T ) distribution independent and O(log T ) distribution
dependent regret bounds. The implementation of their algorithm depends on
two separate offline oracles and the distribution dependent regret additionally
requires existence of a unique optimal action for the learner. Adopting their CPM
model, our first contribution is a Phased Exploration with Greedy Exploitation
(PEGE) algorithmic framework√for the problem. Different algorithms within
the framework achieve O(T 2/3 log T ) distribution independent and O(log2 T )
distribution dependent regret respectively. Crucially, our framework needs only the
simpler “argmax” oracle from GCB and the distribution dependent regret does not
require existence of a unique optimal action. Our second contribution is another
algorithm, PEGE2, which combines gap estimation with a PEGE algorithm, to
achieve an O(log T ) regret bound, matching the GCB guarantee but removing the
dependence on size of the learner’s action space. However, like GCB, PEGE2
requires access to both offline oracles and the existence of a unique optimal action.
Finally, we discuss how our algorithm can be efficiently applied to a CPM problem
of practical interest: namely, online ranking with feedback at the top.

1

Introduction

Partial monitoring (PM) games are repeated games played between a learner and an adversary over
discrete time points. At every time point, the learner and adversary each simultaneously select an
action, from their respective action sets, and the learner gains a reward, which is a function of the two
actions. In PM games, the learner receives limited feedback, which might neither be adversary’s move
(full information games) nor the reward gained (bandit games). In stochastic PM games, adversary
generates actions which are independent and identically distributed according to a distribution fixed
before the start of the game and unknown to the learner. The learner’s objective is to develop a
learning strategy that incurs low regret over time, based on the feedback received during the course of
the game. Regret is defined as the difference between cumulative reward of the learner’s strategy and
the best fixed learner’s action in hindsight. The usual learning strategies in online games combine
some form of exploration (getting feedback on certain learner’s actions) and exploitation (playing the
perceived optimal action based on current estimates).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

