Optimistic Gittins Indices
Eli Gutin
Operations Research Center, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02142
gutin@mit.edu

Vivek F. Farias
MIT Sloan School of Management
Cambridge, MA 02142
vivekf@mit.edu

Abstract
Starting with the Thomspon sampling algorithm, recent years have seen a resurgence of interest in Bayesian algorithms for the Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem. These algorithms seek to exploit prior information on arm biases and while
several have been shown to be regret optimal, their design has not emerged from a
principled approach. In contrast, if one cared about Bayesian regret discounted over
an infinite horizon at a fixed, pre-specified rate, the celebrated Gittins index theorem
offers an optimal algorithm. Unfortunately, the Gittins analysis does not appear to
carry over to minimizing Bayesian regret over all sufficiently large horizons and
computing a Gittins index is onerous relative to essentially any incumbent index
scheme for the Bayesian MAB problem.
The present paper proposes a sequence of ‘optimistic’ approximations to the
Gittins index. We show that the use of these approximations in concert with
the use of an increasing discount factor appears to offer a compelling alternative
to state-of-the-art index schemes proposed for the Bayesian MAB problem in
recent years by offering substantially improved performance with little to no
additional computational overhead. In addition, we prove that the simplest of these
approximations yields frequentist regret that matches the Lai-Robbins lower bound,
including achieving matching constants.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is perhaps the simplest example of a learning problem
that exposes the tension between exploration and exploitation. Recent years have seen a resurgence
of interest in Bayesian MAB problems wherein we are endowed with a prior on arm rewards, and
a number of policies that exploit this prior have been proposed and/or analyzed. These include
Thompson Sampling [20], Bayes-UCB [12], KL-UCB [9], and Information Directed Sampling [19].
The ultimate motivation for these algorithms appears to be two-fold: superior empirical performance
and light computational burden. The strongest performance results available for these algorithms
establish regret lower bounds that match the Lai-Robbins lower bound [15]. Even among this set of
recently proposed algorithms, there is a wide spread in empirically observed performance.
Interestingly, the design of the index policies referenced above has been somewhat ad-hoc as opposed
to having emerged from a principled analysis of the underlying Markov Decision process. Now if in
contrast to requiring ‘small’ regret for all sufficiently large time horizons, we cared about minimizing
Bayesian regret over an infinite horizon, discounted at a fixed, pre-specified rate (or equivalently,
maximizing discounted infinite horizon rewards), the celebrated Gittins index theorem provides an
optimal, efficient solution. Importing this celebrated result to the fundamental problem of designing
algorithms that achieve low regret (either frequentist or Bayesian) simultaneously over all sufficiently
large time horizons runs into two substantial challenges:
High-Dimensional State Space: Even minor ‘tweaks’ to the discounted infinite horizon objective
render the corresponding Markov Decision problem for the Bayesian MAB problem intractable. For
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

