The Product Cut
Xavier Bresson
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
xavier.bresson@ntu.edu.sg

Thomas Laurent
Loyola Marymount University
Los Angeles
tlaurent@lmu.edu

Arthur Szlam
Facebook AI Research
New York
aszlam@fb.com

James H. von Brecht
California State University, Long Beach
Long Beach
james.vonbrecht@csulb.edu

Abstract
We introduce a theoretical and algorithmic framework for multi-way graph partitioning that relies on a multiplicative cut-based objective. We refer to this objective
as the Product Cut. We provide a detailed investigation of the mathematical properties of this objective and an effective algorithm for its optimization. The proposed
model has strong mathematical underpinnings, and the corresponding algorithm
achieves state-of-the-art performance on benchmark data sets.

1

Introduction

We propose the following model for multi-way graph partitioning. Let G = (V, W ) denote a weighted
graph, with V its vertex set and W its weighted adjacency matrix. We define the Product Cut of a
partition P = (A1 , . . . , AR ) of the vertex set V as
QR
R
X
Z(Ar , Ac )
Pcut(P) = r=1 H(P) r ,
H(P) = −
θr log θr ,
(1)
e
r=1
where θr = |Ar |/|V | denotes the relative size of a set. This model provides a distinctive way to
incorporate classical notions of a quality partition. The non-linear, non-local function Z(Ar , Acr ) of
a set measures its intra- and inter-connectivity with respect to the graph. The entropic balance H(P)
measures deviations of the partition P from a collection of sets (A1 , . . . , AR ) with equal size. In this
way, the Product Cut optimization parallels the classical Normalized Cut optimization [10, 15, 13] in
terms of its underlying notion of cluster, and it arises quite naturally as a multiplicative version of the
Normalized Cut.
Nevertheless, the two models strongly diverge beyond the point of this superficial similarity. We
provide a detailed analysis to show that (1) settles the compromise between cut and balance in a
fundamentally different manner than classical objectives, such as the Normalized Cut or the Cheeger
Cut. The sharp inequalities
0 ≤ Ncut(P) ≤ 1

e−H(P) ≤ Pcut(P) ≤ 1

(2)

succinctly capture this distinction; the Product Cut exhibits a non-vanishing lower bound while the
Normalized Cut does not. We show analytically and experimentally that this distinction leads to
superior stability properties and performance. From an algorithmic point-of-view, we show how
to cast the minimization of (1) as a convex maximization program. This leads to a simple, exact
continuous relaxation of the discrete problem that has a clear mathematical structure. We leverage this
formulation to develop a monotonic algorithm for optimizing (1) via a sequence of linear programs,
and we introduce a randomized version of this strategy that leads to a simple yet highly effective
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

