Bayesian optimization for automated model selection

Gustavo Malkomes,† Chip Schaff,† Roman Garnett
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
{luizgustavo, cbschaff, garnett}@wustl.edu

Abstract
Despite the success of kernel-based nonparametric methods, kernel selection still
requires considerable expertise, and is often described as a “black art.” We present a
sophisticated method for automatically searching for an appropriate kernel from an
infinite space of potential choices. Previous efforts in this direction have focused on
traversing a kernel grammar, only examining the data via computation of marginal
likelihood. Our proposed search method is based on Bayesian optimization in
model space, where we reason about model evidence as a function to be maximized.
We explicitly reason about the data distribution and how it induces similarity
between potential model choices in terms of the explanations they can offer for
observed data. In this light, we construct a novel kernel between models to explain
a given dataset. Our method is capable of finding a model that explains a given
dataset well without any human assistance, often with fewer computations of model
evidence than previous approaches, a claim we demonstrate empirically.

1

Introduction

Over the past decades, enormous human effort has been devoted to machine learning; preprocessing
data, model selection, and hyperparameter optimization are some examples of critical and often
expert-dependent tasks. The complexity of these tasks has in some cases relegated them to the realm
of “black art.” In kernel methods in particular, the selection of an appropriate kernel to explain
a given dataset is critical to success in terms of the fidelity of predictions, but the vast space of
potential kernels renders the problem nontrivial. We consider the problem of automatically finding
an appropriate probabilistic model to explain a given dataset. Although our proposed algorithm is
general, we will focus on the case where a model can be completely specified by a kernel, as is the
case for example for centered Gaussian processes (GPs).
Recent work has begun to tackle the kernel-selection problem in a systematic way. Duvenaud et al.
[1] and Grosse et al. [2] described generative grammars for enumerating a countably infinite space of
arbitrarily complex kernels via exploiting the closure of kernels under additive and multiplicative
composition. We adopt this kernel grammar in this work as well. Given a dataset, Duvenaud et al.
[1] proposed searching this infinite space of models using a greedy search mechanism. Beginning
at the root of the grammar, we traverse the tree greedily attempting to maximize the (approximate)
evidence for the data given by a GP model incorporating the kernel.
In this work, we develop a more sophisticated mechanism for searching through this space. The
greedy search described above only considers a given dataset by querying a model’s evidence. Our
search performs a metalearning procedure, which, conditional on a dataset, establishes similarities
among the models in terms of the space of explanations they can offer for the data. With this
viewpoint, we construct a novel kernel between models (a “kernel kernel”). We then approach
†

These authors contributed equally to this work

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

