The Multi-fidelity Multi-armed Bandit

Kirthevasan Kandasamy \ , Gautam Dasarathy ♦ , Jeff Schneider \ , Barnabás Póczos \
\
Carnegie Mellon University, ♦ Rice University
{kandasamy, schneide, bapoczos}@cs.cmu.edu, gautamd@rice.edu

Abstract
We study a variant of the classical stochastic K-armed bandit where observing
the outcome of each arm is expensive, but cheap approximations to this outcome
are available. For example, in online advertising the performance of an ad can be
approximated by displaying it for shorter time periods or to narrower audiences.
We formalise this task as a multi-fidelity bandit, where, at each time step, the
forecaster may choose to play an arm at any one of M fidelities. The highest
fidelity (desired outcome) expends cost λ(M ) . The mth fidelity (an approximation)
expends λ(m) < λ(M ) and returns a biased estimate of the highest fidelity. We
develop MF-UCB, a novel upper confidence bound procedure for this setting and
prove that it naturally adapts to the sequence of available approximations and costs
thus attaining better regret than naive strategies which ignore the approximations.
For instance, in the above online advertising example, MF-UCB would use the
lower fidelities to quickly eliminate suboptimal ads and reserve the larger expensive
experiments on a small set of promising candidates. We complement this result with
a lower bound and show that MF-UCB is nearly optimal under certain conditions.

1

Introduction

Since the seminal work of Robbins [11], the multi-armed bandit has become an attractive framework
for studying exploration-exploitation trade-offs inherent to tasks arising in online advertising, finance
and other fields. In the most basic form of the K-armed bandit [9, 12], we have a set K = {1, . . . , K}
of K arms (e.g. K ads in online advertising). At each time step t = 1, 2, . . . , an arm is played and a
corresponding reward is realised. The goal is to design a strategy of plays that minimises the regret
after n plays. The regret is the comparison, in expectation, of the realised reward against an oracle
that always plays the best arm. The well known Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) algorithm [3],
achieves regret O(K log(n)) after n plays (ignoring mean rewards) and is minimax optimal [9].
In this paper, we propose a new take on this important problem. In many practical scenarios of
interest, one can associate a cost to playing each arm. Furthermore, in many of these scenarios,
one might have access to cheaper approximations to the outcome of the arms. For instance, in
online advertising the goal is to maximise the cumulative number of clicks over a given time period.
Conventionally, an arm pull maybe thought of as the display of an ad for a specific time, say one
hour. However, we may approximate its hourly performance by displaying the ad for shorter periods.
This estimate is biased (and possibly noisy), as displaying an ad for longer intervals changes user
behaviour. It can nonetheless be useful in gauging the long run click through rate. We can also
obtain biased estimates of an ad by displaying it only to certain geographic regions or age groups.
Similarly one might consider algorithm selection for machine learning problems [4], where the goal
is to be competitive with the best among a set of learning algorithms for a task. Here, one might
obtain cheaper approximate estimates of the performance of algorithm by cheaper versions using
less data or computation. In this paper, we will refer to such approximations as fidelities. Consider a
2-fidelity problem where the cost at the low fidelity is λ(1) and the cost at the high fidelity is λ(2) .
We will present a cost weighted notion of regret for this setting for a strategy that expends a capital
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

