Proximal Stochastic Methods for Nonsmooth
Nonconvex Finite-Sum Optimization
Sashank J. Reddi
Carnegie Mellon University
sjakkamr@cs.cmu.edu

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
suvrit@mit.edu

Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Alexander J. Smola
Carnegie Mellon University
alex@smola.org

Abstract
We analyze stochastic algorithms for optimizing nonconvex, nonsmooth finite-sum
problems, where the nonsmooth part is convex. Surprisingly, unlike the smooth
case, our knowledge of this fundamental problem is very limited. For example,
it is not known whether the proximal stochastic gradient method with constant
minibatch converges to a stationary point. To tackle this issue, we develop fast
stochastic algorithms that provably converge to a stationary point for constant
minibatches. Furthermore, using a variant of these algorithms, we obtain provably
faster convergence than batch proximal gradient descent. Our results are based
on the recent variance reduction techniques for convex optimization but with a
novel analysis for handling nonconvex and nonsmooth functions. We also prove
global linear convergence rate for an interesting subclass of nonsmooth nonconvex
functions, which subsumes several recent works.

1

Introduction

We study nonconvex, nonsmooth, finite-sum optimization problems of the form
n

min

x2Rd

F (x) := f (x) + h(x), where f (x) :=

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

and each fi : Rd ! R is smooth (possibly nonconvex) for all i 2 {1, . . . , n} , [n], while
h : Rd ! R is nonsmooth but convex and relatively simple.

Such finite-sum optimization problems are fundamental to machine learning when performing regularized empirical risk minimization. While there has been extensive research in solving nonsmooth
convex finite-sum problems (i.e., each fi is convex for i 2 [n]) [4, 16, 31], our understanding of their
nonsmooth nonconvex counterparts is surprisingly limited. We hope to amend this situation (at least
partially), given the widespread importance of nonconvexity throughout machine learning.
A popular approach to handle nonsmoothness in convex problems is via proximal operators [14, 25],
but as we will soon see, this approach does not work so easily for the nonconvex problem (1).
Nevertheless, recall that proper closed convex function h, the proximal operator is defined as
⇣
⌘
1
prox⌘h (x) := argmin h(y) + 2⌘
ky xk2 ,
for ⌘ > 0.
(2)
y2Rd

The power of proximal operators lies in how they generalize projections: e.g., if h is the indicator
function IC (x) of a closed convex set C, then proxIC (x) ⌘ projC (x) ⌘ argminy2C ky xk.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

