Joint Line Segmentation and Transcription for
End-to-End Handwritten Paragraph Recognition

Théodore Bluche
A2iA SAS
39 rue de la Bienfaisance
75008 Paris
tb@a2ia.com

Abstract
Offline handwriting recognition systems require cropped text line images for both
training and recognition. On the one hand, the annotation of position and transcript
at line level is costly to obtain. On the other hand, automatic line segmentation
algorithms are prone to errors, compromising the subsequent recognition. In this
paper, we propose a modification of the popular and efficient Multi-Dimensional
Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (MDLSTM-RNNs) to
enable end-to-end processing of handwritten paragraphs. More particularly, we
replace the collapse layer transforming the two-dimensional representation into
a sequence of predictions by a recurrent version which can select one line at a
time. In the proposed model, a neural network performs a kind of implicit line
segmentation by computing attention weights on the image representation. The
experiments on paragraphs of Rimes and IAM databases yield results that are
competitive with those of networks trained at line level, and constitute a significant
step towards end-to-end transcription of full documents.

1

Introduction

Offline handwriting recognition consists in recognizing a sequence of characters in an image of
handwritten text. Unlike printed texts, images of handwriting are difficult to segment into characters.
Early methods tried to compute segmentation hypotheses for characters, for example by performing a
heuristic over-segmentation, followed by a scoring of groups of segments (e.g. in [4]). In the nineties,
this kind of approach was progressively replaced by segmentation-free methods, where a whole
word image is fed to a system providing a sequence of scores. A lexicon constrains a decoding step,
allowing to retrieve the character sequence. Some examples are the sliding window approach [25], in
which features are extracted from vertical frames of the line image, or space-displacement neural
networks [4]. In the last decade, word segmentations were abandoned in favor of complete text line
recognition with statistical language models [10].
Nowadays, the state of the art handwriting recognition systems are Multi-Dimensional Long ShortTerm Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (MDLSTM-RNNs [18]), which consider the whole image,
alternating MDLSTM layers and convolutional layers. The transformation of the 2D structure into
a sequence is computed by a simple collapse layer summing the activations along the vertical axis.
Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC [17]) allows to train the network to both align and
recognize sequences of characters. These models have become very popular and won the recent
evaluations of handwriting recognition [9, 34, 37].
However, current models still need segmented text lines, and full document processing pipelines
should include automatic line segmentation algorithms. Although the segmentation of documents
into lines is assumed in most descriptions of handwriting recognition systems, several papers or
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

