Direct Feedback Alignment Provides Learning in
Deep Neural Networks

Arild Nøkland
Trondheim, Norway
arild.nokland@gmail.com

Abstract
Artificial neural networks are most commonly trained with the back-propagation
algorithm, where the gradient for learning is provided by back-propagating the error,
layer by layer, from the output layer to the hidden layers. A recently discovered
method called feedback-alignment shows that the weights used for propagating the
error backward don’t have to be symmetric with the weights used for propagation
the activation forward. In fact, random feedback weights work evenly well, because
the network learns how to make the feedback useful. In this work, the feedback
alignment principle is used for training hidden layers more independently from
the rest of the network, and from a zero initial condition. The error is propagated
through fixed random feedback connections directly from the output layer to each
hidden layer. This simple method is able to achieve zero training error even in
convolutional networks and very deep networks, completely without error backpropagation. The method is a step towards biologically plausible machine learning
because the error signal is almost local, and no symmetric or reciprocal weights
are required. Experiments show that the test performance on MNIST and CIFAR
is almost as good as those obtained with back-propagation for fully connected
networks. If combined with dropout, the method achieves 1.45% error on the
permutation invariant MNIST task.

1

Introduction

For supervised learning, the back-propagation algorithm (BP), see [2], has achieved great success in
training deep neural networks. As today, this method has few real competitors due to its simplicity
and proven performance, although some alternatives do exist.
Boltzmann machine learning in different variants are biologically inspired methods for training neural
networks, see [6], [10] and [5]. The methods use only local available signals for adjusting the weights.
These methods can be combined with BP fine-tuning to obtain good discriminative performance.
Contrastive Hebbian Learning (CHL), is similar to Boltzmann Machine learning, but can be used
in deterministic feed-forward networks. In the case of weak symmetric feedback-connections it
resembles BP [16].
Recently, target-propagation (TP) was introduced as an biologically plausible training method, where
each layer is trained to reconstruct the layer below [7]. This method does not require symmetric
weights and propagates target values instead of gradients backward.
A novel training principle called feedback-alignment (FA) was recently introduced [9]. The authors
show that the feedback weights used to back-propagate the gradient do not have to be symmetric with
the feed-forward weights. The network learns how to use fixed random feedback weights in order to
reduce the error. Essentially, the network learns how to learn, and that is a really puzzling result.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

