Learning Multiagent Communication
with Backpropagation
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar
Dept. of Computer Science
Courant Institute, New York University
sainbar@cs.nyu.edu

Arthur Szlam
Facebook AI Research
New York
aszlam@fb.com

Rob Fergus
Facebook AI Research
New York
robfergus@fb.com

Abstract
Many tasks in AI require the collaboration of multiple agents. Typically, the
communication protocol between agents is manually specified and not altered
during training. In this paper we explore a simple neural model, called CommNet,
that uses continuous communication for fully cooperative tasks. The model consists
of multiple agents and the communication between them is learned alongside their
policy. We apply this model to a diverse set of tasks, demonstrating the ability
of the agents to learn to communicate amongst themselves, yielding improved
performance over non-communicative agents and baselines. In some cases, it
is possible to interpret the language devised by the agents, revealing simple but
effective strategies for solving the task at hand.

1

Introduction

Communication is a fundamental aspect of intelligence, enabling agents to behave as a group, rather
than a collection of individuals. It is vital for performing complex tasks in real-world environments
where each actor has limited capabilities and/or visibility of the world. Practical examples include
elevator control [3] and sensor networks [5]; communication is also important for success in robot
soccer [25]. In any partially observed environment, the communication between agents is vital to
coordinate the behavior of each individual. While the model controlling each agent is typically
learned via reinforcement learning [1, 28], the specification and format of the communication is
usually pre-determined. For example, in robot soccer, the bots are designed to communicate at each
time step their position and proximity to the ball.
In this work, we propose a model where cooperating agents learn to communicate amongst themselves
before taking actions. Each agent is controlled by a deep feed-forward network, which additionally
has access to a communication channel carrying a continuous vector. Through this channel, they
receive the summed transmissions of other agents. However, what each agent transmits on the
channel is not specified a-priori, being learned instead. Because the communication is continuous,
the model can be trained via back-propagation, and thus can be combined with standard single
agent RL algorithms or supervised learning. The model is simple and versatile. This allows it to be
applied to a wide range of problems involving partial visibility of the environment, where the agents
learn a task-specific communication that aids performance. In addition, the model allows dynamic
variation at run time in both the number and type of agents, which is important in applications such
as communication between moving cars.
We consider the setting where we have J agents, all cooperating to maximize reward R in some
environment. We make the simplifying assumption of full cooperation between agents, thus each
agent receives R independent of their contribution. In this setting, there is no difference between
each agent having its own controller, or viewing them as pieces of a larger model controlling all
agents. Taking the latter perspective, our controller is a large feed-forward neural network that maps
inputs for all agents to their actions, each agent occupying a subset of units. A specific connectivity
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

