Coresets for Scalable Bayesian Logistic Regression

Jonathan H. Huggins
Trevor Campbell
Tamara Broderick
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
{jhuggins@, tdjc@, tbroderick@csail.}mit.edu

Abstract
The use of Bayesian methods in large-scale data settings is attractive because of
the rich hierarchical models, uncertainty quantification, and prior specification
they provide. Standard Bayesian inference algorithms are computationally expensive, however, making their direct application to large datasets difficult or infeasible. Recent work on scaling Bayesian inference has focused on modifying
the underlying algorithms to, for example, use only a random data subsample at
each iteration. We leverage the insight that data is often redundant to instead obtain a weighted subset of the data (called a coreset) that is much smaller than the
original dataset. We can then use this small coreset in any number of existing
posterior inference algorithms without modification. In this paper, we develop an
efficient coreset construction algorithm for Bayesian logistic regression models.
We provide theoretical guarantees on the size and approximation quality of the
coreset – both for fixed, known datasets, and in expectation for a wide class of
data generative models. Crucially, the proposed approach also permits efficient
construction of the coreset in both streaming and parallel settings, with minimal
additional effort. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on a number of
synthetic and real-world datasets, and find that, in practice, the size of the coreset
is independent of the original dataset size. Furthermore, constructing the coreset
takes a negligible amount of time compared to that required to run MCMC on it.

1

Introduction

Large-scale datasets, comprising tens or hundreds of millions of observations, are becoming the
norm in scientific and commercial applications ranging from population genetics to advertising. At
such scales even simple operations, such as examining each data point a small number of times,
become burdensome; it is sometimes not possible to fit all data in the physical memory of a single machine. These constraints have, in the past, limited practitioners to relatively simple statistical modeling approaches. However, the rich hierarchical models, uncertainty quantification, and
prior specification provided by Bayesian methods have motivated substantial recent effort in making
Bayesian inference procedures, which are often computationally expensive, scale to the large-data
setting.
The standard approach to Bayesian inference for large-scale data is to modify a specific inference algorithm, such as MCMC or variational Bayes, to handle distributed or streaming processing of data.
Examples include subsampling and streaming methods for variational Bayes [6, 7, 16], subsampling
methods for MCMC [4, 18, 24], and distributed “consensus” methods for MCMC [8, 19, 21, 22].
Existing methods, however, suffer from both practical and theoretical limitations. Stochastic variational inference [16] and subsampling MCMC methods use a new random subset of the data at each
iteration, which requires random access to the data and hence is infeasible for very large datasets
that do not fit into memory. Furthermore, in practice, subsampling MCMC methods have been found
to require examining a constant fraction of the data at each iteration, severely limiting the computational gains obtained [5, 23]. More scalable methods such as consensus MCMC [19, 21, 22]
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

