An Efficient Streaming Algorithm
for the Submodular Cover Problem
Ashkan Norouzi-Fard ⇤

Abbas Bazzi ⇤

ashkan.norouzifard@epfl.ch abbas.bazzi@epfl.ch

Marwa El Halabi †
marwa.elhalabi@epfl.ch

Ilija Bogunovic †

Ya-Ping Hsieh †

Volkan Cevher †

ilija.bogunovic@epfl.ch

ya-ping.hsieh@epfl.ch

volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
We initiate the study of the classical Submodular Cover (SC) problem in the data
streaming model which we refer to as the Streaming Submodular Cover (SSC). We
show that any single pass streaming algorithm using sublinear memory in the size
of the stream will fail to provide any non-trivial approximation guarantees for SSC.
Hence, we consider a relaxed version of SSC, where we only seek to find a partial
cover. We design the first Efficient bicriteria Submodular Cover Streaming (ESCStreaming) algorithm for this problem, and provide theoretical guarantees for its
performance supported by numerical evidence. Our algorithm finds solutions that
are competitive with the near-optimal offline greedy algorithm despite requiring
only a single pass over the data stream. In our numerical experiments, we evaluate
the performance of ESC-Streaming on active set selection and large-scale graph
cover problems.

1 Introduction
We consider the Streaming Submodular Cover (SSC) problem, where we seek to find the smallest
subset that achieves a certain utility, as measured by a monotone submodular function. The data is
assumed to arrive in an arbitrary order and the goal is to minimize the number of passes over the
whole dataset while using a memory that is as small as possible.
The motivation behind studying SSC is that many real-world applications can be modeled as cover
problems, where we need to select a small subset of data points such that they maximize a particular
utility criterion. Often, the quality criterion can be captured by a utility function that satisfies
submodularity [27, 16, 15], an intuitive notion of diminishing returns.
Despite the fact that the standard Submodular Cover (SC) problem is extensively studied and very
well-understood, all the proposed algorithms in the literature heavily rely on having access to whole
ground set during their execution. However, in many real-world applications, this assumption does
not hold. For instance, when the dataset is being generated on the fly or is too large to fit in memory,
having access to the whole ground set may not be feasible. Similarly, depending on the application,
we may have some restrictions on how we can access the data. Namely, it could be that random
access to the data is simply not possible, or we might be restricted to only accessing a small fraction
of it. In all such scenarios, the optimization needs to be done on the fly.
The SC problem is first considered by Wolsey [28], who shows that a simple greedy algorithm yields
a logarithmic factor approximation. This algorithm performs well in practice and usually returns
⇤
†

Theory of Computation Laboratory 2 (THL2), EPFL. These authors contributed equally to this work.
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS), EPFL

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

