Stochastic Gradient MCMC with Stale Gradients
Changyou Chen†
Nan Ding‡
Chunyuan Li†
Yizhe Zhang†
Lawrence Carin†
†
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
‡
Google Inc., Venice, CA, USA
†
{cc448,cl319,yz196,lcarin}@duke.edu; ‡ dingnan@google.com

Abstract
Stochastic gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC) has played an important role in largescale Bayesian learning, with well-developed theoretical convergence properties. In
such applications of SG-MCMC, it is becoming increasingly popular to employ distributed systems, where stochastic gradients are computed based on some outdated
parameters, yielding what are termed stale gradients. While stale gradients could
be directly used in SG-MCMC, their impact on convergence properties has not
been well studied. In this paper we develop theory to show that while the bias and
MSE of an SG-MCMC algorithm depend on the staleness of stochastic gradients,
its estimation variance (relative to the expected estimate, based on a prescribed
number of samples) is independent of it. In a simple Bayesian distributed system
with SG-MCMC, where stale gradients are computed asynchronously by a set
of workers, our theory indicates a linear speedup on the decrease of estimation
variance w.r.t. the number of workers. Experiments on synthetic data and deep
neural networks validate our theory, demonstrating the effectiveness and scalability
of SG-MCMC with stale gradients.

1

Introduction

The pervasiveness of big data has made scalable machine learning increasingly important, especially
for deep models. A basic technique is to adopt stochastic optimization algorithms [1], e.g., stochastic
gradient descent and its extensions [2]. In each iteration of stochastic optimization, a minibatch of
data is used to evaluate the gradients of the objective function and update model parameters (errors
are introduced in the gradients, because they are computed based on minibatches rather than the
entire dataset; since the minibatches are typically selected at random, this yields the term “stochastic”
gradient). This is highly scalable because processing a minibatch of data in each iteration is relatively
cheap compared to analyzing the entire (large) dataset at once. Under certain conditions, stochastic
optimization is guaranteed to converge to a (local) optima [1]. Because of its scalability, the minibatch
strategy has recently been extended to Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) Bayesian sampling
methods, yielding SG-MCMC [3, 4, 5].
In order to handle large-scale data, distributed stochastic optimization algorithms have been developed,
for example [6], to further improve scalability. In a distributed setting, a cluster of machines with
multiple cores cooperate with each other, typically through an asynchronous scheme, for scalability
[7, 8, 9]. A downside of an asynchronous implementation is that stale gradients must be used in
parameter updates (“stale gradients” are stochastic gradients computed based on outdated parameters,
instead of the latest parameters; they are easier to compute in a distributed system, but introduce
additional errors relative to traditional stochastic gradients). While some theory has been developed to
guarantee the convergence of stochastic optimization with stale gradients [10, 11, 12], little analysis
has been done in a Bayesian setting, where SG-MCMC is applied. Distributed SG-MCMC algorithms
share characteristics with distributed stochastic optimization, and thus are highly scalable and suitable
for large-scale Bayesian learning. Existing Bayesian distributed systems with traditional MCMC
methods, such as [13], usually employ stale statistics instead of stale gradients, where stale statistics
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

