A primal-dual method for conic constrained
distributed optimization problems

Necdet Serhat Aybat
Department of Industrial Engineering
Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
nsa10@psu.edu

Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani
Department of Industrial Engineering
Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
evy5047@psu.edu

Abstract
We consider cooperative multi-agent consensus optimization problems over an
undirected network of agents, where only those agents connected by an edge
can directly communicate. The objective is to minimize the sum of agentspecific composite convex functions over agent-specific private conic constraint
sets; hence, the optimal consensus decision should lie in the intersection of these
private sets. We provide convergence rates in sub-optimality, infeasibility and
consensus violation; examine the effect of underlying network topology on the
convergence rates of the proposed decentralized algorithms; and show how to extend these methods to handle time-varying communication networks.

1

Introduction

Let G = (N , E) denote a connected undirected graph of N computing nodes, where N ,
{1, . . . , N } and E ⊆ N × N denotes the set of edges – without loss of generality assume that
(i, j) ∈ E implies i < j. Suppose nodes i and j can exchange information only if (i, j) ∈ E, and
each node i ∈ N has a private (local) cost function Φi : Rn → R ∪ {+∞} such that
Φi (x) , ρi (x) + fi (x),

(1)

where ρi : Rn → R ∪ {+∞} is a possibly non-smooth convex function, and fi : Rn → R is a
smooth convex function. We assume that fi is differentiable on an open set containing dom ρi with
a Lipschitz continuous gradient ∇fi , of which Lipschitz constant is Li ; and the prox map of ρi ,

proxρi (x) , argmin ρi (y) + 12 ky − xk2 ,

(2)

y∈Rn

is efficiently computable for i ∈ N , where k.k denotes the Euclidean norm. Let Ni , {j ∈ N :
(i, j) ∈ E or (j, i) ∈ E} denote the set of neighboring nodes of i ∈ N , and di , |Ni | is the degree
of node i ∈ N . Consider the following minimization problem:
min

x∈Rn

X

i∈N

Φi (x)

s.t.

Ai x − bi ∈ Ki ,

∀i ∈ N ,

(3)

where Ai ∈ Rmi ×n , bi ∈ Rmi and Ki ⊆ Rmi is a closed, convex cone. Suppose that projections
onto Ki can be computed efficiently, while the projection onto the preimage A−1
i (Ki +bi ) is assumed
to be impractical, e.g., when Ki is the positive semidefinite cone, projection to preimage requires
solving an SDP. Our objective is to solve (3) in a decentralized fashion using the computing nodes
N and exchanging information only along the edges E. In Section 2 and Section 3, we consider (3)
when the topology of the connectivity graph is static and time-varying, respectively.
This computational setting, i.e., decentralized consensus optimization, appears as a generic model
for various applications in signal processing, e.g., [1, 2], machine learning, e.g., [3, 4, 5] and statistical inference, e.g., [6]. Clearly, (3) can also be solved in a “centralized” fashion by communicating all the private functions Φi to a central node, and solving the overall problem at this
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

