Learning to Communicate with
Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Jakob N. Foerster1,†
jakob.foerster@cs.ox.ac.uk

Yannis M. Assael1,†
yannis.assael@cs.ox.ac.uk

Nando de Freitas1,2,3
nandodefreitas@google.com

Shimon Whiteson1
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

1

2

University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, CIFAR NCAP Program
3
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We consider the problem of multiple agents sensing and acting in environments
with the goal of maximising their shared utility. In these environments, agents must
learn communication protocols in order to share information that is needed to solve
the tasks. By embracing deep neural networks, we are able to demonstrate endto-end learning of protocols in complex environments inspired by communication
riddles and multi-agent computer vision problems with partial observability. We
propose two approaches for learning in these domains: Reinforced Inter-Agent
Learning (RIAL) and Differentiable Inter-Agent Learning (DIAL). The former uses
deep Q-learning, while the latter exploits the fact that, during learning, agents can
backpropagate error derivatives through (noisy) communication channels. Hence,
this approach uses centralised learning but decentralised execution. Our experiments introduce new environments for studying the learning of communication
protocols and present a set of engineering innovations that are essential for success
in these domains.

1

Introduction

How language and communication emerge among intelligent agents has long been a topic of intense
debate. Among the many unresolved questions are: Why does language use discrete structures?
What role does the environment play? What is innate and what is learned? And so on. Some of the
debates on these questions have been so fiery that in 1866 the French Academy of Sciences banned
publications about the origin of human language.
The rapid progress in recent years of machine learning, and deep learning in particular, opens the
door to a new perspective on this debate. How can agents use machine learning to automatically
discover the communication protocols they need to coordinate their behaviour? What, if anything,
can deep learning offer to such agents? What insights can we glean from the success or failure of
agents that learn to communicate?
In this paper, we take the first steps towards answering these questions. Our approach is programmatic:
first, we propose a set of multi-agent benchmark tasks that require communication; then, we formulate
several learning algorithms for these tasks; finally, we analyse how these algorithms learn, or fail to
learn, communication protocols for the agents.
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

