Preference Completion from Partial Rankings

Suriya Gunasekar
University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA
suriya@utexas.edu

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
sanmi@illinois.edu

Joydeep Ghosh
University of Texas,Austin, TX, USA
ghosh@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel and efficient algorithm for the collaborative preference completion problem, which involves jointly estimating individualized rankings for a set of
entities over a shared set of items, based on a limited number of observed affinity
values. Our approach exploits the observation that while preferences are often
recorded as numerical scores, the predictive quantity of interest is the underlying
rankings. Thus, attempts to closely match the recorded scores may lead to overfitting and impair generalization performance. Instead, we propose an estimator
that directly fits the underlying preference order, combined with nuclear norm
constraints to encourage low–rank parameters. Besides (approximate) correctness
of the ranking order, the proposed estimator makes no generative assumption on
the numerical scores of the observations. One consequence is that the proposed
estimator can fit any consistent partial ranking over a subset of the items represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), generalizing standard techniques that
can only fit preference scores. Despite this generality, for supervision representing
total or blockwise total orders, the computational complexity of our algorithm is
within a log factor of the standard algorithms for nuclear norm regularization based
estimates for matrix completion. We further show promising empirical results for a
novel and challenging application of collaboratively ranking of the associations
between brain–regions and cognitive neuroscience terms.

1

Introduction

Collaborative preference completion is the task of jointly learning bipartite (or dyadic) preferences of
set of entities for a shared list of items, e.g., user–item interactions in a recommender system [14; 22].
It is commonly assumed that such entity–item preferences are generated from a small number of
latent or hidden factors, or equivalently, the underlying preference value matrix is assumed to be
low rank. Further, if the observed affinity scores from various explicit and implicit feedback are
treated as exact (or mildly perturbed) entries of the unobserved preference value matrix, then the
preference completion task naturally fits in the framework of low rank matrix completion [22; 38].
More generally, low rank matrix completion involves predicting the missing entries of a low rank
matrix from a vanishing fraction of its entries observed through a noisy channel. Several low rank
matrix completion estimators and algorithms have been developed in the literature, many with strong
theoretical guarantees and empirical performance [6; 32; 21; 28; 38; 10].
Recent research in the preference completion literature have noted that using a matrix completion
estimator for collaborative preference estimation may be misguided [11; 33; 23] as the observed
entity–item affinity scores from implicit/explicit feedback are potentially subject to systematic
monotonic transformations arising from limitations in feedback collection, e.g., quantization and
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

