Statistical Inference for Pairwise Graphical Models
Using Score Matching
Ming Yu
mingyu@chicagobooth.edu

Varun Gupta
varun.gupta@chicagobooth.edu

Mladen Kolar⇤
mladen.kolar@chicagobooth.edu
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract
Probabilistic graphical models have been widely used to model complex systems
and aid scientific discoveries. As a result, there is a large body of literature
focused on consistent model selection. However, scientists are often interested in
understanding uncertainty associated with the estimated parameters, which current
literature has not addressed thoroughly. In this paper, we propose a novel estimator
for edge parameters for pairwise graphical models based on Hyvärinen scoring
rule. Hyvärinen scoring rule is especially useful in cases where the normalizing
constant
cannot be obtained efficiently in a closed form. We prove that the estimator
p
is n-consistent and asymptotically Normal. This result allows us to construct
confidence intervals for edge parameters, as well as, hypothesis tests. We establish
our results under conditions that are typically assumed in the literature for consistent
estimation. However, we do not require that the estimator consistently recovers
the graph structure. In particular, we prove that the asymptotic distribution of the
estimator is robust to model selection mistakes and uniformly valid for a large
number of data-generating processes. We illustrate validity of our estimator through
extensive simulation studies.

1

Introduction

Undirected probabilistic graphical models are widely used to explore and represent dependencies
between random variables. They have been used in areas ranging from computational biology to
neuroscience and finance. See [7] for a recent review. An undirected probabilistic graphical model
consists of an undirected graph G = (V, E), where V = {1, . . . , p} is the vertex set and E ⇢ V ⇥ V
is the edge set, and a random vector X = (X1 , . . . , Xp ) 2 X p ✓ RP . Each coordinate of the random
vector X is associated with a vertex in V and the graph structure encodes the conditional independence
assumptions underlying the distribution of X. In particular, Xa and Xb are conditionally independent
given all the other variables if and only if (a, b) 62 E, that is, the nodes a and b are not adjacent in G.
One of the fundamental problems in statistics is that of learning the structure of G from i.i.d. samples
from X and quantifying uncertainty of the estimated structure.
⇤

This work is supported by an IBM Corporation Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. This work was completed in part with resources provided by the University of Chicago
Research Computing Center.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

