Multi-view Anomaly Detection via Robust
Probabilistic Latent Variable Models
Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
iwata.tomoharu@lab.ntt.co.jp

Makoto Yamada
Kyoto University
makoto.m.yamada@ieee.org

Abstract
We propose probabilistic latent variable models for multi-view anomaly detection, which is the task of finding instances that have inconsistent views given
multi-view data. With the proposed model, all views of a non-anomalous instance
are assumed to be generated from a single latent vector. On the other hand, an
anomalous instance is assumed to have multiple latent vectors, and its different
views are generated from different latent vectors. By inferring the number of latent vectors used for each instance with Dirichlet process priors, we obtain multiview anomaly scores. The proposed model can be seen as a robust extension of
probabilistic canonical correlation analysis for noisy multi-view data. We present
Bayesian inference procedures for the proposed model based on a stochastic EM
algorithm. The effectiveness of the proposed model is demonstrated in terms of
performance when detecting multi-view anomalies.

1 Introduction
There has been great interest in multi-view learning, in which data are obtained from various information sources. In a wide variety of applications, data are naturally comprised of multiple views.
For example, an image can be represented by color, texture and shape information; a web page can
be represented by words, images and URLs occurring on in the page; and a video can be represented
by audio and visual features. In this paper, we consider the task of finding anomalies in multi-view
data. The task is called horizontal anomaly detection [13], or multi-view anomaly detection [16].
Anomalies in multi-view data are instances that have inconsistent features across multiple views.
Multi-view anomaly detection can be used for many applications, such as information disparity management [9], purchase behavior analysis [13], malicious insider detection [16], and user aggregation
from multiple databases. In information disparity management, multiple views can be obtained from
documents written in different languages such as Wikipedia. Multi-view anomaly detection tries to
find documents that contain different information across different languages, which would be helpful for editors to select documents to be updated, or beneficial for cultural anthropologists to analyze
social difference across different languages. In purchase behavior analysis, multiple views for each
item can be defined as its genre and its purchase history, i.e. a set of users who purchased the item.
Multi-view anomaly detection can find movies inconsistently purchased by users based on the movie
genre, which would assist creating marketing strategies.
Multi-view anomaly detection is different from standard (single-view) anomaly detection. Singleview anomaly detection finds instances that do not conform to expected behavior [6]. Figure 1 (a)
shows the difference between a multi-view anomaly and a single-view anomaly in a two-view data
set. ‘M’ is a multi-view anomaly since ‘M’ belongs to different clusters in different views (‘A–D’
cluster in View 1 and ‘E–J’ cluster in View 2) and views of ‘M’ are not consistent. ‘S’ is a singleview anomaly since ‘S’ is located far from other instances in each view. However, both views of
‘S’ have the same relationship with the others (they are far from the other instances), and then ‘S’
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

