Correlated-PCA: Principal Components’ Analysis
when Data and Noise are Correlated
Namrata Vaswani and Han Guo
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
Email: {namrata,hanguo}@iastate.edu

Abstract
Given a matrix of observed data, Principal Components Analysis (PCA) computes
a small number of orthogonal directions that contain most of its variability. Provably accurate solutions for PCA have been in use for a long time. However, to
the best of our knowledge, all existing theoretical guarantees for it assume that the
data and the corrupting noise are mutually independent, or at least uncorrelated.
This is valid in practice often, but not always. In this paper, we study the PCA
problem in the setting where the data and noise can be correlated. Such noise is
often also referred to as “data-dependent noise”. We obtain a correctness result
for the standard eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) based solution to PCA under
simple assumptions on the data-noise correlation. We also develop and analyze a
generalization of EVD, cluster-EVD, that improves upon EVD in certain regimes.

1

Introduction

Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is among the most frequently used tools for dimension reduction. Given a matrix of data, it computes a small number of orthogonal directions that contain all
(or most) of the variability of the data. The subspace spanned by these directions is the “principal
subspace”. To use PCA for dimension reduction, one projects the observed data onto this subspace.
The standard solution to PCA is to compute the reduced singular value decomposition (SVD) of
the data matrix, or, equivalently, to compute the reduced eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) of the
empirical covariance matrix of the data. If all eigenvalues are nonzero, a threshold is used and all
eigenvectors with eigenvalues above the threshold are retained. This solution, which we henceforth
refer to as simple EVD, or just EVD, has been used for many decades and is well-studied in literature, e.g., see [1] and references therein. However, to the best of our knowledge, all existing results
for it assume that the true data and the corrupting noise in the observed data are independent, or, at
least, uncorrelated. This is valid in practice often, but not always. Here, we study the PCA problem
in the setting where the data and noise vectors may be correlated (correlated-PCA). Such noise is
sometimes called “data-dependent” noise.
Contributions. (1) Under a boundedness assumption on the true data vectors, and some other assumptions, for a fixed desired subspace error level, we show that the sample complexity of simpleEVD for correlated-PCA scales as f 2 r2 log n where n is the data vector length, f is the condition
number of the true data covariance matrix and r is its rank. Here “sample complexity” refers to
the number of samples needed to get a small enough subspace recovery error with high probability
(whp). The dependence on f 2 is problematic for datasets with large condition numbers, and, especially in the high dimensional setting where n is large. (2) To address this, we also develop and
analyze a generalization of simple-EVD, called cluster-EVD. Under an eigenvalues’ “clustering”
assumption, cluster-EVD weakens the dependence on f .
To our best knowledge, the correlated-PCA problem has not been explicitly studied. We first encountered it while solving the dynamic robust PCA problem in the Recursive Projected Compressive
Sensing (ReProCS) framework [2, 3, 4, 5]. The version of correlated-PCA studied here is motivated
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

