Learning and Forecasting Opinion Dynamics in
Social Networks
Abir De∗
Isabel Valera†
Niloy Ganguly∗
∗
Sourangshu Bhattacharya
Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez†
∗
IIT Kharagpur
MPI for Software Systems†
{abir.de,niloy,sourangshu}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
{ivalera,manuelgr}@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Social media and social networking sites have become a global pinboard for exposition and discussion of news, topics, and ideas, where social media users often
update their opinions about a particular topic by learning from the opinions shared
by their friends. In this context, can we learn a data-driven model of opinion dynamics that is able to accurately forecast users’ opinions? In this paper, we introduce SLANT, a probabilistic modeling framework of opinion dynamics, which
represents users’ opinions over time by means of marked jump diffusion stochastic differential equations, and allows for efficient model simulation and parameter
estimation from historical fine grained event data. We then leverage our framework to derive a set of efficient predictive formulas for opinion forecasting and
identify conditions under which opinions converge to a steady state. Experiments
on data gathered from Twitter show that our model provides a good fit to the data
and our formulas achieve more accurate forecasting than alternatives.

1

Introduction

Social media and social networking sites are increasingly used by people to express their opinions,
give their “hot takes”, on the latest breaking news, political issues, sports events, and new products.
As a consequence, there has been an increasing interest on leveraging social media and social networking sites to sense and forecast opinions, as well as understand opinion dynamics. For example,
political parties routinely use social media to sense people’s opinion about their political discourse1 ;
quantitative investment firms measure investor sentiment and trade using social media [18]; and,
corporations leverage brand sentiment, estimated from users’ posts, likes and shares in social media
and social networking sites, to design their marketing campaigns2 . In this context, multiple methods
for sensing opinions, typically based on sentiment analysis [21], have been proposed in recent years.
However, methods for accurately forecasting opinions are still scarce [7, 8, 19], despite the extensive
literature on theoretical models of opinion dynamics [6, 9].
In this paper, we develop a novel modeling framework of opinion dynamics in social media and social networking sites, SLANT3 , which allows for accurate forecasting of individual users’ opinions.
The proposed framework is based on two simple intuitive ideas: i) users’ opinions are hidden until
they decide to share it with their friends (or neighbors); and, ii) users may update their opinions
about a particular topic by learning from the opinions shared by their friends. While the latter is one
of the main underlying premises used by many well-known theoretical models of opinion dynamics [6, 9, 22], the former has been ignored by models of opinion dynamics, despite its relevance on
closely related processes such as information diffusion [12].
1

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/08/technology/campaigns-use-social-media-to-lure-younger-voters.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/31/technology/facebook-twitter-and-foursquare-as-corporate-focus-groups.html
3
Slant is a particular point of view from which something is seen or presented.
2

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

