Optimal Black-Box Reductions
Between Optimization Objectives∗

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu
Institute for Advanced Study
& Princeton University

Elad Hazan
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu
Princeton University

Abstract
The diverse world of machine learning applications has given rise to a plethora
of algorithms and optimization methods, finely tuned to the specific regression
or classification task at hand. We reduce the complexity of algorithm design
for machine learning by reductions: we develop reductions that take a method
developed for one setting and apply it to the entire spectrum of smoothness and
strong-convexity in applications.
Furthermore, unlike existing results, our new reductions are optimal and more
practical. We show how these new reductions give rise to new and faster running
times on training linear classifiers for various families of loss functions, and
conclude with experiments showing their successes also in practice.

1

Introduction

The basic machine learning problem of minimizing a regularizer plus a loss function comes in
numerous different variations and names. Examples include Ridge Regression, Lasso, Support Vector
Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression and many others. A multitude of optimization methods were
introduced for these problems, but in most cases specialized to very particular problem settings.
Such specializations appear necessary since objective functions for different classification and
regularization tasks admin different convexity and smoothness parameters. We list below a few recent
algorithms along with their applicable settings.
• Variance-reduction methods such as SAGA and SVRG [9, 14] intrinsically require the objective to
be smooth, and do not work for non-smooth problems like SVM. This is because for loss functions
such as hinge loss, no unbiased gradient estimator can achieve a variance that approaches to zero.
• Dual methods such as SDCA or APCG [20, 30] intrinsically require the objective to be strongly
convex (SC), and do not directly apply to non-SC problems. This is because for a non-SC objective
such as Lasso, its dual is not well-behaved due to the `1 regularizer.
• Primal-dual methods such as SPDC [35] require the objective to be both smooth and SC. Many
other algorithms are only analyzed for both smooth and SC objectives [7, 16, 17].
In this paper we investigate whether such specializations are inherent. Is it possible to take a convex
optimization algorithm designed for one problem, and apply it to different classification or regression
settings in a black-box manner? Such a reduction should ideally take full and optimal advantage of
the objective properties, namely strong-convexity and smoothness, for each setting.
Unfortunately, existing reductions are still very limited for at least two reasons. First, they incur at
least a logarithmic factor log(1/ε) in the running time so leading only to suboptimal convergence
∗

The full version of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.05642. This paper is partially
supported by an NSF Grant, no. 1523815, and a Microsoft Research Grant, no. 0518584.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

