Global Analysis of Expectation Maximization
for Mixtures of Two Gaussians
Ji Xu
Columbia University
jixu@cs.columbia.edu

Daniel Hsu
Columbia University
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Arian Maleki
Columbia University
arian@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
Expectation Maximization (EM) is among the most popular algorithms for estimating parameters of statistical models. However, EM, which is an iterative algorithm
based on the maximum likelihood principle, is generally only guaranteed to find
stationary points of the likelihood objective, and these points may be far from any
maximizer. This article addresses this disconnect between the statistical principles
behind EM and its algorithmic properties. Specifically, it provides a global analysis
of EM for specific models in which the observations comprise an i.i.d. sample
from a mixture of two Gaussians. This is achieved by (i) studying the sequence of
parameters from idealized execution of EM in the infinite sample limit, and fully
characterizing the limit points of the sequence in terms of the initial parameters;
and then (ii) based on this convergence analysis, establishing statistical consistency
(or lack thereof) for the actual sequence of parameters produced by EM.

1

Introduction

Since Fisher’s 1922 paper (Fisher, 1922), maximum likelihood estimators (MLE) have become one
of the most popular tools in many areas of science and engineering. The asymptotic consistency
and optimality of MLEs have provided users with the confidence that, at least in some sense, there
is no better way to estimate parameters for many standard statistical models. Despite its appealing
properties, computing the MLE is often intractable. Indeed, this is the case for many latent variable
models {f (Y, z; η)}, where the latent variables z are not observed. For each setting of the parameters
η, the marginal distribution of the observed data Y is (for discrete z)
X
f (Y; η) =
f (Y, z; η) .
z

It is this marginalization over latent variables that typically causes the computational difficulty.
Furthermore, many algorithms based on the MLE principle are only known to find stationary points
of the likelihood objective (e.g., local maxima), and these points are not necessarily the MLE.
1.1

Expectation Maximization

Among the algorithms mentioned above, Expectation Maximization (EM) has attracted more attention
for the simplicity of its iterations, and its good performance in practice (Dempster et al., 1977; Redner
and Walker, 1984). EM is an iterative algorithm for climbing the likelihood objective starting from
an initial setting of the parameters η̂ h0i . In iteration t, EM performs the following steps:
X
E-step:
Q̂(η | η̂ hti ) ,
f (z | Y; η̂ hti ) log f (Y, z; η) ,
(1)
z

M-step:

η̂

ht+1i

, arg max Q̂(η | η̂ hti ) ,
η

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(2)

