Spectral Learning of Dynamic Systems from
Nonequilibrium Data

Hao Wu and Frank Noé
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Freie Universität Berlin
Arnimallee 6, 14195 Berlin
{hao.wu,frank.noe}@fu-berlin.de

Abstract
Observable operator models (OOMs) and related models are one of the most important and powerful tools for modeling and analyzing stochastic systems. They
exactly describe dynamics of finite-rank systems and can be efficiently and consistently estimated through spectral learning under the assumption of identically
distributed data. In this paper, we investigate the properties of spectral learning
without this assumption due to the requirements of analyzing large-time scale
systems, and show that the equilibrium dynamics of a system can be extracted
from nonequilibrium observation data by imposing an equilibrium constraint. In
addition, we propose a binless extension of spectral learning for continuous data.
In comparison with the other continuous-valued spectral algorithms, the binless
algorithm can achieve consistent estimation of equilibrium dynamics with only
linear complexity.

1

Introduction

In the last two decades, a collection of highly related dynamic models including observable operator
models (OOMs) [1–3], predictive state representations [4–6] and reduced-rank hidden Markov models
[7, 8], have become powerful and increasingly popular tools for analysis of dynamic data. These
models are largely similar, and all can be learned by spectral methods in a general framework of
multiplicity automata, or equivalently sequential systems [9, 10]. In contrast with the other commonly
used models such as Markov state models [11, 12], Langevin models [13, 14], traditional hidden
Markov models (HMMs) [15, 16], Gaussian process state-space models [17, 18] and recurrent
neural networks [19], the spectral learning based models can exactly characterize the dynamics of a
stochastic system without any a priori knowledge except the assumption of finite dynamic rank (i.e.,
the rank of Hankel matrix) [10, 20], and the parameter estimation can be efficiently performed for
discrete-valued systems without solving any intractable inverse or optimization problem. We focus in
this paper only on stochastic systems without control inputs and all spectral learning based models
can be expressed in the form of OOMs for such systems, so we will refer to them as OOMs below.
In most literature on spectral learning, the observation data are assumed to be identically (possibly not
independently) distributed so that the expected values of observables associated with the parameter
estimation can be reliably computed by empirical averaging. However, this assumption can be
severely violated due to the limit of experimental technique or computational capacity in many
practical situations, especially where metastable physical or chemical processes are involved. A
notable example is the distributed computing project Folding@home [21], which explores protein
folding processes that occur on the timescales of microseconds to milliseconds based on molecular
dynamics simulations on the order of nanoseconds in length. In such a nonequilibrium case where
distributions of observation data are time-varying and dependent on initial conditions, it is still unclear
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

