Adaptive Averaging in Accelerated Descent Dynamics

Walid Krichene ∗
UC Berkeley

Alexandre M. Bayen
UC Berkeley

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley and QUT

walid@eecs.berkeley.edu

bayen@berkeley.edu

bartlett@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study accelerated descent dynamics for constrained convex optimization. This
dynamics can be described naturally as a coupling of a dual variable accumulating
gradients at a given rate η(t), and a primal variable obtained as the weighted average
of the mirrored dual trajectory, with weights w(t). Using a Lyapunov argument,
we give sufficient conditions on η and w to achieve a desired convergence rate. As
an example, we show that the replicator dynamics (an example of mirror descent
on the simplex) can be accelerated using a simple averaging scheme.
We then propose an adaptive averaging heuristic which adaptively computes the
weights to speed up the decrease of the Lyapunov function. We provide guarantees
on adaptive averaging in continuous-time, prove that it preserves the quadratic
convergence rate of accelerated first-order methods in discrete-time, and give
numerical experiments to compare it with existing heuristics, such as adaptive
restarting. The experiments indicate that adaptive averaging performs at least as
well as adaptive restarting, with significant improvements in some cases.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of minimizing a convex function f over a feasible set X , a closed convex subset
of E = Rn . We will assume that f is differentiable, that its gradient ∇f is a Lipschitz function with
Lipschitz constant L, and that the set of minimizers S = arg minx∈X f (x) is non-empty. We will
focus on the study of continuous-time, first-order dynamics for optimization. First-order methods
have seen a resurgence of interest due to the significant increase in both size and dimensionality of the
data sets typically encountered in machine learning and other applications, which makes higher-order
methods computationally intractable in most cases. Continuous-time dynamics for optimization
have been studied for a long time, e.g. [6, 9, 5], and more recently [20, 2, 1, 3, 11, 23], in which a
connection is made between Nesterov’s accelerated methods [14, 15] and a family of continuous-time
ODEs. Many optimization algorithms can be interpreted as a discretization of a continuous-time
process, and studying the continuous-time dynamics is useful for many reasons: The analysis is
often simpler in continuous-time, it can help guide the design and analysis of new algorithms, and
it provides intuition and insight into the discrete process. For example, Su et al. show in [20] that
Nesterov’s original method [14] is a discretization of a second-order ODE, and use this interpretation
to propose a restarting heuristic which empirically speeds up the convergence. In [11], we generalize
this approach to the proximal version of Nesterov’s method [15] which applies to constrained convex
problems, and show that the continuous-time ODE can be interpreted as coupled dynamics of a dual
variable Z(t) which evolves in the dual space E ∗ , and a primal variable X(t) which is obtained as
the weighted average of a non-linear transformation of the dual trajectory. More precisely,

Ż(t) = − rt ∇f (X(t))





R t r−1
τ
∇ψ ∗ (Z(τ ))dτ

X(t) = 0 R t τ r−1 dτ

0



X(0) = ∇ψ ∗ (Z(0)) = x0 ,
∗

Walid Krichene is currently affiliated with Google. walidk@google.com

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

