Learning HMMs with Nonparametric Emissions via
Spectral Decompositions of Continuous Matrices

Kirthevasan Kandasamy⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kandasamy@cs.cmu.edu

Maruan Al-Shedivat⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
alshedivat@cs.cmu.edu

Eric P. Xing
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in using spectral methods for estimating
latent variable models. However, it is usually assumed that the distribution of the
observations conditioned on the latent variables is either discrete or belongs to
a parametric family. In this paper, we study the estimation of an m-state hidden
Markov model (HMM) with only smoothness assumptions, such as Hölderian
conditions, on the emission densities. By leveraging some recent advances in
continuous linear algebra and numerical analysis, we develop a computationally
efficient spectral algorithm for learning nonparametric HMMs. Our technique is
based on computing an SVD on nonparametric estimates of density functions by
viewing them as continuous matrices. We derive sample complexity bounds via
concentration results for nonparametric density estimation and novel perturbation
theory results for continuous matrices. We implement our method using Chebyshev
polynomial approximations. Our method is competitive with other baselines on
synthetic and real problems and is also very computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

Hidden Markov models (HMMs) [1] are one of the most popular statistical models for analyzing time
series data in various application domains such as speech recognition, medicine, and meteorology. In
an HMM, a discrete hidden state undergoes Markovian transitions from one of m possible states to
another at each time step. If the hidden state at time t is ht , we observe a random variable xt 2 X
drawn from an emission distribution, Oj = P(xt |ht = j). In its most basic form X is a discrete set
and Oj are discrete distributions. When dealing with continuous observations, it is conventional to
assume that the emissions Oj belong to a parametric class of distributions, such as Gaussian.
Recently, spectral methods for estimating parametric latent variable models have gained immense
popularity as a viable alternative to the Expectation Maximisation (EM) procedure [2–4]. At a high
level, these methods estimate higher order moments from the data and recover the parameters via
a series of matrix operations such as singular value decompositions, matrix multiplications and
pseudo-inverses of the moments. In the case of discrete HMMs [2], these moments correspond
exactly to the joint probabilities of the observations in the sequence.
Assuming parametric forms for the emission densities is often too restrictive since real world
distributions can be arbitrary. Parametric models may introduce incongruous biases that cannot be
reduced even with large datasets. To address this problem, we study nonparametric HMMs only
assuming some mild smoothness conditions on the emission densities. We design a spectral algorithm
for this setting. Our methods leverage some recent advances in continuous linear algebra [5, 6]
which views two-dimensional functions as continuous analogues of matrices. Chebyshev polynomial
approximations enable efficient computation of algebraic operations on these continuous objects [7,
8]. Using these ideas, we extend existing spectral methods for discrete HMMs to the continuous
nonparametric setting. Our main contributions are:
⇤

Joint lead authors.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

