Improved Variational Inference
with Inverse Autoregressive Flow
Diederik P. Kingma
dpkingma@openai.com

Tim Salimans
tim@openai.com

Rafal Jozefowicz
rafal@openai.com

Ilya Sutskever
ilya@openai.com

Xi Chen
peter@openai.com

Max Welling⇤
M.Welling@uva.nl

Abstract
The framework of normalizing flows provides a general strategy for flexible variational inference of posteriors over latent variables. We propose a new type of
normalizing flow, inverse autoregressive flow (IAF), that, in contrast to earlier
published flows, scales well to high-dimensional latent spaces. The proposed flow
consists of a chain of invertible transformations, where each transformation is
based on an autoregressive neural network. In experiments, we show that IAF
significantly improves upon diagonal Gaussian approximate posteriors. In addition,
we demonstrate that a novel type of variational autoencoder, coupled with IAF, is
competitive with neural autoregressive models in terms of attained log-likelihood
on natural images, while allowing significantly faster synthesis.

1

Introduction

Stochastic variational inference (Blei et al., 2012; Hoffman et al., 2013) is a method for scalable
posterior inference with large datasets using stochastic gradient ascent. It can be made especially
efficient for continuous latent variables through latent-variable reparameterization and inference
networks, amortizing the cost, resulting in a highly scalable learning procedure (Kingma and Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2014). When using neural networks for both the
inference network and generative model, this results in class of models called variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling, 2013) (VAEs). A general strategy for building flexible inference
networks, is the framework of normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015). In this paper we
propose a new type of flow, inverse autoregressive flow (IAF), which scales well to high-dimensional
latent space.
At the core of our proposed method lie Gaussian autoregressive functions that are normally used
for density estimation: functions that take as input a variable with some specified ordering such
as multidimensional tensors, and output a mean and standard deviation for each element of the
input variable conditioned on the previous elements. Examples of such functions are autoregressive
neural density estimators such as RNNs, MADE (Germain et al., 2015), PixelCNN (van den Oord
et al., 2016b) or WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016a) models. We show that such functions
can often be turned into invertible nonlinear transformations of the input, with a simple Jacobian
determinant. Since the transformation is flexible and the determinant known, it can be used as a
normalizing flow, transforming a tensor with relatively simple known density, into a new tensor with
more complicated density that is still cheaply computable. In contrast with most previous work on
⇤

University of Amsterdam, University of California Irvine, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
(CIFAR).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

