Learning Parametric Sparse Models for Image
Super-Resolution

Yongbo Li, Weisheng Dong∗, Xuemei Xie, Guangming Shi1 , Xin Li2 , Donglai Xu3
State Key Lab. of ISN, School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
1
Key Lab. of IPIU (Chinese Ministry of Education), Xidian University, China
2
Lane Dep. of CSEE, West Virginia University, USA
3
Sch. of Sci. and Eng., Teesside University, UK
yongboli@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {wsdong, xmxie}@mail.xidian.edu.cn
gmshi@xidian.edu.cn, Xin.Li@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Learning accurate prior knowledge of natural images is of great importance for
single image super-resolution (SR). Existing SR methods either learn the prior
from the low/high-resolution patch pairs or estimate the prior models from the
input low-resolution (LR) image. Specifically, high-frequency details are learned
in the former methods. Though effective, they are heuristic and have limitations
in dealing with blurred LR images; while the latter suffers from the limitations
of frequency aliasing. In this paper, we propose to combine those two lines of
ideas for image super-resolution. More specifically, the parametric sparse prior
of the desirable high-resolution (HR) image patches are learned from both the
input low-resolution (LR) image and a training image dataset. With the learned
sparse priors, the sparse codes and thus the HR image patches can be accurately
recovered by solving a sparse coding problem. Experimental results show that the
proposed SR method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of both
subjective and objective image qualities.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) aiming to recover a high-resolution (HR) image from a single lowresolution (LR) image, has important applications in image processing and computer vision, ranging
from high-definition (HD) televisions and surveillance to medical imaging. Due to the information
loss in the LR image formation, image SR is a classic ill-posed inverse problem, for which strong
prior knowledge of the underlying HR image is required. Generally, image SR methods can be
categorized into two types, i.e., model-based and learning-based methods.
In model-based image SR, the selection of image prior is of great importance. The image priors,
ranging from smoothness assumptions to sparsity and structured sparsity priors, have been exploited
for image SR [1][3][4][13][14][15][19]. The smoothness prior models, e.g., Tikhonov and total
variation (TV) regularizers[1], are effective in suppressing the noise but tend to over smooth image
details. The sparsity-based SR methods, assuming that the HR patches have sparse representation with
respect to a learned dictionary, have led to promising performances. Due to the ill-posed nature of the
SR problem, designing an appropriate sparse regularizer is critical for the success of these methods.
Generally, parametric sparse distributions, e.g., Laplacian and Generalized Gaussian models, which
correspond to the `1 and `p (0 ≤ p ≤ 1) regularizers, are widely used. It has been shown that the
SR performance can be much boosted by exploiting the structural self-similarity of natural images
∗

Corresponding author.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

