Lifelong Learning with Weighted Majority Votes

Anastasia Pentina
IST Austria
apentina@ist.ac.at

Ruth Urner
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
rurner@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Better understanding of the potential benefits of information transfer and representation learning is an important step towards the goal of building intelligent
systems that are able to persist in the world and learn over time. In this work, we
consider a setting where the learner encounters a stream of tasks but is able to retain
only limited information from each encountered task, such as a learned predictor.
In contrast to most previous works analyzing this scenario, we do not make any
distributional assumptions on the task generating process. Instead, we formulate a
complexity measure that captures the diversity of the observed tasks. We provide a
lifelong learning algorithm with error guarantees for every observed task (rather
than on average). We show sample complexity reductions in comparison to solving every task in isolation in terms of our task complexity measure. Further, our
algorithmic framework can naturally be viewed as learning a representation from
encountered tasks with a neural network.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has made significant progress in understanding both theoretical and practical
aspects of solving a single prediction problem from a set of annotated examples. However, if we
aim at building autonomous agents, capable to persist in the world, we need to establish methods
for continuously learning various tasks over time [25, 26]. There is no hope to initially provide, for
example, an autonomous robot with sufficiently rich prior knowledge to solve any problem that it may
encounter during the course of its life. Therefore, an important goal of machine learning research
is to replicate humans’ ability to learn from experience and to reuse knowledge from previously
encountered tasks for solving new ones more efficiently. This is aimed at in lifelong learning or
learning to learn, where a learning algorithm is assumed to encounter a stream of tasks and is aiming
to exploit commonalities between them by transferring information from earlier tasks to later ones.
The first theoretical formulation of this framework was proposed by Baxter [4]. In that model, tasks
are generated by a probability distribution and the goal, given a sample of tasks from this distribution,
is to perform well in expectation over tasks. Under certain assumptions, such as a shared good
hypothesis set, this model allows for sample complexity savings [4]. However, good performance in
expectation is often too weak a requirement. To stay with the robot example, failure on a single task
may cause severe malfunction – and the end of the robot’s life. Moreover, the theoretical analysis of
this model relies on the assumption that the learner maintains access to training data for all previously
observed tasks, which allows to formulate a joint optimization problem. However, it is unlikely that
an autonomous robot is able to keep all this data.
Thus, we instead focus on a streaming setting for lifelong learning, where the learner can only
retain learned models from previously encountered tasks. These models have a much more compact
description than the joint training data. Specifically, we are interested in analysis and performance
guarantees in the scenario that 1) tasks arrive one at a time without distributional or i.i.d. assumptions,
2) the learner can only keep the learned hypotheses from previously observed tasks, 3) error bounds
are required for every single task, rather than on average.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

