Verification Based Solution for Structured MAB
Problems
Zohar Karnin
Yahoo Research
New York, NY 10036
zkarnin@ymail.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding the best arm in a stochastic Multi-armed
Bandit (MAB) game and propose a general framework based on verification that
applies to multiple well-motivated generalizations of the classic MAB problem. In
these generalizations, additional structure is known in advance, causing the task of
verifying the optimality of a candidate to be easier than discovering the best arm.
Our results are focused on the scenario where the failure probability must be very
low; we essentially show that in this high confidence regime, identifying the best
arm is as easy as the task of verification. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework by applying it, and matching or improving the state-of-the art results in
the problems of: Linear bandits, Dueling bandits with the Condorcet assumption,
Copeland dueling bandits, Unimodal bandits and Graphical bandits.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) game is one where in each round the player chooses an action,
also referred to as an arm, from a pre-determined set. The player then gains a reward associated
with the chosen arm and observes the reward while rewards associated with the other arms are not
revealed. In the stochastic setting, each arm x has a fixed associated value µ(x) throughout all rounds,
and the reward associated with the arm is a random variable, independent of the history, with an
expected value of µ(x). In this paper we focus on the pure exploration task [9] in the stochastic
setting where our objective is to identify the arm maximizing µ(x) with sufficiently high probability,
while minimizing the required number of rounds, otherwise known as the query complexity. This
task, as opposed to the classic task of maximizing the sum of accumulated rewards is motivated
by numerous scenarios where exploration (i.e. trying multiple options) is only possible in an initial
testing phase, and not throughout the running time of the game.
As an example consider a company testing several variations of a (physical) product, and then once
realizing the best one, moving to a production phase where the product is massively produced and
shipped to numerous vendors. It is very natural to require that the identified option is the best one
with very high probability, as a mistake can be very costly. Generally speaking, the vast majority of
uses-cases of a pure exploration requires the error probability to be very small, so much so that
even a logarithmic dependence over is non-negligible. Another example to demonstrate this is that
of explore-then-exploit type algorithms. There are many examples of papers providing a solution to a
regret based MAB problem where the first phase consists of identifying the best arm with probability
at least 1 1/T , and then using it in the remainder of the rounds. Here, = 1/T is often assumed to
be the only non-constant.
We do not focus on the classic MAB problem but rather on several extensions of it for settings where
we are given as input some underlying structural properties of the reward function µ. We elaborate
on the formal definitions and different scenarios in Section 2. Another extension we consider is that
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

