Interpretable Distribution Features
with Maximum Testing Power

Wittawat Jitkrittum, Zoltán Szabó, Kacper Chwialkowski, Arthur Gretton
wittawatj@gmail.com
zoltan.szabo.m@gmail.com
kacper.chwialkowski@gmail.com
arthur.gretton@gmail.com
Gatsby Unit, University College London

Abstract
Two semimetrics on probability distributions are proposed, given as the sum of
differences of expectations of analytic functions evaluated at spatial or frequency
locations (i.e, features). The features are chosen so as to maximize the distinguishability of the distributions, by optimizing a lower bound on test power for a
statistical test using these features. The result is a parsimonious and interpretable
indication of how and where two distributions differ locally. We show that the
empirical estimate of the test power criterion converges with increasing sample size,
ensuring the quality of the returned features. In real-world benchmarks on highdimensional text and image data, linear-time tests using the proposed semimetrics
achieve comparable performance to the state-of-the-art quadratic-time maximum
mean discrepancy test, while returning human-interpretable features that explain
the test results.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of discovering features of distinct probability distributions, with which they
can most easily be distinguished. The distributions may be in high dimensions, can differ in non-trivial
ways (i.e., not simply in their means), and are observed only through i.i.d. samples. One application
for such divergence measures is to model criticism, where samples from a trained model are compared
with a validation sample: in the univariate case, through the KL divergence (Cinzia Carota and Polson,
1996), or in the multivariate case, by use of the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Lloyd and
Ghahramani, 2015). An alternative, interpretable analysis of a multivariate difference in distributions
may be obtained by projecting onto a discriminative direction, such that the Wasserstein distance on
this projection is maximized (Mueller and Jaakkola, 2015). Note that both recent works require low
dimensionality, either explicitly (in the case of Lloyd and Gharamani, the function becomes difficult
to plot in more than two dimensions), or implicitly in the case of Mueller and Jaakkola, in that a
large difference in distributions must occur in projection along a particular one-dimensional axis.
Distances between distributions in high dimensions may be more subtle, however, and it is of interest
to find interpretable, distinguishing features of these distributions.
In the present paper, we take a hypothesis testing approach to discovering features which best
distinguish two multivariate probability measures P and Q, as observed by samples X := {xi }ni=1
drawn independently and identically (i.i.d.) from P , and Y := {yi }ni=1 ⊂ Rd from Q. Nonparametric two-sample tests based on RKHS distances (Eric et al., 2008; Fromont et al., 2012;
Gretton et al., 2012a) or energy distances (Székely and Rizzo, 2004; Baringhaus and Franz, 2004)
have as their test statistic an integral probability metric, the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Gretton
et al., 2012a; Sejdinovic et al., 2013). For this metric, a smooth witness function is computed, such
that the amplitude is largest where the probability mass differs most (e.g. Gretton et al., 2012a,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

