Unsupervised Risk Estimation Using Only
Conditional Independence Structure

Jacob Steinhardt
Stanford University
jsteinhardt@cs.stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We show how to estimate a model’s test error from unlabeled data, on distributions
very different from the training distribution, while assuming only that certain conditional independencies are preserved between train and test. We do not need to
assume that the optimal predictor is the same between train and test, or that the
true distribution lies in any parametric family. We can also efficiently compute
gradients of the estimated error and hence perform unsupervised discriminative
learning. Our technical tool is the method of moments, which allows us to exploit
conditional independencies in the absence of a fully-specified model. Our framework encompasses a large family of losses including the log and exponential loss,
and extends to structured output settings such as conditional random fields.

1

Introduction

Can we measure the accuracy of a model at test time without any ground truth labels, and without
assuming the test distribution is close to the training distribution? This is the problem of unsupervised
risk estimation (Donmez et al., 2010): Given a loss function L(θ; x, y) and a fixed model θ, estimate
def

the risk R(θ) = Ex,y∼p∗ [L(θ; x, y)] with respect to a test distribution p∗ (x, y), given access only
to m unlabeled examples x(1:m) ∼ p∗ (x). Unsupervised risk estimation lets us estimate model
accuracy on a novel distribution, and is thus important for building reliable machine learning systems.
Beyond evaluating a single model, it also provides a way of harnessing unlabeled data for learning: by
minimizing the estimated risk over θ, we can perform unsupervised learning and domain adaptation.
Unsupervised risk estimation is impossible without some assumptions on p∗ , as otherwise p∗ (y | x)—
about which we have no observable information—could be arbitrary. How satisfied we should be
with an estimator depends on how strong its underlying assumptions are. In this paper, we present
an approach which rests on surprisingly weak assumptions—that p∗ satisfies certain conditional
independencies, but not that it lies in any parametric family or is close to the training distribution.
To give a flavor for our results, suppose that y ∈ {1, . . . , k} and that the loss decomposes as a
P3
sum of three parts: L(θ; x, y) = v=1 fv (θ; xv , y), where the xv (v = 1, 2, 3) are independent
conditioned on y. In this case, we show that we can estimate the risk to error  in poly(k)/2 samples,
independently of the dimension of x or θ, with only very mild additional assumptions on p∗ . In
Sections 2 and 3 we generalize to a larger family of losses including the log and exponential losses,
and extend beyond the multiclass case to conditional random fields.
Some intuition behind our result is provided in Figure 1. At a fixed value of x, we can think of each
fv as “predicting” that y = j if fv (xv , j) is low and fv (xv , j 0 ) is high for j 0 6= j. Since f1 , f2 , and
f3 all provide independent signals about y, their rate of agreement gives information about the model
accuracy. If f1 , f2 , and f3 all predict that y = 1, then it is likely that the true y equals 1 and the
loss is small. Conversely, if f1 , f2 , and f3 all predict different values of y, then the loss is likely
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

