Disease Trajectory Maps

Raman Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Peter Schulam
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
pschulam@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Medical researchers are coming to appreciate that many diseases are in fact complex, heterogeneous syndromes composed of subpopulations that express different
variants of a related complication. Longitudinal data extracted from individual
electronic health records (EHR) offer an exciting new way to study subtle differences in the way these diseases progress over time. In this paper, we focus on
answering two questions that can be asked using these databases of longitudinal
EHR data. First, we want to understand whether there are individuals with similar
disease trajectories and whether there are a small number of degrees of freedom
that account for differences in trajectories across the population. Second, we want
to understand how important clinical outcomes are associated with disease trajectories. To answer these questions, we propose the Disease Trajectory Map (DTM), a
novel probabilistic model that learns low-dimensional representations of sparse and
irregularly sampled longitudinal data. We propose a stochastic variational inference
algorithm for learning the DTM that allows the model to scale to large modern
medical datasets. To demonstrate the DTM, we analyze data collected on patients
with the complex autoimmune disease, scleroderma. We find that DTM learns
meaningful representations of disease trajectories and that the representations are
significantly associated with important clinical outcomes.

1

Introduction

Longitudinal data is becoming increasingly important in medical research and practice. This is due,
in part, to the growing adoption of electronic health records (EHRs), which capture snapshots of
an individual’s state over time. These snapshots include clinical observations (apparent symptoms
and vital sign measurements), laboratory test results, and treatment information. In parallel, medical
researchers are beginning to recognize and appreciate that many diseases are in fact complex, highly
heterogeneous syndromes [Craig, 2008] and that individuals may belong to disease subpopulations
or subtypes that express similar sets of symptoms over time (see e.g. Saria and Goldenberg [2015]).
Examples of such diseases include asthma [Lötvall et al., 2011], autism [Wiggins et al., 2012], and
COPD [Castaldi et al., 2014]. The data captured in EHRs can help better understand these complex
diseases. EHRs contain many types of observations and the ability to track their progression can help
bring in to focus the subtle differences across individual disease expression.
In this paper, we focus on two exploratory questions that we can begin to answer using longitudinal
EHR data. First, we want to discover whether there are individuals with similar disease trajectories
and whether there are a small number of degrees of freedom that account for differences across a
heterogeneous population. A low-dimensional characterization of trajectories and how they differ
can yield insights into the biological underpinnings of the disease. In turn, this may motivate new
targeted therapies. In the clinic, physicians can analyze an individual’s clinical history to estimate
the low-dimensional representation of the trajectory and can use this knowledge to make more
accurate prognoses and guide treatment decisions by comparing against representations of past
trajectories. Second, we would like to know whether individuals with similar clinical outcomes (e.g.
death, severe organ damage, or development of comorbidities) have similar disease trajectories. In
complex diseases, individuals are often at risk of developing a number of severe complications and
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

