Mapping Estimation for Discrete Optimal Transport

Michaël Perrot
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS,
Lab. Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023
michael.perrot@univ-st-etienne.fr
Rémi Flamary
Université Côte d’Azur,
Lagrange, UMR 7293 , CNRS, OCA
remi.flamary@unice.fr

Nicolas Courty
Université de Bretagne Sud,
IRISA, UMR 6074, CNRS,
courty@univ-ubs.fr

Amaury Habrard
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS,
Lab. Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023
amaury.habrard@univ-st-etienne.fr

Abstract
We are interested in the computation of the transport map of an Optimal Transport
problem. Most of the computational approaches of Optimal Transport use the
Kantorovich relaxation of the problem to learn a probabilistic coupling γ but do
not address the problem of learning the underlying transport map T linked to
the original Monge problem. Consequently, it lowers the potential usage of such
methods in contexts where out-of-samples computations are mandatory. In this
paper we propose a new way to jointly learn the coupling and an approximation of
the transport map. We use a jointly convex formulation which can be efficiently
optimized. Additionally, jointly learning the coupling and the transport map allows
to smooth the result of the Optimal Transport and generalize it to out-of-samples
examples. Empirically, we show the interest and the relevance of our method in
two tasks: domain adaptation and image editing.

1

Introduction

In recent years Optimal Transport (OT) [1] has received a lot of attention in the machine learning
community [2, 3, 4, 5]. This gain of interest comes from several nice properties of OT when used
as a divergence to compare discrete distributions: (i) it provides a sound and theoretically grounded
way of comparing multivariate probability distributions without the need for estimating parametric
versions and (ii) by considering the geometry of the underlying space through a cost metric, it can
encode useful information about the nature of the problem.
OT is usually expressed as an optimal cost functional but it also enjoys a dual variational formulation [1, Chapter 5]. It has been proven useful in several settings. As a first example it corresponds to
the Wasserstein distance in the space of probability distributions. Using this distance it is possible to
compute means and barycentres [6, 7] or to perform a PCA in the space of probability measures [8].
This distance has also been used in subspace identification problems for analysing the differences
between distributions [9], in graph based semi-supervised learning to propagate histogram labels
across nodes [4] or as a way to define a loss function for multi-label learning [5]. As a second example
OT enjoys a variety of bounds for the convergence rate of empirical to population measures which can
be used to derive new probabilistic bounds for the performance of unsupervised learning algorithms
such as k-means [2]. As a last example OT is a mean of interpolation between distributions [10] that
has been used in Bayesian inference [11], color transfer [12] or domain adaptation [13].
On the computational side, despite some results with finite difference schemes [14], one of the major
gain is the recent development of regularized versions that leads to efficient algorithms [3, 7, 15]. Most
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

