Dense Associative Memory for Pattern Recognition
Dmitry Krotov
Simons Center for Systems Biology
Institute for Advanced Study
Princeton, USA
krotov@ias.edu

John J. Hopfield
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, USA
hopfield@princeton.edu

Abstract
A model of associative memory is studied, which stores and reliably retrieves many
more patterns than the number of neurons in the network. We propose a simple
duality between this dense associative memory and neural networks commonly used
in deep learning. On the associative memory side of this duality, a family of models
that smoothly interpolates between two limiting cases can be constructed. One limit
is referred to as the feature-matching mode of pattern recognition, and the other
one as the prototype regime. On the deep learning side of the duality, this family
corresponds to feedforward neural networks with one hidden layer and various
activation functions, which transmit the activities of the visible neurons to the
hidden layer. This family of activation functions includes logistics, rectified linear
units, and rectified polynomials of higher degrees. The proposed duality makes
it possible to apply energy-based intuition from associative memory to analyze
computational properties of neural networks with unusual activation functions – the
higher rectified polynomials which until now have not been used in deep learning.
The utility of the dense memories is illustrated for two test cases: the logical gate
XOR and the recognition of handwritten digits from the MNIST data set.

1

Introduction

Pattern recognition and models of associative memory [1] are closely related. Consider image
classification as an example of pattern recognition. In this problem, the network is presented with an
image and the task is to label the image. In the case of associative memory the network stores a set of
memory vectors. In a typical query the network is presented with an incomplete pattern resembling,
but not identical to, one of the stored memories and the task is to recover the full memory. Pixel
intensities of the image can be combined together with the label of that image into one vector [2],
which will serve as a memory for the associative memory. Then the image itself can be thought of
as a partial memory cue. The task of identifying an appropriate label is a subpart of the associative
memory reconstruction. There is a limitation in using this idea to do pattern recognition. The standard
model of associative memory works well in the limit when the number of stored patterns is much
smaller than the number of neurons [1], or equivalently the number of pixels in an image. In order
to do pattern recognition with small error rate one would need to store many more memories than
the typical number of pixels in the presented images. This is a serious problem. It can be solved by
modifying the standard energy function of associative memory, quadratic in interactions between the
neurons, by including in it higher order interactions. By properly designing the energy function (or
Hamiltonian) for these models with higher order interactions one can store and reliably retrieve many
more memories than the number of neurons in the network.
Deep neural networks have proven to be useful for a broad range of problems in machine learning
including image classification, speech recognition, object detection, etc. These models are composed
of several layers of neurons, so that the output of one layer serves as the input to the next layer. Each
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

