A Bio-inspired Redundant Sensing Architecture

Anh Tuan Nguyen, Jian Xu and Zhi Yang∗
Department of Biomedical Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
∗
yang5029@umn.edu

Abstract
Sensing is the process of deriving signals from the environment that allows artificial systems to interact with the physical world. The Shannon theorem specifies
the maximum rate at which information can be acquired [1]. However, this upper bound is hard to achieve in many man-made systems. The biological visual
systems, on the other hand, have highly efficient signal representation and processing mechanisms that allow precise sensing. In this work, we argue that redundancy is one of the critical characteristics for such superior performance. We
show architectural advantages by utilizing redundant sensing, including correction
of mismatch error and significant precision enhancement. For a proof-of-concept
demonstration, we have designed a heuristic-based analog-to-digital converter - a
zero-dimensional quantizer. Through Monte Carlo simulation with the error probabilistic distribution as a priori, the performance approaching the Shannon limit
is feasible. In actual measurements without knowing the error distribution, we
observe at least 2-bit extra precision. The results may also help explain biological
processes including the dominance of binocular vision, the functional roles of the
fixational eye movements, and the structural mechanisms allowing hyperacuity.

1

Introduction

Visual systems have perfected the art of sensing through billions of years of evolution. As an example, with roughly 100 million photoreceptors absorbing light and 1.5 million retinal ganglion cells
transmitting information [2, 3, 4], a human can see images in three-dimensional space with great
details and unparalleled resolution. Anatomical studies determine the spatial density of the photoreceptors on the retina, which limits the peak foveal angular resolution to 20-30 arcseconds according
to Shannon theory [1, 2]. There are also other imperfections due to nonuniform distribution of cells’
shape, size, location, and sensitivity that further constrain the precision. However, experiment data
have shown that human can achieve an angular separation close to 1 arcminute in a two-point acuity test [5]. In certain conditions, it is even possible to detect an angular misalignment of only 2-5
arcseconds [6], which surpasses the virtually impossible physical barrier. This ability, known as
hyperacuity, has baffled scientists for decades: what kind of mechanism allows human to read an
undistorted image with such a blunt instrument?
Among the approaches to explain this astonishing feat of human vision, redundant sensing is a
promising candidate. It is well-known that redundancy is an important characteristic of many biological systems, from DNA coding to neural network [7]. Previous studies [8, 9] suggest there is
a connection between hyperacuity and binocular vision - the ability to see images using two eyes
with overlapping field of vision. Also known as stereopsis, it presents a passive form of redundant sensing. In addition to the obvious advantage of seeing objects in three-dimensional space,
the binocular vision has been proven to increase visual dynamic range, contrast, and signal-to-noise
ratio [10]. It is evident that seeing with two eyes enables us to sense a higher level of information
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

