Completely random measures for modelling
block-structured sparse networks

Tue Herlau

Mikkel N. Schmidt Morten Mørup
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens plads 31,
2800 Lyngby, Denmark
{tuhe,mns,mmor}@dtu.dk

Abstract
Statistical methods for network data often parameterize the edge-probability by
attributing latent traits such as block structure to the vertices and assume exchangeability in the sense of the Aldous-Hoover representation theorem. These
assumptions are however incompatible with traits found in real-world networks
such as a power-law degree-distribution. Recently, Caron & Fox (2014) proposed
the use of a different notion of exchangeability after Kallenberg (2005) and obtained a network model which permits edge-inhomogeneity, such as a power-law
degree-distribution whilst retaining desirable statistical properties. However, this
model does not capture latent vertex traits such as block-structure. In this work we
re-introduce the use of block-structure for network models obeying Kallenberg’s
notion of exchangeability and thereby obtain a collapsed model which both admits
the inference of block-structure and edge inhomogeneity. We derive a simple
expression for the likelihood and an efficient sampling method. The obtained
model is not significantly more difficult to implement than existing approaches to
block-modelling and performs well on real network datasets.

1

Introduction

Two phenomena are generally considered important for modelling complex networks. The first is
community or block structure, where the vertices are partitioned into non-overlapping blocks (denoted
by ` = 1, . . . , K in the following) and the probability two vertices i, j are connected depends on
their assignment to blocks:

P Edge between vertex i and j = ξ`m
where ξ`m ∈ [0, 1] is a number only depending on the blocks `, m to which i, j respectively belongs.
Stochastic block models (SBMs) were first proposed by White et al. (1976) and today form the basic
starting point for many important link-prediction methods such as the infinite relational model (Xu
et al., 2006; Kemp et al., 2006).
While block-structure is important for link prediction, the degree distribution of edges in complex
networks is often found to follow a power-law (Newman et al., 2001; Strogatz, 2001). This realization
has led to many important models of network growth, such as the preferential attachment (PA) model
of Barabási (1999).
Models such as the IRM and the PA model have different goals. The PA model attempts to explain
how network structure, such as the degree distribution, follows from simple rules of network growth
and is not suitable for link prediction. In contrast, the IRM aims to discover latent block-structure
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

