Robust Spectral Detection of Global Structures in the
Data by Learning a Regularization

Pan Zhang
Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
panzhang@itp.ac.cn

Abstract
Spectral methods are popular in detecting global structures in the given data that
can be represented as a matrix. However when the data matrix is sparse or noisy,
classic spectral methods usually fail to work, due to localization of eigenvectors
(or singular vectors) induced by the sparsity or noise. In this work, we propose
a general method to solve the localization problem by learning a regularization
matrix from the localized eigenvectors. Using matrix perturbation analysis, we
demonstrate that the learned regularizations suppress down the eigenvalues associated with localized eigenvectors and enable us to recover the informative eigenvectors representing the global structure. We show applications of our method
in several inference problems: community detection in networks, clustering from
pairwise similarities, rank estimation and matrix completion problems. Using extensive experiments, we illustrate that our method solves the localization problem
and works down to the theoretical detectability limits in different kinds of synthetic data. This is in contrast with existing spectral algorithms based on data
matrix, non-backtracking matrix, Laplacians and those with rank-one regularizations, which perform poorly in the sparse case with noise.

1

Introduction

In many statistical inference problems, the task is to detect, from given data, a global structure such
as low-rank structure or clustering. The task is usually hard to solve since modern datasets usually
have a large dimensionality. When the dataset can be represented as a matrix, spectral methods are
popular as it gives a natural way to reduce the dimensionality of data using eigenvectors or singular
vectors. In the point-of-view of inference, data can be seen as measurements to the underlying
structure. Thus more data gives more precise information about the underlying structure.
However in many situations when we do not have enough measurements, i.e. the data matrix is
sparse, standard spectral methods usually have localization problems thus do not work well. One
example is the community detection in sparse networks, where the task is to partition nodes into
groups such that there are many edges connecting nodes within the same group and comparatively
few edges connecting nodes in different groups. It is well known that when the graph has a large
connectivity c, simply using the first few eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n
(with Aij = 1 denoting an edge between node i and node j,and Aij = 0 otherwise) gives a good
result. In this case, like that of a sufficiently dense Erdős-Rényi (ER) random
graph with average
√
degree c, the spectral density follows Wigner’s semicircle rule, P (λ) = 4c − λ2 /2πc, and there
is a gap between the edge of bulk of eigenvalues and the informative eigenvalue that represents the
underlying community structure. However when the network is large and sparse, the spectral density
of the adjacency matrix deviates from the semicircle, the informative eigenvalue is hidden in the
bulk of eigenvalues, as displayed in Fig. 1 left. Its eigenvectors associated with largest eigenvalues
(which are roughly proportional to log n/ log log n for ER random graphs) are localized on the large30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

