An algorithm for 1 nearest neighbor search via
monotonic embedding
Xinan Wang∗
UC San Diego
xinan@ucsd.edu

Sanjoy Dasgupta
UC San Diego
dasgupta@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Fast algorithms for nearest neighbor (NN) search have in large part focused on 2
distance. Here we develop an approach for 1 distance that begins with an explicit
and exactly distance-preserving embedding of the points into 22 . We show how
this can efﬁciently be combined with random-projection based methods for 2 NN
search, such as locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) or random projection trees. We
rigorously establish the correctness of the methodology and show by experimentation using LSH that it is competitive in practice with available alternatives.

1

Introduction

Nearest neighbor (NN) search is a basic primitive of machine learning and statistics. Its utility in
practice hinges on two critical issues: (1) picking the right distance function and (2) using algorithms
that ﬁnd the nearest neighbor, or an approximation thereof, quickly.
The default distance function is very often Euclidean distance. This is a matter of convenience
and can be partially justiﬁed by theory: a classical result of Stone [1] shows that k-nearest neighbor classiﬁcation is universally consistent in Euclidean space. This means that no matter what the
distribution of data and labels might be, as the number of samples n goes to inﬁnity, the kn -NN
classiﬁer converges to the Bayes-optimal decision boundary, for any sequence (kn ) with kn → ∞
and kn /n → 0. The downside is that the rate of convergence could be slow, leading to poor performance on ﬁnite data sets. A more careful choice of distance function can help, by better separating
the different classes. For the well-known MNIST data set of handwritten digits, for instance, the 1NN classiﬁer using Euclidean distance has an error rate of about 3%, whereas a more careful choice
of distance function—tangent distance [2] or shape context [3], for instance—brings this below 1%.
The second impediment to nearest neighbor search in practice is that a naive search through n
candidate neighbors takes O(n) time, ignoring the dependence on dimension. A wide variety of
ingenious data structures have been developed to speed this up. The most popular of these fall into
two categories: hashing-based and tree-based.
Perhaps the best-known hashing approach is locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
These randomized data structures ﬁnd approximate nearest neighbors with high probability, where
c-approximate solutions are those that are at most c times as far as the nearest neighbor.
Whereas hashing methods create a lattice-like spatial partition, tree methods [11, 12, 13, 14] create
a hierarchical partition that can also be used to speed up nearest neighbor search. There are families
of randomized trees with strong guarantees on the tradeoff between query time and probability of
ﬁnding the exact nearest neighbor [15].
These hashing and tree methods for 2 distance both use the same primitive: random projection [16].
For data in Rd , they (repeatedly) choose a random direction u from the multivariate Gaussian
∗

Supported by UC San Diego Jacobs Fellowship

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

