Leveraging Sparsity for Efficient
Submodular Data Summarization
Erik M. Lindgren, Shanshan Wu, Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
erikml@utexas.edu, shanshan@utexas.edu, dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
The facility location problem is widely used for summarizing large datasets and
has additional applications in sensor placement, image retrieval, and clustering.
One difficulty of this problem is that submodular optimization algorithms require
the calculation of pairwise benefits for all items in the dataset. This is infeasible for
large problems, so recent work proposed to only calculate nearest neighbor benefits.
One limitation is that several strong assumptions were invoked to obtain provable
approximation guarantees. In this paper we establish that these extra assumptions
are not necessary—solving the sparsified problem will be almost optimal under
the standard assumptions of the problem. We then analyze a different method of
sparsification that is a better model for methods such as Locality Sensitive Hashing
to accelerate the nearest neighbor computations and extend the use of the problem
to a broader family of similarities. We validate our approach by demonstrating that
it rapidly generates interpretable summaries.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the facility location problem: we are given sets V of size n, I of size m and a
benefit matrix of nonnegative numbers C 2 RI⇥V , where Civ describes the benefit that element i
receives from element v. Our goal is to select a small set A of k columns in this matrix. Once we
have chosen A, element i will get a benefit equal to the best choice out of the available columns,
maxv2A Civ . The total reward is the sum of the row rewards, so the optimal choice of columns is the
solution of:
X
arg max
max Civ .
(1)
{A✓V :|A|k} i2I v2A

A natural application of this problem is in finding a small set of representative images in a big dataset,
where Civ represents the similarity between images i and v. The problem is to select k images that
provide a good coverage of the full dataset, since each one has a close representative in the chosen
set.
Throughout this paper we follow the nomenclature common to the submodular optimization for
machine learning literature. This problem is also known as the maximization version of the k-medians
problem or the submodular facility location problem. A number of recent works have used this
problem for selecting subsets of documents or images from a larger corpus [27, 39], to identify
locations to monitor in order to quickly identify important events in sensor or blog networks [24, 26],
as well as clustering applications [23, 34].
We can naturally interpret Problem 1 as a maximization of a set function F (A) which takes as an
input the selected set of columns and returns the total reward of that set. Formally, let F (;) = 0 and
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

