Maximal Sparsity with Deep Networks?

Bo Xin1,2
Yizhou Wang1
Wen Gao1
Baoyuan Wang3
David Wipf2
2
3
Peking University
Microsoft Research, Beijing
Microsoft Research, Redmond
{boxin, baoyuanw, davidwip}@microsoft.com {yizhou.wang, wgao}@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The iterations of many sparse estimation algorithms are comprised of a fixed linear filter cascaded with a thresholding nonlinearity, which collectively resemble a
typical neural network layer. Consequently, a lengthy sequence of algorithm iterations can be viewed as a deep network with shared, hand-crafted layer weights. It
is therefore quite natural to examine the degree to which a learned network model
might act as a viable surrogate for traditional sparse estimation in domains where
ample training data is available. While the possibility of a reduced computational
budget is readily apparent when a ceiling is imposed on the number of layers, our
work primarily focuses on estimation accuracy. In particular, it is well-known that
when a signal dictionary has coherent columns, as quantified by a large RIP constant, then most tractable iterative algorithms are unable to find maximally sparse
representations. In contrast, we demonstrate both theoretically and empirically the
potential for a trained deep network to recover minimal `0 -norm representations in
regimes where existing methods fail. The resulting system, which can effectively
learn novel iterative sparse estimation algorithms, is deployed on a practical photometric stereo estimation problem, where the goal is to remove sparse outliers
that can disrupt the estimation of surface normals from a 3D scene.

1

Introduction

Our launching point is the optimization problem
min kxk0 s.t. y = Φx,
x

(1)

where y ∈ Rn is an observed vector, Φ ∈ Rn×m is some known, overcomplete dictionary of
feature/basis vectors with m > n, and k·k0 denotes the `0 norm of a vector, or a count of the number
of nonzero elements. Consequently, (1) can be viewed as the search for a maximally sparse feasible
vector x∗ (or approximately feasible if the constraint is relaxed). Unfortunately however, direct
assault on (1) involves an intractable, combinatorial optimization process, and therefore efficient
alternatives that return a maximally sparse x∗ with high probability in restricted regimes are sought.
Popular examples with varying degrees of computational overhead include convex relaxations such
as `1 -norm minimization [2, 5, 21], greedy approaches like orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP)
[18, 22], and many flavors of iterative hard-thresholding (IHT) [3, 4].
Variants of these algorithms find practical relevance in numerous disparate domains, including feature selection [7, 8], outlier removal [6, 13], compressive sensing [5], and source localization [1, 16].
However, a fundamental weakness underlies them all: If the Gram matrix Φ> Φ has significant offdiagonal energy, indicative of strong coherence between columns of Φ, then estimation of x∗ may
be extremely poor. Loosely speaking this occurs because, as higher correlation levels are present,
the null-space of Φ is more likely to include large numbers of approximately sparse vectors that
tend to distract existing algorithms in the feasible region, an unavoidable nuisance in many practical
applications.
In this paper we consider recent developments in the field of deep learning as an entry point for
improving the performance of sparse recovery algorithms. Although seemingly unrelated at first
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

