Linear-Memory and Decomposition-Invariant
Linearly Convergent Conditional Gradient Algorithm
for Structured Polytopes
Dan Garber
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
dgarber@ttic.edu

Ofer Meshi
Google
meshi@google.com

Abstract
Recently, several works have shown that natural modifications of the classical
conditional gradient method (aka Frank-Wolfe algorithm) for constrained convex
optimization, provably converge with a linear rate when: i) the feasible set is a
polytope, and ii) the objective is smooth and strongly-convex. However, all of these
results suffer from two significant shortcomings:
1. large memory requirement due to the need to store an explicit convex decomposition of the current iterate, and as a consequence, large running-time
overhead per iteration
2. the worst case convergence rate depends unfavorably on the dimension
In this work we present a new conditional gradient variant and a corresponding
analysis that improves on both of the above shortcomings. In particular:
1. both memory and computation overheads are only linear in the dimension
2. in case the optimal solution is sparse, the new convergence rate replaces a
factor which is at least linear in the dimension in previous work, with a linear
dependence on the number of non-zeros in the optimal solution
At the heart of our method and corresponding analysis, is a novel way to compute
decomposition-invariant away-steps. While our theoretical guarantees do not apply
to any polytope, they apply to several important structured polytopes that capture
central concepts such as paths in graphs, perfect matchings in bipartite graphs,
marginal distributions that arise in structured prediction tasks, and more. Our
theoretical findings are complemented by empirical evidence which shows that our
method delivers state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

The efficient reduction of a constrained convex optimization problem to a constrained linear optimization problem is an appealing algorithmic concept, in particular for large-scale problems. The reason
is that for many feasible sets of interest, the problem of minimizing a linear function over the set
admits much more efficient methods than its non-linear convex counterpart. Prime examples for this
phenomenon include various structured polytopes that arise in combinatorial optimization, such as
the path polytope of a graph (aka the unit flow polytope), the perfect matching polytope of a bipartite
graph, and the base polyhedron of a matroid, for which we have highly efficient combinatorial
algorithms for linear minimization that rely heavily on the specific rich structure of the polytope
[21]. At the same time, minimizing a non-linear convex function over these sets usually requires the
use of generic interior point solvers that are oblivious to the specific combinatorial structure of the
underlying set, and as a result, are often much less efficient. Indeed, it is for this reason, that the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

