Joint M-Best-Diverse Labelings as a Parametric
Submodular Minimization
Alexander Kirillov1 Alexander Shekhovtsov2 Carsten Rother1 Bogdan Savchynskyy1
1
2
TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
TU Graz, Graz, Austria
alexander.kirillov@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
We consider the problem of jointly inferring the M -best diverse labelings for a
binary (high-order) submodular energy of a graphical model. Recently, it was
shown that this problem can be solved to a global optimum, for many practically
interesting diversity measures. It was noted that the labelings are, so-called, nested.
This nestedness property also holds for labelings of a class of parametric submodular minimization problems, where different values of the global parameter γ give
rise to different solutions. The popular example of the parametric submodular
minimization is the monotonic parametric max-flow problem, which is also widely
used for computing multiple labelings. As the main contribution of this work
we establish a close relationship between diversity with submodular energies and
the parametric submodular minimization. In particular, the joint M -best diverse
labelings can be obtained by running a non-parametric submodular minimization
(in the special case - max-flow) solver for M different values of γ in parallel, for
certain diversity measures. Importantly, the values for γ can be computed in a
closed form in advance, prior to any optimization. These theoretical results suggest
two simple yet efficient algorithms for the joint M -best diverse problem, which
outperform competitors in terms of runtime and quality of results. In particular, as
we show in the paper, the new methods compute the exact M -best diverse labelings
faster than a popular method of Batra et al., which in some sense only obtains
approximate solutions.

1

Introduction

A variety of tasks in machine learning, computer vision and other disciplines can be formulated as
energy minimization problems, also known as Maximum-a-Posteriori (MAP) or Maximum Likelihood
(ML) estimation problems in undirected graphical models (Markov or Conditional Random Fields).
The importance of this problem is well-recognized, which can be seen by the many specialized
benchmarks [36, 21] and computational challenges [10] for its solvers. This motivates the task of
finding the most probable solution. Recently, a slightly different task has gained popularity, both from
a practical and theoretical perspective. The task is not only to find the most probable solution but
multiple diverse solutions, all with low energy, see e.g., [4, 31, 22, 23]. The task is referred to as the
“M -best-diverse problem” [4], and it has been used in a variety of scenarios, such as: (a) Expressing
uncertainty of the computed solutions [33]; (b) Faster training of model parameters [16]; (c) Ranking
of inference results [40]; (d) Empirical risk minimization [32]; (e) Loss-aware optimization [1]; (f)
Using diverse proposals in a cascading framework [39, 35].
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 647769). A. Shekhovtsov was supported
by ERC starting grant agreement 640156.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

