Variational Autoencoder for Deep Learning
of Images, Labels and Captions

Yunchen Pu† , Zhe Gan† , Ricardo Henao† , Xin Yuan‡ , Chunyuan Li† , Andrew Stevens†
and Lawrence Carin†
†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
{yp42, zg27, r.henao, cl319, ajs104, lcarin}@duke.edu
‡
Nokia Bell Labs, Murray Hill
xyuan@bell-labs.com

Abstract
A novel variational autoencoder is developed to model images, as well as associated
labels or captions. The Deep Generative Deconvolutional Network (DGDN) is used
as a decoder of the latent image features, and a deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) is used as an image encoder; the CNN is used to approximate a distribution
for the latent DGDN features/code. The latent code is also linked to generative
models for labels (Bayesian support vector machine) or captions (recurrent neural
network). When predicting a label/caption for a new image at test, averaging is
performed across the distribution of latent codes; this is computationally efficient as
a consequence of the learned CNN-based encoder. Since the framework is capable
of modeling the image in the presence/absence of associated labels/captions, a
new semi-supervised setting is manifested for CNN learning with images; the
framework even allows unsupervised CNN learning, based on images alone.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1] are effective tools for image analysis [2], with most CNNs
trained in a supervised manner [2, 3, 4]. In addition to being used in image classifiers, image features
learned by a CNN have been used to develop models for image captions [5, 6, 7]. Most recent work
on image captioning employs a CNN for image encoding, with a recurrent neural network (RNN)
employed as a decoder of the CNN features, generating a caption.
While large sets of labeled and captioned images have been assembled, in practice one typically
encounters far more images without labels or captions. To leverage the vast quantity of these latter
images (and to tune a model to the specific unlabeled/uncaptioned images of interest at test), semisupervised learning of image features is of interest. To account for unlabeled/uncaptioned images,
it is useful to employ a generative image model, such as the recently developed Deep Generative
Deconvolutional Network (DGDN) [8, 9]. However, while the CNN is a feedforward model for image
features (and is therefore fast at test time), the original DGDN implementation required relatively
expensive inference of the latent image features. Specifically, in [8] parameter learning and inference
are performed with Gibbs sampling or Monte Carlo Expectation-Maximization (MCEM).
We develop a new variational autoencoder (VAE) [10] setup to analyze images. The DGDN [8] is
used as a decoder, and the encoder for the distribution of latent DGDN parameters is based on a
CNN (termed a “recognition model” [10, 11]). Since a CNN is used within the recognition model,
test-time speed is much faster than that achieved in [8]. The VAE framework manifests a novel means
of semi-supervised CNN learning: a Bayesian SVM [12] leverages available image labels, the DGDN
models the images (with or without labels), and the CNN manifests a fast encoder for the distribution
of latent codes. For image-caption modeling, latent codes are shared between the CNN encoder,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

