VIME: Variational Information Maximizing
Exploration

Rein Houthooft§†‡ , Xi Chen†‡ , Yan Duan†‡ , John Schulman†‡ , Filip De Turck§ , Pieter Abbeel†‡
†
UC Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
§
Ghent University - imec, Department of Information Technology
‡
OpenAI

Abstract
Scalable and effective exploration remains a key challenge in reinforcement learning (RL). While there are methods with optimality guarantees in the setting of discrete state and action spaces, these methods cannot be applied in high-dimensional
deep RL scenarios. As such, most contemporary RL relies on simple heuristics
such as -greedy exploration or adding Gaussian noise to the controls. This paper
introduces Variational Information Maximizing Exploration (VIME), an exploration strategy based on maximization of information gain about the agent’s belief
of environment dynamics. We propose a practical implementation, using variational inference in Bayesian neural networks which efficiently handles continuous
state and action spaces. VIME modifies the MDP reward function, and can be
applied with several different underlying RL algorithms. We demonstrate that
VIME achieves significantly better performance compared to heuristic exploration
methods across a variety of continuous control tasks and algorithms, including
tasks with very sparse rewards.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies how an agent can maximize its cumulative reward in a previously
unknown environment, which it learns about through experience. A long-standing problem is how to
manage the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. In exploration, the agent experiments
with novel strategies that may improve returns in the long run; in exploitation, it maximizes rewards
through behavior that is known to be successful. An effective exploration strategy allows the agent
to generate trajectories that are maximally informative about the environment. For small tasks, this
trade-off can be handled effectively through Bayesian RL [1] and PAC-MDP methods [2–6], which
offer formal guarantees. However, these guarantees assume discrete state and action spaces. Hence, in
settings where state-action discretization is infeasible, many RL algorithms use heuristic exploration
strategies. Examples include acting randomly using -greedy or Boltzmann exploration [7], and
utilizing Gaussian noise on the controls in policy gradient methods [8]. These heuristics often rely on
random walk behavior which can be highly inefficient, for example Boltzmann exploration requires
a training time exponential in the number of states in order to solve the well-known n-chain MDP
[9]. In between formal methods and simple heuristics, several works have proposed to address the
exploration problem using less formal, but more expressive methods [10–14]. However, none of
them fully address exploration in continuous control, as discretization of the state-action space scales
exponentially in its dimensionality. For example, the Walker2D task [15] has a 26-dim state-action
space. If we assume a coarse discretization into 10 bins for each dimension, a table of state-action
visitation counts would require 1026 entries.

