Regularized Nonlinear Acceleration

Damien Scieur
INRIA & D.I., UMR 8548,
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
damien.scieur@inria.fr

Alexandre d’Aspremont
CNRS & D.I., UMR 8548,
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
aspremon@di.ens.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA & D.I., UMR 8548,
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
We describe a convergence acceleration technique for generic optimization problems. Our scheme computes estimates of the optimum from a nonlinear average
of the iterates produced by any optimization method. The weights in this average
are computed via a simple and small linear system, whose solution can be updated
online. This acceleration scheme runs in parallel to the base algorithm, providing improved estimates of the solution on the fly, while the original optimization
method is running. Numerical experiments are detailed on classical classification
problems.

1

Introduction

Suppose we want to solve the following optimization problem
min f (x)

x∈Rn

(1)

in the variable x ∈ Rn , where f (x) is strongly convex with respect to the Euclidean norm with
parameter µ, and has a Lipschitz continuous gradient with parameter L with respect to the same norm.
This class of function is often encountered, for example in regression where f (x) is of the form
f (x) = L(x) + Ω(x),
where L(x) is a smooth convex loss function and Ω(x) is a smooth strongly convex penalty function.
Assume we solve this problem using an iterative algorithm of the form
xi+1 = g(xi ),

for i = 1, ..., k,

(2)

where xi ∈ Rn and k the number of iterations. Here, we will focus on the problem of estimating the
solution to (1) by tracking only the sequence of iterates xi produced by an optimization algorithm.
This will lead to an acceleration of the speed of convergence, since we will be able to extrapolate
more accurate solutions without any calls to the oracle g(x).
Since the publication of Nesterov’s optimal first-order smooth convex minimization algorithm [1], a
significant effort has been focused on either providing more explicit interpretable views on current
acceleration techniques, or on replicating these complexity gains using different, more intuitive
schemes. Early efforts were focused on directly extending the original acceleration result in [1] to
broader function classes [2], allow for generic metrics, line searches or simpler proofs [5, 6], produce
adaptive accelerated algorithms [7], etc. More recently however, several authors [8, 9] have started
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

