Feature-distributed sparse regression: a
screen-and-clean approach

Jiyan Yang† Michael W. Mahoney‡ Michael A. Saunders† Yuekai Sun§
† Stanford University ‡ University of California at Berkeley § University of Michigan
jiyan@stanford.edu mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu
saunders@stanford.edu yuekai@umich.edu

Abstract
Most existing approaches to distributed sparse regression assume the data is partitioned by samples. However, for high-dimensional data (D  N ), it is more
natural to partition the data by features. We propose an algorithm to distributed
sparse regression when the data is partitioned by features rather than samples.
Our approach allows the user to tailor our general method to various distributed
computing platforms by trading-off the total amount of data (in bits) sent over the
communication network and the number of rounds of communication. We show
that an implementation of our approach is capable of solving `1 -regularized `2
regression problems with millions of features in minutes.

1

Introduction

Explosive growth in the size of modern datasets has fueled the recent interest in distributed statistical
learning. For examples, we refer to [2, 20, 9] and the references therein. The main computational
bottleneck in distributed statistical learning is usually the movement of data between compute notes,
so the overarching goal of algorithm design is the minimization of such communication costs.
Most work on distributed statistical learning assume the data is partitioned by samples. However, for
high-dimensional datasets, it is more natural to partition the data by features. Unfortunately, methods
that are suited to such feature-distributed problems are scarce. A possible explanation for the paucity
of methods is feature-distributed problems are harder than their sample-distributed counterparts. If
the data is distributed by samples, each machine has a complete view of the problem (albeit a partial
view of the dataset). Given only its local data, each machine can fit the full model. On the other hand,
if the data is distributed by features, each machine no longer has a complete view of the problem.
It can only fit a (generally mis-specified) submodel. Thus communication among the machines is
necessary to solve feature-distributed problems. In this paper, our goal is to develop algorithms that
minimize the amount of data (in bits) sent over the network across all rounds for feature-distributed
sparse linear regression.
The sparse linear model is
y = Xβ ∗ + ,
N ×D

N

(1)
∗

D

where X ∈ R
are features, y ∈ R are responses, β ∈ R are (unknown) regression
coefficients, and  ∈ RN are unobserved errors. The model is sparse because β ∗ is s-sparse; i.e., the
cardinality of S := supp(β ∗ ) is at most s. Although it is an idealized model, the sparse linear model
has proven itself useful in a wide variety of applications.
A popular way to fit a sparse linear model is the lasso [15, 3]:
1
βb ← arg minkβk1 ≤1 2N
ky − Xβk22 ,

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

