Improved Techniques for Training GANs

Tim Salimans
tim@openai.com

Ian Goodfellow
ian@openai.com

Wojciech Zaremba
woj@openai.com

Alec Radford
alec@openai.com

Vicki Cheung
vicki@openai.com

Xi Chen
peter@openai.com

Abstract
We present a variety of new architectural features and training procedures that we
apply to the generative adversarial networks (GANs) framework. Using our new
techniques, we achieve state-of-the-art results in semi-supervised classification on
MNIST, CIFAR-10 and SVHN. The generated images are of high quality as confirmed by a visual Turing test: our model generates MNIST samples that humans
cannot distinguish from real data, and CIFAR-10 samples that yield a human error
rate of 21.3%. We also present ImageNet samples with unprecedented resolution
and show that our methods enable the model to learn recognizable features of
ImageNet classes.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks [1] (GANs) are a class of methods for learning generative models
based on game theory. The goal of GANs is to train a generator network G(z; θ (G) ) that produces
samples from the data distribution, pdata (x), by transforming vectors of noise z as x = G(z; θ (G) ).
The training signal for G is provided by a discriminator network D(x) that is trained to distinguish
samples from the generator distribution pmodel (x) from real data. The generator network G in turn
is then trained to fool the discriminator into accepting its outputs as being real.
Recent applications of GANs have shown that they can produce excellent samples [2, 3]. However,
training GANs requires finding a Nash equilibrium of a non-convex game with continuous, highdimensional parameters. GANs are typically trained using gradient descent techniques that are
designed to find a low value of a cost function, rather than to find the Nash equilibrium of a game.
When used to seek for a Nash equilibrium, these algorithms may fail to converge [4].
In this work, we introduce several techniques intended to encourage convergence of the GANs game.
These techniques are motivated by a heuristic understanding of the non-convergence problem. They
lead to improved semi-supervised learning peformance and improved sample generation. We hope
that some of them may form the basis for future work, providing formal guarantees of convergence.
All code and hyperparameters may be found at https://github.com/openai/improved-gan.

2

Related work

Several recent papers focus on improving the stability of training and the resulting perceptual quality
of GAN samples [2, 3, 5, 6]. We build on some of these techniques in this work. For instance, we
use some of the “DCGAN” architectural innovations proposed in Radford et al. [3], as discussed
below.
One of our proposed techniques, feature matching, discussed in Sec. 3.1, is similar in spirit to
approaches that use maximum mean discrepancy [7, 8, 9] to train generator networks [10, 11].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

