On Regularizing Rademacher Observation Losses

Richard Nock
Data61, The Australian National University & The University of Sydney
richard.nock@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
It has recently been shown that supervised learning linear classifiers with two of
the most popular losses, the logistic and square loss, is equivalent to optimizing an
equivalent loss over sufficient statistics about the class: Rademacher observations
(rados). It has also been shown that learning over rados brings solutions to two
prominent problems for which the state of the art of learning from examples can be
comparatively inferior and in fact less convenient: (i) protecting and learning from
private examples, (ii) learning from distributed datasets without entity resolution.
Bis repetita placent: the two proofs of equivalence are different and rely on specific
properties of the corresponding losses, so whether these can be unified and generalized inevitably comes to mind. This is our first contribution: we show how they can
be fit into the same theory for the equivalence between example and rado losses. As
a second contribution, we show that the generalization unveils a surprising new connection to regularized learning, and in particular a sufficient condition under which
regularizing the loss over examples is equivalent to regularizing the rados (i.e. the
data) in the equivalent rado loss, in such a way that an efficient algorithm for one
regularized rado loss may be as efficient when changing the regularizer. This is our
third contribution: we give a formal boosting algorithm for the regularized exponential rado-loss which boost with any of the ridge, lasso, SLOPE, `∞ , or elastic
net regularizer, using the same master routine for all. Because the regularized exponential rado-loss is the equivalent of the regularized logistic loss over examples
we obtain the first efficient proxy to the minimization of the regularized logistic
loss over examples using such a wide spectrum of regularizers. Experiments with a
readily available code display that regularization significantly improves rado-based
learning and compares favourably with example-based learning.

1

Introduction

What kind of data should we use to train a supervised learner ? A recent result has shown that
minimising the popular logistic loss over examples with linear classifiers (in supervised learning) is
equivalent to the minimisation of the exponential loss over sufficient statistics about the class known
as Rademacher observations (rados, [Nock et al., 2015]), for the same classifier. In short, we fit a
classifier over data that is different from examples, and the same classifier generalizes well to new
observations. It has been shown that rados offer solutions for two problems for which the state of the
art involving examples can be comparatively significantly inferior:
• protection of the examples’ privacy from various algebraic, geometric, statistical and computational standpoints, and learning from private data [Nock et al., 2015];
• learning from a large number of distributed datasets without having to perform entity
resolution between datasets [Patrini et al., 2016].
Quite remarkably, the training time of the algorithms involved can be smaller than it would be on
examples, by orders of magnitude [Patrini et al., 2016]. Two key problems remain however: the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

