Statistical Inference for Cluster Trees
Jisu Kim
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
jisuk1@andrew.cmu.edu

Yen-Chi Chen
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
yenchic@uw.edu

Alessandro Rinaldo
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
arinaldo@stat.cmu.edu

Sivaraman Balakrishnan
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
siva@stat.cmu.edu

Larry Wasserman
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
larry@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
A cluster tree provides a highly-interpretable summary of a density function by
representing the hierarchy of its high-density clusters. It is estimated using the
empirical tree, which is the cluster tree constructed from a density estimator. This
paper addresses the basic question of quantifying our uncertainty by assessing the
statistical significance of topological features of an empirical cluster tree. We first
study a variety of metrics that can be used to compare different trees, analyze their
properties and assess their suitability for inference. We then propose methods to
construct and summarize confidence sets for the unknown true cluster tree. We
introduce a partial ordering on cluster trees which we use to prune some of the
statistically insignificant features of the empirical tree, yielding interpretable and
parsimonious cluster trees. Finally, we illustrate the proposed methods on a variety
of synthetic examples and furthermore demonstrate their utility in the analysis of a
Graft-versus-Host Disease (GvHD) data set.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central problem in the analysis and exploration of data. It is a broad topic, with several
existing distinct formulations, objectives, and methods. Despite the extensive literature on the topic,
a common aspect of the clustering methodologies that has hindered its widespread scientific adoption
is the dearth of methods for statistical inference in the context of clustering. Methods for inference
broadly allow us to quantify our uncertainty, to discern “true” clusters from finite-sample artifacts, as
well as to rigorously test hypotheses related to the estimated cluster structure.
In this paper, we study statistical inference for the cluster tree of an unknown density. We assume that
we observe an i.i.d. sample {X1 , . . . , Xn } from a distribution P0 with unknown density p0 . Here,
Xi ∈ X ⊂ Rd . The connected components C(λ), of the upper level set {x : p0 (x) ≥ λ}, are called
high-density clusters. The set of high-density clusters forms a nested hierarchy which is referred to
as the cluster tree1 of p0 , which we denote as Tp0 .
Methods for density clustering fall broadly in the space of hierarchical clustering algorithms, and
inherit several of their advantages: they allow for extremely general cluster shapes and sizes, and
in general do not require the pre-specification of the number of clusters. Furthermore, unlike flat
1

It is also referred to as the density tree or the level-set tree.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

