Guided Policy Search via Approximate Mirror
Descent
William Montgomery
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
wmonty@cs.washington.edu

Sergey Levine
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
svlevine@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Guided policy search algorithms can be used to optimize complex nonlinear policies, such as deep neural networks, without directly computing policy gradients
in the high-dimensional parameter space. Instead, these methods use supervised
learning to train the policy to mimic a “teacher” algorithm, such as a trajectory
optimizer or a trajectory-centric reinforcement learning method. Guided policy
search methods provide asymptotic local convergence guarantees by construction,
but it is not clear how much the policy improves within a small, finite number of
iterations. We show that guided policy search algorithms can be interpreted as an
approximate variant of mirror descent, where the projection onto the constraint
manifold is not exact. We derive a new guided policy search algorithm that is simpler and provides appealing improvement and convergence guarantees in simplified
convex and linear settings, and show that in the more general nonlinear setting, the
error in the projection step can be bounded. We provide empirical results on several
simulated robotic navigation and manipulation tasks that show that our method is
stable and achieves similar or better performance when compared to prior guided
policy search methods, with a simpler formulation and fewer hyperparameters.

1

Introduction

Policy search algorithms based on supervised learning from a computational or human “teacher” have
gained prominence in recent years due to their ability to optimize complex policies for autonomous
flight [16], video game playing [15, 4], and bipedal locomotion [11]. Among these methods, guided
policy search algorithms [6] are particularly appealing due to their ability to adapt the teacher to
produce data that is best suited for training the final policy with supervised learning. Such algorithms
have been used to train complex deep neural network policies for vision-based robotic manipulation
[6], as well as a variety of other tasks [19, 11]. However, convergence results for these methods
typically follow by construction from their formulation as a constrained optimization, where the
teacher is gradually constrained to match the learned policy, and guarantees on the performance of
the final policy only hold at convergence if the constraint is enforced exactly. This is problematic in
practical applications, where such algorithms are typically executed for a small number of iterations.
In this paper, we show that guided policy search algorithms can be interpreted as approximate variants
of mirror descent under constraints imposed by the policy parameterization, with supervised learning
corresponding to a projection onto the constraint manifold. Based on this interpretation, we can
derive a new, simplified variant of guided policy search, which corresponds exactly to mirror descent
under linear dynamics and convex policy spaces. When these convexity and linearity assumptions do
not hold, we can show that the projection step is approximate, up to a bound that depends on the step
size of the algorithm, which suggests that for a small enough step size, we can achieve continuous
improvement. The form of this bound provides us with intuition about how to adjust the step size in
practice, so as to obtain a simple algorithm with a small number of hyperparameters.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

