SURGE: Surface Regularized Geometry Estimation
from a Single Image

Peng Wang1 Xiaohui Shen2 Bryan Russell2 Scott Cohen2 Brian Price2 Alan Yuille3
1

University of California, Los Angeles

2

Adobe Research

3

Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
This paper introduces an approach to regularize 2.5D surface normal and depth
predictions at each pixel given a single input image. The approach infers and
reasons about the underlying 3D planar surfaces depicted in the image to snap
predicted normals and depths to inferred planar surfaces, all while maintaining
fine detail within objects. Our approach comprises two components: (i) a fourstream convolutional neural network (CNN) where depths, surface normals, and
likelihoods of planar region and planar boundary are predicted at each pixel,
followed by (ii) a dense conditional random field (DCRF) that integrates the four
predictions such that the normals and depths are compatible with each other and
regularized by the planar region and planar boundary information. The DCRF is
formulated such that gradients can be passed to the surface normal and depth CNNs
via backpropagation. In addition, we propose new planar-wise metrics to evaluate
geometry consistency within planar surfaces, which are more tightly related to
dependent 3D editing applications. We show that our regularization yields a 30%
relative improvement in planar consistency on the NYU v2 dataset [24].

1

Introduction

Recent efforts to estimate the 2.5D layout of a depicted scene from a single image, such as per-pixel
depths and surface normals, have yielded high-quality outputs respecting both the global scene layout
and fine object detail [2, 6, 7, 29]. Upon closer inspection, however, the predicted depths and normals
may fail to be consistent with the underlying surface geometry. For example, consider the depth and
normal predictions from the contemporary approach of Eigen and Fergus [6] shown in Figure 1 (b)
(Before DCRF). Notice the significant distortion in the predicted depth corresponding to the depicted
planar surfaces, such as the back wall and cabinet. We argue that such distortion arises from the fact
that the 2.5D predictions (i) are made independently per pixel from appearance information alone,
and (ii) do not explicitly take into account the underlying surface geometry. When 3D geometry has
been used, e.g., [29], it often consists of a boxy room layout constraint, which may be too coarse
and fail to account for local planar regions that do not adhere to the box constraint. Moreover, when
multiple 2.5D predictions are made (e.g., depth and normals), they are not explicitly enforced to
agree with each other.
To overcome the above issues, we introduce an approach to identify depicted 3D planar regions in the
image along with their spatial extent, and to leverage such planar regions to regularize the depth and
surface normal outputs. We formulate our approach as a four-stream convolutional neural network
(CNN), followed by a dense conditional random field (DCRF). The four-stream CNN independently
predicts at each pixel the surface normal, depth, and likelihoods of planar region and planar boundary.
The four cues are integrated into a DCRF, which encourages the output depths and normals to align
with the inferred 3D planar surfaces while maintaining fine detail within objects. Furthermore, the
output depths and normals are explicitly encouraged to agree with each other.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

