Toward Deeper Understanding of Neural Networks: The Power
of Initialization and a Dual View on Expressivity

Amit Daniely
Google Brain

Roy Frostig∗
Google Brain

Yoram Singer
Google Brain

Abstract
We develop a general duality between neural networks and compositional kernel
Hilbert spaces. We introduce the notion of a computation skeleton, an acyclic
graph that succinctly describes both a family of neural networks and a kernel space.
Random neural networks are generated from a skeleton through node replication
followed by sampling from a normal distribution to assign weights. The kernel
space consists of functions that arise by compositions, averaging, and non-linear
transformations governed by the skeleton’s graph topology and activation functions.
We prove that random networks induce representations which approximate the
kernel space. In particular, it follows that random weight initialization often yields
a favorable starting point for optimization despite the worst-case intractability of
training neural networks.

1

Introduction

Neural network (NN) learning has underpinned state of the art empirical results in numerous applied
machine learning tasks, see for instance [25, 26]. Nonetheless, theoretical analyses of neural network
learning are still lacking in several regards. Notably, it remains unclear why training algorithms ﬁnd
good weights and how learning is impacted by network architecture and its activation functions.
This work analyzes the representation power of neural networks within the vicinity of random
initialization. We show that for regimes of practical interest, randomly initialized neural networks
well-approximate a rich family of hypotheses. Thus, despite worst-case intractability of training
neural networks, commonly used initialization procedures constitute a favorable starting point for
training.
Concretely, we deﬁne a computation skeleton that is a succinct description of feed-forward networks.
A skeleton induces a family of network architectures as well as an hypothesis class H of functions
obtained by non-linear compositions mandated by the skeleton’s structure. We then analyze the set of
functions that can be expressed by varying the weights of the last layer, a simple region of the training
domain over which the objective is convex. We show that with high probability over the choice of
initial network weights, any function in H can be approximated by selecting the ﬁnal layer’s weights.
Before delving into technical detail, we position our results in the context of previous research.
Current theoretical understanding of NN learning. Standard results from complexity theory [22]
imply that all efﬁciently computable functions can be expressed by a network of moderate size.
Barron’s theorem [7] states that even two-layer networks can express a very rich set of functions. The
generalization ability of algorithms for training neural networks is also fairly well studied. Indeed,
both classical [3, 9, 10] and more recent [18, 33] results from statistical learning theory show that, as
the number of examples grows in comparison to the size of the network, the empirical risk approaches
the population risk. In contrast, it remains puzzling why and when efﬁcient algorithms, such as
stochastic gradient methods, yield solutions that perform well. While learning algorithms succeed in
∗

Most of this work performed while the author was at Stanford University.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

