Following the Leader and Fast Rates in Linear
Prediction: Curved Constraint Sets and Other
Regularities

Ruitong Huang
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, AB, Canada
ruitong@ualberta.ca

Tor Lattimore
School of Informatics and Computing
Indiana University, IN, USA
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

András György
Dept. of Electrical & Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London, UK
a.gyorgy@imperial.ac.uk

Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, AB, Canada
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
The follow the leader (FTL) algorithm, perhaps the simplest of all online learning
algorithms, is known to perform well when the loss functions it is used on are positively curved. In this paper we ask whether there are other “lucky” settings when
FTL achieves sublinear, “small” regret. In particular, we study the fundamental
problem of linear prediction over a non-empty convex, compact domain. Amongst
other results, we prove that the curvature of the boundary of the domain can act as
if the losses were curved: In this case, we prove that as long as the mean of the loss
vectors have positive lengths bounded away from zero, FTL enjoys a logarithmic
growth rate of regret, while, e.g., for polyhedral domains and stochastic data it
enjoys finite expected regret. Building on a previously known meta-algorithm, we
also get an algorithm that simultaneously enjoys the worst-case guarantees and the
bound available for FTL.

1

Introduction

Learning theory traditionally has been studied in a statistical framework, discussed at length, for
example, by Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David [2014]. The issue with this approach is that the analysis
of the performance of learning methods seems to critically depend on whether the data generating
mechanism satisfies some probabilistic assumptions. Realizing that these assumptions are not
necessarily critical, much work has been devoted recently to studying learning algorithms in the socalled online learning framework [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]. The online learning framework
makes minimal assumptions about the data generating mechanism, while allowing one to replicate
results of the statistical framework through online-to-batch conversions [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2004].
By following a minimax approach, however, results proven in the online learning setting, at least
initially, led to rather conservative results and algorithm designs, failing to capture how more regular,
“easier” data, may give rise to faster learning speed. This is problematic as it may suggest overly
conservative learning strategies, missing opportunities to extract more information when the data is
nicer. Also, it is hard to argue that data resulting from passive data collection, such as weather data,
would ever be adversarially generated (though it is equally hard to defend that such data satisfies
precise stochastic assumptions). Realizing this issue, during recent years much work has been devoted
to understanding what regularities and how can lead to faster learning speed. For example, much
work has been devoted to showing that faster learning speed (smaller “regret”) can be achieved in
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

