Optimistic Bandit Convex Optimization
Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google
251 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10012

Scott Yang
Courant Institute
251 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10012

mohri@cims.nyu.edu

yangs@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract

1

We introduce the general and powerful scheme of predicting information re-use
in optimization algorithms. This allows us to devise a computationally efficient
algorithm for bandit convex optimization with new state-of-the-art guarantees for
both Lipschitz loss functions and loss functions with Lipschitz gradients. This is
the first algorithm admitting both a polynomial time complexity and a regret that is
polynomial in the dimension of the action space that improves upon the original
e T 11/16 d3/8 . Our
regret bound for Lipschitz loss functions, achieving a regret of O
algorithm further improves upon the best existing polynomial-in-dimension bound
(both computationally and in terms of regret) for loss functions with Lipschitz
e T 8/13 d5/3 .
gradients, achieving a regret of O

Introduction

Bandit convex optimization (BCO) is a key framework for modeling learning problems with sequential
data under partial feedback. In the BCO scenario, at each round, the learner selects a point (or action)
in a bounded convex set and observes the value at that point of a convex loss function determined by
an adversary. The feedback received is limited to that information: no gradient or any other higher
order information about the function is provided to the learner. The learner’s objective is to minimize
his regret, that is the difference between his cumulative loss over a finite number of rounds and that
of the loss of the best fixed action in hindsight.
The limited feedback makes the BCO setup relevant to a number of applications, including online
advertising. On the other hand, it also makes the problem notoriously difficult and requires the learner
to find a careful trade-off between exploration and exploitation. While it has been the subject of
extensive study in recent years, the fundamental BCO problem remains one of the most challenging
scenarios in machine learning where several questions concerning optimality guarantees remain open.
e 5/6 ) is achievable for bounded
The original work of Flaxman et al. [2005] showed that a regret of O(T
loss functions and of e
O(T 3/4 ) for Lipschitz loss functions (the latter bound is also given in [Kleinberg,
2004]), both of which are still the best known results given by explicit algorithms. Agarwal et al.
[2010] introduced an algorithm that maintains a regret of e
O(T 2/3 ) for loss functions that are both
Lipschitz and strongly convex, which is also still state-of-the-art. For functions that are Lipschitz
and also admit Lipschitz gradients, Saha and Tewari [2011] designed an algorithm with a regret of
e 2/3 ) regret, a result that was recently improved to O(T
e 5/8 ) by Dekel et al. [2015].
O(T

Here, we further improve upon these bounds both in the Lipschitz and Lipschitz gradient settings. By
incorporating the novel and powerful idea of predicting information re-use, we introduce an algorithm
with a regret bound of e
O T 11/16 for Lipschitz loss functions. Similarly, our algorithm also achieves
the best regret guarantee among computationally tractable algorithms for loss functions with Lipschitz
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

