Can Active Memory Replace Attention?

Łukasz Kaiser
Google Brain
lukaszkaiser@google.com

Samy Bengio
Google Brain
bengio@google.com

Abstract
Several mechanisms to focus attention of a neural network on selected parts of its
input or memory have been used successfully in deep learning models in recent
years. Attention has improved image classification, image captioning, speech
recognition, generative models, and learning algorithmic tasks, but it had probably
the largest impact on neural machine translation.
Recently, similar improvements have been obtained using alternative mechanisms
that do not focus on a single part of a memory but operate on all of it in parallel,
in a uniform way. Such mechanism, which we call active memory, improved over
attention in algorithmic tasks, image processing, and in generative modelling.
So far, however, active memory has not improved over attention for most natural
language processing tasks, in particular for machine translation. We analyze this
shortcoming in this paper and propose an extended model of active memory that
matches existing attention models on neural machine translation and generalizes
better to longer sentences. We investigate this model and explain why previous
active memory models did not succeed. Finally, we discuss when active memory
brings most benefits and where attention can be a better choice.

1

Introduction

Recent successes of deep neural networks have spanned many domains, from computer vision [1] to
speech recognition [2] and many other tasks. In particular, sequence-to-sequence recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) with long short-term memory (LSTM) cells [3] have proven especially successful
at natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including machine translation [4, 5, 6].
The basic sequence-to-sequence architecture for machine translation is composed of an RNN encoder
which reads the source sentence one token at a time and transforms it into a fixed-sized state vector.
This is followed by an RNN decoder, which generates the target sentence, one token at a time, from
the state vector. While a pure sequence-to-sequence recurrent neural network can already obtain good
translation results [4, 6], it suffers from the fact that the whole sentence to be translated needs to be
encoded into a single fixed-size vector. This clearly manifests itself in the degradation of translation
quality on longer sentences (see Figure 6) and hurts even more when there is less training data [7].
In [5], a successful mechanism to overcome this problem was presented: a neural model of attention.
In a sequence-to-sequence model with attention, one retains the outputs of all steps of the encoder
and concatenates them to a memory tensor. At each step of the decoder, a probability distribution
over this memory is computed and used to estimate a weighted average encoder representation to be
used as input to the next decoder step. The decoder can hence focus on different parts of the encoder
representation while producing tokens. Figure 1 illustrates a single step of this process.
The attention mechanism has proven useful well beyond the machine translation task. Image models
can benefit from attention too; for instance, image captioning models can focus on the relevant parts
of the image when describing it [8]; generative models for images yield especially good results with
attention, as was demonstrated by the DRAW model [9], where the network focuses on a part of the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

