Stochastic Gradient Geodesic MCMC Methods

†

Chang Liu† , Jun Zhu† , Yang Song‡∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab; Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research
†
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
Dept. of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{chang-li14@mails, dcszj@}.tsinghua.edu.cn; songyang@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose two stochastic gradient MCMC methods for sampling from Bayesian
posterior distributions defined on Riemann manifolds with a known geodesic flow,
e.g. hyperspheres. Our methods are the first scalable sampling methods on these
manifolds, with the aid of stochastic gradients. Novel dynamics are conceived
and 2nd-order integrators are developed. By adopting embedding techniques and
the geodesic integrator, the methods do not require a global coordinate system of
the manifold and do not involve inner iterations. Synthetic experiments show the
validity of the method, and its application to the challenging inference for spherical
topic models indicate practical usability and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Dynamics-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (D-MCMCs) are sampling methods using
dynamics simulation for state transition in a Markov chain. They have become a workhorse for
Bayesian inference, with well-known examples like Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [22] and
stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [29]. Here we consider variants for sampling from
distributions defined on Riemann manifolds. Overall, geodesic Monte Carlo (GMC) [7] stands out
for its notable performance on manifolds with known geodesic flow, such as simplex, hypersphere
and Stiefel manifold [26, 16]. Its applicability to manifolds with no global coordinate systems (e.g.
hyperspheres) is enabled by the embedding technique, and its geodesic integrator eliminates inner
(within one step in dynamics simulation) iteration to ensure efficiency. It is also used for efficient
sampling from constraint distributions [17]. Constrained HMC (CHMC) [6] aims at manifolds defined
by a constraint in some Rn . It covers all common manifolds, but inner iteration makes it less appealing.
Other D-MCMCs involving Riemann manifold, e.g. Riemann manifold Langevin dynamics (RMLD)
and Riemann manifold HMC (RMHMC) [13], are invented for better performance but still on the task
of sampling in Euclidean space, where the target variable is treated as the global coordinates of some
distribution manifold. Although they can be used to sample in non-Euclidean Riemann manifolds by
replacing the distribution manifold with the target manifold, a global coordinate system of the target
manifold is required. Moreover, RMHMC suffers from expensive inner iteration.
However, GMC scales undesirably to large datasets, which are becoming common. An effective
strategy to scale up D-MCMCs is by randomly sampling a subset to estimate a noisy but unbiased
stochastic gradient, with stochastic gradient MCMC methods (SG-MCMCs). Welling et al. [29]
pioneered in this direction by developing stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD). Chen
et al. [9] apply the idea to HMC with stochastic gradient HMC (SGHMC), where a non-trivial
dynamics with friction has to be conceived. Ding et at. [10] propose stochastic gradient Nosé-Hoover
thermostats (SGNHT) to automatically adapt the friction to the noise by a thermostats. To unify
dynamics used for SG-MCMCs, Ma et al. [19] develop a complete recipe to formulate the dynamics.
∗

JZ is the corresponding author; YS is with Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, CA.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

