Multiple-Play Bandits in the Position-Based Model

Paul Lagrée∗
LRI, Université Paris Sud
Université Paris Saclay
paul.lagree@u-psud.fr

Claire Vernade∗
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris Saclay
vernade@enst.fr

Olivier Cappé
LTCI, CNRS
Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris Saclay

Abstract
Sequentially learning to place items in multi-position displays or lists is a task that
can be cast into the multiple-play semi-bandit setting. However, a major concern in
this context is when the system cannot decide whether the user feedback for each
item is actually exploitable. Indeed, much of the content may have been simply
ignored by the user. The present work proposes to exploit available information
regarding the display position bias under the so-called Position-based click model
(PBM). We first discuss how this model differs from the Cascade model and its
variants considered in several recent works on multiple-play bandits. We then
provide a novel regret lower bound for this model as well as computationally
efficient algorithms that display good empirical and theoretical performance.

1

Introduction

During their browsing experience, users are constantly provided – without having asked for it – with
clickable content spread over web pages. While users interact on a website, they send clicks to the
system for a very limited selection of the clickable content. Hence, they let every unclicked item with
an equivocal answer: the system does not know whether the content was really deemed irrelevant
or simply ignored. In contrast, in traditional multi-armed bandit (MAB) models, the learner makes
actions and observes at each round the reward corresponding to the chosen action. In the so-called
multiple play semi-bandit setting, when users are presented with L items, they are assumed to provide
feedback for each of those items.
Several variants of this basic setting have been considered in the bandit literature. The necessity
for the user to provide feedback for each item has been called into question in the context of the
so-called Cascade Model [8, 14, 6] and its extensions such as the Dependent Click Model (DCM)
[20]. Both models are particularly suited for search contexts, where the user is assumed to be looking
for something relative to a query. Consequently, the learner expects explicit feedback: in the Cascade
Model each valid observation sequence must be either all zeros or terminated by a one, such that no
ambiguity is left on the evaluation of the presented items, while multiple clicks are allowed in the
DCM thus leaving some ambiguity on the last zeros of a sequence.
In the Cascade Model, the positions of the items are not taken into account in the reward process
because the learner is assumed to obtain a click as long as the interesting item belongs to the list.
Indeed, there are even clear indications that the optimal strategy in a learning context consists in
showing the most relevant items at the end of the list in order to maximize the amount of observed
feedback [14] – which is counter-intuitive in recommendation tasks.
To overcome these limitations, [6] introduces weights – to be defined by the learner – that are
attributed to positions in the list, with a click on position l ∈ {1, . . . , L} providing a reward wl ,
where the sequence (wl )l is decreasing to enforce the ranking behavior. However, no rule is given for
∗

The two authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

