PerforatedCNNs: Acceleration through Elimination
of Redundant Convolutions
Michael Figurnov1,2 , Aijan Ibraimova4 , Dmitry Vetrov1,3 , and Pushmeet Kohli5
1

National Research University Higher School of Economics 2 Lomonosov Moscow State University
3
Yandex 4 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 5 Microsoft Research
michael@figurnov.ru, aijan.ibraimova@gmail.com, vetrovd@yandex.ru,
pkohli@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to reduce the computational cost of evaluation of
convolutional neural networks, a factor that has hindered their deployment in lowpower devices such as mobile phones. Inspired by the loop perforation technique
from source code optimization, we speed up the bottleneck convolutional layers by
skipping their evaluation in some of the spatial positions. We propose and analyze
several strategies of choosing these positions. We demonstrate that perforation
can accelerate modern convolutional networks such as AlexNet and VGG-16 by a
factor of 2× - 4×. Additionally, we show that perforation is complementary to the
recently proposed acceleration method of Zhang et al. [28].

1

Introduction

The last few years have seen convolutional neural networks (CNNs) emerge as an indispensable tool
for computer vision. However, modern CNNs have a high computational cost of evaluation, with
convolutional layers usually taking up over 80% of the time. For instance, VGG-16 network [25] for
the problem of object recognition requires 1.5 · 1010 floating point multiplications per image. These
computational requirements hinder the deployment of such networks on systems without GPUs and
in scenarios where power consumption is a major concern, such as mobile devices.
The problem of trading accuracy of computations for speed is well-known within the software
engineering community. One of the most prominent methods for this problem is loop perforation [18,
19, 24]. In a nutshell, this technique isolates loops in the code that are not critical for the execution, and
then reduces their computational cost by skipping some iterations. More recently, researchers have
considered problem-dependent perforation strategies that exploit the structure of the problem [23].
Inspired by the general principle of perforation, we propose to reduce the computational cost of CNN
evaluation by exploiting the spatial redundancy of the network. Modern CNNs, such as AlexNet,
exploit this redundancy through the use of strides in the convolutional layers. However, using the
convolutional strides changes the architecture of the network (intermediate representations size and
the number of weights in the first fully-connected layer), which might be undesirable. Instead of
using strides, we argue for the use of interpolation (perforation) of responses in the convolutional
layer. A key element of this approach is the choice of the perforation mask, which defines the output
positions to evaluate exactly. We propose several approaches to select the perforation masks and a
method of choosing a combination of perforation masks for different layers. To restore the network
accuracy, we perform fine-tuning of the perforated network. Our experiments show that this method
can reduce the evaluation time of modern CNN architectures proposed in the literature by a factor of
2× - 4× with a small decrease in accuracy.

2

Related Work

Reducing the computational cost of CNN evaluation is an active area of research, with both highly
optimized implementations and approximate methods investigated.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

