Sublinear Time Orthogonal Tensor Decomposition∗

Zhao Song‡
David P. Woodruff†
Huan Zhang?
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Texas, Austin, USA
†
IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, USA
?
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, USA
zhaos@utexas.edu, dpwoodru@us.ibm.com, ecezhang@ucdavis.edu
‡

Abstract
A recent work (Wang et. al., NIPS 2015) gives the fastest known algorithms
for orthogonal tensor decomposition with provable guarantees. Their algorithm
is based on computing sketches of the input tensor, which requires reading the
entire input. We show in a number of cases one can achieve the same theoretical
guarantees in sublinear time, i.e., even without reading most of the input tensor.
Instead of using sketches to estimate inner products in tensor decomposition
algorithms, we use importance sampling. To achieve sublinear time, we need
to know the norms of tensor slices, and we P
show how to do this in a number of
k
important cases. For symmetric tensors T = i=1 λi u⊗p
i with λi > 0 for all i, we
estimate such norms in sublinear time whenever p is even. For the important case
of p = 3 and small values of k, we can also estimate such norms. For asymmetric
tensors sublinear time is not possible in general, but we show if the tensor slice
norms are just slightly below k T kF then sublinear time is again possible. One of
the main strengths of our work is empirical - in a number of cases our algorithm is
orders of magnitude faster than existing methods with the same accuracy.

1

Introduction

Tensors are a powerful tool for dealing with multi-modal and multi-relational data. In recommendation
systems, often using more than two attributes can lead to better recommendations. This could occur,
for example, in Groupon where one could look at users, activities, and time (season, time of day,
weekday/weekend, etc.), as three attributes to base predictions on (see [13] for a discussion). Similar
to low rank matrix approximation, we seek a tensor decomposition to succinctly store the tensor and
to apply it quickly. A popular decomposition method is the canonical polyadic decomposition, i.e.,
the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition, where the tensor is decomposed into a sum of
rank-1 components [9]. We refer the reader to [23], where applications of CP including data mining,
computational neuroscience, and statistical learning for latent variable models are mentioned.
A natural question, given the emergence of large data sets, is whether such decompositions can be
performed quickly. There are a number of works on this topic [17, 16, 7, 11, 10, 4, 20]. Most related
to ours are several recent works of Wang et al. [23] and Tung et al. [18], in which it is shown how to
significantly speed up this decomposition for orthogonal tensor decomposition using the randomized
technique of linear sketching [15]. In this work we also focus on orthogonal tensor decomposition.
The idea in [23] is to create a succinct sketch of the input tensor, from which one can then perform
implicit tensor decomposition by approximating inner products in existing decomposition methods.
Existing methods, like the power method, involve computing the inner product of a vector, which is
now a rank-1 matrix, with another vector, which is now a slice of a tensor. Such inner products can
∗
†

Full version appears on arXiv, 2017. ‡Work done while visiting IBM Almaden.
Supported by XDATA DARPA Air Force Research Laboratory contract FA8750-12-C-0323.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

