Man is to Computer Programmer as Woman is to
Homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings
Tolga Bolukbasi1 , Kai-Wei Chang2 , James Zou2 , Venkatesh Saligrama1,2 , Adam Kalai2
1

Boston University, 8 Saint Mary’s Street, Boston, MA
Microsoft Research New England, 1 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA
tolgab@bu.edu, kw@kwchang.net, jamesyzou@gmail.com, srv@bu.edu, adam.kalai@microsoft.com
2

Abstract
The blind application of machine learning runs the risk of amplifying biases present
in data. Such a danger is facing us with word embedding, a popular framework to
represent text data as vectors which has been used in many machine learning and
natural language processing tasks. We show that even word embeddings trained on
Google News articles exhibit female/male gender stereotypes to a disturbing extent.
This raises concerns because their widespread use, as we describe, often tends to
amplify these biases. Geometrically, gender bias is first shown to be captured by
a direction in the word embedding. Second, gender neutral words are shown to
be linearly separable from gender definition words in the word embedding. Using
these properties, we provide a methodology for modifying an embedding to remove
gender stereotypes, such as the association between the words receptionist and
female, while maintaining desired associations such as between the words queen
and female. Using crowd-worker evaluation as well as standard benchmarks, we
empirically demonstrate that our algorithms significantly reduce gender bias in
embeddings while preserving the its useful properties such as the ability to cluster
related concepts and to solve analogy tasks. The resulting embeddings can be used
in applications without amplifying gender bias.

1

Introduction

Research on word embeddings has drawn significant interest in machine learning and natural language
processing. There have been hundreds of papers written about word embeddings and their applications,
from Web search [22] to parsing Curriculum Vitae [12]. However, none of these papers have
recognized how blatantly sexist the embeddings are and hence risk introducing biases of various
types into real-world systems.
A word embedding, trained on word co-occurrence in text corpora, represents each word (or common
phrase) w as a d-dimensional word vector w
~ 2 Rd . It serves as a dictionary of sorts for computer
programs that would like to use word meaning. First, words with similar semantic meanings tend to
have vectors that are close together. Second, the vector differences between words in embeddings
have been shown to represent relationships between words [27, 21]. For example given an analogy
puzzle, “man is to king as woman is to x” (denoted as man:king :: woman:x), simple arithmetic of
!
! woman
! ⇡ king
!
the embedding vectors finds that x=queen is the best answer because man
queen.
Similarly, x=Japan is returned for Paris:France :: Tokyo:x. It is surprising that a simple vector
arithmetic can simultaneously capture a variety of relationships. It has also excited practitioners
because such a tool could be useful across applications involving natural language. Indeed, they
are being studied and used in a variety of downstream applications (e.g., document ranking [22],
sentiment analysis [14], and question retrieval [17]).
However, the embeddings also pinpoint sexism implicit in text. For instance, it is also the case that:
!
!
! woman
! ⇡ computer programmer
man
homemaker.

In other words, the same system that solved the above reasonable analogies will offensively answer
“man is to computer programmer as woman is to x” with x=homemaker. Similarly, it outputs that a
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

