The Limits of Learning with Missing Data
Brian Bullins
Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
{bbullins,ehazan}@cs.princeton.edu

Tomer Koren
Google Brain
Mountain View, CA
tkoren@google.com

Abstract
We study linear regression and classification in a setting where the learning algorithm is allowed to access only a limited number of attributes per example, known
as the limited attribute observation model. In this well-studied model, we provide
the first lower bounds giving a limit on the precision attainable by any algorithm for
several variants of regression, notably linear regression with the absolute loss and
the squared loss, as well as for classification with the hinge loss. We complement
these lower bounds with a general purpose algorithm that gives an upper bound on
the achievable precision limit in the setting of learning with missing data.

1

Introduction

The primary objective of linear regression is to determine the relationships between multiple variables
and how they may affect a certain outcome. A standard example is that of medical diagnosis, whereby
the data gathered for a given patient provides information about their susceptibility to certain illnesses.
A major drawback to this process is the work necessary to collect the data, as it requires running
numerous tests for each person, some of which may be discomforting. In such cases it may be
necessary to impose limitations on the amount of data available for each example. For medical
diagnosis, this might mean having each patient only undergo a small subset of tests.
A formal setting for capturing regression and learning with limits on the number of attribute observations is known as the Limited Attribute Observation (LAO) setting, first introduced by Ben-David
and Dichterman [1]. For example, in a regression problem, the learner has access to a distribution
D over data (x, y) 2 Rd ⇥ R, and fits the best (generalized) linear model according to a certain loss
function, i.e., it approximately solves the optimization problem
min

w: kw k p B

L D (w),

f
L D (w) = E(x, y)⇠D `(w> x

g
y) .

In the LAO setting, the learner does not have complete access to the examples x, which the reader
may think of as attributes of a certain patient. Rather, the learner can observe at most a fixed number
of these attributes, denoted k  d. If k = d, this is the standard regression problem which can be
solved to arbitrary precision.
The main question we address: is it possible to compute an arbitrarily accurate solution if the number
of observations per example, k, is strictly less than d? More formally, given any " > 0, can one
compute a vector w for which
L D (w) 

min

kw⇤ k p B

L D (w⇤ ) + ".

Efficient algorithms for regression with squared loss when k < d have been shown in previous work
[2], and the sample complexity bounds have since been tightened [6, 8]. However, similar results for
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

