Learning Bound for Parameter Transfer Learning

Wataru Kumagai
Faculty of Engineering
Kanagawa University
kumagai@kanagawa-u.ac.jp

Abstract
We consider a transfer-learning problem by using the parameter transfer approach,
where a suitable parameter of feature mapping is learned through one task and applied to another objective task. Then, we introduce the notion of the local stability
and parameter transfer learnability of parametric feature mapping, and thereby
derive a learning bound for parameter transfer algorithms. As an application of
parameter transfer learning, we discuss the performance of sparse coding in selftaught learning. Although self-taught learning algorithms with plentiful unlabeled
data often show excellent empirical performance, their theoretical analysis has not
been studied. In this paper, we also provide the first theoretical learning bound for
self-taught learning.

1

Introduction

In traditional machine learning, it is assumed that data are identically drawn from a single distribution. However, this assumption does not always hold in real-world applications. Therefore, it would
be significant to develop methods capable of incorporating samples drawn from different distributions. In this case, transfer learning provides a general way to accommodate these situations. In
transfer learning, besides the availability of relatively few samples related with an objective task,
abundant samples in other domains that are not necessarily drawn from an identical distribution, are
available. Then, transfer learning aims at extracting some useful knowledge from data in other domains and applying the knowledge to improve the performance of the objective task. In accordance
with the kind of knowledge that is transferred, approaches to solving transfer-learning problems can
be classified into cases such as instance transfer, feature representation transfer, and parameter transfer (Pan and Yang (2010)). In this paper, we consider the parameter transfer approach, where some
kind of parametric model is supposed and the transferred knowledge is encoded into parameters.
Since the parameter transfer approach typically requires many samples to accurately learn a suitable
parameter, unsupervised methods are often utilized for the learning process. In particular, transfer learning from unlabeled data for predictive tasks is known as self-taught learning (Raina et al.
(2007)), where a joint generative model is not assumed to underlie unlabeled samples even though
the unlabeled samples should be indicative of a structure that would subsequently be helpful in predicting tasks. In recent years, self-taught learning has been intensively studied, encouraged by the
development of strong unsupervised methods. Furthermore, sparsity-based methods such as sparse
coding or sparse neural networks have often been used in empirical studies of self-taught learning.
Although many algorithms based on the parameter transfer approach have empirically demonstrated
impressive performance in self-taught learning, some fundamental problems remain. First, the theoretical aspects of the parameter transfer approach have not been studied, and in particular, no learning
bound was obtained. Second, although it is believed that a large amount of unlabeled data help to
improve the performance of the objective task in self-taught learning, it has not been sufficiently
clarified how many samples are required. Third, although sparsity-based methods are typically employed in self-taught learning, it is unknown how the sparsity works to guarantee the performance
of self-taught learning.

