Deep Neural Networks with Inexact Matching for
Person Re-Identification
Arulkumar Subramaniam
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Chennai, India 600036
aruls@cse.iitm.ac.in

Moitreya Chatterjee
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Chennai, India 600036
metro.smiles@gmail.com

Anurag Mittal
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Chennai, India 600036
amittal@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Person Re-Identification is the task of matching images of a person across multiple
camera views. Almost all prior approaches address this challenge by attempting to
learn the possible transformations that relate the different views of a person from a
training corpora. Then, they utilize these transformation patterns for matching a
query image to those in a gallery image bank at test time. This necessitates learning
good feature representations of the images and having a robust feature matching
technique. Deep learning approaches, such as Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN), simultaneously do both and have shown great promise recently.
In this work, we propose two CNN-based architectures for Person Re-Identification.
In the first, given a pair of images, we extract feature maps from these images via
multiple stages of convolution and pooling. A novel inexact matching technique
then matches pixels in the first representation with those of the second. Furthermore, we search across a wider region in the second representation for matching.
Our novel matching technique allows us to tackle the challenges posed by large
viewpoint variations, illumination changes or partial occlusions. Our approach
shows a promising performance and requires only about half the parameters as a
current state-of-the-art technique. Nonetheless, it also suffers from false matches at
times. In order to mitigate this issue, we propose a fused architecture that combines
our inexact matching pipeline with a state-of-the-art exact matching technique. We
observe substantial gains with the fused model over the current state-of-the-art on
multiple challenging datasets of varying sizes, with gains of up to about 21%.

1

Introduction

Successful object recognition systems, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), extract
“distinctive patterns” that describe an object (e.g. a human) in an image, when “shown” several images
known to contain that object, exploiting Machine Learning techniques [1]. Through successive stages
of convolutions and a host of non-linear operations such as pooling, non-linear activation, etc., CNNs
extract complex yet discriminative representation of objects that are then classified into categories
using a classifier, such as softmax.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

