Linear dynamical neural population models through
nonlinear embeddings
Yuanjun Gao⇤ 1 , Evan Archer⇤12 , Liam Paninski12 , John P. Cunningham12
Department of Statistics1 and Grossman Center2
Columbia University
New York, NY, United States
yg2312@columbia.edu, evan@stat.columbia.edu,
liam@stat.columbia.edu, jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
A body of recent work in modeling neural activity focuses on recovering lowdimensional latent features that capture the statistical structure of large-scale neural
populations. Most such approaches have focused on linear generative models,
where inference is computationally tractable. Here, we propose fLDS, a general
class of nonlinear generative models that permits the firing rate of each neuron
to vary as an arbitrary smooth function of a latent, linear dynamical state. This
extra flexibility allows the model to capture a richer set of neural variability than
a purely linear model, but retains an easily visualizable low-dimensional latent
space. To fit this class of non-conjugate models we propose a variational inference
scheme, along with a novel approximate posterior capable of capturing rich temporal correlations across time. We show that our techniques permit inference in a
wide class of generative models.We also show in application to two neural datasets
that, compared to state-of-the-art neural population models, fLDS captures a much
larger proportion of neural variability with a small number of latent dimensions,
providing superior predictive performance and interpretability.

1

Introduction

Until recently, neural data analysis techniques focused primarily upon the analysis of single neurons
and small populations. However, new experimental techniques enable the simultaneous recording
of ever-larger neural populations (at present, hundreds to tens of thousands of neurons). Access to
these high-dimensional data has spurred a search for new statistical methods. One recent approach
has focused on extracting latent, low-dimensional dynamical trajectories that describe the activity
of an entire population [1, 2, 3]. The resulting models and techniques permit tractable analysis and
visualization of high-dimensional neural data. Further, applications to motor cortex [4] and visual
cortex [5, 6] suggest that the latent trajectories recovered by these methods can provide insight into
underlying neural computations.
Previous work for inferring latent trajectories has considered models with a latent linear dynamics
that couple with observations either linearly, or through a restricted nonlinearity [1, 3, 7]. When
the true data generating process is nonlinear (for example, when neurons respond nonlinearly to
a common, low-dimensional unobserved stimulus), the observation may lie in a low-dimensional
nonlinear subspace that can not be captured using a mismatched observation model, hampering
the ability of latent linear models to recover the low-dimensional structure from the data. Here,
we propose fLDS, a new approach to inferring latent neural trajectories that generalizes several
previously proposed methods. As in previous methods, we model a latent dynamical state with a
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

