Optimal Cluster Recovery
in the Labeled Stochastic Block Model
Se-Young Yun
CNLS, Los Alamos National Lab.
Los Alamos, NM 87545
syun@lanl.gov

Alexandre Proutiere
Automatic Control Dept., KTH
Stockholm 100-44, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
We consider the problem of community detection or clustering in the labeled
Stochastic Block Model (LSBM) with a finite number K of clusters of sizes
linearly growing with the global population of items n. Every pair of items is
labeled independently at random, and label ` appears with probability p(i, j, `)
between two items in clusters indexed by i and j, respectively. The objective is to
reconstruct the clusters from the observation of these random labels.
Clustering under the SBM and their extensions has attracted much attention recently.
Most existing work aimed at characterizing the set of parameters such that it is
possible to infer clusters either positively correlated with the true clusters, or with
a vanishing proportion of misclassified items, or exactly matching the true clusters.
We find the set of parameters such that there exists a clustering algorithm with
at most s misclassified items in average under the general LSBM and for any
s = o(n), which solves one open problem raised in [2]. We further develop
an algorithm, based on simple spectral methods, that achieves this fundamental
performance limit within O(npolylog(n)) computations and without the a-priori
knowledge of the model parameters.

1

Introduction

Community detection consists in extracting (a few) groups of similar items from a large global
population, and has applications in a wide spectrum of disciplines including social sciences, biology,
computer science, and statistical physics. The communities or clusters of items are inferred from the
observed pair-wise similarities between items, which, most often, are represented by a graph whose
vertices are items and edges are pairs of items known to share similar features.
The stochastic block model (SBM), introduced three decades ago in [12], constitutes a natural
performance benchmark for community detection, and has been, since then, widely studied. In the
SBM, the set of items V = {1, . . . , n} are partitioned into K non-overlapping clusters V1 , . . . , VK ,
that have to be recovered from an observed realization of a random graph. In the latter, an edge
between two items belonging to clusters Vi and Vj , respectively, is present with probability p(i, j),
independently of other edges. The analyses presented in this paper apply to the SBM, but also to the
labeled stochastic block model (LSBM) [11], a more general model to describe the similarities of
items. There, the observation of the similarity between two items comes in the form of a label taken
from a finite set L = {0, 1, . . . , L}, and label ` is observed between two items in clusters Vi and Vj ,
respectively, with probability p(i, j, `), independently of other labels. The standard SBM can be seen
as a particular instance of its labeled counterpart with two possible labels 0 and 1, and where the
edges present (resp. absent) in the SBM correspond to item pairs with label 1 (resp. 0). The problem
of cluster recovery under the LSBM consists in inferring the hidden partition V1 , . . . , VK from the
observation of the random labels on each pair of items.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

