Maximizing Influence in an Ising Network:
A Mean-Field Optimal Solution

Christopher W. Lynn
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Pennsylvania
chlynn@sas.upenn.edu

Daniel D. Lee
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
ddlee@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Influence maximization in social networks has typically been studied in the context
of contagion models and irreversible processes. In this paper, we consider an
alternate model that treats individual opinions as spins in an Ising system at dynamic
equilibrium. We formalize the Ising influence maximization problem, which has a
natural physical interpretation as maximizing the magnetization given a budget of
external magnetic field. Under the mean-field (MF) approximation, we present a
gradient ascent algorithm that uses the susceptibility to efficiently calculate local
maxima of the magnetization, and we develop a number of sufficient conditions
for when the MF magnetization is concave and our algorithm converges to a
global optimum. We apply our algorithm on random and real-world networks,
demonstrating, remarkably, that the MF optimal external fields (i.e., the external
fields which maximize the MF magnetization) shift from focusing on high-degree
individuals at high temperatures to focusing on low-degree individuals at low
temperatures. We also establish a number of novel results about the structure of
steady-states in the ferromagnetic MF Ising model on general graph topologies,
which are of independent interest.

1

Introduction

With the proliferation of online social networks, the problem of optimally influencing the opinions
of individuals in a population has garnered tremendous attention [1–3]. The prevailing paradigm
treats marketing as a viral process, whereby the advertiser is given a budget of seed infections and
chooses the subset of individuals to infect such that the spread of the ensuing contagion is maximized.
The development of algorithmic methods for influence maximization under the viral paradigm has
been the subject of vigorous study, resulting in a number of efficient techniques for identifying
meaningful marketing strategies in real-world settings [4–6]. While the viral paradigm accurately
describes out-of-equilibrium phenomena, such as the introduction of new ideas or products to a
system, these models fail to capture reverberant opinion dynamics wherein repeated interactions
between individuals in the network give rise to complex macroscopic opinion patterns, as, for example,
is the case in the formation of political opinions [7–10]. In this context, rather than maximizing
the spread of a viral advertisement, the marketer is interested in optimally shifting the equilibrium
opinions of individuals in the network.
To describe complex macroscopic opinion patterns resulting from repeated microscopic interactions,
we naturally employ the language of statistical mechanics, treating individual opinions as spins in an
Ising system at dynamic equilibrium and modeling marketing as the addition of an external magnetic
field. The resulting problem, which we call Ising influence maximization (IIM), has a natural physical
interpretation as maximizing the magnetization of an Ising system given a budget of external field.
While a number of models have been proposed for describing reverberant opinion dynamics [11], our
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

