Causal meets Submodular: Subset Selection with
Directed Information
Costas J. Spanos
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
spanos@berkeley.edu

Yuxun Zhou
Department of EECS
UC Berekely
yxzhou@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study causal subset selection with Directed Information as the measure of
prediction causality. Two typical tasks, causal sensor placement and covariate
selection, are correspondingly formulated into cardinality constrained directed
information maximizations. To attack the NP-hard problems, we show that the first
problem is submodular while not necessarily monotonic. And the second one is
“nearly” submodular. To substantiate the idea of approximate submodularity, we
introduce a novel quantity, namely submodularity index (SmI), for general set functions. Moreover, we show that based on SmI, greedy algorithm has performance
guarantee for the maximization of possibly non-monotonic and non-submodular
functions, justifying its usage for a much broader class of problems. We evaluate
the theoretical results with several case studies, and also illustrate the application
of the subset selection to causal structure learning.

1

Introduction

A wide variety of research disciplines, including computer science, economic, biology and social
science, involve causality analysis of a network of interacting random processes. In particular, many
of those tasks are closely related to subset selection. For example, in sensor network applications,
with limited budget it is necessary to place sensors at information “sources” that provide the best
observability of the system. To better predict a stock under consideration, investors need to select
causal covariates from a pool of candidate information streams. We refer to the first type of problems
as “causal sensor placement”, and the second one as “causal covariate selection”.
To solve the aforementioned problems we firstly need a causality measure for multiple random
processes. In literature, there exists two types of causality definitions, one is related with time
series prediction (called Granger-type causality) and another with counter-factuals [18]. We focus
on Granger-type prediction causality substantiated with Directed Information (DI), a tool from
information theory. Recently, a large body of work has successfully employed DI in many research
fields, including influence mining in gene networks [14], causal relationship inference in neural spike
train recordings [19], and message transmission analysis in social media [23]. Compared to modelbased or testing-based methods such as [2][21], DI is not limited by model assumptions and can
naturally capture non-linear and non-stationary dependence among random processes. In addition, it
has clear information theoretical interpretation and admits well-established estimation techniques. In
this regards, we formulate causal sensor placement and covariate selection into cardinality constrained
directed information maximizations problems.
We then need an efficient algorithm that makes optimal subset selection. Although subset selection, in
general, is not tractable due to its combinatorial nature, the study of greedy heuristics for submodular
objectives has shown promising results in both theory and practice. To list a few, following the
pioneering work [8] that proves the near optimal 1 − 1/e guarantee, [12] [1] investigates the submod30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

