Interaction Screening: Efficient and Sample-Optimal
Learning of Ising Models

Marc Vuffray1 , Sidhant Misra2 , Andrey Y. Lokhov1,3 , and Michael Chertkov1,3,4
1

Theoretical Division T-4, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
Theoretical Division T-5, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
3
Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
4
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 143026 Moscow, Russia
2

{vuffray, sidhant, lokhov, chertkov}@lanl.gov

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the underlying graph of an unknown Ising
model on p spins from a collection of i.i.d. samples generated from the model. We
suggest a new estimator that is computationally efficient and requires a number of
samples that is near-optimal with respect to previously established informationtheoretic lower-bound. Our statistical estimator has a physical interpretation in
terms of “interaction screening”. The estimator is consistent and is efficiently
implemented using convex optimization. We prove that with appropriate regularization, the estimator recovers the underlying graph using a number of samples that is
logarithmic in the system size p and exponential in the maximum coupling-intensity
and maximum node-degree.

1

Introduction

A Graphical Model (GM) describes a probability distribution over a set of random variables which
factorizes over the edges of a graph. It is of interest to recover the structure of GMs from random
samples. The graphical structure contains valuable information on the dependencies between the
random variables. In fact, the neighborhood of a random variable is the minimal set that provides us
maximum information about this variable. Unsurprisingly, GM reconstruction plays an important
role in various fields such as the study of gene expression [1], protein interactions [2], neuroscience
[3], image processing [4], sociology [5] and even grid science [6, 7].
The origin of the GM reconstruction problem is traced back to the seminal 1968 paper by Chow and
Liu [8], where the problem was posed and resolved for the special case of tree-structured GMs. In
this special tree case the maximum likelihood estimator is tractable and is tantamount to finding a
maximum weighted spanning-tree. However, it is also known that in the case of general graphs with
cycles, maximum likelihood estimators are intractable as they require computation of the partition
function of the underlying GM, with notable exceptions of the Gaussian GM, see for instance [9],
and some other special cases, like planar Ising models without magnetic field [10].
A lot of efforts in this field has focused on learning Ising models, which are the most general
GMs over binary variables with pairwise interaction/factorization. Early attempts to learn the Ising
model structure efficiently were heuristic, based on various mean-field approximations, e.g. utilizing
empirical correlation matrices [11, 12, 13, 14]. These methods were satisfactory in cases when
correlations decrease with graph distance. However it was also noticed that the mean-field methods
perform poorly for the Ising models with long-range correlations. This observation is not surprising
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

