Improved Dropout for Shallow and Deep Learning

Zhe Li1 , Boqing Gong2 , Tianbao Yang1
The University of Iowa, Iowa city, IA 52245
2
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
{zhe-li-1,tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu
bgong@crcv.ucf.edu
1

Abstract
Dropout has been witnessed with great success in training deep neural networks by
independently zeroing out the outputs of neurons at random. It has also received
a surge of interest for shallow learning, e.g., logistic regression. However, the
independent sampling for dropout could be suboptimal for the sake of convergence. In this paper, we propose to use multinomial sampling for dropout, i.e.,
sampling features or neurons according to a multinomial distribution with different
probabilities for different features/neurons. To exhibit the optimal dropout probabilities, we analyze the shallow learning with multinomial dropout and establish
the risk bound for stochastic optimization. By minimizing a sampling dependent
factor in the risk bound, we obtain a distribution-dependent dropout with sampling
probabilities dependent on the second order statistics of the data distribution. To
tackle the issue of evolving distribution of neurons in deep learning, we propose
an efficient adaptive dropout (named evolutional dropout) that computes the sampling probabilities on-the-fly from a mini-batch of examples. Empirical studies on
several benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed dropouts achieve not
only much faster convergence and but also a smaller testing error than the standard
dropout. For example, on the CIFAR-100 data, the evolutional dropout achieves
relative improvements over 10% on the prediction performance and over 50% on
the convergence speed compared to the standard dropout.

1

Introduction

Dropout has been widely used to avoid overfitting of deep neural networks with a large number of
parameters [9, 16], which usually identically and independently at random samples neurons and sets
their outputs to be zeros. Extensive experiments [4] have shown that dropout can help obtain the
state-of-the-art performance on a range of benchmark data sets. Recently, dropout has also been
found to improve the performance of logistic regression and other single-layer models for natural
language tasks such as document classification and named entity recognition [21].
In this paper, instead of identically and independently at random zeroing out features or neurons, we
propose to use multinomial sampling for dropout, i.e., sampling features or neurons according to
a multinomial distribution with different probabilities for different features/neurons. Intuitively, it
makes more sense to use non-uniform multinomial sampling than identical and independent sampling
for different features/neurons. For example, in shallow learning if input features are centered, we
can drop out features with small variance more frequently or completely allowing the training to
focus on more important features and consequentially enabling faster convergence. To justify the
multinomial sampling for dropout and reveal the optimal sampling probabilities, we conduct a
rigorous analysis on the risk bound of shallow learning by stochastic optimization with multinomial
dropout, and demonstrate that a distribution-dependent dropout leads to a smaller expected risk (i.e.,
faster convergence and smaller generalization error).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

