Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Reproducing
Kernels for Koopman Spectral Analysis

a

Yoshinobu Kawaharaab
The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University
b
Center for Advanced Integrated Intelligence Research, RIKEN
ykawahara@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
A spectral analysis of the Koopman operator, which is an infinite dimensional linear operator on an observable, gives a (modal) description of the global behavior
of a nonlinear dynamical system without any explicit prior knowledge of its governing equations. In this paper, we consider a spectral analysis of the Koopman
operator in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). We propose a modal decomposition algorithm to perform the analysis using finite-length data sequences
generated from a nonlinear system. The algorithm is in essence reduced to the
calculation of a set of orthogonal bases for the Krylov matrix in RKHS and the
eigendecomposition of the projection of the Koopman operator onto the subspace
spanned by the bases. The algorithm returns a decomposition of the dynamics
into a finite number of modes, and thus it can be thought of as a feature extraction
procedure for a nonlinear dynamical system. Therefore, we further consider applications in machine learning using extracted features with the presented analysis.
We illustrate the method on the applications using synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Modeling nonlinear dynamical systems using data is fundamental in a variety of engineering and
scientific fields. In machine learning, the problem of learning dynamical systems has been actively
discussed, and several Bayesian approaches have been proposed [11, 34]. In the fields of physics,
one popular approach for this purpose is the decomposition methods that factorize the dynamics into
modes based on some criterion from the data. For example, proper orthogonal decomposition (POD)
(see, for example, [12]), which generates orthogonal modes that optimally capture the vector energy
of a given dataset, has been extensively applied to complex phenomena in physics [5, 22] even
though this method is currently known to have several drawbacks. The so-called spectral method
for dynamical systems [15, 31, 17], which is often discussed in machine learning, is closely related
to this type of technique, where one aims to estimate a prediction model rather than understand the
dynamics by examining the obtained modes.
Among the decomposition techniques, dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) [25, 26] has recently
attracted attention in the field of physics, such as flow mechanics, and in engineering, and has been
applied to data obtained from complex phenomena [2, 4, 6, 10, 21, 25, 27, 32]. DMD approximates
the spectra of the Koopman operator [16], which is an infinite-dimensional linear operator that represents nonlinear and finite-dimensional dynamics without linearization. While POD just finds the
principal directions in a dataset, DMD can yield direct information concerning the dynamics such
as growth rates and the frequencies of the dynamics.
In this paper, we consider a spectral analysis of the Koopman operator in reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHSs) for a nonlinear dynamical system
xt+1 = f (xt ),
(1)
where x ∈ M is the state vector on a finite-dimensional manifold M ⊆ Rd , and f is a (possibly,
nonlinear) state-transition function. We present a modal decomposition algorithm to perform this,
1

