Learning feed-forward one-shot learners

Luca Bertinetto∗
University of Oxford
luca@robots.ox.ac.uk

João F. Henriques∗
University of Oxford
joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Jack Valmadre∗
University of Oxford
jvlmdr@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
One-shot learning is usually tackled by using generative models or discriminative
embeddings. Discriminative methods based on deep learning, which are very
effective in other learning scenarios, are ill-suited for one-shot learning as they
need large amounts of training data. In this paper, we propose a method to learn the
parameters of a deep model in one shot. We construct the learner as a second deep
network, called a learnet, which predicts the parameters of a pupil network from
a single exemplar. In this manner we obtain an efficient feed-forward one-shot
learner, trained end-to-end by minimizing a one-shot classification objective in
a learning to learn formulation. In order to make the construction feasible, we
propose a number of factorizations of the parameters of the pupil network. We
demonstrate encouraging results by learning characters from single exemplars in
Omniglot, and by tracking visual objects from a single initial exemplar in the Visual
Object Tracking benchmark.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have taken by storm areas such as computer vision, natural language processing and speech recognition. One of their key strengths is the ability to leverage large quantities of
labelled data and extract meaningful and powerful representations from it. However, this capability is
also one of their most significant limitations since using large datasets to train deep neural network is
not just an option, but a necessity. It is well known, in fact, that these models are prone to overfitting.
Thus, deep networks seem less useful when the goal is to learn a new concept on the fly, from a few or
even a single example as in one shot learning. These problems are usually tackled by using generative
models [18, 13] or, in a discriminative setting, using ad-hoc solutions such as exemplar support vector
machines (SVMs) [14]. Perhaps the most common discriminative approach to one-shot learning is to
learn off-line a deep embedding function and then to define on-line simple classification rules such as
nearest neighbors in the embedding space [5, 16]. However, computing an embedding is a far cry
from learning a model of the new object.
In this paper, we take a very different approach and ask whether we can induce, from a single
supervised example, a full, deep discriminative model to recognize other instances of the same object
class. Furthermore, we do not want our solution to require a lengthy optimization process, but to be
computable on-the-fly, efficiently and in one go. We formulate this problem as the one of learning a
deep neural network, called a learnet, that, given a single exemplar of a new object class, predicts the
parameters of a second network that can recognize other objects of the same type.
∗

The first three authors contributed equally, and are listed in alphabetical order.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

