The Power of Adaptivity in Identifying Statistical
Alternatives
Kevin Jamieson, Daniel Haas, Ben Recht
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
{kjamieson,dhaas,brecht}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the trade-off between two different kinds of pure exploration:
breadth versus depth. We focus on the most biased coin problem, asking how
many total coin flips are required to identify a “heavy” coin from an infinite bag
containing both “heavy” coins with mean ✓1 2 (0, 1), and “light" coins with
mean ✓0 2 (0, ✓1 ), where heavy coins are drawn from the bag with proportion
↵ 2 (0, 1/2). When ↵, ✓0 , ✓1 are unknown, the key difficulty of this problem lies in
distinguishing whether the two kinds of coins have very similar means, or whether
heavy coins are just extremely rare. While existing solutions to this problem require
some prior knowledge of the parameters ✓0 , ✓1 , ↵, we propose an adaptive algorithm
that requires no such knowledge yet still obtains near-optimal sample complexity
guarantees. In contrast, we provide a lower bound showing that non-adaptive
strategies require at least quadratically more samples. In characterizing this gap
between adaptive and nonadaptive strategies, we make connections to anomaly
detection and prove lower bounds on the sample complexity of differentiating
between a single parametric distribution and a mixture of two such distributions.

1

Introduction

The trade-off between exploration and exploitation has been an ever-present trope in the online
learning literature. In contrast, this paper studies the trade-off between two different kinds of pure
exploration: breadth versus depth. Consider a bag that contains an infinite number of two kinds
of biased coins: “heavy” coins with mean ✓1 2 (0, 1) and “light” coins with mean ✓0 2 (0, ✓1 ).
When a player picks a coin from the bag, with probability ↵ the coin is “heavy” and with probability
(1 ↵) the coin is “light.” The player can flip any coin she picks from the bag as many times as she
wants, and the goal is to identify a heavy coin using as few total flips as possible. When ↵, ✓0 , ✓1 are
unknown, the key difficulty of this problem lies in distinguishing whether the two kinds of coins have
very similar means, or whether heavy coins are just extremely rare. That is, how does one balance
flipping an individual coin many times to better estimate its mean against considering many new coins
to maximize the probability of observing a heavy one. Previous work has only proposed solutions
that rely on some or full knowledge ↵, ✓0 , ✓1 , limiting their applicability. In this work we propose
the first algorithm that requires no knowledge of ↵, ✓0 , ✓1 , is guaranteed to return a heavy coin with
probability at least 1
, and flips a total number of coins, in expectation, that nearly matches known
lower bounds. Moreover, our fully adaptive algorithm supports more general sub-Gaussian sources in
addition to just coins, and only ever has one “coin” outside the bag at a given time, a constraint of
practical importance to some applications.
In addition, we connect the most biased coin problem to anomaly detection and prove novel lower
bounds on the difficulty of detecting the presence of a mixture versus just a single component of
a known family of distributions (e.g. X ⇠ (1 ↵)g✓0 + ↵g✓1 versus X ⇠ g✓ for some ✓). We
show that in detecting the presence of a mixture distribution, there is a stark difference of difficulty
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

