Generalized Correspondence-LDA Models (GC-LDA)
for Identifying Functional Regions in the Brain

Timothy N. Rubin
SurveyMonkey

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

Michael N. Jones
Indiana University

Tal Yarkoni
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
This paper presents Generalized Correspondence-LDA (GC-LDA), a generalization
of the Correspondence-LDA model that allows for variable spatial representations
to be associated with topics, and increased flexibility in terms of the strength
of the correspondence between data types induced by the model. We present
three variants of GC-LDA, each of which associates topics with a different spatial
representation, and apply them to a corpus of neuroimaging data. In the context of
this dataset, each topic corresponds to a functional brain region, where the region’s
spatial extent is captured by a probability distribution over neural activity, and the
region’s cognitive function is captured by a probability distribution over linguistic
terms. We illustrate the qualitative improvements offered by GC-LDA in terms
of the types of topics extracted with alternative spatial representations, as well
as the model’s ability to incorporate a-priori knowledge from the neuroimaging
literature. We furthermore demonstrate that the novel features of GC-LDA improve
predictions for missing data.

1

Introduction

One primary goal of cognitive neuroscience is to find a mapping from neural activity onto cognitive
processes–that is, to identify functional networks in the brain and the role they play in supporting
macroscopic functions. A major milestone towards this goal would be the creation of a “functionalanatomical atlas” of human cognition, where, for each putative cognitive function, one could identify
the regions and brain networks within the region that support the function.
Efforts to create such functional brain atlases are increasingly common in recent years. Most studies
have proceeded by applying dimensionality reduction or source decomposition methods such as
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [4] and clustering analysis [9] to large fMRI datasets such
as the Human Connectome Project [10] or the meta-analytic BrainMap database [8]. While such
work has provided valuable insights, these approaches also have significant drawbacks. In particular,
they typically do not jointly estimate regions along with their mapping onto cognitive processes.
Instead, they first extract a set of neural regions (e.g., via ICA performed on resting-state data), and
then in a separate stage—if at all—estimate a mapping onto cognitive functions. Such approaches do
not allow information regarding cognitive function to constrain the spatial characterization of the
regions. Moreover, many data-driven parcellation approaches involve a hard assignment of each brain
voxel to a single parcel or cluster, an assumption that violates the many-to-many nature of functional
brain networks. Ideally, a functional-anatomical atlas of human cognition should allow the spatial
and functional correlates of each atom or unit to be jointly characterized, where the function of each
region constrains its spatial boundaries, and vice-versa.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

