A Theoretically Grounded Application of Dropout in
Recurrent Neural Networks
Yarin Gal

University of Cambridge
{yg279,zg201}@cam.ac.uk

Zoubin Ghahramani

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) stand at the forefront of many recent developments in deep learning. Yet a major difficulty with these models is their tendency to
overfit, with dropout shown to fail when applied to recurrent layers. Recent results
at the intersection of Bayesian modelling and deep learning offer a Bayesian interpretation of common deep learning techniques such as dropout. This grounding of
dropout in approximate Bayesian inference suggests an extension of the theoretical
results, offering insights into the use of dropout with RNN models. We apply this
new variational inference based dropout technique in LSTM and GRU models,
assessing it on language modelling and sentiment analysis tasks. The new approach
outperforms existing techniques, and to the best of our knowledge improves on the
single model state-of-the-art in language modelling with the Penn Treebank (73.4
test perplexity). This extends our arsenal of variational tools in deep learning.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are sequence-based models of key importance for natural language
understanding, language generation, video processing, and many other tasks [1–3]. The model’s input
is a sequence of symbols, where at each time step a simple neural network (RNN unit) is applied to a
single symbol, as well as to the network’s output from the previous time step. RNNs are powerful
models, showing superb performance on many tasks, but overfit quickly. Lack of regularisation in
RNN models makes it difficult to handle small data, and to avoid overfitting researchers often use
early stopping, or small and under-specified models [4].
Dropout is a popular regularisation technique with deep networks [5, 6] where network units are
randomly masked during training (dropped). But the technique has never been applied successfully
to RNNs. Empirical results have led many to believe that noise added to recurrent layers (connections
between RNN units) will be amplified for long sequences, and drown the signal [4]. Consequently,
existing research has concluded that the technique should be used with the inputs and outputs of the
RNN alone [4, 7–10]. But this approach still leads to overfitting, as is shown in our experiments.
Recent results at the intersection of Bayesian research and deep learning offer interpretation of
common deep learning techniques through Bayesian eyes [11–16]. This Bayesian view of deep
learning allowed the introduction of new techniques into the field, such as methods to obtain principled
uncertainty estimates from deep learning networks [14, 17]. Gal and Ghahramani [14] for example
showed that dropout can be interpreted as a variational approximation to the posterior of a Bayesian
neural network (NN). Their variational approximating distribution is a mixture of two Gaussians
with small variances, with the mean of one Gaussian fixed at zero. This grounding of dropout in
approximate Bayesian inference suggests that an extension of the theoretical results might offer
insights into the use of the technique with RNN models.
Here we focus on common RNN models in the field (LSTM [18], GRU [19]) and interpret these
as probabilistic models, i.e. as RNNs with network weights treated as random variables, and with
suitably defined likelihood functions. We then perform approximate variational inference in these
probabilistic Bayesian models (which we will refer to as Variational RNNs). Approximating the
posterior distribution over the weights with a mixture of Gaussians (with one component fixed at
zero and small variances) will lead to a tractable optimisation objective. Optimising this objective is
identical to performing a new variant of dropout in the respective RNNs.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

