Dynamic Filter Networks

Bert De Brabandere1∗
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, iMinds

Xu Jia1∗
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, iMinds

Tinne Tuytelaars1
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, iMinds
Luc Van Gool1,2
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, iMinds
D-ITET, ETH Zurich
1
firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be 2 vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In a traditional convolutional layer, the learned filters stay fixed after training. In
contrast, we introduce a new framework, the Dynamic Filter Network, where filters
are generated dynamically conditioned on an input. We show that this architecture
is a powerful one, with increased flexibility thanks to its adaptive nature, yet without
an excessive increase in the number of model parameters. A wide variety of filtering
operations can be learned this way, including local spatial transformations, but also
others like selective (de)blurring or adaptive feature extraction. Moreover, multiple
such layers can be combined, e.g. in a recurrent architecture.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the dynamic filter network on the tasks of
video and stereo prediction, and reach state-of-the-art performance on the moving
MNIST dataset with a much smaller model. By visualizing the learned filters,
we illustrate that the network has picked up flow information by only looking at
unlabelled training data. This suggests that the network can be used to pretrain
networks for various supervised tasks in an unsupervised way, like optical flow and
depth estimation.

1

Introduction

Humans are good at predicting another view from related views. For example, humans can use
their everyday experience to predict how the next frame in a video will differ; or after seeing a
person’s profile face have an idea of her frontal view. This capability is extremely useful to get early
warnings about impinging dangers, to be prepared for necessary actions, etc. The vision community
has realized that endowing machines with similar capabilities would be rewarding.
Several papers have already addressed the generation of an image conditioned on given image(s).
Yim et al. [24] and Yang et al. [23] learn to rotate a given face to another pose. The authors
of [16, 19, 18, 15, 12] train a deep neural network to predict subsequent video frames. Flynn et al. [3]
use a deep network to interpolate between views separated by a wide baseline. Yet all these methods
apply the exact same set of filtering operations on each and every input image. This seems suboptimal
for the tasks at hand. For example, for video prediction, there are different motion patterns within
different video clips. The main idea behind our work is to generate the future frames with parameters
∗

X. Jia and B. De Brabandere contributed equally to this work and are listed in alphabetical order.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

