CMA-ES with Optimal Covariance Update and
Storage Complexity

Oswin Krause
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
oswin.krause@di.ku.dk

Dídac R. Arbonès
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
didac@di.ku.dk

Christian Igel
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
igel@di.ku.dk

Abstract
The covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) is arguably one
of the most powerful real-valued derivative-free optimization algorithms, finding
many applications in machine learning. The CMA-ES is a Monte Carlo method,
sampling from a sequence of multi-variate Gaussian distributions. Given the
function values at the sampled points, updating and storing the covariance matrix
dominates the time and space complexity in each iteration of the algorithm. We
propose a numerically stable quadratic-time covariance matrix update scheme
with minimal memory requirements based on maintaining triangular Cholesky
factors. This requires a modification of the cumulative step-size adaption (CSA)
mechanism in the CMA-ES, in which we replace the inverse of the square root of
the covariance matrix by the inverse of the triangular Cholesky factor. Because
the triangular Cholesky factor changes smoothly with the matrix square root, this
modification does not change the behavior of the CMA-ES in terms of required
objective function evaluations as verified empirically. Thus, the described algorithm
can and should replace the standard CMA-ES if updating and storing the covariance
matrix matters.

1

Introduction

The covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy, CMA-ES [Hansen and Ostermeier, 2001], is
recognized as one of the most competitive derivative-free algorithms for real-valued optimization
[Beyer, 2007; Eiben and Smith, 2015]. The algorithm has been successfully applied in many unbiased
performance comparisons and numerous real-world applications. In machine learning, it is mainly
used for direct policy search in reinforcement learning and hyperparameter tuning in supervised
learning (e.g., see Gomez et al. [2008]; Heidrich-Meisner and Igel [2009a,b]; Igel [2010], and
references therein).
The CMA-ES is a Monte Carlo method for optimizing functions f : Rd → R. The objective function
f does not need to be continuous and can be multi-modal, constrained, and disturbed by noise. In
each iteration, the CMA-ES samples from a d-dimensional multivariate normal distribution, the
search distribution, and ranks the sampled points according to their objective function values. The
mean and the covariance matrix of the search distribution are then adapted based on the ranked points.
Given the ranking of the sampled points, the runtime of one CMA-ES iteration is ω(d2 ) because
the square root of the covariance matrix is required, which is typically computed by an eigenvalue
decomposition. If the objective function can be evaluated efficiently and/or d is large, the computation
of the matrix square root can easily dominate the runtime of the optimization process.
Various strategies have been proposed to address this problem. The basic approach for reducing the
runtime is to perform an update of the matrix only every τ ∈ Ω(d) steps [Hansen and Ostermeier,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

