Image Restoration Using Very Deep Convolutional
Encoder-Decoder Networks with Symmetric Skip
Connections

†

Xiao-Jiao Mao† , Chunhua Shen? , Yu-Bin Yang†
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
?
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a very deep fully convolutional encoding-decoding framework for image restoration such as denoising and super-resolution. The network is
composed of multiple layers of convolution and deconvolution operators, learning
end-to-end mappings from corrupted images to the original ones. The convolutional layers act as the feature extractor, which capture the abstraction of image
contents while eliminating noises/corruptions. Deconvolutional layers are then
used to recover the image details. We propose to symmetrically link convolutional
and deconvolutional layers with skip-layer connections, with which the training
converges much faster and attains a higher-quality local optimum. First, the skip
connections allow the signal to be back-propagated to bottom layers directly, and
thus tackles the problem of gradient vanishing, making training deep networks
easier and achieving restoration performance gains consequently. Second, these
skip connections pass image details from convolutional layers to deconvolutional
layers, which is beneficial in recovering the original image. Significantly, with
the large capacity, we can handle different levels of noises using a single model.
Experimental results show that our network achieves better performance than recent
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The task of image restoration is to recover a clean image from its corrupted observation, which
is known to be an ill-posed inverse problem. By accommodating different types of corruption
distributions, the same mathematical model applies to problems such as image denoising and superresolution. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown their superior performance in image
processing and computer vision tasks, ranging from high-level recognition, semantic segmentation to
low-level denoising, super-resolution, deblur, inpainting and recovering raw images from compressed
ones. Despite the progress that DNNs achieve, some research questions remain to be answered. For
example, can a deeper network in general achieve better performance? Can we design a single deep
model which is capable to handle different levels of corruptions?
Observing recent superior performance of DNNs on image processing tasks, we propose a convolutional neural network (CNN)-based framework for image restoration. We observe that in order to
obtain good restoration performance, it is beneficial to train a very deep model. Meanwhile, we show
that it is possible to achieve very promising performance with a single network when processing
multiple different levels of corruptions due to the benefits of large-capacity networks. Specifically,
the proposed framework learns end-to-end fully convolutional mappings from corrupted images to the
clean ones. The network is composed of multiple layers of convolution and deconvolution operators.
As deeper networks tend to be more difficult to train, we propose to symmetrically link convolutional
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

