Convolutional Neural Networks on Graphs
with Fast Localized Spectral Filtering
Michaël Defferrard

Xavier Bresson

Pierre Vandergheynst

EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{michael.defferrard,xavier.bresson,pierre.vandergheynst}@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this work, we are interested in generalizing convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) from low-dimensional regular grids, where image, video and speech are
represented, to high-dimensional irregular domains, such as social networks, brain
connectomes or words’ embedding, represented by graphs. We present a formulation of CNNs in the context of spectral graph theory, which provides the necessary mathematical background and efficient numerical schemes to design fast
localized convolutional filters on graphs. Importantly, the proposed technique offers the same linear computational complexity and constant learning complexity
as classical CNNs, while being universal to any graph structure. Experiments on
MNIST and 20NEWS demonstrate the ability of this novel deep learning system
to learn local, stationary, and compositional features on graphs.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks [19] offer an efficient architecture to extract highly meaningful statistical patterns in large-scale and high-dimensional datasets. The ability of CNNs to learn local
stationary structures and compose them to form multi-scale hierarchical patterns has led to breakthroughs in image, video, and sound recognition tasks [18]. Precisely, CNNs extract the local stationarity property of the input data or signals by revealing local features that are shared across
the data domain. These similar features are identified with localized convolutional filters or kernels,
which are learned from the data. Convolutional filters are shift- or translation-invariant filters, meaning they are able to recognize identical features independently of their spatial locations. Localized
kernels or compactly supported filters refer to filters that extract local features independently of the
input data size, with a support size that can be much smaller than the input size.
User data on social networks, gene data on biological regulatory networks, log data on telecommunication networks, or text documents on word embeddings are important examples of data lying on
irregular or non-Euclidean domains that can be structured with graphs, which are universal representations of heterogeneous pairwise relationships. Graphs can encode complex geometric structures
and can be studied with strong mathematical tools such as spectral graph theory [6].
A generalization of CNNs to graphs is not straightforward as the convolution and pooling operators
are only defined for regular grids. This makes this extension challenging, both theoretically and
implementation-wise. The major bottleneck of generalizing CNNs to graphs, and one of the primary
goals of this work, is the definition of localized graph filters which are efficient to evaluate and learn.
Precisely, the main contributions of this work are summarized below.
1. Spectral formulation. A spectral graph theoretical formulation of CNNs on graphs built
on established tools in graph signal processing (GSP). [31].
2. Strictly localized filters. Enhancing [4], the proposed spectral filters are provable to be
strictly localized in a ball of radius K, i.e. K hops from the central vertex.
3. Low computational complexity. The evaluation complexity of our filters is linear w.r.t. the
filters support’s size K and the number of edges |E|. Importantly, as most real-world graphs
are highly sparse, we have |E|  n2 and |E| = kn for the widespread k-nearest neighbor
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

