Learning Tree Structured Potential Games

Vikas K. Garg
CSAIL, MIT
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Tommi Jaakkola
CSAIL, MIT
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Many real phenomena, including behaviors, involve strategic interactions that can
be learned from data. We focus on learning tree structured potential games where
equilibria are represented by local maxima of an underlying potential function. We
cast the learning problem within a max margin setting and show that the problem
is NP-hard even when the strategic interactions form a tree. We develop a variant
of dual decomposition to estimate the underlying game and demonstrate with
synthetic and real decision/voting data that the game theoretic perspective (carving
out local maxima) enables meaningful recovery.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction methods [1; 2; 3; 4; 5] are widely adopted techniques for learning mappings
between context descriptions x ∈ X and configurations y ∈ Y. The variables specifying each configuration y (e.g., arcs in natural language parsing) are typically mutually dependent and it is therefore
beneficial to predict them jointly rather than individually. The predicted y often arises as the highest
scoring configuration with respect to a parameterized scoring function that decomposes into terms
that couple two or more variables together to model their interactions. Structured prediction methods
have been broadly useful across areas, from computational biology (e.g., molecular arrangements,
alignments), natural language processing (e.g., parsing, tagging), computer vision (e.g., segmentation,
matching), and many others. However, the setting is less suitable for modeling strategic interactions
that are better characterized in terms of local consistency constraints.
We consider the problem of predicting configurations y that represent game theoretic equilibria. Such
configurations are unlikely to coincide with the maximum of a global scoring function as in structured
prediction. Indeed, there may be many possible equilibria in a specific context, and the particular
choice may vary considerably. Each possible configuration is nevertheless characterized by local
constraints that represent myopic optimizations of individual players. For example, senators can
be thought to vote relative to give and take deals with other closely associated senators. Several
assumptions are necessary to make the game theoretic setting feasible.
We abstract the setting as a potential game [6; 7; 8] among the players, and define a stochastic process
to model the dynamics of the game. A game is said to be a potential game if the incentive of all
players to change their strategy can be expressed using a single global potential function. Every
potential game is guaranteed to have at least one (possibly multiple) pure strategy Nash equilibria
[9], and we will exploit this property in modeling and analyzing several real world scenarios. Note
that each pure Nash equilibrium corresponds to a local optimum of the underlying potential function
rather than the global optimum as in structured prediction.
We further restrict the setting by permitting the payoff of each player to depend only on their own
action and the actions of their neighbors (a subset of the other players). Thus, we may view our
setting as a graphical game [10; 11]. In this work, we investigate potential games where the graphical
structure of the interactions form a tree. The goal is to recover the tree structured potential function
that supports observed configurations of actions as locally optimal solutions. We prove that it is
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

