The Power of Optimization from Samples
Eric Balkanski
Harvard University
ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu

Aviad Rubinstein
University of California, Berkeley
aviad@eecs.berkeley.edu

Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimization from samples of monotone submodular
functions with bounded curvature. In numerous applications, the function optimized is not known a priori, but instead learned from data. What are the guarantees
we have when optimizing functions from sampled data?
In this paper we show that for any monotone submodular function with curvature
c there is a (1 c)/(1 + c c2 ) approximation algorithm for maximization
under cardinality constraints when polynomially-many samples are drawn from the
uniform distribution over feasible sets. Moreover, we show that this algorithm is
optimal. That is, for any c < 1, there exists a submodular function with curvature
c for which no algorithm can achieve a better approximation. The curvature
assumption is crucial as for general monotone submodular functions no algorithm
can obtain a constant-factor approximation for maximization under a cardinality
constraint when observing polynomially-many samples drawn from any distribution
over feasible sets, even when the function is statistically learnable.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, machine learning is concerned with predictions: assuming data is generated from some
model, the goal is to predict the behavior of the model on data similar to that observed. In many cases
however, we harness machine learning to make decisions: given observations from a model the goal
is to find its optimum, rather than predict its behavior. Some examples include:
• Ranking in information retrieval: In ranking the goal is to select k 2 N documents that
are most relevant for a given query. The underlying model is a function which maps a set
of documents and a given query to its relevance score. Typically we do not to have access
to the scoring function, and thus learn it from data. In the learning to rank framework, for
example, the input consists of observations of document-query pairs and their relevance
score. The goal is to construct a scoring function of query-document pairs so that given a
query we can decide on the k most relevant documents.
• Optimal tagging: The problem of optimal tagging consists of picking k tags for some new
content to maximize incoming traffic. The model is a function which captures the way in
which users navigate through content given their tags. Since the algorithm designer cannot
know the behavior of every online user, the model is learned from observations on user
navigation in order to make a decision on which k tags maximize incoming traffic.
• Influence in networks: In influence maximization the goal is to identify a subset of individuals who can spread information in a manner that generates a large cascade. The underlying
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

