InfoGAN: Interpretable Representation Learning by
Information Maximizing Generative Adversarial Nets

Xi Chen†‡ , Yan Duan†‡ , Rein Houthooft†‡ , John Schulman†‡ , Ilya Sutskever‡ , Pieter Abbeel†‡
† UC Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
‡ OpenAI

Abstract
This paper describes InfoGAN, an information-theoretic extension to the Generative Adversarial Network that is able to learn disentangled representations in a
completely unsupervised manner. InfoGAN is a generative adversarial network
that also maximizes the mutual information between a small subset of the latent
variables and the observation. We derive a lower bound of the mutual information
objective that can be optimized efficiently. Specifically, InfoGAN successfully
disentangles writing styles from digit shapes on the MNIST dataset, pose from
lighting of 3D rendered images, and background digits from the central digit on
the SVHN dataset. It also discovers visual concepts that include hair styles, presence/absence of eyeglasses, and emotions on the CelebA face dataset. Experiments
show that InfoGAN learns interpretable representations that are competitive with
representations learned by existing supervised methods. For an up-to-date version
of this paper, please see https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03657.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning can be described as the general problem of extracting value from unlabelled
data which exists in vast quantities. A popular framework for unsupervised learning is that of
representation learning [1, 2], whose goal is to use unlabelled data to learn a representation that
exposes important semantic features as easily decodable factors. A method that can learn such
representations is likely to exist [2], and to be useful for many downstream tasks which include
classification, regression, visualization, and policy learning in reinforcement learning.
While unsupervised learning is ill-posed because the relevant downstream tasks are unknown at
training time, a disentangled representation, one which explicitly represents the salient attributes of a
data instance, should be helpful for the relevant but unknown tasks. For example, for a dataset of
faces, a useful disentangled representation may allocate a separate set of dimensions for each of the
following attributes: facial expression, eye color, hairstyle, presence or absence of eyeglasses, and the
identity of the corresponding person. A disentangled representation can be useful for natural tasks
that require knowledge of the salient attributes of the data, which include tasks like face recognition
and object recognition. It is not the case for unnatural supervised tasks, where the goal could be,
for example, to determine whether the number of red pixels in an image is even or odd. Thus, to be
useful, an unsupervised learning algorithm must in effect correctly guess the likely set of downstream
classification tasks without being directly exposed to them.
A significant fraction of unsupervised learning research is driven by generative modelling. It is
motivated by the belief that the ability to synthesize, or “create” the observed data entails some form
of understanding, and it is hoped that a good generative model will automatically learn a disentangled
representation, even though it is easy to construct perfect generative models with arbitrarily bad
representations. The most prominent generative models are the variational autoencoder (VAE) [3]
and the generative adversarial network (GAN) [4].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

