Full-Capacity Unitary Recurrent Neural Networks

Scott Wisdom1∗ , Thomas Powers1∗ , John R. Hershey2 , Jonathan Le Roux2 , and Les Atlas1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington
{swisdom, tcpowers, atlas}@uw.edu
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
{hershey, leroux}@merl.com

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks are powerful models for processing sequential data,
but they are generally plagued by vanishing and exploding gradient problems.
Unitary recurrent neural networks (uRNNs), which use unitary recurrence matrices, have recently been proposed as a means to avoid these issues. However, in
previous experiments, the recurrence matrices were restricted to be a product of
parameterized unitary matrices, and an open question remains: when does such a
parameterization fail to represent all unitary matrices, and how does this restricted
representational capacity limit what can be learned? To address this question,
we propose full-capacity uRNNs that optimize their recurrence matrix over all
unitary matrices, leading to significantly improved performance over uRNNs that
use a restricted-capacity recurrence matrix. Our contribution consists of two main
components. First, we provide a theoretical argument to determine if a unitary
parameterization has restricted capacity. Using this argument, we show that a
recently proposed unitary parameterization has restricted capacity for hidden state
dimension greater than 7. Second, we show how a complete, full-capacity unitary
recurrence matrix can be optimized over the differentiable manifold of unitary
matrices. The resulting multiplicative gradient step is very simple and does not
require gradient clipping or learning rate adaptation. We confirm the utility of our
claims by empirically evaluating our new full-capacity uRNNs on both synthetic
and natural data, achieving superior performance compared to both LSTMs and
the original restricted-capacity uRNNs.

1

Introduction

Deep feed-forward and recurrent neural networks have been shown to be remarkably effective in a
wide variety of problems. A primary difficulty in training using gradient-based methods has been
the so-called vanishing or exploding gradient problem, in which the instability of the gradients over
multiple layers can impede learning [1, 2]. This problem is particularly keen for recurrent networks,
since the repeated use of the recurrent weight matrix can magnify any instability.
This problem has been addressed in the past by various means, including gradient clipping [3],
using orthogonal matrices for initialization of the recurrence matrix [4, 5], or by using pioneering
architectures such as long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent networks [6] or gated recurrent
units [7]. Recently, several innovative architectures have been introduced to improve information
flow in a network: residual networks, which directly pass information from previous layers up in
a feed-forward network [8], and attention networks, which allow a recurrent network to access
past activations [9]. The idea of using a unitary recurrent weight matrix was introduced so that the
gradients are inherently stable and do not vanish or explode [10]. The resulting unitary recurrent
∗

Equal contribution

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

