A Credit Assignment Compiler for Joint Prediction

Kai-Wei Chang
University of Virginia
kw@kwchang.net

He He
University of Maryland
hhe@cs.umd.edu

John Langford
Microsoft Research
jcl@microsoft.com

Hal Daumé III
University of Maryland
me@hal3.name

Stephane Ross
Google
stephaneross@google.com

Abstract
Many machine learning applications involve jointly predicting multiple mutually
dependent output variables. Learning to search is a family of methods where the
complex decision problem is cast into a sequence of decisions via a search space.
Although these methods have shown promise both in theory and in practice, implementing them has been burdensomely awkward. In this paper, we show the
search space can be defined by an arbitrary imperative program, turning learning
to search into a credit assignment compiler. Altogether with the algorithmic improvements for the compiler, we radically reduce the complexity of programming
and the running time. We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach on multiple joint prediction tasks. In all cases, we obtain accuracies as high as alternative
approaches, at drastically reduced execution and programming time.

1

Introduction

Many applications require a predictor to make coherent decisions. As an example, consider recognizing a handwritten word where each character might be recognized in turn to understand the word.
Here, it is commonly observed that exposing information from related predictions (i.e. adjacent
letters) aids individual predictions. Furthermore, optimizing a joint loss function can improve the
gracefulness of error recovery. Despite these advantages, it is empirically common to build independent predictors, in settings where joint prediction naturally applies, because they are simpler to
implement and faster to run. Can we make joint prediction algorithms as easy and fast to program
and compute while maintaining their theoretical benefits?
Methods making a sequence of sub-decisions have been proposed for handling complex joint predictions in a variety of applications, including sequence tagging [30], dependency parsing (known as
transition-based method) [35], machine translation [18], and co-reference resolution [44]. Recently,
general search-based joint prediction approaches (e.g., [10, 12, 14, 22, 41]) have been investigated.
The key issue of these search-based approaches is credit assignment: when something goes wrong
do you blame the first, second, or third prediction? Existing methods often take two strategies:
• The system ignores the possibility that a previous prediction may have been wrong, different costs have different errors, or the difference between train-time and test-time prediction.
• The system uses handcrafted credit assignment heuristics to cope with errors that the underlying algorithm makes and the long-term outcomes of decisions.
Both approaches may lead to statistical inconsistency: when features are not rich enough for perfect
prediction, the machine learning may converge sub-optimally.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

