Cooperative Graphical Models

Josip Djolonga
Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
josipd@inf.ethz.ch

Stefanie Jegelka
CSAIL, MIT
stefje@mit.edu

Sebastian Tschiatschek
Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
stschia@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
krausea@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We study a rich family of distributions that capture variable interactions significantly more expressive than those representable with low-treewidth or pairwise
graphical models, or log-supermodular models. We call these cooperative graphical models. Yet, this family retains structure, which we carefully exploit for
efficient inference techniques. Our algorithms combine the polyhedral structure of
submodular functions in new ways with variational inference methods to obtain
both lower and upper bounds on the partition function. While our fully convex upper
bound is minimized as an SDP or via tree-reweighted belief propagation, our lower
bound is tightened via belief propagation or mean-field algorithms. The resulting
algorithms are easy to implement and, as our experiments show, effectively obtain
good bounds and marginals for synthetic and real-world examples.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic inference in high-order discrete graphical models has
been an ongoing computational challenge, and all existing methods
rely on exploiting specific structure: either low-treewidth or pairwise
graphical models, or functional properties of the distribution such as
log-submodularity. Here, we aim to compute approximate marginal
probabilities in complex models with long-range variable interactions
that do not possess any of these properties. Instead, we exploit a
combination of structural and functional properties in new ways.

X1,1

X1,2

X1,3

X1,4

X2,1

X2,2

X2,3

X2,4

X3,1

X3,2

X3,3

X3,4

The classical example of image segmentation may serve to motivate
our family of models: we would like to estimate a posterior marginal Figure 1: Example cooperadistribution over k labels for each pixel in an image. A common tive model. Edge colors inapproach uses Conditional Random Fields on a pixel neighborhood dicate the edge cluster. Dotgraph with pairwise potentials that encourage neighboring pixels to ted edges are cut under the
take on the same label. From the perspective of the graph, this model current assignment.
prefers configurations with few edges cut, where an edge is said to
be cut if its endpoints have different labels. Such cut-based models,
however, short-cut elongated structures (e.g. tree branches), a problem known as shrinking bias.
Jegelka and Bilmes [1] hence replace the bias towards short cuts (boundaries) by a bias towards
configurations with certain higher-order structure: the cut edges occur at similar-looking pixel pairs.
They group the graph edges into clusters (based on, say, color gradients across the endpoints),
observing that the true object boundary is captured by few of these clusters. To encourage cutting
edges from few clusters, the cost of cutting an edge decreases as more edges in its cluster are cut.
In short, the edges “cooperate”. In Figure 1, each pixel takes on one of two labels (colors), and cut
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

