Stochastic Optimization for
Large-scale Optimal Transport

Aude Genevay
CEREMADE, Université Paris-Dauphine
INRIA – Mokaplan project-team
genevay@ceremade.dauphine.fr

Marco Cuturi
CREST, ENSAE
Université Paris-Saclay
marco.cuturi@ensae.fr

Gabriel Peyré
CNRS and DMA, École Normale Supérieure
INRIA – Mokaplan project-team
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA – Sierra project-team
DI, ENS
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) defines a powerful framework to compare probability
distributions in a geometrically faithful way. However, the practical impact of OT
is still limited because of its computational burden. We propose a new class of
stochastic optimization algorithms to cope with large-scale OT problems. These
methods can handle arbitrary distributions (either discrete or continuous) as long
as one is able to draw samples from them, which is the typical setup in highdimensional learning problems. This alleviates the need to discretize these densities,
while giving access to provably convergent methods that output the correct distance
without discretization error. These algorithms rely on two main ideas: (a) the
dual OT problem can be re-cast as the maximization of an expectation; (b) the
entropic regularization of the primal OT problem yields a smooth dual optimization
which can be addressed with algorithms that have a provably faster convergence.
We instantiate these ideas in three different setups: (i) when comparing a discrete
distribution to another, we show that incremental stochastic optimization schemes
can beat Sinkhorn’s algorithm, the current state-of-the-art finite dimensional OT
solver; (ii) when comparing a discrete distribution to a continuous density, a semidiscrete reformulation of the dual program is amenable to averaged stochastic
gradient descent, leading to better performance than approximately solving the
problem by discretization ; (iii) when dealing with two continuous densities, we
propose a stochastic gradient descent over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS). This is currently the only known method to solve this problem, apart
from computing OT on finite samples. We backup these claims on a set of discrete,
semi-discrete and continuous benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

Many problems in computational sciences require to compare probability measures or histograms.
As a set of representative examples, let us quote: bag-of-visual-words comparison in computer
vision [17], color and shape processing in computer graphics [21], bag-of-words for natural language
processing [11] and multi-label classification [9]. In all of these problems, a geometry between the
features (words, visual words, labels) is usually known, and can be leveraged to compare probability
distributions in a geometrically faithful way. This underlying geometry might be for instance the
planar Euclidean domain for 2-D shapes, a perceptual 3D color metric space for image processing
or a high-dimensional semantic embedding for words. Optimal transport (OT) [24] is the canonical
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

