Blind Regression: Nonparametric Regression for
Latent Variable Models via Collaborative Filtering

Christina E. Lee
Yihua Li
Devavrat Shah
Dogyoon Song
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{celee, liyihua, devavrat, dgsong}@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce the framework of blind regression motivated by matrix completion
for recommendation systems: given m users, n movies, and a subset of user-movie
ratings, the goal is to predict the unobserved user-movie ratings given the data,
i.e., to complete the partially observed matrix. Following the framework of nonparametric statistics, we posit that user u and movie i have features x1 (u) and
x2 (i) respectively, and their corresponding rating y(u, i) is a noisy measurement of
f (x1 (u), x2 (i)) for some unknown function f . In contrast with classical regression,
the features x = (x1 (u), x2 (i)) are not observed, making it challenging to apply
standard regression methods to predict the unobserved ratings.
Inspired by the classical Taylor’s expansion for differentiable functions, we provide a prediction algorithm that is consistent for all Lipschitz functions. In fact,
the analysis through our framework naturally leads to a variant of collaborative
filtering, shedding insight into the widespread success of collaborative filtering in
practice. Assuming each entry is sampled independently with probability at least
max(m−1+δ , n−1/2+δ ) with δ > 0, we prove that the expected fraction of our
estimates with error greater than  is less than γ 2 /2 plus a polynomially decaying
term, where γ 2 is the variance of the additive entry-wise noise term.
Experiments with the MovieLens and Netflix datasets suggest that our algorithm
provides principled improvements over basic collaborative filtering and is competitive with matrix factorization methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we provide a statistical framework for performing nonparametric regression over latent
variable models. We are initially motivated by the problem of matrix completion arising in the
context of designing recommendation systems. In the popularized setting of Netflix, there are m
users, indexed by u ∈ [m], and n movies, indexed by i ∈ [n]. Each user u has a rating for each
movie i, denoted as y(u, i). The system observes ratings for only a small fraction of user-movie
pairs. The goal is to predict ratings for the rest of the unknown user-movie pairs, i.e., to complete
the partially observed m × n rating matrix. To be able to obtain meaningful predictions from the
partially observed matrix, it is essential to impose a structure on the data.
We assume each user u and movie i is associated to features x1 (u) ∈ X1 and x2 (i) ∈ X2 for some
compact metric spaces X1 , X2 equipped with Borel probability measures. Following the philosophy
of non-parametric statistics, we assume that there exists some function f : X1 × X2 → R such that
the rating of user u for movie i is given by
y(u, i) = f (x1 (u), x2 (i)) + ηui ,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(1)

