Brains on Beats
Umut Güçlü
Radboud University, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
u.guclu@donders.ru.nl

Jordy Thielen
Radboud University, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
j.thielen@psych.ru.nl

Michael Hanke∗
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg
Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences
Magdeburg, Germany
michael.hanke@ovgu.de

Marcel A. J. van Gerven†
Radboud University, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
m.vangerven@donders.ru.nl

Abstract
We developed task-optimized deep neural networks (DNNs) that achieved state-ofthe-art performance in different evaluation scenarios for automatic music tagging.
These DNNs were subsequently used to probe the neural representations of music.
Representational similarity analysis revealed the existence of a representational
gradient across the superior temporal gyrus (STG). Anterior STG was shown to
be more sensitive to low-level stimulus features encoded in shallow DNN layers
whereas posterior STG was shown to be more sensitive to high-level stimulus
features encoded in deep DNN layers.

1

Introduction

The human sensory system is devoted to the processing of sensory information to drive our perception
of the environment [1]. Sensory cortices are thought to encode a hierarchy of ever more invariant
representations of the environment [2]. A research question that is at the core of sensory neuroscience
is what sensory information is processed as one traverses the sensory pathways from the primary
sensory areas to higher sensory areas.
The majority of the work on auditory cortical representations has remained limited to understanding
the neural representation of hand-designed low-level stimulus features such as spectro-temporal
models [3], spectro-location models [4], timbre, rhythm, tonality [5–7] and pitch [8] or high-level
representations such as music genre [9] and sound categories [10]. For example, Santoro et al. [3]
found that a joint frequency-specific modulation transfer function predicted observed fMRI activity
best compared to frequency-nonspecific and independent models. They showed specificity to fine
spectral modulations along Heschl’s gyrus (HG) and anterior superior temporal gyrus (STG), whereas
coarse spectral modulations were mostly located posterior-laterally to HG, on the planum temporale
(PT), and STG. Preference for slow temporal modulations was found along HG and STG, whereas fast
temporal modulations were observed on PT, and posterior and medially adjacent to HG. Also, it has
been shown that activity in STG, somatosensory cortex, the default mode network, and cerebellum
are sensitive to timbre, while amygdala, hippocampus and insula are more sensitive to rhythmic and
∗

http://psychoinformatics.de; supported by the German federal state of Saxony-Anhalt and the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF), project: Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences.
†
http://www.ccnlab.net; supported by VIDI grant 639.072.513 of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

