Density Estimation via Discrepancy Based
Adaptive Sequential Partition

Dangna Li
ICME,
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
dangna@stanford.edu

Kun Yang
Google
Mountain View, CA 94043
kunyang@stanford.edu

Wing Hung Wong
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
whwong@stanford.edu

Abstract
Given iid observations from an unknown absolute continuous distribution defined
on some domain Ω, we propose a nonparametric method to learn a piecewise
constant function to approximate the underlying probability density function. Our
density estimate is a piecewise constant function defined on a binary partition of
Ω. The key ingredient of the algorithm is to use discrepancy, a concept originates
from Quasi Monte Carlo analysis, to control the partition process. The resulting
algorithm is simple, efficient, and has a provable convergence rate. We empirically
demonstrate its efficiency as a density estimation method. We also show how it can
be utilized to find good initializations for k-means.

1

Introduction

Density estimation is one of the fundamental problems in statistics. Once an explicit estimate of the
density function is constructed, various kinds of statistical inference tasks follow naturally. Given iid
observations, our goal in this paper is to construct an estimate of their common density function via a
nonparametric domain partition approach.
As pointed out in [1], for density estimation, the bias due to the limited approximation power of a
parametric family will become dominant in the over all error as the sample size grows. Hence it is
necessary to adopt a nonparametric approach to handle this bias. The kernel density estimation [2]
is a popular nonparametric density estimation method. Although in theory it can achieve optimal
convergence rate when the kernel and the bandwidth are appropriately chosen, its result can be
sensitive to the choice of bandwidth, especially in high dimension. In practice, kernel density
estimation is typically not applicable to problems of dimension higher than 6.
Another widely used nonparametric density estimation method in low dimension is the histogram. But
similarly with kernel density estimation, it can not be scaled easily to higher dimensions. Motivated
by the usefulness of histogram and the need for a method to handle higher dimensional cases, we
propose a novel nonparametric density estimation method which learns a piecewise constant density
function defined on a binary partition of domain Ω.
A key ingredient for any partition based method is the decision for stopping. Based on the observation
that for any piecewise constant density, the distribution conditioned on each sub-region is uniform,
we propose to use star discrepancy, which originates from analysis of Quasi-Monte Carlo methods,
to formally measure the degree of uniformity. We will see in section 4 that this allows our density
estimator to have near optimal convergence rate.
In summary, we highlight our contribution as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, our method is the first density estimation method that utilizes
Quasi-Monte Carlo technique in density estimation.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

