Hierarchical Clustering via Spreading Metrics
Aurko Roy1 and Sebastian Pokutta2
1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Email: aurko@gatech.edu
2
ISyE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Email: sebastian.pokutta@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
We study the cost function for hierarchical clusterings introduced by [16] where
hierarchies are treated as first-class objects rather than deriving their cost from
projections into flat clusters. It was also shown in [16] that a top-down algorithm
returns a hierarchical clustering of cost at most O (αn log n) times the cost of
the optimal hierarchical clustering, where αn is the approximation ratio of the
Sparsest Cut subroutine used. Thus using the best known approximation algorithm
for Sparsest Cut due to Arora-Rao-Vazirani,
the top-down algorithm returns a

3/2
hierarchical clustering of cost at most O log n times the cost of the optimal
solution. We improve this by giving an O(log n)-approximation algorithm for this
problem. Our main technical ingredients are a combinatorial characterization of
ultrametrics induced by this cost function, deriving an Integer Linear Programming
(ILP) formulation for this family of ultrametrics, and showing how to iteratively
round an LP relaxation of this formulation by using the idea of sphere growing
which has been extensively used in the context of graph partitioning. We also prove
that our algorithm returns an O(log n)-approximate hierarchical clustering for a
generalization of this cost function also studied in [16]. We also give constant
factor inapproximability results for this problem.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical clustering is an important method in cluster analysis where a data set is recursively
partitioned into clusters of successively smaller size. They are typically represented by rooted trees
where the root corresponds to the entire data set, the leaves correspond to individual data points and
the intermediate nodes correspond to a cluster of its descendant leaves. Such a hierarchy represents
several possible flat clusterings of the data at various levels of granularity; indeed every pruning of
this tree returns a possible clustering. Therefore in situations where the number of desired clusters is
not known beforehand, a hierarchical clustering scheme is often preferred to flat clustering.
The most popular algorithms for hierarchical clustering are bottoms-up agglomerative algorithms
like single linkage, average linkage and complete linkage. In terms of theoretical guarantees these
algorithms are known to correctly recover a ground truth clustering if the similarity function on the
data satisfies corresponding stability properties (see, e.g., [5]). Often, however, one wishes to think of
a good clustering as optimizing some kind of cost function rather than recovering a hidden “ground
truth”. This is the standard approach in the classical clustering setting where popular objectives are
k-means, k-median, min-sum and k-center (see Chapter 14, [23]). However as pointed out by [16]
for a lot of popular hierarchical clustering algorithms including linkage based algorithms, it is hard
to pinpoint explicitly the cost function that these algorithms are optimizing. Moreover, much of the
existing cost function based approaches towards hierarchical clustering evaluate a hierarchy based
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

