Graphical Time Warping for Joint Alignment of
Multiple Curves

Yizhi Wang
Virginia Tech
yzwang@vt.edu

David J. Miller
Pennsylvania State University
djmiller@engr.psu.edu

Yue Wang
Virginia Tech
yuewang@vt.edu

Kira Poskanzer
University of California, San Francisco
Kira.Poskanzer@ucsf.edu

Lin Tian
University of California, Davis
lintian@ucdavis.edu

Guoqiang Yu
Virginia Tech
yug@vt.edu

Abstract
Dynamic time warping (DTW) is a fundamental technique in time series analysis
for comparing one curve to another using a flexible time-warping function. However, it was designed to compare a single pair of curves. In many applications,
such as in metabolomics and image series analysis, alignment is simultaneously
needed for multiple pairs. Because the underlying warping functions are often
related, independent application of DTW to each pair is a sub-optimal solution.
Yet, it is largely unknown how to efficiently conduct a joint alignment with all
warping functions simultaneously considered, since any given warping function
is constrained by the others and dynamic programming cannot be applied. In
this paper, we show that the joint alignment problem can be transformed into a
network flow problem and thus can be exactly and efficiently solved by the max
flow algorithm, with a guarantee of global optimality. We name the proposed
approach graphical time warping (GTW), emphasizing the graphical nature of
the solution and that the dependency structure of the warping functions can be
represented by a graph. Modifications of DTW, such as windowing and weighting,
are readily derivable within GTW. We also discuss optimal tuning of parameters
and hyperparameters in GTW. We illustrate the power of GTW using both synthetic
data and a real case study of an astrocyte calcium movie.

1

Introduction

Time series, such as neural recordings, economic observations and biological imaging movies, are
ubiquitous, containing rich information about the temporal patterns of physical quantities under
certain conditions. Comparison of time series lies at the heart of many scientific questions. Due to
the time distortions, direct comparison of time series using e.g. Euclidean distance is problematic.
Dynamic time warping (DTW) is a powerful and popular technique for time series comparison
using flexible warping functions. DTW has been successful for various tasks, including querying,
classification, and clustering [1, 2, 3]. Although DTW is a mature approach, significant improvements
have been proposed over the years, such as derivative DTW [4], weighted DTW [5], curve pairs with
multiple dimensions [6], and extensions for large scale data mining [7].
However, DTW and all its variants consider the alignment of a single pair of time series, while in
many applications we encounter the task of aligning multiple pairs simultaneously. One might apply
DTW or its variants to each pair separately. However, very often, this is suboptimal because it ignores
the dependency structure between the multiple warping functions. For example, when analyzing time
lapse imaging data [8], we can consider the data as a collection of time series indexed by pixel. One
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

