Dialog-based Language Learning

Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research,
New York.
jase@fb.com

Abstract
A long-term goal of machine learning research is to build an intelligent dialog
agent. Most research in natural language understanding has focused on learning
from fixed training sets of labeled data, with supervision either at the word level
(tagging, parsing tasks) or sentence level (question answering, machine translation). This kind of supervision is not realistic of how humans learn, where language is both learned by, and used for, communication. In this work, we study
dialog-based language learning, where supervision is given naturally and implicitly in the response of the dialog partner during the conversation. We study this
setup in two domains: the bAbI dataset of [23] and large-scale question answering
from [3]. We evaluate a set of baseline learning strategies on these tasks, and show
that a novel model incorporating predictive lookahead is a promising approach for
learning from a teacher’s response. In particular, a surprising result is that it can
learn to answer questions correctly without any reward-based supervision at all.

1

Introduction

Many of machine learning’s successes have come from supervised learning, which typically involves
employing annotators to label large quantities of data per task. However, humans can learn by acting
and learning from the consequences of (i.e, the feedback from) their actions. When humans act in
dialogs (i.e., make speech utterances) the feedback is from other human’s responses, which hence
contain very rich information. This is perhaps most pronounced in a student/teacher scenario where
the teacher provides positive feedback for successful communication and corrections for unsuccessful ones [8, 22]. However, in general any reply from a dialog partner, teacher or not, is likely to
contain an informative training signal for learning how to use language in subsequent conversations.
In this paper we explore whether we can train machine learning models to learn from dialogs. The
ultimate goal is to be able to develop an intelligent dialog agent that can learn while conducting conversations. To do that it needs to learn from feedback that is supplied as natural language. However,
most machine learning tasks in the natural language processing literature are not of this form: they
are either hand labeled at the word level (part of speech tagging, named entity recognition), segment
(chunking) or sentence level (question answering) by labelers. Subsequently, learning algorithms
have been developed to learn from that kind of supervision. We therefore need to develop evaluation
datasets for the dialog-based language learning setting, as well as developing models and algorithms
able to learn in such a regime.
The contribution of the present work is thus:
• We introduce a set of tasks that model natural feedback from a teacher and hence assess the
feasibility of dialog-based language learning.
• We evaluate some baseline models on this data, comparing to standard supervised learning.
• We introduce a novel forward prediction model, whereby the learner tries to predict the
teacher’s replies to its actions, yielding promising results, even with no reward signal at all.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

