Adaptive Maximization of Pointwise Submodular
Functions With Budget Constraint

Nguyen Viet Cuong1
Huan Xu2
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, vcn22@cam.ac.uk
2
Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
huan.xu@isye.gatech.edu
1

Abstract
We study the worst-case adaptive optimization problem with budget constraint that
is useful for modeling various practical applications in artificial intelligence and
machine learning. We investigate the near-optimality of greedy algorithms for this
problem with both modular and non-modular cost functions. In both cases, we
prove that two simple greedy algorithms are not near-optimal but the best between
them is near-optimal if the utility function satisfies pointwise submodularity and
pointwise cost-sensitive submodularity respectively. This implies a combined
algorithm that is near-optimal with respect to the optimal algorithm that uses half
of the budget. We discuss applications of our theoretical results and also report
experiments comparing the greedy algorithms on the active learning problem.

1

Introduction

Consider problems where we need to adaptively make a sequence of decisions while taking into
account the outcomes of previous decisions. For instance, in the sensor placement problem [1, 2], one
needs to sequentially place sensors at some pre-specified locations, taking into account the working
conditions of previously deployed sensors. The aim is to cover as large an area as possible while
keeping the cost of placement within a given budget. As another example, in the pool-based active
learning problem [3, 4], one needs to sequentially select unlabeled examples and query their labels,
taking into account the previously observed labels. The aim is to learn a good classifier while ensuring
that the cost of querying does not exceed some given budget.
These problems can usually be considered under the framework of adaptive optimization with budget
constraint. In this framework, the objective is to find a policy for making decisions that maximizes the
value of some utility function. With a budget constraint, such a policy must have a cost no higher than
the budget given by the problem. Adaptive optimization with budget constraint has been previously
studied in the average case [2, 5, 6] and worst case [7]. In this paper, we focus on this problem in the
worst case.
In contrast to previous works on adaptive optimization with budget constraint (both in the average
and worst cases) [2, 8], we consider not only modular cost functions but also general, possibly
non-modular, cost functions on sets of decisions. For example, in the sensor placement problem, the
cost of a set of deployed sensors may be the weight of the minimum spanning tree connecting those
sensors, where the weight of the edge between any two sensors is the distance between them.1 In
this case, the cost of deploying a sensor is not fixed, but depends on the set of previously deployed
sensors. This setting allows the cost function to be non-modular, and thus is more general than the
setting in previous works, which usually assume the cost to be modular.
1
This cost function is reasonable in practice if we think of it as the minimal necessary communication cost to
keep the sensors connected (rather than the placement cost).

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

