Memory-Efficient Backpropagation Through Time

Audrūnas Gruslys
Google DeepMind
audrunas@google.com

Rémi Munos
Google DeepMind
munos@google.com

Marc Lanctot
Google DeepMind
lanctot@google.com

Ivo Danihelka
Google DeepMind
danihelka@google.com

Alex Graves
Google DeepMind
gravesa@google.com

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to reduce memory consumption of the backpropagation through time (BPTT) algorithm when training recurrent neural networks
(RNNs). Our approach uses dynamic programming to balance a trade-off between
caching of intermediate results and recomputation. The algorithm is capable of
tightly fitting within almost any user-set memory budget while finding an optimal
execution policy minimizing the computational cost. Computational devices have
limited memory capacity and maximizing a computational performance given a
fixed memory budget is a practical use-case. We provide asymptotic computational
upper bounds for various regimes. The algorithm is particularly effective for long
sequences. For sequences of length 1000, our algorithm saves 95% of memory
usage while using only one third more time per iteration than the standard BPTT.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are artificial neural networks where connections between units
can form cycles. They are often used for sequence mapping problems, as they can propagate hidden
state information from early parts of the sequence back to later points. LSTM [9] in particular
is an RNN architecture that has excelled in sequence generation [3, 13, 4], speech recognition
[5] and reinforcement learning [12, 10] settings. Other successful RNN architectures include the
differentiable neural computer (DNC) [6], DRAW network [8], and Neural Transducers [7].
Backpropagation Through Time algorithm (BPTT) [11, 14] is typically used to obtain gradients
during training. One important problem is the large memory consumption required by the BPTT.
This is especially troublesome when using Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) due to the limitations
of GPU memory.
Memory budget is typically known in advance. Our algorithm balances the tradeoff between memorization and recomputation by finding an optimal memory usage policy which minimizes the total
computational cost for any fixed memory budget. The algorithm exploits the fact that the same
memory slots may be reused multiple times. The idea to use dynamic programming to find a provably
optimal policy is the main contribution of this paper.
Our approach is largely architecture agnostic and works with most recurrent neural networks. Being
able to fit within limited memory devices such as GPUs will typically compensate for any increase in
computational cost.

2

Background and related work

In this section, we describe the key terms and relevant previous work for memory-saving in RNNs.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

