Bootstrap Model Aggregation for Distributed
Statistical Learning

Jun Han
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
jun.han.gr@dartmouth.edu

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
qiang.liu@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
In distributed, or privacy-preserving learning, we are often given a set of probabilistic models estimated from different local repositories, and asked to combine them
into a single model that gives efficient statistical estimation. A simple method is to
linearly average the parameters of the local models, which, however, tends to be
degenerate or not applicable on non-convex models, or models with different parameter dimensions. One more practical strategy is to generate bootstrap samples from
the local models, and then learn a joint model based on the combined bootstrap
set. Unfortunately, the bootstrap procedure introduces additional noise and can
significantly deteriorate the performance. In this work, we propose two variance
reduction methods to correct the bootstrap noise, including a weighted M-estimator
that is both statistically efficient and practically powerful. Both theoretical and
empirical analysis is provided to demonstrate our methods.

1

Introduction

Modern data science applications increasingly involve learning complex probabilistic models over
massive datasets. In many cases, the datasets are distributed into multiple machines at different
locations, between which communication is expensive or restricted; this can be either because the
data volume is too large to store or process in a single machine, or due to privacy constraints as
these in healthcare or financial systems. There has been a recent growing interest in developing
communication-efficient algorithms for probabilistic learning with distributed datasets; see e.g., Boyd
et al. (2011); Zhang et al. (2012); Dekel et al. (2012); Liu and Ihler (2014); Rosenblatt and Nadler
(2014) and reference therein.
This work focuses on a one-shot approach for distributed learning, in which we first learn a set
of local models from local machines, and then combine them in a fusion center to form a single
model that integrates all the information in the local models. This approach is highly efficient in
both computation and communication costs, but casts a challenge in designing statistically efficient
combination strategies. Many studies have been focused on a simple linear averaging method that
linearly averages the parameters of the local models (e.g., Zhang et al., 2012, 2013; Rosenblatt
and Nadler, 2014); although nearly optimal asymptotic error rates can be achieved, this simple
method tends to degenerate in practical scenarios for models with non-convex log-likelihood or
non-identifiable parameters (such as latent variable models, and neural models), and is not applicable
at all for models with non-additive parameters (e.g., when the parameters have discrete or categorical
values, or the parameter dimensions of the local models are different).
A better strategy that overcomes all these practical limitations of linear averaging is the KL-averaging
method (Liu and Ihler, 2014; Merugu and Ghosh, 2003), which finds a model that minimizes the
sum of Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to all the local models. In this way, we directly combine
the models, instead of the parameters. The exact KL-averaging is not computationally tractable
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

