Fast Mixing Markov Chains for Strongly Rayleigh
Measures, DPPs, and Constrained Sampling
Chengtao Li
MIT
ctli@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
MIT
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We study probability measures induced by set functions with constraints. Such
measures arise in a variety of real-world settings, where prior knowledge, resource
limitations, or other pragmatic considerations impose constraints. We consider
the task of rapidly sampling from such constrained measures, and develop fast
Markov chain samplers for them. Our first main result is for MCMC sampling
from Strongly Rayleigh (SR) measures, for which we present sharp polynomial
bounds on the mixing time. As a corollary, this result yields a fast mixing sampler
for Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs), yielding (to our knowledge) the first
provably fast MCMC sampler for DPPs since their inception over four decades
ago. Beyond SR measures, we develop MCMC samplers for probabilistic models
with hard constraints and identify sufficient conditions under which their chains
mix rapidly. We illustrate our claims by empirically verifying the dependence of
mixing times on the key factors governing our theoretical bounds.

1

Introduction

Distributions over subsets of objects arise in a variety of machine learning applications. They occur
as discrete probabilistic models [5, 20, 28, 36, 38] in computer vision, computational biology and
natural language processing. They also occur in combinatorial bandit learning [9], as well as in recent
applications to neural network compression [32] and matrix approximations [29].
Yet, practical use of discrete distributions can be hampered by computational challenges due to
their combinatorial nature. Consider for instance sampling, a task fundamental to learning, optimization, and approximation. Without further restrictions, efficient sampling can be impossible
[13]. Several lines of work thus focus on identifying tractable sub-classes, which in turn have had
wide-ranging impacts on modeling and algorithms. Important examples include the Ising model [22],
matchings (and the matrix permanent) [23], spanning trees (and graph algorithms) [2, 6, 16, 37],
and Determinantal Point Processes (D PPs) that have gained substantial attention in machine learning [3, 17, 24, 26, 28, 30].
In this work, we extend the classes of tractable discrete distributions. Specifically, we consider
the following two classes of distributions on 2V (the set of subsets of a ground set V = [N ] :=
{1, . . . , N }): (1) strongly Rayleigh (SR) measures, and (2) distributions with certain cardinality or
matroid-constraints. We analyze Markov chains for sampling from both classes. As a byproduct of
our analysis, we answer a long-standing question about rapid mixing of MCMC sampling from DPPs.
SR measures are defined by strong negative correlations, and have recently emerged as valuable
tools in the design of algorithms [2], in the theory of polynomials and combinatorics [4], and in
machine learning through D PPs, a special case of SR distributions. Our first main result is the first
polynomial-time sampling algorithm that applies to all SR measures (and thus a fortiori to D PPs).
General distributions on 2V with constrained support (case (2) above) typically arise upon incorporating prior knowledge or resource constraints. We focus on resource constraints such as bounds on
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

