Learning Additive Exponential Family Graphical
Models via ℓ2,1-norm Regularized M-Estimation
Xiao-Tong Yuan† Ping Li‡§ Tong Zhang‡ Qingshan Liu† Guangcan Liu†
†B-DAT Lab, Nanjing University of Info. Sci.&Tech.
Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210044, China
‡Depart. of Statistics and §Depart. of Computer Science, Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA
{xtyuan,qsliu, gcliu}@nuist.edu.cn, {pingli,tzhang}@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We investigate a subclass of exponential family graphical models of which the
sufficient statistics are defined by arbitrary additive forms. We propose two ℓ2,1 norm regularized maximum likelihood estimators to learn the model parameters
from i.i.d. samples. The first one is a joint MLE estimator which estimates all
the parameters simultaneously. The second one is a node-wise conditional MLE
estimator which estimates the parameters for each node individually. For both
estimators, statistical analysis shows that under mild conditions the extra flexibility gained by the additive exponential family models comes at almost no cost of
statistical efficiency. A Monte-Carlo approximation method is developed to efficiently optimize the proposed estimators. The advantages of our estimators over
Gaussian graphical models and Nonparanormal estimators are demonstrated on
synthetic and real data sets.

1

Introduction

As an important class of statistical models for exploring the interrelationship among a large number
of random variables, undirected graphical models (UGMs) have enjoyed popularity in a wide range
of scientific and engineering domains, including statistical physics, computer vision, data mining,
and computational biology. Let X = [X1 , ..., Xp ]⊤ be a p-dimensional random vector with each
variable Xi taking values in a set X . Suppose G = (V, E) is an undirected graph consists of a set
of vertices V = {1, ..., p} and a set of unordered pairs E representing edges between the vertices.
The pairwise UGMs over X corresponding to G can be written as the following exponential family
distribution:



∑
∑
(1)
θs φs (Xs ) +
θst ϕst (Xs , Xt ) .
P(X; θ) ∝ exp


s∈V

(s,t)∈E

In such a pairwise model, (Xs , Xt ) are conditionally independent (given the rest of the variables)
if and only if the weight θst is zero. The most popular instances of pairwise UGMs are Gaussian
graphical models (GGMs) [19, 2] for real-valued random variables and Ising (or Potts) models [15]
for binary or finite nominal discrete random variables. More broadly, in order to derive multivariate graphical models from univariate exponential family distributions (such as the Gaussian, binomial/multinomial, Poisson, exponential distributions, etc.), the exponential family graphical models
(EFGMs) [27, 21] were proposed as a unified framework to learn UGMs with node-wise conditional
distributions arising from generalized linear models (GLMs).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

