Threshold Learning for Optimal Decision Making

Nathan F. Lepora
Department of Engineering Mathematics, University of Bristol, UK
n.lepora@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Decision making under uncertainty is commonly modelled as a process of competitive stochastic evidence accumulation to threshold (the drift-diffusion model).
However, it is unknown how animals learn these decision thresholds. We examine
threshold learning by constructing a reward function that averages over many trials
to Wald’s cost function that defines decision optimality. These rewards are highly
stochastic and hence challenging to optimize, which we address in two ways: first,
a simple two-factor reward-modulated learning rule derived from Williams’ REINFORCE method for neural networks; and second, Bayesian optimization of the
reward function with a Gaussian process. Bayesian optimization converges in fewer
trials than REINFORCE but is slower computationally with greater variance. The
REINFORCE method is also a better model of acquisition behaviour in animals
and a similar learning rule has been proposed for modelling basal ganglia function.

1

Introduction

The standard view of perceptual decision making across psychology and neuroscience is of a
competitive process that accumulates sensory evidence for the choices up to a threshold (bound)
that triggers the decision [1, 2, 3]. While there is debate about whether humans and animals are
‘optimal’, nonetheless the standard psychological model of this process for two-alternative forced
choices (the drift-diffusion model [1]) is a special case of an optimal statistical test for selecting
between two hypotheses (the sequential probability ratio test, or SPRT [4]). Formally, this sequential
test optimizes a cost function linear in the decision time and type I/II errors averaged over many
trials [4]. Thus, under broad assumptions about the decision process, the optimal behaviour is simply
to stop gathering data after reaching a threshold independent of the data history and collection time.
However, there remains the problem of how to set these decision thresholds. While there is consensus
that an animal tunes its decision making by maximizing mean reward ([3, Chapter 5],[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]),
the learning rule is not known. More generally, it is unknown how an animal tunes its propensity
towards making choices while also tuning its overall speed-accuracy balance.
Here we show that optimization of the decision thresholds can be considered as reinforcement learning
over single trial rewards derived from Wald’s trial averaged cost function considered previously.
However, these single trial rewards are highly stochastic and their average has a broad flat peak
(Fig. 1B), constituting a challenging optimization problem that will defeat standard methods. We
address this challenge by proposing two distinct ways to learn the decision thresholds, with one
approach closer to learning rules from neuroscience and the other to machine learning. The first
approach is a learning rule derived from Williams’ REINFORCE algorithm for training neural
networks [11], which we here combine with an appropriate policy for controlling the thresholds for
optimal decision making. The second is a Bayesian optimization method that fits a Gaussian process
to the reward function and samples according to the mean reward and reward variance [12, 13, 14].
We find that both methods can successfully learn the thresholds, as validated by comparison against
an exhaustive optimization of the reward function. Bayesian optimization converges in fewer trials
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

