The Forget-me-not Process
Kieran Milan† , Joel Veness† , James Kirkpatrick, Demis Hassabis
Google DeepMind
{kmilan,aixi,kirkpatrick,demishassabis}@google.com
Anna Koop, Michael Bowling
University of Alberta
{anna,bowling}@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract
We introduce the Forget-me-not Process, an efficient, non-parametric metaalgorithm for online probabilistic sequence prediction for piecewise stationary,
repeating sources. Our method works by taking a Bayesian approach to partitioning a stream of data into postulated task-specific segments, while simultaneously
building a model for each task. We provide regret guarantees with respect to piecewise stationary data sources under the logarithmic loss, and validate the method
empirically across a range of sequence prediction and task identification problems.

1

Introduction

Modeling non-stationary temporal data sources is a fundamental problem in signal processing,
statistical data compression, quantitative finance and model-based reinforcement learning. One
widely-adopted and successful approach has been to design meta-algorithms that automatically
generalize existing stationary learning algorithms to various non-stationary settings. In this paper
we introduce the Forget-me-not Process, a probabilistic meta-algorithm that provides the ability to
model the class of memory bounded, piecewise-repeating sources given an arbitrary, probabilistic
memory bounded stationary model.
The most well studied class of probabilistic meta-algorithms are those for piecewise stationary
sources, which model data sequences with abruptly changing statistics. Almost all meta-algorithms for
abruptly changing sources work by performing Bayesian model averaging over a class of hypothesized
temporal partitions. To the best of our knowledge, the earliest demonstration of this fundamental
technique was [21], for the purpose of data compression; closely related techniques have gained
popularity within the machine learning community for change point detection [1] and have been
proposed by neuroscientists as a mechanism by which humans deal with open-ended environments
composed of multiple distinct tasks [4–6]. One of the reasons for the popularity of this approach is
that the temporal structure can be exploited to make exact Bayesian inference tractable via dynamic
programming; in particular inference over all possible temporal partitions of n data points results in
an algorithm of O(n2 ) time complexity and O(n) space complexity [21, 1]. Many variants have been
proposed in the literature [20, 11, 10, 17], which trade off predictive accuracy for improved time and
space complexity; in particular the Partition Tree Weighting meta-algorithm [17] has O(n log n) time
and O(log n) space complexity, and has been shown empirically to exhibit superior performance
versus other low-complexity alternatives on piecewise stationary sources.
A key limitation of these aforementioned techniques is that they can perform poorly when there
exist multiple segments of data that are similarly distributed. For example, consider data generated
according to the schedule depicted in Figure 1. For all these methods, once a change-point occurs, the
base (stationary) model is invoked from scratch, even if the task repeats, which is clearly undesirable
† indicates joint first authorship.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

