Residual Networks Behave Like Ensembles of
Relatively Shallow Networks

Andreas Veit
Michael Wilber
Serge Belongie
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech
Cornell University
{av443, mjw285, sjb344}@cornell.edu

Abstract
In this work we propose a novel interpretation of residual networks showing that
they can be seen as a collection of many paths of differing length. Moreover,
residual networks seem to enable very deep networks by leveraging only the short
paths during training. To support this observation, we rewrite residual networks as
an explicit collection of paths. Unlike traditional models, paths through residual
networks vary in length. Further, a lesion study reveals that these paths show
ensemble-like behavior in the sense that they do not strongly depend on each other.
Finally, and most surprising, most paths are shorter than one might expect, and
only the short paths are needed during training, as longer paths do not contribute
any gradient. For example, most of the gradient in a residual network with 110
layers comes from paths that are only 10-34 layers deep. Our results reveal one
of the key characteristics that seem to enable the training of very deep networks:
Residual networks avoid the vanishing gradient problem by introducing short paths
which can carry gradient throughout the extent of very deep networks.

1

Introduction

Most modern computer vision systems follow a familiar architecture, processing inputs from lowlevel features up to task specific high-level features. Recently proposed residual networks [5, 6]
challenge this conventional view in three ways. First, they introduce identity skip-connections that
bypass residual layers, allowing data to flow from any layers directly to any subsequent layers. This
is in stark contrast to the traditional strictly sequential pipeline. Second, skip connections give rise to
networks that are two orders of magnitude deeper than previous models, with as many as 1202 layers.
This is contrary to architectures like AlexNet [13] and even biological systems [17] that can capture
complex concepts within half a dozen layers.1 Third, in initial experiments, we observe that removing
single layers from residual networks at test time does not noticeably affect their performance. This
is surprising because removing a layer from a traditional architecture such as VGG [18] leads to a
dramatic loss in performance.
In this work we investigate the impact of these differences. To address the influence of identity skipconnections, we introduce the unraveled view. This novel representation shows residual networks
can be viewed as a collection of many paths instead of a single deep network. Further, the perceived
resilience of residual networks raises the question whether the paths are dependent on each other or
whether they exhibit a degree of redundancy. To find out, we perform a lesion study. The results show
ensemble-like behavior in the sense that removing paths from residual networks by deleting layers or
corrupting paths by reordering layers only has a modest and smooth impact on performance. Finally,
we investigate the depth of residual networks. Unlike traditional models, paths through residual
networks vary in length. The distribution of path lengths follows a binomial distribution, meaning
1

Making the common assumption that a layer in a neural network corresponds to a cortical area.

