Learning brain regions via large-scale online
structured sparse dictionary-learning

Elvis Dohmatob, Arthur Mensch, Gael Varoquaux, Bertrand Thirion
firstname.lastname@inria.fr
Parietal Team, INRIA / CEA, Neurospin, Université Paris-Saclay, France

Abstract
We propose a multivariate online dictionary-learning method for obtaining decompositions of brain images with structured and sparse components (aka atoms).
Sparsity is to be understood in the usual sense: the dictionary atoms are constrained
to contain mostly zeros. This is imposed via an `1 -norm constraint. By "structured", we mean that the atoms are piece-wise smooth and compact, thus making up
blobs, as opposed to scattered patterns of activation. We propose to use a Sobolev
(Laplacian) penalty to impose this type of structure. Combining the two penalties,
we obtain decompositions that properly delineate brain structures from functional
images. This non-trivially extends the online dictionary-learning work of Mairal et
al. (2010), at the price of only a factor of 2 or 3 on the overall running time. Just
like the Mairal et al. (2010) reference method, the online nature of our proposed
algorithm allows it to scale to arbitrarily sized datasets. Preliminary xperiments
on brain data show that our proposed method extracts structured and denoised
dictionaries that are more intepretable and better capture inter-subject variability in
small medium, and large-scale regimes alike, compared to state-of-the-art models.

1

Introduction

In neuro-imaging, inter-subject variability is often handled as a statistical residual and discarded. Yet
there is evidence that it displays structure and contains important information. Univariate models are
ineffective both computationally and statistically due to the large number of voxels compared to the
number of subjects. Likewise, statistical analysis of weak effects on medical images often relies on
defining regions of interests (ROIs). For instance, pharmacology with Positron Emission Tomography
(PET) often studies metabolic processes in specific organ sub-parts that are defined from anatomy.
Population-level tests of tissue properties, such as diffusion, or simply their density, are performed on
ROIs adapted to the spatial impact of the pathology of interest. Also, in functional brain imaging,
e.g function magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), ROIs must be adapted to the cognitive process
under study, and are often defined by the very activation elicited by a closely related process [18].
ROIs can boost statistical power by reducing multiple comparisons that plague image-based statistical
testing. If they are defined to match spatially the differences to detect, they can also improve the
signal-to-noise ratio by averaging related signals. However, the crux of the problem is how to define
these ROIs in a principled way. Indeed, standard approaches to region definition imply a segmentation
step. Segmenting structures in individual statistical maps, as in fMRI, typically yields meaningful
units, but is limited by the noise inherent to these maps. Relying on a different imaging modality hits
cross-modality correspondence problems.
Sketch of our contributions. In this manuscript, we propose to use the variability of the statistical
maps across the population to define regions. This idea is reminiscent of clustering approaches, that
have been employed to define spatial units for quantitative analysis of information as diverse as brain
fiber tracking, brain activity, brain structure, or even imaging-genetics. See [21, 14] and references
therein. The key idea is to group together features –voxels of an image, vertices on a mesh, fiber tracts–
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

