SDP Relaxation with Randomized Rounding for
Energy Disaggregation
Kiarash Shaloudegi
Imperial College London
k.shaloudegi16@imperial.ac.uk
Csaba Szepesvári
University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

András György
Imperial College London
a.gyorgy@imperial.ac.uk
Wilsun Xu
University of Alberta
wxu@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We develop a scalable, computationally efficient method for the task of energy
disaggregation for home appliance monitoring. In this problem the goal is to
estimate the energy consumption of each appliance over time based on the total
energy-consumption signal of a household. The current state of the art is to model
the problem as inference in factorial HMMs, and use quadratic programming to
find an approximate solution to the resulting quadratic integer program. Here we
take a more principled approach, better suited to integer programming problems,
and find an approximate optimum by combining convex semidefinite relaxations
randomized rounding, as well as a scalable ADMM method that exploits the special
structure of the resulting semidefinite program. Simulation results both in synthetic
and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method.

1

Introduction

Energy efficiency is becoming one of the most important issues in our society. Identifying the
energy consumption of individual electrical appliances in homes can raise awareness of power
consumption and lead to significant saving in utility bills. Detailed feedback about the power
consumption of individual appliances helps energy consumers to identify potential areas for energy
savings, and increases their willingness to invest in more efficient products. Notifying home owners
of accidentally running stoves, ovens, etc., may not only result in savings but also improves safety.
Energy disaggregation or non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) uses data from utility smart meters
to separate individual load consumptions (i.e., a load signal) from the total measured power (i.e., the
mixture of the signals) in households.
The bulk of the research in NILM has mostly concentrated on applying different data mining and
pattern recognition methods to track the footprint of each appliance in total power measurements.
Several techniques, such as artificial neural networks (ANN) [Prudenzi, 2002, Chang et al., 2012,
Liang et al., 2010], deep neural networks [Kelly and Knottenbelt, 2015], k-nearest neighbor (k-NN)
[Figueiredo et al., 2012, Weiss et al., 2012], sparse coding [Kolter et al., 2010], or ad-hoc heuristic
methods [Dong et al., 2012] have been employed. Recent works, rather than turning electrical events
into features fed into classifiers, consider the temporal structure of the data[Zia et al., 2011, Kolter
and Jaakkola, 2012, Kim et al., 2011, Zhong et al., 2014, Egarter et al., 2015, Guo et al., 2015],
resulting in state-of-the-art performance [Kolter and Jaakkola, 2012]. These works usually model the
individual appliances by independent hidden Markov models (HMMs), which leads to a factorial
HMM (FHMM) model describing the total consumption.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

