A Minimax Approach to Supervised Learning

Farzan Farnia∗
farnia@stanford.edu

David Tse∗
dntse@stanford.edu

Abstract
Given a task of predicting Y from X, a loss function L, and a set of probability
distributions Γ on (X, Y ), what is the optimal decision rule minimizing the worstcase expected loss over Γ? In this paper, we address this question by introducing
a generalization of the maximum entropy principle. Applying this principle to
sets of distributions with marginal on X constrained to be the empirical marginal,
we provide a minimax interpretation of the maximum likelihood problem over
generalized linear models as well as some popular regularization schemes. For
quadratic and logarithmic loss functions we revisit well-known linear and logistic
regression models. Moreover, for the 0-1 loss we derive a classifier which we
call the minimax SVM. The minimax SVM minimizes the worst-case expected
0-1 loss over the proposed Γ by solving a tractable optimization problem. We
perform several numerical experiments to show the power of the minimax SVM in
outperforming the SVM.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning, the task of inferring a function that predicts a target Y from a feature vector
X = (X1 , . . . , Xd ) by using n labeled training samples {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}, has been a problem
of central interest in machine learning. Given the underlying distribution P̃X,Y , the optimal prediction
rules had long been studied and formulated in the statistics literature. However, the advent of highdimensional problems raised this important question: What would be a good prediction rule when we
do not have enough samples to estimate the underlying distribution?
To understand the difficulty of learning in high-dimensional settings, consider a genome-based
classification task where we seek to predict a binary trait of interest Y from an observation of
3, 000, 000 SNPs, each of which can be considered as a discrete variable Xi ∈ {0, 1, 2}. Hence, to
estimate the underlying distribution we need O(33,000,000 ) samples.
With no possibility of estimating the underlying P̃ in such problems, several approaches have been
proposed to deal with high-dimensional settings. The standard approach in statistical learning
theory is empirical risk minimization (ERM) [1]. ERM learns the prediction rule by minimizing an
approximated loss under the empirical distribution of samples. However, to avoid overfitting, ERM
restricts the set of allowable decision rules to a class of functions with limited complexity measured
through its VC-dimension.
This paper focuses on a complementary approach to ERM where one can learn the prediction rule
through minimizing a decision rule’s worst-case loss over a larger set of distributions Γ(P̂ ) centered
at the empirical distribution P̂ . In other words, instead of restricting the class of decision rules, we
consider and evaluate all possible decision rules, but based on a more stringent criterion that they will
have to perform well over all distributions in Γ(P̂ ). As seen in Figure 1, this minimax approach can
be broken into three main steps:
1. We compute the empirical distribution P̂ from the data,
∗

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

