Unsupervised Learning of 3D Structure from Images
Danilo Jimenez Rezende*
danilor@google.com

S. M. Ali Eslami*
aeslami@google.com

Peter Battaglia*
peterbattaglia@google.com

Shakir Mohamed*
shakir@google.com

Max Jaderberg*
jaderberg@google.com

Nicolas Heess*
heess@google.com
* Google DeepMind

Abstract
A key goal of computer vision is to recover the underlying 3D structure that gives
rise to 2D observations of the world. If endowed with 3D understanding, agents
can abstract away from the complexity of the rendering process to form stable,
disentangled representations of scene elements. In this paper we learn strong
deep generative models of 3D structures, and recover these structures from 2D
images via probabilistic inference. We demonstrate high-quality samples and
report log-likelihoods on several datasets, including ShapeNet [2], and establish
the first benchmarks in the literature. We also show how these models and their
inference networks can be trained jointly, end-to-end, and directly from 2D images
without any use of ground-truth 3D labels. This demonstrates for the first time
the feasibility of learning to infer 3D representations of the world in a purely
unsupervised manner.

1

Introduction

We live in a three-dimensional world, yet our observations of it are typically in the form of twodimensional projections that we capture with our eyes or with cameras. A key goal of computer
vision is that of recovering the underlying 3D structure that gives rise to these 2D observations.
The 2D projection of a scene is a complex function of the attributes and positions of the camera, lights
and objects that make up the scene. If endowed with 3D understanding, agents can abstract away
from this complexity to form stable, disentangled representations, e.g., recognizing that a chair is a
chair whether seen from above or from the side, under different lighting conditions, or under partial
occlusion. Moreover, such representations would allow agents to determine downstream properties
of these elements more easily and with less training, e.g., enabling intuitive physical reasoning about
the stability of the chair, planning a path to approach it, or figuring out how best to pick it up or sit on
it. Models of 3D representations also have applications in scene completion, denoising, compression
and generative virtual reality.
There have been many attempts at performing this kind of reasoning, dating back to the earliest years
of the field. Despite this, progress has been slow for several reasons: First, the task is inherently illposed. Objects always appear under self-occlusion, and there are an infinite number of 3D structures
that could give rise to a particular 2D observation. The natural way to address this problem is by
learning statistical models that recognize which 3D structures are likely and which are not. Second,
even when endowed with such a statistical model, inference is intractable. This includes the sub-tasks
of mapping image pixels to 3D representations, detecting and establishing correspondences between
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

