Rényi Divergence Variational Inference

Yingzhen Li
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
yl494@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces the variational Rényi bound (VR) that extends traditional variational inference to Rényi’s α-divergences. This new family of variational methods
unifies a number of existing approaches, and enables a smooth interpolation from
the evidence lower-bound to the log (marginal) likelihood that is controlled by the
value of α that parametrises the divergence. The reparameterization trick, Monte
Carlo approximation and stochastic optimisation methods are deployed to obtain a
tractable and unified framework for optimisation. We further consider negative α
values and propose a novel variational inference method as a new special case in
the proposed framework. Experiments on Bayesian neural networks and variational
auto-encoders demonstrate the wide applicability of the VR bound.

1

Introduction

Approximate inference, that is approximating posterior distributions and likelihood functions, is at the
core of modern probabilistic machine learning. This paper focuses on optimisation-based approximate
inference algorithms, popular examples of which include variational inference (VI), variational Bayes
(VB) [1, 2] and expectation propagation (EP) [3, 4]. Historically, VI has received more attention
compared to other approaches, although EP can be interpreted as iteratively minimising a set of local
divergences [5]. This is mainly because VI has elegant and useful theoretical properties such as the
fact that it proposes a lower-bound of the log-model evidence. Such a lower-bound can serve as
a surrogate to both maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of the hyper-parameters and posterior
approximation by Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence minimisation.
Recent advances of approximate inference follow three major trends. First, scalable methods,
e.g. stochastic variational inference (SVI) [6] and stochastic expectation propagation (SEP) [7, 8],
have been developed for datasets comprising millions of datapoints. Recent approaches [9, 10, 11]
have also applied variational methods to coordinate parallel updates arising from computations
performed on chunks of data. Second, Monte Carlo methods and black-box inference techniques have
been deployed to assist variational methods, e.g. see [12, 13, 14, 15] for VI and [16] for EP. They all
proposed ascending the Monte Carlo approximated variational bounds to the log-likelihood using
noisy gradients computed with automatic differentiation tools. Third, tighter variational lower-bounds
have been proposed for (approximate) MLE. The importance weighted auto-encoder (IWAE) [17]
improved upon the variational auto-encoder (VAE) [18, 19] framework, by providing tighter lowerbound approximations to the log-likelihood using importance sampling. These recent developments
are rather separated and little work has been done to understand their connections.
In this paper we try to provide a unified framework from an energy function perspective that
encompasses a number of recent advances in variational methods, and we hope our effort could
potentially motivate new algorithms in the future. This is done by extending traditional VI to Rényi’s
α-divergence [20], a rich family that includes many well-known divergences as special cases. After
reviewing useful properties of Rényi divergences and the VI framework, we make the following
contributions:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

