Estimating the Size of a Large Network and its
Communities from a Random Sample

1

Lin Chen1,2 , Amin Karbasi1,2 , Forrest W. Crawford2,3
Department of Electrical Engineering, 2 Yale Institute for Network Science,
3
Department of Biostatistics, Yale University
{lin.chen, amin.karbasi, forrest.crawford}@yale.edu

Abstract
Most real-world networks are too large to be measured or studied directly and
there is substantial interest in estimating global network properties from smaller
sub-samples. One of the most important global properties is the number of vertices/nodes in the network. Estimating the number of vertices in a large network is a
major challenge in computer science, epidemiology, demography, and intelligence
analysis. In this paper we consider a population random graph G = (V, E) from the
stochastic block model (SBM) with K communities/blocks. A sample is obtained
by randomly choosing a subset W ⊆ V and letting G(W ) be the induced subgraph
in G of the vertices in W . In addition to G(W ), we observe the total degree of
each sampled vertex and its block membership. Given this partial information, we
propose an efficient PopULation Size Estimation algorithm, called P ULSE, that
accurately estimates the size of the whole population as well as the size of each
community. To support our theoretical analysis, we perform an exhaustive set of
experiments to study the effects of sample size, K, and SBM model parameters
on the accuracy of the estimates. The experimental results also demonstrate that
P ULSE significantly outperforms a widely-used method called the network scale-up
estimator in a wide variety of scenarios.

1

Introduction

Many real-world networks cannot be studied directly because they are obscured in some way, are too
large, or are too difficult to measure. There is therefore a great deal of interest in estimating properties
of large networks via sub-samples [15, 5]. One of the most important properties of a large network
is the number of vertices it contains. Unfortunately census-like enumeration of all the vertices in a
network is often impossible, so researchers must try to learn about the size of real-world networks
by sampling smaller components. In addition to the size of the total network, there is great interest
in estimating the size of different communities or sub-groups from a sample of a network. Many
real-world networks exhibit community structure, where nodes in the same community have denser
connections than those in different communities [10, 18]. In the following examples, we describe
network size estimation problems in which only a small subgraph of a larger network is observed.
Social networks. The social and economic value of an online social network (e.g. Facebook,
Instagram, Twitter) is closely related to the number of users the service has. When a social networking
service does not reveal the true number of users, economists, marketers, shareholders, or other groups
may wish to estimate the number of people who use the service based on a sub-sample [4].
World Wide Web. Pages on the World-Wide Web can be classified into several categories (e.g.
academic, commercial, media, government, etc.). Pages in the same category tend to have more
connections. Computer scientists have developed crawling methods for obtaining a sub-network of
web pages, along with their hyperlinks to other unknown pages. Using the crawled sub-network and
hyperlinks, they can estimate the number of pages of a certain category [17, 16, 21, 13, 19].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

