Fast recovery from a union of subspaces
Chinmay Hegde
Iowa State University

Piotr Indyk
MIT

Ludwig Schmidt
MIT

Abstract
We address the problem of recovering a high-dimensional but structured vector
from linear observations in a general setting where the vector can come from an
arbitrary union of subspaces. This setup includes well-studied problems such as
compressive sensing and low-rank matrix recovery. We show how to design more
efficient algorithms for the union-of-subspace recovery problem by using approximate projections. Instantiating our general framework for the low-rank matrix
recovery problem gives the fastest provable running time for an algorithm with
optimal sample complexity. Moreover, we give fast approximate projections for 2D
histograms, another well-studied low-dimensional model of data. We complement
our theoretical results with experiments demonstrating that our framework also
leads to improved time and sample complexity empirically.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, exploiting low-dimensional structure in high-dimensional problems has become
a highly active area of research in machine learning, signal processing, and statistics. In a nutshell,
the general approach is to utilize a low-dimensional model of relevant data in order to achieve
better prediction, compression, or estimation compared to a “black box” treatment of the ambient
high-dimensional space. For instance, the seminal work on compressive sensing and sparse linear
regression has shown how to estimate a sparse, high-dimensional vector from a small number of
linear observations that essentially depends only on the small sparsity of the vector, as opposed to its
large ambient dimension. Further examples of low-dimensional models are low-rank matrices, groupstructured sparsity, and general union-of-subspaces models, all of which have found applications in
problems such as matrix completion, principal component analysis, compression, and clustering.
These low-dimensional models have a common reason for their success: they capture important
structure present in real world data with a formal concept that is suitable for a rigorous mathematical
analysis. This combination has led to statistical performance improvements in several applications
where the ambient high-dimensional space is too large for accurate estimation from a limited number
of samples. However, exploiting the low-dimensional structure also comes at a cost: incorporating
the structural constraints into the statistical estimation procedure often results in a more challenging
algorithmic problems. Given the growing size of modern data sets, even problems that are solvable
in polynomial time can quickly become infeasible. This leads to the following important question:
Can we design efficient algorithms that combine (near)-optimal statistical efficiency with good
computational complexity?
In this paper, we make progress on this question in the context of recovering a low-dimensional
vector from noisy linear observations, which is the fundamental problem underlying both low-rank
matrix recovery and compressive sensing / sparse linear regression. While there is a wide range of
algorithms for these problems, two approaches for incorporating structure tend to be most common:
(i) convex relaxations of the low-dimensional constraint such as the `1 - or the nuclear norm [19], and
(ii) iterative methods based on projected gradient descent, e.g., the IHT (Iterative Hard Thresholding)
or SVP (Singular Value Projection) algorithms [5, 15]. Since the convex relaxations are often also
solved with first order methods (e.g., FISTA or SVT [6]), the low-dimensional constraint enters both
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

