Local Minimax Complexity of
Stochastic Convex Optimization
Yuancheng Zhu
Wharton Statistics Department
University of Pennsylvania
John Duchi
Department of Statistics
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University

Sabyasachi Chatterjee
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
John Lafferty
Department of Statistics
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago

Abstract
We extend the traditional worst-case, minimax analysis of stochastic convex optimization by introducing a localized form of minimax complexity for individual
functions. Our main result gives function-specific lower and upper bounds on
the number of stochastic subgradient evaluations needed to optimize either the
function or its “hardest local alternative” to a given numerical precision. The
bounds are expressed in terms of a localized and computational analogue of the
modulus of continuity that is central to statistical minimax analysis. We show how
the computational modulus of continuity can be explicitly calculated in concrete
cases, and relates to the curvature of the function at the optimum. We also prove a
superefficiency result that demonstrates it is a meaningful benchmark, acting as
a computational analogue of the Fisher information in statistical estimation. The
nature and practical implications of the results are demonstrated in simulations.

1

Introduction

The traditional analysis of algorithms is based on a worst-case, minimax formulation. One studies
the running time, measured in terms of the smallest number of arithmetic operations required by any
algorithm to solve any instance in the family of problems under consideration. Classical worst-case
complexity theory focuses on discrete problems. In the setting of convex optimization, where the
problem instances require numerical rather than combinatorial optimization, Nemirovsky and Yudin
[12] developed an approach to minimax analysis based on a first order oracle model of computation.
In this model, an algorithm to minimize a convex function can make queries to a first-order “oracle,”
and the complexity is defined as the smallest error achievable using some specified minimum number
of queries needed. Specifically, the oracle is queried with an input point x 2 C from a convex domain
C, and returns an unbiased estimate of a subgradient vector to the function f at x. After T calls to the
oracle, an algorithm A returns a value x
bA 2 C, which is a random variable due to the stochastic nature
of the oracle, and possibly also due to randomness in the algorithm. The Nemirovski-Yudin analysis
reveals that, in the worst case, the number of calls to the oracle required to drive the expected error
E(f (b
xA ) inf x2C f (x)) below ✏ scales as T = O(1/✏) for the class of strongly convex functions,
and as T = O(1/✏2 ) for the class of Lipschitz convex functions.
In practice, one naturally finds that some functions are easier to optimize than others. Intuitively, if
the function is “steep” near the optimum, then the subgradient may carry a great deal of information,
and a stochastic gradient descent algorithm may converge relatively quickly. A minimax approach
to analyzing the running time cannot take this into account for a particular function, as it treats the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

