Stein Variational Gradient Descent: A General
Purpose Bayesian Inference Algorithm

Qiang Liu
Dilin Wang
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
{qiang.liu, dilin.wang.gr}@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We propose a general purpose variational inference algorithm that forms a natural
counterpart of gradient descent for optimization. Our method iteratively transports a set of particles to match the target distribution, by applying a form of
functional gradient descent that minimizes the KL divergence. Empirical studies
are performed on various real world models and datasets, on which our method is
competitive with existing state-of-the-art methods. The derivation of our method
is based on a new theoretical result that connects the derivative of KL divergence
under smooth transforms with Stein’s identity and a recently proposed kernelized
Stein discrepancy, which is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference provides a powerful tool for modeling complex data and reasoning under uncertainty, but casts a long standing challenge on computing intractable posterior distributions. Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) has been widely used to draw approximate posterior samples, but is
often slow and has difficulty accessing the convergence. Variational inference instead frames the
Bayesian inference problem into a deterministic optimization that approximates the target distribution
with a simpler distribution by minimizing their KL divergence. This makes variational methods
efficiently solvable by using off-the-shelf optimization techniques, and easily applicable to large
datasets (i.e., "big data") using the stochastic gradient descent trick [e.g., 1]. In contrast, it is much
more challenging to scale up MCMC to big data settings [see e.g., 2, 3].
Meanwhile, both the accuracy and computational cost of variational inference critically depend on
the set of distributions in which the approximation is defined. Simple approximation sets, such as
these used in the traditional mean field methods, are too restrictive to resemble the true posterior
distributions, while more advanced choices cast more difficulties on the subsequent optimization tasks.
For this reason, efficient variational methods often need to be derived on a model-by-model basis,
causing is a major barrier for developing general purpose, user-friendly variational tools applicable
for different kinds of models, and accessible to non-ML experts in application domains.
This case is in contrast with the maximum a posteriori (MAP) optimization tasks for finding the
posterior mode (sometimes known as the poor man’s Bayesian estimator, in contrast with the full
Bayesian inference for approximating the full posterior distribution), for which variants of (stochastic)
gradient descent serve as a simple, generic, yet extremely powerful toolbox. There has been a recent
growth of interest in creating user-friendly variational inference tools [e.g., 4–7], but more efforts are
still needed to develop more efficient general purpose algorithms.
In this work, we propose a new general purpose variational inference algorithm which can be treated
as a natural counterpart of gradient descent for full Bayesian inference (see Algorithm 1). Our
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

