Scan Order in Gibbs Sampling: Models in Which it
Matters and Bounds on How Much
Bryan He, Christopher De Sa, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Christopher Ré
Stanford University
{bryanhe,cdesa,imit,chrismre}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Gibbs sampling is a Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling technique that iteratively
samples variables from their conditional distributions. There are two common scan
orders for the variables: random scan and systematic scan. Due to the benefits
of locality in hardware, systematic scan is commonly used, even though most
statistical guarantees are only for random scan. While it has been conjectured that
the mixing times of random scan and systematic scan do not differ by more than a
logarithmic factor, we show by counterexample that this is not the case, and we
prove that that the mixing times do not differ by more than a polynomial factor
under mild conditions. To prove these relative bounds, we introduce a method of
augmenting the state space to study systematic scan using conductance.

1

Introduction

Gibbs sampling, or Glauber dynamics, is a Markov chain Monte Carlo method that draws approximate
samples from multivariate distributions that are difficult to sample directly [9; 15, p. 40]. A major use
of Gibbs sampling is marginal inference: the estimation of the marginal distributions of some variables
of interest [8]. Some applications include various computer vision tasks [9, 23, 24], information
extraction [7], and latent Dirichlet allocation for topic modeling [11]. Gibbs sampling is simple to
implement and quickly produces accurate samples for many models, so it is widely used and available
in popular libraries such as OpenBUGS [16], FACTORIE [17], JAGS [18], and MADlib [14].
Gibbs sampling (Algorithm 1) iteratively selects a single variable and resamples it from its conditional
distribution, given the other variables in the model. The method that selects the variable index to
sample (s in Algorithm 1) is called the scan order. Two scan orders are commonly used: random scan
and systematic scan (also known as deterministic or sequential scan). In random scan, the variable to
sample is selected uniformly and independently at random at each iteration. In systematic scan, a
fixed permutation is selected, and the variables are repeatedly selected in that order. The existence of
these two distinct options raises an obvious question—which scan order produces accurate samples
more quickly? This question has two components: hardware efficiency (how long does each iteration
take?) and statistical efficiency (how many iterations are needed to produce an accurate sample?).
From the hardware efficiency perspective, systematic scans are clearly superior [21, 22]. Systematic
scans have good spatial locality because they access the variables in linear order, which makes their
iterations run faster on hardware. As a result, systematic scans are commonly used in practice.
Comparing the two scan orders is much more interesting from the perspective of statistical efficiency,
which we focus on for the rest of this paper. Statistical efficiency is measured by the mixing
time, which is the number of iterations needed to obtain an accurate sample [15, p. 55]. The
mixing times of random scan and systematic scan have been studied, and there is a longstanding
conjecture [3; 15, p. 300] that systematic scan (1) never mixes more than a constant factor slower
than random scan and (2) never mixes more than a logarithmic factor faster than random scan. This
conjecture implies that the choice of scan order does not have a large effect on performance.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

