Bayesian latent structure discovery from
multi-neuron recordings

Scott W. Linderman
Columbia University
swl2133@columbia.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Harvard University and Twitter
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton University
pillow@princeton.edu

Abstract
Neural circuits contain heterogeneous groups of neurons that differ in type, location,
connectivity, and basic response properties. However, traditional methods for
dimensionality reduction and clustering are ill-suited to recovering the structure
underlying the organization of neural circuits. In particular, they do not take
advantage of the rich temporal dependencies in multi-neuron recordings and fail
to account for the noise in neural spike trains. Here we describe new tools for
inferring latent structure from simultaneously recorded spike train data using a
hierarchical extension of a multi-neuron point process model commonly known as
the generalized linear model (GLM). Our approach combines the GLM with flexible
graph-theoretic priors governing the relationship between latent features and neural
connectivity patterns. Fully Bayesian inference via Pólya-gamma augmentation
of the resulting model allows us to classify neurons and infer latent dimensions of
circuit organization from correlated spike trains. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method with applications to synthetic data and multi-neuron recordings in
primate retina, revealing latent patterns of neural types and locations from spike
trains alone.

1

Introduction

Large-scale recording technologies are revolutionizing the field of neuroscience [e.g., 1, 5, 15]. These
advances present an unprecedented opportunity to probe the underpinnings of neural computation,
but they also pose an extraordinary statistical and computational challenge: how do we make sense
of these complex recordings? To address this challenge, we need methods that not only capture
variability in neural activity and make accurate predictions, but also expose meaningful structure
that may lead to novel hypotheses and interpretations of the circuits under study. In short, we need
exploratory methods that yield interpretable representations of large-scale neural data.
For example, consider a population of distinct retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). These cells only respond
to light within their small receptive field. Moreover, decades of painstaking work have revealed a
plethora of RGC types [16]. Thus, it is natural to characterize these cells in terms of their type and
the location of their receptive field center. Rather than manually searching for such a representation
by probing with different visual stimuli, here we develop a method to automatically discover this
structure from correlated patterns of neural activity.
Our approach combines latent variable network models [6, 10] with generalized linear models of
neural spike trains [11, 19, 13, 20] in a hierarchical Bayesian framework. The network serves as a
bridge, connecting interpretable latent features of interest to the temporal dynamics of neural spike
trains. Unlike many previous studies [e.g., 2, 3, 17], our goal here is not necessarily to recover true
synaptic connectivity, nor is our primary emphasis on prediction. Instead, our aim is to explore
and compare latent patterns of functional organization, integrating over possible networks. To do
so, we develop an efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) inference algorithm by leveraging
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

