Algorithms and matching lower bounds for
approximately-convex optimization

Yuanzhi Li
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, 08450
yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu

Andrej Risteski
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, 08450
risteski@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
In recent years, a rapidly increasing number of applications in practice requires
optimizing non-convex objectives, like training neural networks, learning graphical
models, maximum likelihood estimation. Though simple heuristics such as gradient
descent with very few modifications tend to work well, theoretical understanding
is very weak.
We consider possibly the most natural class of non-convex functions where one
could hope to obtain provable guarantees: functions that are “approximately convex”, i.e. functions f˜ : Rd → R for which there exists a convex function f such
that for all x, |f˜(x) − f (x)| ≤ ∆ for a fixed value ∆. We then want to minimize
f˜, i.e. output a point x̃ such that f˜(x̃) ≤ minx f˜(x) + .
It is quite natural to conjecture that for fixed , the problem gets harder for larger
∆, however, the exact dependency of  and ∆ is not known. In this paper, we
significantly improve the known lower bound on ∆ as a function of  and an
algorithm matching this lower bound for a natural class of convex bodies. More
precisely, we identify a function T : R+ → R+ such that when ∆ = O(T ()),
˜
˜
we can give an algorithm
 that outputs a point x̃ such that f (x̃) ≤ minx f (x) + 
1
within time poly d,  . On the other hand, when ∆ = Ω(T ()), we also prove an
information theoretic lower bound that any algorithm that outputs such a x̃ must
use super polynomial number of evaluations of f˜.

1

Introduction

Optimization of convex functions over a convex domain is a well studied problem in machine
learning, where a variety of algorithms exist to solve the problem efficiently. However, in recent years,
practitioners face ever more often non-convex objectives – e.g. training neural networks, learning
graphical models, clustering data, maximum likelihood estimation etc. Albeit simple heuristics such
as gradient descent with few modifications usually work very well, theoretical understanding in these
settings are still largely open.
The most natural class of non-convex functions where one could hope to obtain provable guarantees
is functions that are “approximately convex”: functions f˜ : Rd → R for which there exists a convex
function f such that for all x, |f˜(x) − f (x)| ≤ ∆ for a fixed value ∆. In this paper, we focus on zero
order optimization of f˜: an algorithm that outputs a point x̃ such that f˜(x̃) ≤ minx f˜(x) + , where
the algorithm in the course of its execution is allowed to pick points x ∈ Rd and query the value of
f˜(x).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

