Local Maxima in the Likelihood of Gaussian Mixture
Models: Structural Results and Algorithmic
Consequences

Chi Jin
UC Berkeley
chijin@cs.berkeley.edu

Yuchen Zhang
UC Berkeley
yuczhang@berkeley.edu

Martin J. Wainwright
UC Berkeley
wainwrig@berkeley.edu

Sivaraman Balakrishnan
Carnegie Mellon University
siva@stat.cmu.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We provide two fundamental results on the population (infinite-sample) likelihood
function of Gaussian mixture models with M ≥ 3 components. Our first main
result shows that the population likelihood function has bad local maxima even
in the special case of equally-weighted mixtures of well-separated and spherical
Gaussians. We prove that the log-likelihood value of these bad local maxima can
be arbitrarily worse than that of any global optimum, thereby resolving an open
question of Srebro [2007]. Our second main result shows that the EM algorithm
(or a first-order variant of it) with random initialization will converge to bad critical
points with probability at least 1 − e−Ω(M ) . We further establish that a first-order
variant of EM will not converge to strict saddle points almost surely, indicating that
the poor performance of the first-order method can be attributed to the existence of
bad local maxima rather than bad saddle points. Overall, our results highlight the
necessity of careful initialization when using the EM algorithm in practice, even
when applied in highly favorable settings.

1

Introduction

Finite mixture models are widely used in variety of statistical settings, as models for heterogeneous
populations, as flexible models for multivariate density estimation and as models for clustering. Their
ability to model data as arising from underlying subpopulations provides essential flexibility in a
wide range of applications Titterington [1985]. This combinatorial structure also creates challenges
for statistical and computational theory, and there are many problems associated with estimation of
finite mixtures that are still open. These problems are often studied in the setting of Gaussian mixture
models (GMMs), reflecting the wide use of GMMs in applications, particular in the multivariate
setting, and this setting will also be our focus in the current paper.
Early work [Teicher, 1963] studied the identifiability of finite mixture models, and this problem has
continued to attract significant interest (see the recent paper of Allman et al. [2009] for a recent
overview). More recent theoretical work has focused on issues related to the use of GMMs for the
density estimation problem [Genovese and Wasserman, 2000, Ghosal and Van Der Vaart, 2001].
Focusing on rates of convergence for parameter estimation in GMMs, Chen [1995] established
√ the
surprising result that when the number of mixture components is unknown, then the standard n-rate
for regular parametric models is not achievable. Recent investigations [Ho and Nguyen, 2015] into
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

