Average-case hardness of RIP certification

Tengyao Wang
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Cambridge, CB3 0WB, United Kingdom
t.wang@statslab.cam.ac.uk

Quentin Berthet
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Cambridge, CB3 0WB, United Kingdom
q.berthet@statslab.cam.ac.uk

Yaniv Plan
1986 Mathematics Road
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z2, Canada
yaniv@math.ubc.ca

Abstract
The restricted isometry property (RIP) for design matrices gives guarantees for
optimal recovery in sparse linear models. It is of high interest in compressed
sensing and statistical learning. This property is particularly important for computationally efficient recovery methods. As a consequence, even though it is in
general NP-hard to check that RIP holds, there have been substantial efforts to
find tractable proxies for it. These would allow the construction of RIP matrices
and the polynomial-time verification of RIP given an arbitrary matrix. We consider the framework of average-case certifiers, that never wrongly declare that a
matrix is RIP, while being often correct for random instances. While there are
such functions which are tractable in a suboptimal parameter regime, we show
that this is a computationally hard task in any better regime. Our results are based
on a new, weaker assumption on the problem of detecting dense subgraphs.

Introduction
In many areas of data science, high-dimensional signals contain rich structure. It is of great interest to leverage this structure to improve our ability to describe characteristics of the signal and
to make future predictions. Sparsity is a structure of wide applicability (see, e.g. Mallat, 1999;
Rauhut and Foucart, 2013; Eldar and Kutyniok, 2012), with a broad literature dedicated to its study
in various scientific fields.
The sparse linear model takes the form y = Xβ + ε, where y ∈ Rn is a vector of observations,
X ∈ Rn×p is a design matrix, ε ∈ Rn is noise, and the vector β ∈ Rp is assumed to have a
small number k of non-zero entries. Estimating β or the mean response, Xβ, are among the most
widely studied problems in signal processing, as well as in statistical learning. In high-dimensional
problems, one would wish to recover β with as few observations as possible. For an incoherent
design matrix, it is known that an order of k 2 observations suffice (Donoho, Elad and Temlyakov,
2006; Donoho and Elad, 2003). However, this appears to require a number of observations far
exceeding the information content of β, which has only k variables, albeit with unknown locations.
This dependence in k can be greatly improved by using design matrices that are almost isometries
on some low dimensional subspaces, i.e., matrices that satisfy the restricted isometry property with
parameters k and θ, or RIP(k, θ) (see Definition 1.1). It is a highly robust property, and in fact
implies that many different polynomial time methods, such as greedy methods (Blumensath and
Davies, 2009; Needell and Tropp, 2009; Dai and Milenkovic, 2009) and convex optimization (Candès, 2008; Candès, Romberg and Tao, 2006b; Candès and Tao, 2005), are stable in recovering β.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

