Crowdsourced Clustering: Querying Edges vs
Triangles

Ramya Korlakai Vinayak
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech, Pasadena
ramya@caltech.edu

Babak Hassibi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech, Pasadena
hassibi@systems.caltech.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of clustering items using answers from non-expert crowd
workers. In such cases, the workers are often not able to label the items directly,
however, it is reasonable to assume that they can compare items and judge whether
they are similar or not. An important question is what queries to make, and we
compare two types: random edge queries, where a pair of items is revealed, and
random triangles, where a triple is. Since it is far too expensive to query all possible
edges and/or triangles, we need to work with partial observations subject to a fixed
query budget constraint. When a generative model for the data is available (and we
consider a few of these) we determine the cost of a query by its entropy; when such
models do not exist we use the average response time per query of the workers
as a surrogate for the cost. In addition to theoretical justification, through several
simulations and experiments on two real data sets on Amazon Mechanical Turk,
we empirically demonstrate that, for a fixed budget, triangle queries uniformly
outperform edge queries. Even though, in contrast to edge queries, triangle queries
reveal dependent edges, they provide more reliable edges and, for a fixed budget,
many more of them. We also provide a sufficient condition on the number of
observations, edge densities inside and outside the clusters and the minimum
cluster size required for the exact recovery of the true adjacency matrix via triangle
queries using a convex optimization-based clustering algorithm.

1

Introduction

Collecting data from non-expert workers on crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical
Turk, Zooinverse, Planet Hunters, etc. for various applications has recently become quite popular.
Applications range from creating a labeled dataset for training and testing supervised machine
learning algorithms [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] to making scientific discoveries [7, 8]. Since the workers on
the crowdsourcing platforms are often non-experts, the answers obtained will invariably be noisy.
Therefore the problem of designing queries and inferring quality data from such non-expert crowd
workers is of great importance.
As an example, consider the task of collecting labels of images, e.g, of birds or dogs of different
kinds and breeds. To label the image of a bird, or dog, a worker should either have some expertise
regarding the bird species and dog breeds, or should be trained on how to label each of them. Since
hiring experts or training non-experts is expensive, we shall focus on collecting labels of images
through image comparison followed by clustering. Instead of asking a worker to label an image
of a bird, we can show her two images of birds and ask: “Do these two birds belong to the same
species?"(Figure 1(a)). Answering this comparison question is much easier than the labeling task
and does not require expertise or training. Though different workers might use different criteria for
comparison, e.g, color of feathers, shape, size etc., the hope is that, averaged over the crowd workers,
we will be able to reasonably resolve the clusters (and label each).
Consider a graph of n images that needs to be clustered, where each pairwise comparison is an ‘edge
query’. Since the number of edges grows as O(n2 ), it is too expensive to query all edges. Instead,
we want to query a subset of the edges, based on our total query budget, and cluster the resulting
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

