Matrix Completion has No Spurious Local Minimum
Rong Ge
Duke University
308 Research Drive, NC 27708
rongge@cs.duke.edu.

Jason D. Lee
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Pkwy, CA 90089
jasonlee@marshall.usc.edu.

Tengyu Ma
Princeton University
35 Olden Street, NJ 08540
tengyu@cs.princeton.edu.

Abstract
Matrix completion is a basic machine learning problem that has wide applications, especially in collaborative filtering and recommender systems. Simple
non-convex optimization algorithms are popular and effective in practice. Despite
recent progress in proving various non-convex algorithms converge from a good
initial point, it remains unclear why random or arbitrary initialization suffices in
practice. We prove that the commonly used non-convex objective function for
positive semidefinite matrix completion has no spurious local minima – all local
minima must also be global. Therefore, many popular optimization algorithms such
as (stochastic) gradient descent can provably solve positive semidefinite matrix
completion with arbitrary initialization in polynomial time. The result can be
generalized to the setting when the observed entries contain noise. We believe that
our main proof strategy can be useful for understanding geometric properties of
other statistical problems involving partial or noisy observations.

1

Introduction

Matrix completion is the problem of recovering a low rank matrix from partially observed entries. It
has been widely used in collaborative filtering and recommender systems [Kor09, RS05], dimension
reduction [CLMW11] and multi-class learning [AFSU07]. There has been extensive work on
designing efficient algorithms for matrix completion with guarantees. One earlier line of results
(see [Rec11, CT10, CR09] and the references therein) rely on convex relaxations. These algorithms
achieve strong statistical guarantees, but are quite computationally expensive in practice.
More recently, there has been growing interest in analyzing non-convex algorithms for matrix
completion [KMO10, JNS13, Har14, HW14, SL15, ZWL15, CW15]. Let M 2 Rd⇥d be the target
matrix with rank r ⌧ d that we aim to recover, and let ⌦ = {(i, j) : Mi,j is observed} be the
set of observed entries. These methods are instantiations of optimization algorithms applied to the
objective1 ,
⇤2
1 X ⇥
f (X) =
Mi,j (XX > )i,j ,
(1.1)
2
(i,j)2⌦

These algorithms are much faster than the convex relaxation algorithms, which is crucial for their
empirical success in large-scale collaborative filtering applications [Kor09].

1
In this paper, we focus on the symmetric case when the true M has a symmetric decomposition M = ZZ T .
Some of previous papers work on the asymmetric case when M = ZW T , which is harder than the symmetric
case.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

