Mixed vine copulas as joint models
of spike counts and local field potentials

Arno Onken
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy
arno.onken@iit.it

Stefano Panzeri
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy
stefano.panzeri@iit.it

Abstract
Concurrent measurements of neural activity at multiple scales, sometimes performed with multimodal techniques, become increasingly important for studying
brain function. However, statistical methods for their concurrent analysis are currently lacking. Here we introduce such techniques in a framework based on vine
copulas with mixed margins to construct multivariate stochastic models. These
models can describe detailed mixed interactions between discrete variables such
as neural spike counts, and continuous variables such as local field potentials.
We propose efficient methods for likelihood calculation, inference, sampling and
mutual information estimation within this framework. We test our methods on simulated data and demonstrate applicability on mixed data generated by a biologically
realistic neural network. Our methods hold the promise to considerably improve
statistical analysis of neural data recorded simultaneously at different scales.

1

Introduction

The functions of the brain likely rely on the concerted interaction of its microscopic, mesoscopic
and macroscopic systems. Concurrent recordings of signals at different scales, such as simultaneous
measurements of field potential and single-cell spiking activity or other multimodal measures such as
concurrent electrophysiological and fMRI measures, are leading to rapid advances in understanding
brain dynamics [16]. Analysis of these concurrent data is complicated by the great difference in
nature (e.g. discrete vs. continuous) and signal-to-noise ratio of each type of neural signal. To
take full advantage of these data, flexible statistical models that take into account many variables
with different statistics and their dependencies are needed. Recently, construction of multivariate
statistical models based on the concept of copulas has attracted a lot of attention [9]. Intuitively,
a copula represents a particular relationship between a set of random variables that, together with
separate margin models of the individual elements can be used to construct a joint statistical model.
This approach has become an indispensable tool in economics, finance and risk management in
both theoretical and practical applications [9, 13, 11]. Yet, despite their promise, application to
neuroscience has been limited [10, 14, 19]. The copula approach is general and, in principle,
applicable to model mixed discrete and continuous statistics. Specific cases of mixed discrete and
continuous copula-based models with parametric distributions were recently applied in clinical
applications [24, 7]. Racine [17] proposed nonparametric mixed copula distributions based on
kernel density estimators. In most studies, however, the elements of the copula-based multivariate
distributions are all continuous [9, 13, 11]. A reason for this is that in the general case, likelihood
calculation has exponential complexity in the number of discrete elements, limiting the usefulness
of the models. In particular, these methods are impractical for likelihood-based estimation of
information-theoretic quantities which requires many likelihood evaluations. Smith and Khaled [23]
recently proposed a copula-based framework with quadratic complexity, but limited to fully discrete
distributions. For valuable applications in neuroscience settings, however, we need a framework
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

