On Explore-Then-Commit Strategies

Aurélien Garivier∗
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse; UMR5219
Université de Toulouse; CNRS
UPS IMT, F-31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France
aurelien.garivier@math.univ-toulouse.fr
Emilie Kaufmann
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Inria SequeL
UMR 9189, CRIStAL - Centre de Recherche en Informatique Signal et Automatique de Lille
F-59000 Lille, France
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille1.fr
Tor Lattimore
University of Alberta
116 St & 85 Ave, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of minimising regret in two-armed bandit problems with
Gaussian rewards. Our objective is to use this simple setting to illustrate that
strategies based on an exploration phase (up to a stopping time) followed by
exploitation are necessarily suboptimal. The results hold regardless of whether
or not the difference in means between the two arms is known. Besides the
main message, we also refine existing deviation inequalities, which allow us to
design fully sequential strategies with finite-time regret guarantees that are (a)
asymptotically optimal as the horizon grows and (b) order-optimal in the minimax
sense. Furthermore we provide empirical evidence that the theory also holds in
practice and discuss extensions to non-gaussian and multiple-armed case.

1

Introduction

It is now a very frequent issue for companies to optimise their daily profits by choosing between
one of two possible website layouts. A natural approach is to start with a period of A/B Testing
(exploration) during which the two versions are uniformly presented to users. Once the testing is
complete, the company displays the version believed to generate the most profit for the rest of the
month (exploitation). The time spent exploring may be chosen adaptively based on past observations,
but could also be fixed in advance. Our contribution is to show that strategies of this form are
much worse than if the company is allowed to dynamically select which website to display without
restrictions for the whole month.
Our analysis focusses on a simple sequential decision problem played over T time-steps. In time-step
t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T the agent chooses an action At ∈ {1, 2} and receives a normally distributed reward
∗

This work was partially supported by the CIMI (Centre International de Mathématiques et d’Informatique)
Excellence program while Emilie Kaufmann visited Toulouse in November 2015. The authors acknowledge the
support of the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), under grants ANR-13-BS01-0005 (project
SPADRO) and ANR-13-CORD-0020 (project ALICIA).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

