Neural Universal Discrete Denoiser
Taesup Moon
DGIST
Daegu, Korea 42988
tsmoon@dgist.ac.kr

Seonwoo Min, Byunghan Lee, Sungroh Yoon
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea 08826
{mswzeus, styxkr, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a new framework of applying deep neural networks (DNN) to devise a
universal discrete denoiser. Unlike other approaches that utilize supervised learning
for denoising, we do not require any additional training data. In such setting, while
the ground-truth label, i.e., the clean data, is not available, we devise “pseudolabels” and a novel objective function such that DNN can be trained in a same way
as supervised learning to become a discrete denoiser. We experimentally show that
our resulting algorithm, dubbed as Neural DUDE, significantly outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art in several applications with a systematic rule of choosing
the hyperparameter, which is an attractive feature in practice.

1

Introduction

Cleaning noise-corrupted data, i.e., denoising, is a ubiquotous problem in signal processing and
machine learning. Discrete denoising, in particular, focuses on the cases in which both the underlying
clean and noisy data take their values in some finite set. Such setting covers several applications
in different domains, such as image denoising [1, 2], DNA sequence denoising [3], and channel
decoding [4].
A conventional approach for addressing the denoising problem is the Bayesian approach, which can
often yield a computationally efficient algorithm with reasonable performance. However, limitations
can arise when the assumed stochastic models do not accurately reflect the real data distribution.
Particularly, while the models for the noise can often be obtained relatively reliably, obtaining the
accurate model for the original clean data is more tricky; the model for the clean data may be wrong,
changing, or may not exist at all.
In order to alleviate the above mentioned limitations, [5] proposed a universal approach for discrete
denoising. Namely, they first considered a general setting that the clean finite-valued source symbols
are corrupted by a discrete memoryless channel (DMC), a noise mechanism that corrupts each source
symbol independently and statistically identically. Then, they devised an algorithm called DUDE
(Discrete Universal DEnoiser) and showed rigorous performance guarantees for the semi-stochastic
setting; namely, that where no stochastic modeling assumptions are made on the underlying source
data, while the corruption mechanism is assumed to be governed by a known DMC. DUDE is shown
to universally attain the optimum denoising performance for any source data as the data size grows.
In addition to the strong theoretical performance guarantee, DUDE can be implemented as a computationally efficient sliding window denoiser; hence, it has been successfully applied and extended
to some practical applications, e.g., [1, 3, 4, 2]. However, it also had limitations; namely, the performance is sensitive on the choice of sliding window size k, which has to be hand-tuned without
any systematic rule. Moreover, when k becomes large and the alphabet size of the signal increases,
DUDE suffers from the data sparsity problem, which significantly deteriorates the performance.
In this paper, we present a novel framework of addressing above limitations of DUDE by adopting
the machineries of deep neural networks (DNN) [6], which recently have seen great empirical success
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

