Temporal Regularized Matrix Factorization for
High-dimensional Time Series Prediction
Hsiang-Fu Yu
University of Texas at Austin
rofuyu@cs.utexas.edu

Nikhil Rao
Technicolor Research
nikhilrao86@gmail.com

Inderjit S. Dhillon
University of Texas at Austin
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Time series prediction problems are becoming increasingly high-dimensional in
modern applications, such as climatology and demand forecasting. For example,
in the latter problem, the number of items for which demand needs to be forecast
might be as large as 50,000. In addition, the data is generally noisy and full of
missing values. Thus, modern applications require methods that are highly scalable,
and can deal with noisy data in terms of corruptions or missing values. However,
classical time series methods usually fall short of handling these issues. In this
paper, we present a temporal regularized matrix factorization (TRMF) framework
which supports data-driven temporal learning and forecasting. We develop novel
regularization schemes and use scalable matrix factorization methods that are
eminently suited for high-dimensional time series data that has many missing values.
Our proposed TRMF is highly general, and subsumes many existing approaches
for time series analysis. We make interesting connections to graph regularization
methods in the context of learning the dependencies in an autoregressive framework.
Experimental results show the superiority of TRMF in terms of scalability and
prediction quality. In particular, TRMF is two orders of magnitude faster than
other methods on a problem of dimension 50,000, and generates better forecasts on
real-world datasets such as Wal-mart E-commerce datasets.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis is a central problem in many applications such as demand forecasting and
climatology. Often, such applications require methods that are highly scalable to handle a very large
number (n) of possibly inter-dependent one-dimensional time series and/or have a large time frame
(T ). For example, climatology applications involve data collected from possibly thousands of sensors,
every hour (or less) over several years. Similarly, a store tracking its inventory would track thousands
of items every day for multiple years. Not only is the scale of such problems huge, but they might
also involve missing values, due to sensor malfunctions, occlusions or simple human errors. Thus,
modern time series applications present two challenges to practitioners: scalability to handle large n
and T and the flexibility to handle missing values.
Most approaches in the traditional time series literature such as autoregressive (AR) models or
dynamic linear models (DLM)[7, 21] focus on low-dimensional time-series data and fall short of
handling the two aforementioned issues. For example, an AR model of order L requires O(T L2 n4 +
L3 n6 ) time to estimate O(Ln2 ) parameters, which is prohibitive even for moderate values of n.
Similarly, Kalman filter based DLM approaches need O(kn2 T + k 3 T ) computation cost to update
parameters, where k is the latent dimensionality, which is usually chosen to be larger than n in many
situations [13]. As a specific example, the maximum likelihood estimator implementation in the
widely used R-DLM package [12], which relies on a general optimization solver, cannot scale beyond
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

