Greedy Feature Construction

Dino Oglic† ‡
dino.oglic@uni-bonn.de
†
Institut für Informatik III
Universität Bonn, Germany

Thomas Gärtner ‡
thomas.gaertner@nottingham.ac.uk
‡
School of Computer Science
The University of Nottingham, UK

Abstract
We present an effective method for supervised feature construction. The main
goal of the approach is to construct a feature representation for which a set of
linear hypotheses is of sufficient capacity – large enough to contain a satisfactory
solution to the considered problem and small enough to allow good generalization
from a small number of training examples. We achieve this goal with a greedy
procedure that constructs features by empirically fitting squared error residuals.
The proposed constructive procedure is consistent and can output a rich set of
features. The effectiveness of the approach is evaluated empirically by fitting a
linear ridge regression model in the constructed feature space and our empirical
results indicate a superior performance of our approach over competing methods.

1

Introduction

Every supervised learning algorithm with the ability to generalize from training examples to unseen
data points has some type of inductive bias [5]. The bias can be defined as a set of assumptions that
together with the training data explain the predictions at unseen points [25]. In order to simplify
theoretical analysis of learning algorithms, the inductive bias is often represented by a choice
of a hypothesis space (e.g., the inductive bias of linear regression models is the assumption that
the relationship between inputs and outputs is linear). The fundamental limitation of learning
procedures with an a priori specified hypothesis space (e.g., linear models or kernel methods with
a preselected kernel) is that they can learn good concept descriptions only if the hypothesis space
selected beforehand is large enough to contain a good solution to the considered problem and small
enough to allow good generalization from a small number of training examples. As finding a good
hypothesis space is equivalent to finding a good set of features [5], we propose an effective supervised
feature construction method to tackle this problem. The main goal of the approach is to embed the
data into a feature space for which a set of linear hypotheses is of sufficient capacity. The motivation
for this choice of hypotheses is in the desire to exploit the scalability of existing algorithms for
training linear models. It is for their scalability that these models are frequently a method of choice
for learning on large scale data sets (e.g., the implementation of linear SVM [13] has won the large
scale learning challenge at ICML 2008 and KDD CUP 2010). However, as the set of linear hypotheses
defined on a small or moderate number of input features is usually of low capacity these methods
often learn inaccurate descriptions of target concepts. The proposed approach surmounts this and
exploits the scalability of existing algorithms for training linear models while overcoming their low
capacity on input features. The latter is achieved by harnessing the information contained in the
labeled training data and constructing features by empirically fitting squared error residuals.
We draw motivation for our approach by considering the minimization of the expected squared error
using functional gradient descent (Section 2.1). In each step of the descent, the current estimator
is updated by moving in the direction of the residual function. We want to mimic this behavior by
constructing a feature representation incrementally so that for each step of the descent we add a
feature which approximates well the residual function. In this constructive process, we select our
features from a predetermined set of basis functions which can be chosen so that a high capacity set
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

