Tracking the Best Expert in Non-stationary Stochastic
Environments
Chen-Yu Wei
Yi-Te Hong
Chi-Jen Lu
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{bahh723, ted0504, cjlu}@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
We study the dynamic regret of multi-armed bandit and experts problem in nonstationary stochastic environments. We introduce a new parameter Λ, which
measures the total statistical variance of the loss distributions over T rounds of the
process, and study how this amount affects the regret. We investigate the interaction
between Λ and Γ, which counts the number of times the distributions change, as
well as Λ and V , which measures how far the distributions deviates over time. One
striking result we find is that even when Γ, V , and Λ are all restricted to constant,
the regret lower bound in the bandit setting still grows with T . The other highlight
is that in the full-information setting, a constant regret becomes achievable with
constant Γ and Λ, as it can be made independent of T , while with constant V and
Λ, the regret still has a T 1/3 dependency. We not only propose algorithms with
upper bound guarantee, but prove their matching lower bounds as well.

1

Introduction

Many situations in our daily life require us to make repeated decisions which result in some losses
corresponding to our chosen actions. This can be abstracted as the well-known online decision
problem in machine learning [5]. Depending on how the loss vectors are generated, two different
worlds are usually considered. In the adversarial world, loss vectors are assumed to be deterministic
and controlled by an adversary, while in the stochastic world, loss vectors are assumed to be sampled
independently from some distributions.
In both worlds, good online algorithms are known which
√
can achieve a regret of about T over T time steps, where the regret is the difference between the
total loss of the online algorithm and that of the best offline one. Another distinction is about the
information the online algorithm can receive after each action. In the full-information setting, it gets
to know the whole loss vector of that step, while in the bandit setting,
only the loss value of the
√
chosen action is received. Again, in both settings, a regret of about T turns out to be achievable.
While the regret bounds remain in the same order in those general scenarios discussed above, things
become different when some natural conditions are considered. One well-known example is that in
the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, when the best arm (or action) is substantially
better than the second best, with a constant gap between their means, then a much lower regret, of the
order of log T , becomes possible. This motivates us to consider other possible conditions which can
have finer characterization of the problem in terms of the achievable regret.
In the stochastic world, most previous works focused on the stationary setting, in which the loss (or
reward) vectors are assumed to be sampled from the same distribution for all time steps. With this
assumption, although one needs to balance between exploration and exploitation in the beginning,
after some trials, one can be confident about which action is the best and rest assured that there are
no more surprises. On the other hand, the world around us may not be stationary, in which existing
learning algorithms for the stationary case may no longer work. In fact, in a non-stationary world, the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

