A Non-convex One-Pass Framework for Generalized
Factorization Machine and Rank-One Matrix Sensing

Ming Lin
University of Michigan
linmin@umich.edu

Jieping Ye
University of Michigan
jpye@umich.edu

Abstract
We develop an efficient alternating framework for learning a generalized version of
Factorization Machine (gFM) on steaming data with provable guarantees. When
the instances are sampled from d dimensional random Gaussian vectors and the
target second order coefficient matrix in gFM is of rank k, our algorithm converges
linearly, achieves O() recovery error after retrieving O(k 3 d log(1/)) training
instances, consumes O(kd) memory in one-pass of dataset and only requires matrixvector product operations in each iteration. The key ingredient of our framework is
a construction of an estimation sequence endowed with a so-called Conditionally
Independent RIP condition (CI-RIP). As special cases of gFM, our framework can
be applied to symmetric or asymmetric rank-one matrix sensing problems, such as
inductive matrix completion and phase retrieval.

1

Introduction

Linear models are one of the foundations of modern machine learning due to their strong learning
guarantees and efficient solvers [Koltchinskii, 2011]. Conventionally linear models only consider the
first order information of the input feature which limits their capacity in non-linear problems. Among
various efforts extending linear models to the non-linear domain, the Factorization Machine [Rendle,
2010] (FM) captures the second order information by modeling the pairwise feature interaction in
regression under low-rank constraints. FMs have been found successful in many applications, such as
recommendation systems [Rendle et al., 2011] and text retrieval [Hong et al., 2013]. In this paper, we
consider a generalized version of FM called gFM which removes several redundant constraints in
the original FM such as positive semi-definite and zero-diagonal, leading to a more general model
without sacrificing its learning ability. From theoretical side, the gFM includes rank-one matrix
sensing [Zhong et al., 2015, Chen et al., 2015, Cai and Zhang, 2015, Kueng et al., 2014] as a special
case, where the latter one has been studied widely in context such as inductive matrix completion
[Jain and Dhillon, 2013] and phase retrieval [Candes et al., 2011].
Despite of the popularity of FMs in industry, there is rare theoretical study of learning guarantees for
FMs. One of the main challenges in developing a provable FM algorithm is to handle its symmetric
rank-one matrix sensing operator. For conventional matrix sensing problems where the matrix sensing
operator is RIP, there are several alternating methods with provable guarantees [Hardt, 2013, Jain
et al., 2013, Hardt and Wootters, 2014, Zhao et al., 2015a,b]. However, for a symmetric rank-one
matrix sensing operator, the RIP condition doesn’t hold trivially which turns out to be the main
difficulty in designing efficient provable FM solvers.
In rank-one matrix sensing, when the sensing operator is asymmetric, the problem is also known as
inductive matrix completion which can be solved via alternating minimization with a global linear
convergence rate [Jain and Dhillon, 2013, Zhong et al., 2015]. For symmetric rank-one matrix sensing
operators, we are not aware of any efficient solver by the time of writing this paper. In a special case
when the target matrix is of rank one, the problem is called “phase retrieval” whose convex solver
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

