Estimating the class prior and posterior from noisy
positives and unlabeled data
Shantanu Jain, Martha White, Predrag Radivojac
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
{shajain, martha, predrag}@indiana.edu

Abstract
We develop a classification algorithm for estimating posterior distributions from
positive-unlabeled data, that is robust to noise in the positive labels and effective
for high-dimensional data. In recent years, several algorithms have been proposed
to learn from positive-unlabeled data; however, many of these contributions remain theoretical, performing poorly on real high-dimensional data that is typically
contaminated with noise. We build on this previous work to develop two practical
classification algorithms that explicitly model the noise in the positive labels and
utilize univariate transforms built on discriminative classifiers. We prove that these
univariate transforms preserve the class prior, enabling estimation in the univariate space and avoiding kernel density estimation for high-dimensional data. The
theoretical development and parametric and nonparametric algorithms proposed
here constitute an important step towards wide-spread use of robust classification
algorithms for positive-unlabeled data.

1

Introduction

Access to positive, negative and unlabeled examples is a standard assumption for most semisupervised binary classification techniques. In many domains, however, a sample from one of the
classes (say, negatives) may not be available, leading to the setting of learning from positive and
unlabeled data (Denis et al., 2005). Positive-unlabeled learning often emerges in sciences and commerce where an observation of a positive example (say, that a protein catalyzes reactions or that a
social network user likes a particular product) is usually reliable. Here, however, the absence of a
positive observation cannot be interpreted as a negative example. In molecular biology, for example,
an attempt to label a data point as positive (say, that a protein is an enzyme) may be unsuccessful for
a variety of experimental and biological reasons, whereas in social networks an explicit dislike of a
product may not be possible. Both scenarios lead to a situation where negative examples cannot be
actively collected.
Fortunately, the absence of negatively labeled examples can be tackled by incorporating unlabeled
examples as negatives, leading to the development of non-traditional classifiers. Here we follow the
terminology by Elkan and Noto (2008) that a traditional classifier predicts whether an example is
positive or negative, whereas a non-traditional classifier predicts whether the example is positive or
unlabeled. Positive vs. unlabeled (non-traditional) training is reasonable because the class posterior
— and also the optimum scoring function for composite losses (Reid and Williamson, 2010) — in the
traditional setting is monotonically related to the posterior in the non-traditional setting. However,
the true posterior can be fully recovered from the non-traditional posterior only if we know the class
prior; i.e., the proportion of positives in unlabeled data. The knowledge of the class prior is also
necessary for estimation of the performance criteria such as the error rate, balanced error rate or
F-measure, and also for finding the right threshold for the non-traditional scoring function that leads
to an optimal classifier with respect to some criteria (Menon et al., 2015).

