Combining Fully Convolutional and Recurrent
Neural Networks for 3D Biomedical Image
Segmentation

Jianxu Chen
University of Notre Dame
jchen16@nd.edu
Yizhe Zhang
University of Notre Dame
yzhang29@nd.edu

Lin Yang
University of Notre Dame
lyang5@nd.edu

Mark Alber
University of Notre Dame
malber@nd.edu

Danny Z. Chen
University of Notre Dame
dchen@nd.edu

Abstract
Segmentation of 3D images is a fundamental problem in biomedical image analysis.
Deep learning (DL) approaches have achieved state-of-the-art segmentation performance. To exploit the 3D contexts using neural networks, known DL segmentation
methods, including 3D convolution, 2D convolution on planes orthogonal to 2D
image slices, and LSTM in multiple directions, all suffer incompatibility with the
highly anisotropic dimensions in common 3D biomedical images. In this paper,
we propose a new DL framework for 3D image segmentation, based on a combination of a fully convolutional network (FCN) and a recurrent neural network
(RNN), which are responsible for exploiting the intra-slice and inter-slice contexts,
respectively. To our best knowledge, this is the first DL framework for 3D image
segmentation that explicitly leverages 3D image anisotropism. Evaluating using a
dataset from the ISBI Neuronal Structure Segmentation Challenge and in-house
image stacks for 3D fungus segmentation, our approach achieves promising results
comparing to the known DL-based 3D segmentation approaches.

1

Introduction

In biomedical image analysis, a fundamental problem is the segmentation of 3D images, to identify
target 3D objects such as neuronal structures [1] and knee cartilage [15]. In biomedical imaging, 3D
images often consist of highly anisotropic dimensions [11], that is, the scale of each voxel in depth
(the z-axis) can be much larger (e.g., 5 ∼ 10 times) than that in the xy plane.
On various biomedical image segmentation tasks, deep learning (DL) methods have achieved tremendous success in terms of accuracy (outperforming classic methods by a large margin [4]) and
generality (mostly application-independent [16]). For 3D segmentation, known DL schemes can be
broadly classified into four categories. (I) 2D fully convolutional networks (FCN), such as U-Net
[16] and DCAN [2], can be applied to each 2D image slice, and 3D segmentation is then generated
by concatenating the 2D results. (II) 3D convolutions can be employed to replace 2D convolutions
[10], or combined with 2D convolutions into a hybrid network [11]. (III) Tri-planar schemes (e.g.,
[15]) apply three 2D convolutional networks based on orthogonal planes (i.e., the xy, yz, and xz
planes) to perform voxel classification. (IV) 3D segmentation can also be conducted by recurrent
neural networks (RNN). A most representative RNN based scheme is Pyramid-LSTM [18], which
uses six generalized long short term memory networks to exploit the 3D context.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

