Parameter Learning
for Log-supermodular Distributions

Tatiana Shpakova
INRIA - École Normale Supérieure Paris
tatiana.shpakova@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA - École Normale Supérieure Paris
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider log-supermodular models on binary variables, which are probabilistic
models with negative log-densities which are submodular. These models provide
probabilistic interpretations of common combinatorial optimization tasks such as
image segmentation. In this paper, we focus primarily on parameter estimation in
the models from known upper-bounds on the intractable log-partition function. We
show that the bound based on separable optimization on the base polytope of the
submodular function is always inferior to a bound based on “perturb-and-MAP”
ideas. Then, to learn parameters, given that our approximation of the log-partition
function is an expectation (over our own randomization), we use a stochastic
subgradient technique to maximize a lower-bound on the log-likelihood. This can
also be extended to conditional maximum likelihood. We illustrate our new results
in a set of experiments in binary image denoising, where we highlight the flexibility
of a probabilistic model to learn with missing data.

1

Introduction

Submodular functions provide efficient and flexible tools for learning on discrete data. Several
common combinatorial optimization tasks, such as clustering, image segmentation, or document
summarization, can be achieved by the minimization or the maximization of a submodular function [1,
8, 14]. The key benefit of submodularity is the ability to model notions of diminishing returns, and
the availability of exact minimization algorithms and approximate maximization algorithms with
precise approximation guarantees [12].
In practice, it is not always straightforward to define an appropriate submodular function for a problem
at hand. Given fully-labeled data, e.g., images and their foreground/background segmentations in
image segmentation, structured-output prediction methods such as the structured-SVM may be
used [18]. However, it is common (a) to have missing data, and (b) to embed submodular function
minimization within a larger model. These are two situations well tackled by probabilistic modelling.
Log-supermodular models, with negative log-densities equal to a submodular function, are a first important step toward probabilistic modelling on discrete data with submodular functions [5]. However,
it is well known that the log-partition function is intractable in such models. Several bounds have
been proposed, that are accompanied with variational approximate inference [6]. These bounds are
based on the submodularity of the negative log-densities. However, parameter learning (typically by
maximum likelihood), which is a key feature of probabilistic modeling, has not been tackled yet. We
make the following contributions:
– In Section 3, we review existing variational bounds for the log-partition function and show that
the bound of [9], based on “perturb-and-MAP” ideas, formally dominates the bounds proposed
by [5, 6].
– In Section 4.1, we show that for parameter learning via maximum likelihood the existing bound
of [5, 6] typically leads to a degenerate solution while the one based on “perturb-and-MAP” ideas
and logistic samples [9] does not.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

