Consistent Estimation of Functions of Data Missing
Non-Monotonically and Not at Random

Ilya Shpitser
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
ilyas@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Missing records are a perennial problem in analysis of complex data of all types,
when the target of inference is some function of the full data law. In simple cases,
where data is missing at random or completely at random [15], well-known adjustments exist that result in consistent estimators of target quantities.
Assumptions underlying these estimators are generally not realistic in practical
missing data problems. Unfortunately, consistent estimators in more complex
cases where data is missing not at random, and where no ordering on variables
induces monotonicity of missingness status are not known in general, with some
notable exceptions [13, 18, 16].
In this paper, we propose a general class of consistent estimators for cases where
data is missing not at random, and missingness status is non-monotonic. Our estimators, which are generalized inverse probability weighting estimators, make
no assumptions on the underlying full data law, but instead place independence
restrictions, and certain other fairly mild assumptions, on the distribution of missingness status conditional on the data.
The assumptions we place on the distribution of missingness status conditional on
the data can be viewed as a version of a conditional Markov random field (MRF)
corresponding to a chain graph. Assumptions embedded in our model permit
identification from the observed data law, and admit a natural fitting procedure
based on the pseudo likelihood approach of [2]. We illustrate our approach with
a simple simulation study, and an analysis of risk of premature birth in women in
Botswana exposed to highly active anti-retroviral therapy.

1

Introduction

Practical data sets generally have missing or corrupted entries. A classical missing data problem is
to find a way to make valid inferences about the full data law. In other words, the goal is to exploit
assumptions on the mechanism which is responsible for missingness or corruption of data records
to transform the problem into another where missingness or corruption were not present at all.
In simple cases, where missingness status is assumed to be missing completely at random (determined by an independent coin flip), or at random (determined by a coin flip independent conditional
on observed data records), adjustments exist which result in consistent estimators of many functions
of the full data law. Unfortunately, these cases are difficult to justify in practice. Often, data records
are missing intermittently and in complex patterns that do not conform to above assumptions. For
instance, in longitudinal observational studies in medicine, patients may elect to not show up at a
particular time point, for reasons having to do with their (by definition missing) health status at that
time point, and then later return for followup.
1

