Adaptive optimal training of animal behavior

Ji Hyun Bak1,4 Jung Yoon Choi2,3 Athena Akrami3,5 Ilana Witten2,3 Jonathan W. Pillow2,3
1

Department of Physics, 2 Department of Psychology, Princeton University
3
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
4
School of Computational Sciences, Korea Institute for Advanced Study
5
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
jhbak@kias.re.kr, {jungchoi,aakrami,iwitten,pillow}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Neuroscience experiments often require training animals to perform tasks designed
to elicit various sensory, cognitive, and motor behaviors. Training typically involves
a series of gradual adjustments of stimulus conditions and rewards in order to bring
about learning. However, training protocols are usually hand-designed, relying
on a combination of intuition, guesswork, and trial-and-error, and often require
weeks or months to achieve a desired level of task performance. Here we combine
ideas from reinforcement learning and adaptive optimal experimental design to
formulate methods for adaptive optimal training of animal behavior. Our work
addresses two intriguing problems at once: first, it seeks to infer the learning rules
underlying an animal’s behavioral changes during training; second, it seeks to
exploit these rules to select stimuli that will maximize the rate of learning toward a
desired objective. We develop and test these methods using data collected from rats
during training on a two-interval sensory discrimination task. We show that we can
accurately infer the parameters of a policy-gradient-based learning algorithm that
describes how the animal’s internal model of the task evolves over the course of
training. We then formulate a theory for optimal training, which involves selecting
sequences of stimuli that will drive the animal’s internal policy toward a desired
location in the parameter space. Simulations show that our method can in theory
provide a substantial speedup over standard training methods. We feel these results
will hold considerable theoretical and practical implications both for researchers in
reinforcement learning and for experimentalists seeking to train animals.

1

Introduction

An important first step in many neuroscience experiments is to train animals to perform a particular
sensory, cognitive, or motor task. In many cases this training process is slow (requiring weeks to
months) or difficult (resulting in animals that do not successfully learn the task). This increases the
cost of research and the time taken for experiments to begin, and poorly trained animals—for example,
animals that incorrectly base their decisions on trial history instead of the current stimulus—may
introduce variability in experimental outcomes, reducing interpretability and increasing the risk of
false conclusions.
In this paper, we present a principled theory for the design of normatively optimal adaptive training
methods. The core innovation is a synthesis of ideas from reinforcement learning and adaptive
experimental design: we seek to reverse engineer an animal’s internal learning rule from its observed
behavior in order to select stimuli that will drive learning as quickly as possible toward a desired
objective. Our approach involves estimating a model of the animal’s internal state as it evolves over
training sessions, including both the current policy governing behavior and the learning rule used to
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

