Architectural Complexity Measures of
Recurrent Neural Networks
Saizheng Zhang1,∗, Yuhuai Wu2,∗ , Tong Che4 , Zhouhan Lin1 ,
Roland Memisevic1,5 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov3,5 and Yoshua Bengio1,5
1
MILA, Université de Montréal, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Carnegie Mellon University,
4
Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, France, 5 CIFAR

Abstract
In this paper, we systematically analyze the connecting architectures of recurrent
neural networks (RNNs). Our main contribution is twofold: first, we present a
rigorous graph-theoretic framework describing the connecting architectures of
RNNs in general. Second, we propose three architecture complexity measures of
RNNs: (a) the recurrent depth, which captures the RNN’s over-time nonlinear
complexity, (b) the feedforward depth, which captures the local input-output nonlinearity (similar to the “depth” in feedforward neural networks (FNNs)), and (c)
the recurrent skip coefficient which captures how rapidly the information propagates over time. We rigorously prove each measure’s existence and computability.
Our experimental results show that RNNs might benefit from larger recurrent depth
and feedforward depth. We further demonstrate that increasing recurrent skip
coefficient offers performance boosts on long term dependency problems.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been shown to achieve promising results on many difficult
sequential learning problems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. There is also much work attempting to reveal the
principles behind the challenges and successes of RNNs, including optimization issues [6, 7], gradient
vanishing/exploding related problems [8, 9], analysing/designing new RNN transition functional
units like LSTMs, GRUs and their variants [10, 11, 12, 13].
This paper focuses on another important theoretical aspect of RNNs: the connecting architecture.
Ever since [14, 15] introduced different forms of “stacked RNNs”, researchers have taken architecture
design for granted and have paid less attention to the exploration of other connecting architectures.
Some examples include [16, 1, 17] who explored the use of skip connections; [18] who pointed out
the distinction of constructing a “deep” RNN from the view of the recurrent paths and the view of the
input-to-hidden and hidden-to-output maps. However, they did not rigorously formalize the notion
of “depth” and its implications in “deep” RNNs. Besides “deep” RNNs, there still remains a vastly
unexplored field of connecting architectures. We argue that one barrier for better understanding the
architectural complexity is the lack of a general definition of the connecting architecture. This forced
previous researchers to mostly consider the simple cases while neglecting other possible connecting
variations. Another barrier is the lack of quantitative measurements of the complexity of different
RNN connecting architectures: even the concept of “depth” is not clear with current RNNs.
In this paper, we try to address these two barriers. We first introduce a general formulation of
RNN connecting architectures, using a well-defined graph representation. Observing that the RNN
undergoes multiple transformations not only feedforwardly (from input to output within a time step)
but also recurrently (across multiple time steps), we carry out a quantitative analysis of the number of
transformations in these two orthogonal directions, which results in the definitions of recurrent depth
∗

Equal contribution.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

