Infinite Hidden Semi-Markov Modulated Interaction
Point Process
Peng Lin§† , Bang Zhang§ , Ting Guo§ , Yang Wang§ , Fang Chen§
Data61 CSIRO, Australian Technology Park, 13 Garden Street, Eveleigh NSW 2015, Australia
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
{peng.lin, bang.zhang, ting.guo, yang.wang, fang.chen}@data61.csiro.au

§

Abstract
The correlation between events is ubiquitous and important for temporal events
modelling. In many cases, the correlation exists between not only events’ emitted
observations, but also their arrival times. State space models (e.g., hidden Markov
model) and stochastic interaction point process models (e.g., Hawkes process)
have been studied extensively yet separately for the two types of correlations
in the past. In this paper, we propose a Bayesian nonparametric approach that
considers both types of correlations via unifying and generalizing the hidden semiMarkov model and interaction point process model. The proposed approach can
simultaneously model both the observations and arrival times of temporal events,
and automatically determine the number of latent states from data. A Metropoliswithin-particle-Gibbs sampler with ancestor resampling is developed for efficient
posterior inference. The approach is tested on both synthetic and real-world data
with promising outcomes.

1

Introduction

Temporal events modeling is a classic machine learning problem that has drawn enormous research
attentions for decades. It has wide applications in many areas, such as financial modelling, social
events analysis, seismological and epidemiological forecasting. An event is often associated with
an arrival time and an observation, e.g., a scalar or vector. For example, a trading event in financial
market has a trading time and a trading price. A message in social network has a posting time and a
sequence of words. A main task of temporal events modelling is to capture the underlying events
correlation and use it to make predictions for future events’ observations and/or arrival times.
The correlation between events’ observations can be readily found in many real-world cases in which
an event’s observation is influenced by its predecessors’ observations. For examples, the price of a
trading event is impacted by former trading prices. The content of a new social message is affected
by the contents of the previous messages. State space model (SSM), e.g., the hidden Markov model
(HMM) [16], is one of the most prevalent frameworks that consider such correlation. It models the
correlation via latent state dependency. Each event in the HMM is associated with a latent state
that can emit an observation. A latent state is independent of all but the most recent state, i.e.,
Markovianity. Hence, a future event observation can be predicted based on the observed events and
inferred mechanisms of emission and transition.
Despite its popularity, the HMM lacks the flexibility to model event arrival time. It only allows
fixed inter-arrival time. The duration of a type of state follows a geometric distribution with its
self-transition probability as the parameter due to the strict Markovian constraint. The hidden semiMarkov model (HSMM) [14, 21] was developed to allow non-geometric state duration. It is an
extension of the HMM by allowing the underlying state transition process to be a semi-Markov chain
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

