Data Poisoning Attacks on Factorization-Based
Collaborative Filtering
Bo Li ∗
Vanderbilt University
bo.li.2@vanderbilt.edu
Aarti Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
aarti@cs.cmu.edu

Yining Wang ∗
Carnegie Mellon University
ynwang.yining@gmail.com

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Vanderbilt University
yevgeniy.vorobeychik@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Recommendation and collaborative filtering systems are important in modern information and e-commerce applications. As these systems are becoming increasingly
popular in the industry, their outputs could affect business decision making, introducing incentives for an adversarial party to compromise the availability or
integrity of such systems. We introduce a data poisoning attack on collaborative
filtering systems. We demonstrate how a powerful attacker with full knowledge
of the learner can generate malicious data so as to maximize his/her malicious
objectives, while at the same time mimicking normal user behavior to avoid being
detected. While the complete knowledge assumption seems extreme, it enables a
robust assessment of the vulnerability of collaborative filtering schemes to highly
motivated attacks. We present efficient solutions for two popular factorizationbased collaborative filtering algorithms: the alternative minimization formulation
and the nuclear norm minimization method. Finally, we test the effectiveness of our
proposed algorithms on real-world data and discuss potential defensive strategies.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems have emerged as a crucial feature of many electronic commerce systems. In
machine learning such problems are usually referred to as collaborative filtering or matrix completion,
where the known users’ preferences are abstracted into an incomplete user-by-item matrix, and
the goal is to complete the matrix and subsequently make new item recommendations for each
user. Existing approaches in the literature include nearest-neighbor methods, where a user’s (item’s)
preference is determined by other users (items) with similar profiles [1], and factorization-based
methods where the incomplete preference matrix is assumed to be approximately low-rank [2, 3].
As recommendation systems play an ever increasing role in current information and e-commerce
systems, they are susceptible to a risk of being maliciously attacked. One particular form of attacks
is called data poisoning, in which a malicious party creates dummy (malicious) users in a recommendation system with carefully chosen item preferences (i.e., data) such that the effectiveness or
credibility of the system is maximally degraded. For example, an attacker might attempt to make
recommendations that are as different as possible from those that would otherwise be made by
the recommendation system. In another, more subtle, example, the attacker is associated with the
producer of a specific movie or product, who may wish to increase or decrease the popularity of a
certain item. In both cases, the credibility of a recommendation system is harmed by the malicious
activities, which could lead to significant economic loss. Due to the open nature of recommendation
∗

Both authors contribute equally

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

