On statistical learning via the lens of compression

Ofir David
Department of Mathematics
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
ofirdav@tx.technion.ac.il
Shay Moran
Department of Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
shaymrn@cs.technion.ac.il
Amir Yehudayoff
Department of Mathematics
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
amir.yehudayoff@gmail.com

Abstract
This work continues the study of the relationship between sample compression
schemes and statistical learning, which has been mostly investigated within the
framework of binary classification. The central theme of this work is establishing
equivalences between learnability and compressibility, and utilizing these equivalences in the study of statistical learning theory. We begin with the setting of
multiclass categorization (zero/one loss). We prove that in this case learnability
is equivalent to compression of logarithmic sample size, and that uniform convergence implies compression of constant size. We then consider Vapnik’s general
learning setting: we show that in order to extend the compressibility-learnability
equivalence to this case, it is necessary to consider an approximate variant of compression. Finally, we provide some applications of the compressibility-learnability
equivalences.

1

Introduction

This work studies statistical learning theory using the point of view of compression. The main theme
in this work is establishing equivalences between learnability and compressibility, and making an
effective use of these equivalences to study statistical learning theory.
In a nutshell, the usefulness of these equivalences stems from that compressibility is a combinatorial
notion, while learnability is a statistical notion. These equivalences, therefore, translate statistical
statements to combinatorial ones and vice versa. This translation helps to reveal properties that are
otherwise difficult to find, and highlights useful guidelines for designing learning algorithms.
We first consider the setting of multiclass categorization, which is used to model supervised learning
problems using the zero/one loss function, and then move to Vapnik’s general learning setting [23],
which models many supervised and unsupervised learning problems.
Zero/one loss function (Section 3) This is the setting in which sample compression schemes were
defined by Littlestone and Warmuth [16], as an abstraction of a common property of many learning
algorithms. For more background on sample compression schemes, see e.g. [16, 8, 9, 22].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

