Dueling Bandits: Beyond Condorcet Winners to
General Tournament Solutions
Siddartha Ramamohan
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 560012, India

Arun Rajkumar
Xerox Research
Bangalore 560103, India

Shivani Agarwal
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

siddartha.yr@csa.iisc.ernet.in

arun_r@csa.iisc.ernet.in

ashivani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Recent work on deriving O(log T ) anytime regret bounds for stochastic dueling
bandit problems has considered mostly Condorcet winners, which do not always
exist, and more recently, winners defined by the Copeland set, which do always
exist. In this work, we consider a broad notion of winners defined by tournament
solutions in social choice theory, which include the Copeland set as a special case
but also include several other notions of winners such as the top cycle, uncovered set,
and Banks set, and which, like the Copeland set, always exist. We develop a family
of UCB-style dueling bandit algorithms for such general tournament solutions, and
show O(log T ) anytime regret bounds for them. Experiments confirm the ability of
our algorithms to achieve low regret relative to the target winning set of interest.

1

Introduction

There has been significant interest and progress in recent years in developing algorithms for dueling
bandit problems [1–11]. Here there are K arms; on each trial t, one selects a pair of arms (it , jt ) for
comparison, and receives a binary feedback signal yt ∈ {0, 1} indicating which arm was preferred.
Most work on dueling bandits is in the stochastic setting and assumes a stochastic model – a preference
matrix P of pairwise comparison probabilities Pij – from which the feedback signals yt are drawn;
as with standard stochastic multi-armed bandits, the target here is usually to design algorithms with
O(ln T ) regret bounds, and where possible, O(ln T ) anytime (or ‘horizon-free’) regret bounds, for
which the algorithm does not need to know the horizon or number of trials T in advance.
Early work on dueling bandits often assumed strong conditions on the preference matrix P, such as
existence of a total order, under which there is a natural notion of a ‘maximal’ element with respect to
which regret is measured. Recent work has sought to design algorithms under weaker conditions on
P; most work, however, has assumed the existence of a Condorcet winner, which is an arm i that beats
every other arm j (Pij > 12 ∀j 6= i), and which reduces to the maximal element when a total order
exists. Unfortunately, the Condorcet winner does not always exist, and this has motivated a search for
other natural notions of winners, such as Borda winners and the Copeland set (see Figure 1).1 Among
these, the only work that offers anytime O(ln T ) regret bounds is the recent work of Zoghi et al. [11]
on Copeland sets. In this work, we consider defining winners in dueling bandits via the natural notion
of tournament solutions used in social choice theory, of which the Copeland set is a special case.
We develop general upper confidence bound (UCB) style dueling bandit algorithms for a number
of tournament solutions including the top cycle, uncovered set, and Banks set, and prove O(ln T )
anytime regret bounds for them, where the regret is measured relative to the tournament solution of
interest. Our proof technique is modular and can be used to develop algorithms with similar bounds
for any tournament solution for which a ‘selection procedure’ satisfying certain ‘safety conditions’
can be designed. Experiments confirm the ability of our algorithms to achieve low regret relative to
the target winning set of interest.
1

Recently, Dudik et al. [10] also studied von Neumann winners, although they did so in a different (contextual)
setting, leading to O(T 1/2 ) and O(T 2/3 ) regret bounds.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

