Sample Complexity of Automated Mechanism Design

Maria-Florina Balcan, Tuomas Sandholm, Ellen Vitercik
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{ninamf,sandholm,vitercik}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The design of revenue-maximizing combinatorial auctions, i.e. multi-item auctions
over bundles of goods, is one of the most fundamental problems in computational
economics, unsolved even for two bidders and two items for sale. In the traditional
economic models, it is assumed that the bidders’ valuations are drawn from an
underlying distribution and that the auction designer has perfect knowledge of
this distribution. Despite this strong and oftentimes unrealistic assumption, it is
remarkable that the revenue-maximizing combinatorial auction remains unknown.
In recent years, automated mechanism design has emerged as one of the most practical and promising approaches to designing high-revenue combinatorial auctions.
The most scalable automated mechanism design algorithms take as input samples
from the bidders’ valuation distribution and then search for a high-revenue auction
in a rich auction class. In this work, we provide the first sample complexity analysis
for the standard hierarchy of deterministic combinatorial auction classes used in
automated mechanism design. In particular, we provide tight sample complexity
bounds on the number of samples needed to guarantee that the empirical revenue
of the designed mechanism on the samples is close to its expected revenue on the
underlying, unknown distribution over bidder valuations, for each of the auction
classes in the hierarchy. In addition to helping set automated mechanism design on
firm foundations, our results also push the boundaries of learning theory. In particular, the hypothesis functions used in our contexts are defined through multi-stage
combinatorial optimization procedures, rather than simple decision boundaries, as
are common in machine learning.

1

Introduction

Multi-item, multi-bidder auctions have been studied extensively in economics, operations research,
and computer science. In a combinatorial auction (CA), the bidders may submit bids on bundles of
goods, rather than on individual items alone, and thereby they may fully express their complex valuation functions. Notably, these functions may be non-additive due to the presence of complementary
or substitutable goods for sale. There are many important and practical applications of CAs, ranging
from the US government’s wireless spectrum license auctions to sourcing auctions, through which
companies coordinate the procurement and distribution of equipment, materials and supplies.
One of the most important and tantalizing open questions in computational economics is the design
of optimal auctions, that is, auctions that maximize the seller’s expected. In the standard economic
model, it is assumed that the bidders’ valuations are drawn from an underlying distribution and that
the mechanism designer has perfect information about this distribution. Astonishingly, even with this
strong assumption, the optimal CA design problem is unsolved even for auctions with just two distinct
items for sale and two bidders. A monumental advance in the study of optimal auction design was
the characterization of the optimal 1-item auction [Myerson, 1981]. However, the problem becomes
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

