Unsupervised Learning for Physical Interaction
through Video Prediction

Chelsea Finn∗
UC Berkeley
cbfinn@eecs.berkeley.edu

Ian Goodfellow
OpenAI
ian@openai.com

Sergey Levine
Google Brain
UC Berkeley
slevine@google.com

Abstract
A core challenge for an agent learning to interact with the world is to predict
how its actions affect objects in its environment. Many existing methods for
learning the dynamics of physical interactions require labeled object information.
However, to scale real-world interaction learning to a variety of scenes and objects,
acquiring labeled data becomes increasingly impractical. To learn about physical
object motion without labels, we develop an action-conditioned video prediction
model that explicitly models pixel motion, by predicting a distribution over pixel
motion from previous frames. Because our model explicitly predicts motion, it
is partially invariant to object appearance, enabling it to generalize to previously
unseen objects. To explore video prediction for real-world interactive agents, we
also introduce a dataset of 59,000 robot interactions involving pushing motions,
including a test set with novel objects. In this dataset, accurate prediction of videos
conditioned on the robot’s future actions amounts to learning a “visual imagination”
of different futures based on different courses of action. Our experiments show that
our proposed method produces more accurate video predictions both quantitatively
and qualitatively, when compared to prior methods.

1

Introduction

Object detection, tracking, and motion prediction are fundamental problems in computer vision,
and predicting the effect of physical interactions is a critical challenge for learning agents acting in
the world, such as robots, autonomous cars, and drones. Most existing techniques for learning to
predict physics rely on large manually labeled datasets (e.g. [18]). However, if interactive agents
can use unlabeled raw video data to learn about physical interaction, they can autonomously collect
virtually unlimited experience through their own exploration. Learning a representation which can
predict future video without labels has applications in action recognition and prediction and, when
conditioned on the action of the agent, amounts to learning a predictive model that can then be used
for planning and decision making.
However, learning to predict physical phenomena poses many challenges, since real-world physical
interactions tend to be complex and stochastic, and learning from raw video requires handling the
high dimensionality of image pixels and the partial observability of object motion from videos. Prior
video prediction methods have typically considered short-range prediction [17], small image patches
[22], or synthetic images [20]. Such models follow a paradigm of reconstructing future frames
from the internal state of the model. In our approach, we propose a method which does not require
the model to store the object and background appearance. Such appearance information is directly
available in the previous frame. We develop a predictive model which merges appearance information
∗

Work was done while the author was at Google Brain.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

