Fast and Provably Good Seedings for k-Means
Olivier Bachem
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
olivier.bachem@inf.ethz.ch

Mario Lucic
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
lucic@inf.ethz.ch

S. Hamed Hassani
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
hamed@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Seeding – the task of finding initial cluster centers – is critical in obtaining highquality clusterings for k-Means. However, k-means++ seeding, the state of the
art algorithm, does not scale well to massive datasets as it is inherently sequential
and requires k full passes through the data. It was recently shown that Markov
chain Monte Carlo sampling can be used to efficiently approximate the seeding
step of k-means++. However, this result requires assumptions on the data generating distribution. We propose a simple yet fast seeding algorithm that produces
provably good clusterings even without assumptions on the data. Our analysis
shows that the algorithm allows for a favourable trade-off between solution quality
and computational cost, speeding up k-means++ seeding by up to several orders
of magnitude. We validate our theoretical results in extensive experiments on a
variety of real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

k-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007) is one of the most widely used methods to solve k-Means
clustering. The algorithm is simple and consists of two steps: In the seeding step, initial cluster
centers are found using an adaptive sampling scheme called D2 -sampling. In the second step, this
solution is refined using Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982), the classic iterative algorithm for k-Means.
The key advantages of k-means++ are its strong empirical performance, theoretical guarantees on
the solution quality, and ease of use. Arthur & Vassilvitskii (2007) show that k-means++ produces
clusterings that are in expectation O(log k)-competitive with the optimal solution without any
assumptions on the data. Furthermore, this theoretical guarantee already holds after the seeding
step. The subsequent use of Lloyd’s algorithm to refine the solution only guarantees that the solution
quality does not deteriorate and that it converges to a locally optimal solution in finite time. In
contrast, using naive seeding such as selecting data points uniformly at random followed by Lloyd’s
algorithm can produce solutions that are arbitrarily bad compared to the optimal solution.
The drawback of k-means++ is that it does not scale easily to massive data sets since both its
seeding step and every iteration of Lloyd’s algorithm require the computation of all pairwise distances
between cluster centers and data points. Lloyd’s algorithm can be parallelized in the MapReduce
framework (Zhao et al., 2009) or even replaced by fast stochastic optimization techniques such as
online or mini-batch k-Means (Bottou & Bengio, 1994; Sculley, 2010). However, the seeding step
requires k inherently sequential passes through the data, making it impractical even for moderate k.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

