A Bayesian method for reducing bias in neural
representational similarity analysis

Ming Bo Cai
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
mcai@princeton.edu

Nicolas W. Schuck
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
nschuck@princeton.edu

Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
pillow@princeton.edu

Yael Niv
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
yael@princeton.edu

Abstract
In neuroscience, the similarity matrix of neural activity patterns in response to
different sensory stimuli or under different cognitive states reflects the structure
of neural representational space. Existing methods derive point estimations of
neural activity patterns from noisy neural imaging data, and the similarity is
calculated from these point estimations. We show that this approach translates
structured noise from estimated patterns into spurious bias structure in the resulting
similarity matrix, which is especially severe when signal-to-noise ratio is low and
experimental conditions cannot be fully randomized in a cognitive task. We propose
an alternative Bayesian framework for computing representational similarity in
which we treat the covariance structure of neural activity patterns as a hyperparameter in a generative model of the neural data, and directly estimate this
covariance structure from imaging data while marginalizing over the unknown
activity patterns. Converting the estimated covariance structure into a correlation
matrix offers a much less biased estimate of neural representational similarity. Our
method can also simultaneously estimate a signal-to-noise map that informs where
the learned representational structure is supported more strongly, and the learned
covariance matrix can be used as a structured prior to constrain Bayesian estimation
of neural activity patterns. Our code is freely available in Brain Imaging Analysis
Kit (Brainiak) (https://github.com/IntelPNI/brainiak).

1

Neural pattern similarity as a way to understand neural representations

Understanding how patterns of neural activity relate to internal representations of the environment
is one of the central themes of both system neuroscience and human neural imaging [20, 5, 7, 15].
One can record neural responses (e.g. by functional magnetic resonance imaging; fMRI) while
participants observe sensory stimuli, and in parallel, build different computational models to mimic
the brain’s encoding of these stimuli. Neural activity pattern corresponding to each feature of an
encoding model can then be estimated from the imaging data. Such activity patterns can be used
to decode the perceived content with respect to the encoding features from new imaging data. The
degree to which stimuli can be decoded from one brain area based on different encoding models
informs us of the type of information represented in that area. For example, an encoding model based
on motion energy in visual stimuli captured activity fluctuations from visual cortical areas V1 to V3,
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

