Incremental Boosting Convolutional Neural Network
for Facial Action Unit Recognition

Shizhong Han, Zibo Meng, Ahmed Shehab Khan, Yan Tong
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
{han38, mengz, akhan}@email.sc.edu, tongy@cse.sc.edu

Abstract
Recognizing facial action units (AUs) from spontaneous facial expressions is still
a challenging problem. Most recently, CNNs have shown promise on facial AU
recognition. However, the learned CNNs are often overfitted and do not generalize well to unseen subjects due to limited AU-coded training images. We proposed a novel Incremental Boosting CNN (IB-CNN) to integrate boosting into
the CNN via an incremental boosting layer that selects discriminative neurons
from the lower layer and is incrementally updated on successive mini-batches. In
addition, a novel loss function that accounts for errors from both the incremental boosted classifier and individual weak classifiers was proposed to fine-tune
the IB-CNN. Experimental results on four benchmark AU databases have demonstrated that the IB-CNN yields significant improvement over the traditional CNN
and the boosting CNN without incremental learning, as well as outperforming the
state-of-the-art CNN-based methods in AU recognition. The improvement is more
impressive for the AUs that have the lowest frequencies in the databases.

1 Introduction
Facial behavior is a powerful means to express emotions and to perceive the intentions of a human. Developed by Ekman and Friesen [1], the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) describes
facial behavior as combinations of facial action units (AUs), each of which is anatomically related
to the contraction of a set of facial muscles. In addition to applications in human behavior analysis, an automatic AU recognition system has great potential to advance emerging applications in
human-computer interaction (HCI), such as online/remote education, interactive games, and intelligent transportation, as well as to push the frontier of research in psychology.
Recognizing facial AUs from spontaneous facial expressions is challenging because of subtle facial
appearance changes, free head movements, and occlusions, as well as limited AU-coded training
images. As elaborated in the survey papers [2, 3], a number of approaches have been developed
to extract features from videos or static images to characterize facial appearance or geometrical
changes caused by target AUs. Most of them employed hand-crafted features, which, however, are
not designed and optimized for facial AU recognition. Most recently, CNNs have achieved incredible
success in different applications such as object detection and categorization, video analysis, and have
shown promise on facial expression and AU recognition [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
CNNs contain a large number of parameters, especially as the network becomes deeper. To achieve
satisfactory performance, a large number of training images are required and a mini-batch strategy
is used to deal with large training data, where a small batch of images are employed in each iteration.
In contrast to the millions of training images employed in object categorization and detection, AUcoded training images are limited and usually collected from a small population, e.g., 48,000 images
from 15 subjects in the FERA2015 SEMAINE database [11], and 130,814 images from 27 subjects
in Denver Intensity of Spontaneous Facial Action (DISFA) database [12]. As a result, the learned
CNNs are often overfitted and do not generalize well to unseen subjects.
Boosting, e.g., AdaBoost, is a popular ensemble learning technique, which combines many “weak”
classifiers and has been demonstrated to yield better generalization performance in AU recognition [13]. Boosting can be integrated into the CNN such that discriminative neurons are selected and
activated in each iteration of CNN learning. However, the boosting CNN (B-CNN) can overfit due
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

