Generating Images with Perceptual Similarity
Metrics based on Deep Networks

Alexey Dosovitskiy and Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
{dosovits, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
We propose a class of loss functions, which we call deep perceptual similarity
metrics (DeePSiM), allowing to generate sharp high resolution images from compressed abstract representations. Instead of computing distances in the image space,
we compute distances between image features extracted by deep neural networks.
This metric reflects perceptual similarity of images much better and, thus, leads to
better results. We demonstrate two examples of use cases of the proposed loss: (1)
networks that invert the AlexNet convolutional network; (2) a modified version of
a variational autoencoder that generates realistic high-resolution random images.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been a surge of interest in training neural networks to generate images. These are
being used for a wide variety of applications: generative models, analysis of learned representations,
learning of 3D representations, future prediction in videos. Nevertheless, there is little work on
studying loss functions which are appropriate for the image generation task. The widely used
squared Euclidean (SE) distance between images often yields blurry results; see Fig. 1 (b). This is
especially the case when there is inherent uncertainty in the prediction. For example, suppose we
aim to reconstruct an image from its feature representation. The precise location of all details is not
preserved in the features. A loss in image space leads to averaging all likely locations of details,
hence the reconstruction looks blurry.
However, exact locations of all fine details are not important for perceptual similarity of images.
What is important is the distribution of these details. Our main insight is that invariance to irrelevant
transformations and sensitivity to local image statistics can be achieved by measuring distances in a
suitable feature space. In fact, convolutional networks provide a feature representation with desirable
properties. They are invariant to small, smooth deformations but sensitive to perceptually important
image properties, like salient edges and textures.
Using a distance in feature space alone does not yet yield a good loss function; see Fig. 1 (d).
Since feature representations are typically contractive, feature similarity does not automatically
mean image similarity. In practice this leads to high-frequency artifacts (Fig. 1 (d)). To force the
network generate realistic images, we introduce a natural image prior based on adversarial training,
as proposed by Goodfellow et al. [1] 1 . We train a discriminator network to distinguish the output of
the generator from real images based on local image statistics. The objective of the generator is to
trick the discriminator, that is, to generate images that the discriminator cannot distinguish from real
ones. A combination of similarity in an appropriate feature space with adversarial training yields
the best results; see Fig. 1 (e). Results produced with adversarial loss alone (Fig. 1 (c)) are clearly
inferior to those of our approach, so the feature space loss is crucial.
1
An interesting alternative would be to explicitly analyze feature statistics, similar to Gatys et al. [2] .
However, our preliminary experiments with this approach were not successful.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

