Using Fast Weights to Attend to the Recent Past

Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto

Geoffrey Hinton
University of Toronto and Google Brain

jimmy@psi.toronto.edu

geoffhinton@google.com

Volodymyr Mnih
Google DeepMind

Joel Z. Leibo
Google DeepMind

Catalin Ionescu
Google DeepMind

vmnih@google.com

jzl@google.com

cdi@google.com

Abstract
Until recently, research on artificial neural networks was largely restricted to systems with only two types of variable: Neural activities that represent the current
or recent input and weights that learn to capture regularities among inputs, outputs
and payoffs. There is no good reason for this restriction. Synapses have dynamics at many different time-scales and this suggests that artificial neural networks
might benefit from variables that change slower than activities but much faster
than the standard weights. These “fast weights” can be used to store temporary
memories of the recent past and they provide a neurally plausible way of implementing the type of attention to the past that has recently proved very helpful in
sequence-to-sequence models. By using fast weights we can avoid the need to
store copies of neural activity patterns.

1

Introduction

Ordinary recurrent neural networks typically have two types of memory that have very different time
scales, very different capacities and very different computational roles. The history of the sequence
currently being processed is stored in the hidden activity vector, which acts as a short-term memory
that is updated at every time step. The capacity of this memory is O(H) where H is the number
of hidden units. Long-term memory about how to convert the current input and hidden vectors into
the next hidden vector and a predicted output vector is stored in the weight matrices connecting the
hidden units to themselves and to the inputs and outputs. These matrices are typically updated at the
end of a sequence and their capacity is O(H 2 ) + O(IH) + O(HO) where I and O are the numbers
of input and output units.
Long short-term memory networks [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] are a more complicated
type of RNN that work better for discovering long-range structure in sequences for two main reasons:
First, they compute increments to the hidden activity vector at each time step rather than recomputing
the full vector1 . This encourages information in the hidden states to persist for much longer. Second,
they allow the hidden activities to determine the states of gates that scale the effects of the weights.
These multiplicative interactions allow the effective weights to be dynamically adjusted by the input
or hidden activities via the gates. However, LSTMs are still limited to a short-term memory capacity
of O(H) for the history of the current sequence.
Until recently, there was surprisingly little practical investigation of other forms of memory in recurrent nets despite strong psychological evidence that it exists and obvious computational reasons why
it was needed. There were occasional suggestions that neural networks could benefit from a third
form of memory that has much higher storage capacity than the neural activities but much faster
dynamics than the standard slow weights. This memory could store information specific to the history of the current sequence so that this information is available to influence the ongoing processing
1

This assumes the “remember gates ” of the LSTM memory cells are set to one.

