Variational Inference in
Mixed Probabilistic Submodular Models
Josip Djolonga
Sebastian Tschiatschek
Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
{josipd,tschiats,krausea}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We consider the problem of variational inference in probabilistic models with both
log-submodular and log-supermodular higher-order potentials. These models can
represent arbitrary distributions over binary variables, and thus generalize the
commonly used pairwise Markov random fields and models with log-supermodular
potentials only, for which efficient approximate inference algorithms are known.
While inference in the considered models is #P-hard in general, we present efficient approximate algorithms exploiting recent advances in the field of discrete
optimization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in a large set of
experiments, where our model allows reasoning about preferences over sets of
items with complements and substitutes.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic inference is one of the main building blocks for decision making under uncertainty. In
general, however, this problem is notoriously hard even for deceptively simple-looking models and
approximate inference techniques are necessary. There are essentially two large classes in which
we can categorize approximate inference algorithms — those based on variational inference or on
sampling. However, these methods typically do not scale well to large numbers of variables, or
exhibit an exponential dependence on the model order, rendering them intractable for models with
large factors, which can naturally arise in practice.
In this paper we focus on the problem of inference in point processes, i.e. distributions P (A) over
subsets A ⊆ V of some finite ground set V . Equivalently, these models can represent arbitrary
distributions over |V | binary variables1 . Specifically, we consider models that arise from submodular
functions. Recently, Djolonga and Krause [1] discussed inference in probabilistic submodular models
(PSMs), those of the form P (A) ∝ exp(±F (A)), where F is submodular. These models are called
log-submodular (with the plus) and log-supermodular (with the minus) respectively. They generalize
widely used models, e.g., pairwise purely attractive or repulsive Ising models and determinantal point
processes (DPPs) [2]. Approximate inference in these models via variational techniques [1, 3] and
sampling based methods [4, 5] has been investigated.
However, many real-world problems have neither purely log-submodular nor log-supermodular
formulations, but can be naturally expressed in the form P (A) ∝ exp(F (A) − G(A)), where both
F (A) and G(A) are submodular functions — we call these types of models mixed PSMs. For instance,
in a probabilistic model for image segmentation there can be both attractive (log-supermodular)
potentials, e.g., potentials modeling smoothness in the segmentation, and repulsive (log-submodular)
potentials, e.g., potentials indicating that certain pixels should not be assigned to the same class.
While the sampling based approaches for approximate inference are in general applicable to models
1
Distributions over sets A ⊆ V are isomorphic to distributions over |V | binary variables, where each binary
variable corresponds to an indicator whether a certain element is included in A or not.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

