Optimal Learning for Multi-pass Stochastic Gradient
Methods
Junhong Lin
LCSL, IIT-MIT, USA
junhong.lin@iit.it

Lorenzo Rosasco
DIBRIS, Univ. Genova, ITALY
LCSL, IIT-MIT, USA
lrosasco@mit.edu

Abstract
We analyze the learning properties of the stochastic gradient method when multiple
passes over the data and mini-batches are allowed. In particular, we consider
the square loss and show that for a universal step-size choice, the number of
passes acts as a regularization parameter, and optimal finite sample bounds can be
achieved by early-stopping. Moreover, we show that larger step-sizes are allowed
when considering mini-batches. Our analysis is based on a unifying approach,
encompassing both batch and stochastic gradient methods as special cases.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning applications require computational approaches that are at the same time
statistically accurate and numerically efficient [2]. This has motivated a recent interest in stochastic
gradient methods (SGM), since on the one hand they enjoy good practical performances, especially
in large scale scenarios, and on the other hand they are amenable to theoretical studies. In particular,
unlike other learning approaches, such as empirical risk minimization or Tikhonov regularization,
theoretical results on SGM naturally integrate statistical and computational aspects.
Most generalization studies on SGM consider the case where only one pass over the data is allowed
and the step-size is appropriately chosen, [5, 14, 29, 26, 9, 16] (possibly considering averaging [18]).
In particular, recent works show how the step-size can be seen to play the role of a regularization
parameter whose choice controls the bias and variance properties of the obtained solution [29, 26, 9].
These latter works show that balancing these contributions, it is possible to derive a step-size choice
leading to optimal learning bounds. Such a choice typically depends on some unknown properties of
the data generating distributions and in practice can be chosen by cross-validation.
While processing each data point only once is natural in streaming/online scenarios, in practice SGM
is often used as a tool for processing large data-sets and multiple passes over the data are typically
considered. In this case, the number of passes over the data, as well as the step-size, need then to
be determined. While the role of multiple passes is well understood if the goal is empirical risk
minimization [3], its effect with respect to generalization is less clear and a few recent works have
recently started to tackle this question. In particular, results in this direction have been derived in [10]
and [11]. The former work considers a general stochastic optimization setting and studies stability
properties of SGM allowing to derive convergence results as well as finite sample bounds. The latter
work, restricted to supervised learning, further develops these results to compare the respective roles
of step-size and number of passes, and show how different parameter settings can lead to optimal
error bounds. In particular, it shows that there are two extreme cases: one between the step-size or the
number of passes is fixed a priori, while the other one acts as a regularization parameter and needs
to be chosen adaptively. The main shortcoming of these latter results is that they are in the worst
case, in the sense that they do not consider the possible effect of capacity assumptions [30, 4] shown
to lead to faster rates for other learning approaches such as Tikhonov regularization. Further, these
results do not consider the possible effect of mini-batches, rather than a single point in each gradient
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

