Online ICA: Understanding Global Dynamics of
Nonconvex Optimization via Diffusion Processes
Chris Junchi Li
Zhaoran Wang
Han Liu
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University
{junchil, zhaoran, hanliu}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Solving statistical learning problems often involves nonconvex optimization. Despite the empirical success of nonconvex statistical optimization methods, their
global dynamics, especially convergence to the desirable local minima, remain
less well understood in theory. In this paper, we propose a new analytic paradigm
based on diffusion processes to characterize the global dynamics of nonconvex
statistical optimization. As a concrete example, we study stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for the tensor decomposition formulation of independent component
analysis. In particular, we cast different phases of SGD into diffusion processes,
i.e., solutions to stochastic differential equations. Initialized from an unstable equilibrium, the global dynamics of SGD transit over three consecutive phases: (i) an
unstable Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process slowly departing from the initialization, (ii)
the solution to an ordinary differential equation, which quickly evolves towards the
desirable local minimum, and (iii) a stable Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process oscillating
around the desirable local minimum. Our proof techniques are based upon Stroock
and Varadhan’s weak convergence of Markov chains to diffusion processes, which
are of independent interest.

1

Introduction

For solving a broad range of large-scale statistical learning problems, e.g., deep learning, nonconvex
optimization methods often exhibit favorable computational and statistical efficiency empirically.
However, there is still a lack of theoretical understanding of the global dynamics of these nonconvex
optimization methods. In specific, it remains largely unexplored why simple optimization algorithms,
e.g., stochastic gradient descent (SGD), often exhibit fast convergence towards local minima with desirable statistical accuracy. In this paper, we aim to develop a new analytic framework to theoretically
understand this phenomenon.
The dynamics of nonconvex statistical optimization are of central interest to a recent line of work.
Specifically, by exploring the local convexity within the basins of attraction, [1, 5–8, 10–13, 20–
22, 24–26, 31, 35, 36, 39, 46–58] establish local fast rates of convergence towards the desirable local
minima for a variety statistical problems. Most of these characterizations of local dynamics are based
on two decoupled ingredients from statistics and optimization: (i) the local (approximately) convex
geometry of the objective functions, which is induced by the underlying statistical models, and (ii)
adaptation of classical optimization analysis [19, 34] by incorporating the perturbations induced by
nonconvex geometry as well as random noise. To achieve global convergence guarantees, they rely
on various problem-specific approaches to obtain initializations that provably fall into the basins of
attraction. Meanwhile, for some learning problems, such as phase retrieval and tensor decomposition
for latent variable models, it is empirically observed that good initializations within the basins of
attraction are not essential to the desirable convergence. However, it remains highly challenging to
characterize the global dynamics, especially within the highly nonconvex regions outside the local
basins of attraction.
In this paper, we address this problem with a new analytic framework based on diffusion processes.
In particular, we focus on the concrete example of SGD applied on the tensor decomposition formula30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

