Finding significant combinations of features in the
presence of categorical covariates

Laetitia Papaxanthos∗ , Felipe Llinares-López∗ , Dean Bodenham, Karsten Borgwardt
Machine Learning and Computational Biology Lab
D-BSSE, ETH Zurich
*Equally contributing authors.

Abstract
In high-dimensional settings, where the number of features p is much larger than the
number of samples n, methods that systematically examine arbitrary combinations
of features have only recently begun to be explored. However, none of the current
methods is able to assess the association between feature combinations and a target
variable while conditioning on a categorical covariate. As a result, many false
discoveries might occur due to unaccounted confounding effects.
We propose the Fast Automatic Conditional Search (FACS) algorithm, a significant
discriminative itemset mining method which conditions on categorical covariates
and only scales as O(k log k), where k is the number of states of the categorical
covariate. Based on the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel Test, FACS demonstrates superior speed and statistical power on simulated and real-world datasets compared to
the state of the art, opening the door to numerous applications in biomedicine.

1

Introduction

In the last 10 years, the amount of data available is growing at an unprecedented rate. However, in
many application domains, such as computational biology and healthcare, the amount of features is
growing much faster than typical sample sizes. Therefore, statistical inference in high-dimensional
spaces has become a tool of the utmost importance for practitioners in those fields. Despite the great
success of approaches based on sparsity-inducing regularizers [16, 2], the development of methods to
systematically explore arbitrary combinations of features and assess their statistical association with
a target of interest has been less studied. Exploring all combinations of p features is equivalent to
handling a 2p -dimensional space, thus combinatorial feature discovery exacerbates the challenges for
statistical inference in high-dimensional spaces even for moderate p.
Under the assumption that features and targets are binary random variables, recent work in the field
of significant discriminative itemset mining offers tools to solve the computational and statistical
challenges incurred by combinatorial feature discovery. However, all state-of-the-art approaches [15,
10, 13, 7, 8] share a key limitation: no method exists to assess the conditional association between
feature combinations and the target. The ability to condition the associations on an observed covariate
is fundamental to correct for confounding effects. If unaccounted for, one may find many false
positives that are actually associated with the covariate and not the class of interest [17]. For example,
in medical case/control association studies, it is common to search for combinations of genetic
variants that are associated with a disease of interest. In this setting, the class labels are the health
status of individuals, sick or healthy. The features represent binary genetic variants, encoded as 1
if the variant is altered and as 0 if not. Often, in high-order association studies, a subset of genetic
variants are combined to form a binary variable whose value is 1 if the subset only contains altered
genetic variants and is 0 otherwise. A subset of genetic variants is associated with the class label if the
frequencies of altered combinations in each class are statistically different. However, it is often the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

