Single Pass PCA of Matrix Products
Shanshan Wu
The University of Texas at Austin
shanshan@utexas.edu

Srinadh Bhojanapalli
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
srinadh@ttic.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
The University of Texas at Austin
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper we present a new algorithm for computing a low rank approximation
of the product AT B by taking only a single pass of the two matrices A and B. The
straightforward way to do this is to (a) first sketch A and B individually, and then
(b) find the top components using PCA on the sketch. Our algorithm in contrast
retains additional summary information about A, B (e.g. row and column norms
etc.) and uses this additional information to obtain an improved approximation from
the sketches. Our main analytical result establishes a comparable spectral norm
guarantee to existing two-pass methods; in addition we also provide results from
an Apache Spark implementation1 that shows better computational and statistical
performance on real-world and synthetic evaluation datasets.

1

Introduction

Given two large matrices A and B we study the problem of finding a low rank approximation of their
product AT B, using only one pass over the matrix elements. This problem has many applications in
machine learning and statistics. For example, if A = B, then this general problem reduces to Principal
Component Analysis (PCA). Another example is a low rank approximation of a co-occurrence matrix
from large logs, e.g., A may be a user-by-query matrix and B may be a user-by-ad matrix, so AT B
computes the joint counts for each query-ad pair. The matrices A and B can also be two large bag-ofword matrices. For this case, each entry of AT B is the number of times a pair of words co-occurred
together. As a fourth example, AT B can be a cross-covariance matrix between two sets of variables,
e.g., A and B may be genotype and phenotype data collected on the same set of observations. A low
rank approximation of the product matrix is useful for Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [3].
For all these examples, AT B captures pairwise variable interactions and a low rank approximation is
a way to efficiently represent the significant pairwise interactions in sub-quadratic space.
Let A and B be matrices of size d ⇥ n (d
n) assumed too large to fit in main memory. To obtain
a rank-r approximation of AT B, a naive way is to compute AT B first, and then perform truncated
singular value decomposition (SVD) of AT B. This algorithm needs O(n2 d) time and O(n2 ) memory
to compute the product, followed by an SVD of the n ⇥ n matrix. An alternative option is to directly
run power method on AT B without explicitly computing the product. Such an algorithm will need to
access the data matrices A and B multiple times and the disk IO overhead for loading the matrices to
memory multiple times will be the major performance bottleneck.
For this reason, a number of recent papers introduce randomized algorithms that require only a few
passes over the data, approximately linear memory, and also provide spectral norm guarantees. The
1

The code can be found at https://github.com/wushanshan/MatrixProductPCA

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

