Linear Relaxations for Finding Diverse Elements in
Metric Spaces
Aditya Bhaskara
University of Utah
bhaskara@cs.utah.edu

Mehrdad Ghadiri
Sharif University of Technology
ghadiri@ce.sharif.edu

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Ola Svensson
EPFL
ola.svensson@epfl.ch

Abstract
Choosing a diverse subset of a large collection of points in a metric space is a fundamental problem, with applications in feature selection, recommender systems,
web search, data summarization, etc. Various notions of diversity have been proposed, tailored to different applications. The general algorithmic goal is to ﬁnd
a subset of points that maximize diversity, while obeying a cardinality (or more
generally, matroid) constraint. The goal of this paper is to develop a novel linear
programming (LP) framework that allows us to design approximation algorithms
for such problems. We study an objective known as sum-min diversity, which
is known to be effective in many applications, and give the ﬁrst constant factor
approximation algorithm. Our LP framework allows us to easily incorporate additional constraints, as well as secondary objectives. We also prove a hardness result
for two natural diversity objectives, under the so-called planted clique assumption.
Finally, we study the empirical performance of our algorithm on several standard
datasets. We ﬁrst study the approximation quality of the algorithm by comparing
with the LP objective. Then, we compare the quality of the solutions produced by
our method with other popular diversity maximization algorithms.

1

Introduction

Computing a concise, yet diverse and representative subset of a large collection of elements is a
central problem in many areas. In machine learning, it has been used for feature selection [23],
and in recommender systems [24]. There are also several data mining applications, such as web
search [21, 20], news aggregation [2], etc. Diversity maximization has also found applications
in drug discovery, where the goal is to choose a small and diverse subset of a large collection of
compounds to use for testing [16].
A general way to formalize the problem is as follows: we are given a set of objects in a metric
space, and the goal is to ﬁnd a subset of them of a prescribed size so as to maximize some measure
of diversity (a function of the distances between the chosen points). One well studied example of
a diversity measure is the minimum pairwise distance between the selected points – the larger it is,
the more “mutually separated” the chosen points are. This, as well as other diversity measures have
been studied in the literature [11, 10, 6, 23], including those based on mutual information and linear
algebraic notions of distance, and approximation algorithms have been proposed. This is similar in
spirit to the rich and beautiful literature on clustering problems with various objectives (e.g. k-center,
k-median, k-means). Similar to clustering, many of the variants of diversity maximization admit
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

