Synthesizing the preferred inputs for neurons in
neural networks via deep generator networks
Anh Nguyen
anguyen8@uwyo.edu
Jason Yosinski
jason@geometric.ai

Alexey Dosovitskiy
dosovits@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Thomas Brox
brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Jeff Clune
jeffclune@uwyo.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art results on many
pattern recognition tasks, especially vision classification problems. Understanding
the inner workings of such computational brains is both fascinating basic science
that is interesting in its own right—similar to why we study the human brain—and
will enable researchers to further improve DNNs. One path to understanding
how a neural network functions internally is to study what each of its neurons
has learned to detect. One such method is called activation maximization (AM),
which synthesizes an input (e.g. an image) that highly activates a neuron. Here
we dramatically improve the qualitative state of the art of activation maximization
by harnessing a powerful, learned prior: a deep generator network (DGN). The
algorithm (1) generates qualitatively state-of-the-art synthetic images that look
almost real, (2) reveals the features learned by each neuron in an interpretable
way, (3) generalizes well to new datasets and somewhat well to different network
architectures without requiring the prior to be relearned, and (4) can be considered
as a high-quality generative method (in this case, by generating novel, creative,
interesting, recognizable images).

1

Introduction and Related Work

Understanding how the human brain works has been a long-standing quest in human history. Neuroscientists have discovered neurons in human brains that selectively fire in response to specific, abstract
concepts such as Halle Berry or Bill Clinton, shedding light on the question of whether learned neural
codes are local vs. distributed [1]. These neurons were identified by finding the preferred stimuli
(here, images) that highly excite a specific neuron, which was accomplished by showing subjects
many different images while recording a target neuron’s activation. Such neurons are multifaceted:
for example, the “Halle Berry neuron” responds to very different stimuli related to the actress—from
pictures of her face, to pictures of her in costume, to the word “Halle Berry” printed as text [1].
Inspired by such neuroscience research, we are interested in shedding light into the inner workings
of DNNs by finding the preferred inputs for each of their neurons. As the neuroscientists did, one
could simply show the network a large set of images and record a set of images that highly activate a
neuron [2]. However, that method has disadvantages vs. synthesizing preferred stimuli: 1) it requires
a distribution of images that are similar to those used to train the network, which may not be known
(e.g. when probing a trained network when one does not know which data were used to train it); 2)
even in such a dataset, many informative images that would activate the neuron may not exist because
the image space is vast [3]; 3) with real images, it is unclear which of their features a neuron has
learned: for example, if a neuron is activated by a picture of a lawn mower on grass, it is unclear if it
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

