Yggdrasil: An Optimized System for Training Deep
Decision Trees at Scale
Firas Abuzaid1 , Joseph Bradley2 , Feynman Liang3 , Andrew Feng4 , Lee Yang4 ,
Matei Zaharia1 , Ameet Talwalkar5
1
2
MIT CSAIL, Databricks, 3 University of Cambridge, 4 Yahoo, 5 UCLA

Abstract
Deep distributed decision trees and tree ensembles have grown in importance due
to the need to model increasingly large datasets. However, P LANET, the standard
distributed tree learning algorithm implemented in systems such as XGB OOST
and Spark ML LIB, scales poorly as data dimensionality and tree depths grow. We
present Y GGDRASIL, a new distributed tree learning method that outperforms
existing methods by up to 24×. Unlike P LANET, Y GGDRASIL is based on vertical partitioning of the data (i.e., partitioning by feature), along with a set of
optimized data structures to reduce the CPU and communication costs of training. Y GGDRASIL (1) trains directly on compressed data for compressible features
and labels; (2) introduces efficient data structures for training on uncompressed
data; and (3) minimizes communication between nodes by using sparse bitvectors.
Moreover, while P LANET approximates split points through feature binning, Y G GDRASIL does not require binning, and we analytically characterize the impact of
this approximation. We evaluate Y GGDRASIL against the MNIST 8M dataset and
a high-dimensional dataset at Yahoo; for both, Y GGDRASIL is faster by up to an
order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Decision tree-based methods, such as random forests and gradient-boosted trees, have a rich and
successful history in the machine learning literature. They remain some of the most widely-used
models for both regression and classification tasks, and have proven to be practically advantageous
for several reasons: they are arbitrarily expressive, can naturally handle categorical features, and are
robust to a wide range of hyperparameter settings [4].
As datasets have grown in scale, there is an increasing need for distributed algorithms to train decision
trees. Google’s P LANET framework [12] has been the de facto approach for distributed tree learning,
with several popular open source implementations, including Apache Mahout, Spark ML LIB, and
XGB OOST [1, 11, 7]. P LANET partitions the training instances across machines and parallelizes the
computation of split points and stopping criteria over them, thus effectively leveraging a large cluster.
While P LANET works well for shallow trees and small numbers of features, it has high communication
costs when tree depths and data dimensionality grow. P LANET’s communication cost is linear in the
number of features p, and is linear in 2D , where D is the tree depth. As demonstrated by several
studies [13, 3, 8], datasets have become increasingly high-dimensional (large p) and complex, often
requiring high-capacity models (e.g., deep trees with large D) to achieve good predictive accuracy.
We present Y GGDRASIL, a new distributed tree learning system that scales well to high-dimensional
data and deep trees. Unlike P LANET, Y GGDRASIL is based on vertical partitioning of the data [5]: it
assigns a subset of the features to each worker machine, and asks it to compute an optimal split for
each of its features. These candidate splits are then sent to a master, which selects the best one. On
top of the basic idea of vertical partitioning, Y GGDRASIL introduces three novel optimizations:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

