Breaking the Bandwidth Barrier:
Geometrical Adaptive Entropy Estimation

Weihao Gao∗, Sewoong Oh†, and Pramod Viswanath∗
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
{wgao9,swoh,pramodv}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Estimators of information theoretic measures such as entropy and mutual information are a basic workhorse for many downstream applications in modern data
science. State of the art approaches have been either geometric (nearest neighbor
(NN) based) or kernel based (with a globally chosen bandwidth). In this paper, we
combine both these approaches to design new estimators of entropy and mutual
information that outperform state of the art methods. Our estimator uses local
bandwidth choices of k-NN distances with a finite k, independent of the sample
size. Such a local and data dependent choice improves performance in practice, but
the bandwidth is vanishing at a fast rate, leading to a non-vanishing bias. We show
that the asymptotic bias of the proposed estimator is universal; it is independent of
the underlying distribution. Hence, it can be precomputed and subtracted from the
estimate. As a byproduct, we obtain a unified way of obtaining both kernel and
NN estimators. The corresponding theoretical contribution relating the asymptotic
geometry of nearest neighbors to order statistics is of independent mathematical
interest.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning is one of the major themes of modern data science; a common
theme among the various approaches is to extract maximally “informative" features via informationtheoretic metrics (entropy, mutual information and their variations) – the primary reason for the
popularity of information theoretic measures is that they are invariant to one-to-one transformations
and that they obey natural axioms such as data processing. Such an approach is evident in many
applications, as varied as computational biology [11], sociology [20] and information retrieval [17],
with the citations representing a mere smattering of recent works. Within mainstream machine
learning, a systematic effort at unsupervised clustering and hierarchical information extraction is
conducted in recent works of [25, 23]. The basic workhorse in all these methods is the computation
of mutual information (pairwise and multivariate) from i.i.d. samples. Indeed, sample-efficient
estimation of mutual information emerges as the central scientific question of interest in a variety
of applications, and is also of fundamental interest to statistics, machine learning and information
theory communities.
While these estimation questions have been studied in the past three decades (and summarized in [28]),
the renewed importance of estimating information theoretic measures in a sample-efficient manner
is persuasively argued in a recent work [2], where the authors note that existing estimators perform
poorly in several key scenarios of central interest (especially when the high dimensional random
variables are strongly related to each other). The most common estimators (featured in scientific
∗
†

Coordinated Science Lab and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Coordinated Science Lab and Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

