Doubly Convolutional Neural Networks

Yu Cheng
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
chengyu@us.ibm.com

Shuangfei Zhai
Binghamton University
Vestal, NY 13902, USA
szhai2@binghamton.edu
Weining Lu
Tsinghua University
Beijing 10084, China
luwn14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhongfei (Mark) Zhang
Binghamton University
Vestal, NY 13902, USA
zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
Building large models with parameter sharing accounts for most of the success of
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In this paper, we propose doubly convolutional neural networks (DCNNs), which significantly improve the performance
of CNNs by further exploring this idea. In stead of allocating a set of convolutional
filters that are independently learned, a DCNN maintains groups of filters where
filters within each group are translated versions of each other. Practically, a DCNN
can be easily implemented by a two-step convolution procedure, which is supported
by most modern deep learning libraries. We perform extensive experiments on
three image classification benchmarks: CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, and
show that DCNNs consistently outperform other competing architectures. We have
also verified that replacing a convolutional layer with a doubly convolutional layer
at any depth of a CNN can improve its performance. Moreover, various design
choices of DCNNs are demonstrated, which shows that DCNN can serve the dual
purpose of building more accurate models and/or reducing the memory footprint
without sacrificing the accuracy.

1

Introduction

In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success to solve many
problems in machine learning and computer vision. CNNs are extremely parameter efficient due
to exploring the translation invariant property of images, which is the key to training very deep
models without severe overfitting. While considerable progresses have been achieved by aggressively
exploring deeper architectures [1, 2, 3, 4] or novel regularization techniques [5, 6] with the standard
"convolution + pooling" recipe, we contribute from a different view by providing an alternative to the
default convolution module, which can lead to models with even better generalization abilities and/or
parameter efficiency.
Our intuition originates from observing well trained CNNs where many of the learned filters are the
slightly translated versions of each other. To quantify this in a more formal fashion, we define the
k-translation correlation between two convolutional filters within a same layer Wi , Wj as:
ρk (Wi , Wj ) =

max
x,y∈{−k,...,k},(x,y)6=(0,0)

< Wi , T (Wj , x, y) >f
,
kWi k2 kWj k2

(1)

where T (·, x, y) denotes the translation of the first operand by (x, y) along its spatial dimensions,
with proper zero padding at borders to maintain the shape; < ·, · >f denotes the flattened inner
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

