CNNpack: Packing Convolutional Neural Networks
in the Frequency Domain

Yunhe Wang1,3 , Chang Xu2 , Shan You1,3 , Dacheng Tao2 , Chao Xu1,3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems,
School of Software, University of Technology Sydney
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University
wangyunhe@pku.edu.cn, Chang.Xu@uts.edu.au, youshan@pku.edu.cn,
Dacheng.Tao@uts.edu.au, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are successfully used in a number
of applications. However, their storage and computational requirements have
largely prevented their widespread use on mobile devices. Here we present an
effective CNN compression approach in the frequency domain, which focuses not
only on smaller weights but on all the weights and their underlying connections.
By treating convolutional filters as images, we decompose their representations
in the frequency domain as common parts (i.e., cluster centers) shared by other
similar filters and their individual private parts (i.e., individual residuals). A
large number of low-energy frequency coefficients in both parts can be discarded
to produce high compression without significantly compromising accuracy. We
relax the computational burden of convolution operations in CNNs by linearly
combining the convolution responses of discrete cosine transform (DCT) bases.
The compression and speed-up ratios of the proposed algorithm are thoroughly
analyzed and evaluated on benchmark image datasets to demonstrate its superiority
over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Thanks to the large amount of accessible training data and computational power of GPUs, deep
learning models, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have been successfully applied to
various computer vision (CV) applications such as image classification [19], human face verification
[20], object recognition, and object detection [7, 17]. However, most of the widely used CNNs can
only be used on desktop PCs or even workstations due to their demanding storage and computational
resource requirements. For example, over 232MB of memory and over 7.24 × 108 multiplications
are required to launch AlexNet and VGG-Net per image, preventing them from being used in mobile
terminal apps on smartphones or tablet PCs. Nevertheless, CV applications are growing in importance
for mobile device use and there is, therefore, an imperative to develop and use CNNs for this purpose.
Considering the lack of GPU support and the limited storage and CPU performance of mainstream
mobile devices, compressing and accelerating CNNs is essential. Although CNNs can have millions
of neurons and weights, recent research [9] has highlighted that over 85% of weights are useless
and can be set to 0 without an obvious deterioration in performance. This suggests that the gap in
demands made by large CNNs and the limited resources offered by mobile devices may be bridged.
Some effective algorithms have been developed to tackle this challenging problem. [8] utilized vector
quantization to allow similar connections to share the same cluster center. [6] showed that the weight
matrices can be reduced by low-rank decomposition approaches.[4] proposed a network architecture
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

