Fast -free Inference of Simulation Models with
Bayesian Conditional Density Estimation

George Papamakarios
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
g.papamakarios@ed.ac.uk

Iain Murray
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
i.murray@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Many statistical models can be simulated forwards but have intractable likelihoods.
Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) methods are used to infer properties
of these models from data. Traditionally these methods approximate the posterior
over parameters by conditioning on data being inside an -ball around the observed
data, which is only correct in the limit  → 0. Monte Carlo methods can then draw
samples from the approximate posterior to approximate predictions or error bars on
parameters. These algorithms critically slow down as  → 0, and in practice draw
samples from a broader distribution than the posterior. We propose a new approach
to likelihood-free inference based on Bayesian conditional density estimation.
Preliminary inferences based on limited simulation data are used to guide later
simulations. In some cases, learning an accurate parametric representation of the
entire true posterior distribution requires fewer model simulations than Monte Carlo
ABC methods need to produce a single sample from an approximate posterior.

1

Introduction

A simulator-based model is a data-generating process described by a computer program, usually
with some free parameters we need to learn from data. Simulator-based modelling lends itself
naturally to scientific domains such as evolutionary biology [1], ecology [24], disease epidemics [10],
economics [8] and cosmology [23], where observations are best understood as products of underlying
physical processes. Inference in these models amounts to discovering plausible parameter settings
that could have generated our observed data. The application domains mentioned can require properly
calibrated distributions that express uncertainty over plausible parameters, rather than just point
estimates, in order to reach scientific conclusions or make decisions.
As an analytical expression for the likelihood of parameters given observations is typically not available for simulator-based models, conventional likelihood-based Bayesian inference is not applicable.
An alternative family of algorithms for likelihood-free inference has been developed, referred to as
Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC). These algorithms simulate the model repeatedly and
only accept parameter settings which generate synthetic data similar to the observed data, typically
gathered in a real-world experiment.
Rejection ABC [21], the most basic ABC algorithm, simulates the model for each setting of proposed
parameters, and rejects parameters if the generated data is not within a certain distance from the
observations. The accepted parameters form a set of independent samples from an approximate
posterior. Markov Chain Monte Carlo ABC (MCMC-ABC) [13] is an improvement over rejection
ABC which, instead of independently proposing parameters, explores the parameter space by perturbing the most recently accepted parameters. Sequential Monte Carlo ABC (SMC-ABC) [2, 5] uses
importance sampling to simulate a sequence of slowly-changing distributions, the last of which is an
approximation to the parameter posterior.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

