Assortment Optimization Under the Mallows model
Antoine Désir
IEOR Department
Columbia University
antoine@ieor.columbia.edu

Vineet Goyal
IEOR Department
Columbia University
vgoyal@ieor.columbia.edu

Srikanth Jagabathula
IOMS Department
NYU Stern School of Business
sjagabat@stern.nyu.edu

Danny Segev
Department of Statistics
University of Haifa
segevd@stat.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the assortment optimization problem when customer preferences
follow a mixture of Mallows distributions. The assortment optimization problem
focuses on determining the revenue/profit maximizing subset of products from a
large universe of products; it is an important decision that is commonly faced by
retailers in determining what to offer their customers. There are two key challenges:
(a) the Mallows distribution lacks a closed-form expression (and requires summing
an exponential number of terms) to compute the choice probability and, hence, the
expected revenue/profit per customer; and (b) finding the best subset may require an
exhaustive search. Our key contributions are an efficiently computable closed-form
expression for the choice probability under the Mallows model and a compact
mixed integer linear program (MIP) formulation for the assortment problem.

1

Introduction

Determining the subset (or assortment) of items to offer is a key decision problem that commonly
arises in several application contexts. A concrete setting is that of a retailer who carries a large
universe of products U but can offer only a subset of the products in each store, online or offline. The
objective of the retailer is typically to choose the offer set that maximizes the expected revenue/profit1
earned from each arriving customer. Determining the best offer set requires: (a) a demand model and
(b) a set optimization algorithm. The demand model specifies the expected revenue from each offer
set, and the set optimization algorithm finds (an approximation of) the revenue maximizing subset.
In determining the demand, the demand model must account for product substitution behavior,
whereby customers substitute to an available product (say, a dark blue shirt) when her most preferred
product (say, a black one) is not offered. The substitution behavior makes the demand for each
offered product a function of the entire offer set, increasing the complexity of the demand model.
Nevertheless, existing work has shown that demand models that incorporate substitution effects
provide significantly more accurate predictions than those that do not. The common approach to
capturing substitution is through a choice model that specifies the demand as the probability P(a|S)
of a random customer choosing product a from offer set S. The most general and popularly studied
class of choice models is the rank-based class [9, 24, 12], which models customer purchase decisions
through distributions over preference lists or rankings. These models assume that in each choice
instance, a customer samples a preference list specifying a preference ordering over a subset of the
1
As elaborated below, conversion-rate maximization can be obtained as a special case of revenue/profit
maximization by setting the revenue/profit of all the products to be equal.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

