Provable Efficient Online Matrix Completion via
Non-convex Stochastic Gradient Descent
Chi Jin
UC Berkeley
chijin@cs.berkeley.edu

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington
sham@cs.washington.edu

Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research India
praneeth@microsoft.com

Abstract
Matrix completion, where we wish to recover a low rank matrix by observing a
few entries from it, is a widely studied problem in both theory and practice with
wide applications. Most of the provable algorithms so far on this problem have
been restricted to the offline setting where they provide an estimate of the unknown
matrix using all observations simultaneously. However, in many applications, the
online version, where we observe one entry at a time and dynamically update our
estimate, is more appealing. While existing algorithms are efficient for the offline
setting, they could be highly inefficient for the online setting.
In this paper, we propose the first provable, efficient online algorithm for matrix
completion. Our algorithm starts from an initial estimate of the matrix and then
performs non-convex stochastic gradient descent (SGD). After every observation,
it performs a fast update involving only one row of two tall matrices, giving near
linear total runtime. Our algorithm can be naturally used in the offline setting as
well, where it gives competitive sample complexity and runtime to state of the art
algorithms. Our proofs introduce a general framework to show that SGD updates
tend to stay away from saddle surfaces and could be of broader interests to other
non-convex problems.

1

Introduction

Low rank matrix completion refers to the problem of recovering a low rank matrix by observing the
values of only a tiny fraction of its entries. This problem arises in several applications such as video
denoising [13], phase retrieval [3] and most famously in movie recommendation engines [15]. In the
context of recommendation engines for instance, the matrix we wish to recover would be user-item
rating matrix where each row corresponds to a user and each column corresponds to an item. Each
entry of the matrix is the rating given by a user to an item. Low rank assumption on the matrix is
inspired by the intuition that rating of an item by a user depends on only a few hidden factors, which
are much fewer than the number of users or items. The goal is to estimate the ratings of all items by
users given only partial ratings of items by users, which would then be helpful in recommending new
items to users.
The seminal works of Candès and Recht [4] first identified regularity conditions under which low
rank matrix completion can be solved in polynomial time using convex relaxation – low rank matrix
completion could be ill-posed and NP-hard in general without such regularity assumptions [9].
Since then, a number of works have studied various algorithms under different settings for matrix
completion: weighted and noisy matrix completion, fast convex solvers, fast iterative non-convex
solvers, parallel and distributed algorithms and so on.
Most of this work however deals only with the offline setting where all the observed entries are
revealed at once and the recovery procedure does computation using all these observations simultaneously. However in several applications [5, 18], we encounter the online setting where observations are
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

