Deep Alternative Neural Network: Exploring
Contexts as Early as Possible for Action Recognition

Jinzhuo Wang, Wenmin Wang, Xiongtao Chen, Ronggang Wang, Wen Gao†
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University
†
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
jzwang@pku.edu.cn, wangwm@ece.pku.edu.cn
cxt@pku.edu.cn, rgwang@ece.pku.edu.cn, wgao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Contexts are crucial for action recognition in video. Current methods often mine
contexts after extracting hierarchical local features and focus on their high-order
encodings. This paper instead explores contexts as early as possible and leverages their evolutions for action recognition. In particular, we introduce a novel
architecture called deep alternative neural network (DANN) stacking alternative
layers. Each alternative layer consists of a volumetric convolutional layer followed
by a recurrent layer. The former acts as local feature learner while the latter is
used to collect contexts. Compared with feed-forward neural networks, DANN
learns contexts of local features from the very beginning. This setting helps to
preserve hierarchical context evolutions which we show are essential to recognize
similar actions. Besides, we present an adaptive method to determine the temporal
size for network input based on optical flow energy, and develop a volumetric
pyramid pooling layer to deal with input clips of arbitrary sizes. We demonstrate
the advantages of DANN on two benchmarks HMDB51 and UCF101 and report
competitive or superior results to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Contexts contribute semantic clues for action recognition in video. Current leading convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [13, 22, 31] and its shifted version 3D CNNs [11, 28, 29] often aggregate
contexts in the late stage. More precisely, in the first layer of a typical CNN, receptive field (RF)
starts at the kernel size which is usually small and the outputs only extract local features. As the layer
goes deeper, RF expands and contexts start to be involved. These models need to be very deep [32] to
preserve rich context topologies and reach competitive trajectory-based works [16, 19, 20, 30]. We
speculate this is the main reason that going deeper with convolutions achieves better performance
on many visual recognition tasks [23, 26]. However, it is not wise to simply increase layer number
due to parameter burden. Besides, these models do not embed context evolutions of local features in
the forward flow which is essential for context mining [17, 18]. To this end, we attempt to explore
contexts as early as possible and investigate architectures for action recognition.
Our motivation also derives from the relations between CNNs and visual systems of brain since they
share many properties [9, 10]. One remarkable difference is that abundant recurrent connections
exist in the visual system of brain [3] while CNNs only have forward connections. Anatomical
evidences have shown that recurrent synapses typically outnumber feed-forward, top-down and
feedback synapses in the neocortex [4, 37]. This makes visual recognition tend to be a dynamic
procedure. Hence, we investigate to insert recurrent connections in the deployment of our architecture.
Recent works utilize recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with long-short term memory (LSTM) units
at the end CNN-based features of each frame to exploit semantic combinations [5, 25, 35]. These
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

