Linear Contextual Bandits with Knapsacks

Shipra Agrawal∗

Nikhil R. Devanur†

Abstract
We consider the linear contextual bandit problem with resource consumption, in
addition to reward generation. In each round, the outcome of pulling an arm is
a reward as well as a vector of resource consumptions. The expected values of
these outcomes depend linearly on the context of that arm. The budget/capacity
constraints require that the total consumption doesn’t exceed the budget for each
resource. The objective is once again to maximize the total reward. This problem
turns out to be a common generalization of classic linear contextual bandits (linContextual) [8, 11, 1], bandits with knapsacks (BwK) [3, 9], and the online stochastic
packing problem (OSPP) [4, 14]. We present algorithms with near-optimal regret
bounds for this problem. Our bounds compare favorably to results on the unstructured version of the problem [5, 10] where the relation between the contexts and
the outcomes could be arbitrary, but the algorithm only competes against a fixed
set of policies accessible through an optimization oracle. We combine techniques
from the work on linContextual, BwK and OSPP in a nontrivial manner while also
tackling new difficulties that are not present in any of these special cases.

1 Introduction
In the contextual bandit problem [8, 2], the decision maker observes a sequence of contexts (or
features). In every round she needs to pull one out of K arms, after observing the context for that
round. The outcome of pulling an arm may be used along with the contexts to decide future arms.
Contextual bandit problems have found many useful applications such as online recommendation
systems, online advertising, and clinical trials, where the decision in every round needs to be
customized to the features of the user being served. The linear contextual bandit problem [1, 8, 11]
is a special case of the contextual bandit problem, where the outcome is linear in the feature vector
encoding the context. As pointed by [2], contextual bandit problems represent a natural half-way
point between supervised learning and reinforcement learning: the use of features to encode contexts
and the models for the relation between these feature vectors and the outcome are often inherited from
supervised learning, while managing the exploration-exploitation tradeoff is necessary to ensure good
performance in reinforcement learning. The linear contextual bandit problem can thus be thought of
as a midway between the linear regression model of supervised learning, and reinforcement learning.
Recently, there has been a significant interest in introducing multiple “global constraints” in the
standard bandit setting [9, 3, 10, 5]. Such constraints are crucial for many important real-world
applications. For example, in clinical trials, the treatment plans may be constrained by the total
availability of medical facilities, drugs and other resources. In online advertising, there are budget
constraints that restrict the number of times an ad is shown. Other applications include dynamic
pricing, dynamic procurement, crowdsourcing, etc.; see [9, 3] for many such examples.
In this paper, we consider the linear contextual bandit with knapsacks (henceforth, linCBwK)
problem. In this problem, the context vectors are generated i.i.d. in every round from some unknown
distribution, and on picking an arm, a reward and a consumption vector is observed, which depend
∗
†

Columbia University. sa3305@columbia.edu.
Microsoft Research. nikdev@microsoft.com.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

