Variance Reduction in Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics
Avinava Dubey∗ , Sashank J. Reddi∗ , Barnabás Póczos, Alexander J. Smola, Eric P. Xing
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{akdubey, sjakkamr, bapoczos, alex, epxing}@cs.cmu.edu
Sinead A. Williamson
IROM/Statistics and Data Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sinead.williamson@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient-based Monte Carlo methods such as stochastic gradient
Langevin dynamics are useful tools for posterior inference on large scale datasets
in many machine learning applications. These methods scale to large datasets by
using noisy gradients calculated using a mini-batch or subset of the dataset. However, the high variance inherent in these noisy gradients degrades performance and
leads to slower mixing. In this paper, we present techniques for reducing variance
in stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, yielding novel stochastic Monte Carlo
methods that improve performance by reducing the variance in the stochastic gradient. We show that our proposed method has better theoretical guarantees on
convergence rate than stochastic Langevin dynamics. This is complemented by
impressive empirical results obtained on a variety of real world datasets, and on
four different machine learning tasks (regression, classiﬁcation, independent component analysis and mixture modeling). These theoretical and empirical contributions combine to make a compelling case for using variance reduction in stochastic
Monte Carlo methods.

1

Introduction

Monte Carlo methods are the gold standard in Bayesian posterior inference due to their asymptotic
convergence properties; however convergence can be slow in large models due to poor mixing.
Gradient-based Monte Carlo methods such as Langevin Dynamics and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
[10] allow us to use gradient information to more efﬁciently explore posterior distributions over
continuous-valued parameters. By traversing contours of a potential energy function based on the
posterior distribution, these methods allow us to make large moves in the sample space. Although
gradient-based methods are efﬁcient in exploring the posterior distribution, they are limited by the
computational cost of computing the gradient and evaluating the likelihood on large datasets. As a
result, stochastic variants are a popular choice when working with large data sets [15].
Stochastic gradient methods [13] have long been used in the optimization community to decrease
the computational cost of gradient-based optimization algorithms such as gradient descent. These
methods replace the (expensive, but accurate) gradient evaluation with a noisy (but computationally
∗ denotes equal contribution
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

