LightRNN: Memory and Computation-Efficient
Recurrent Neural Networks

1

Xiang Li1
Tao Qin2 Jian Yang1 Tie-Yan Liu2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Microsoft Research Asia
1
implusdream@gmail.com 1 csjyang@njust.edu.cn
2
{taoqin, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performances in
many natural language processing tasks, such as language modeling and machine
translation. However, when the vocabulary is large, the RNN model will become
very big (e.g., possibly beyond the memory capacity of a GPU device) and its
training will become very inefficient. In this work, we propose a novel technique to
tackle this challenge. The key idea is to use 2-Component (2C) shared embedding
for word representations. We allocate every word in the vocabulary into a table,
each row of which is associated with a vector, and each column associated with
another vector. Depending on its position in the table, a word is jointly represented
by two components: a row vector and a column vector. Since the words in the
same row share the rowpvector and the words in the same column share the column
vector, we only need 2 |V | vectors to represent a vocabulary of |V | unique words,
which are far less than the |V | vectors required by existing approaches. Based
on the 2-Component shared embedding, we design a new RNN algorithm and
evaluate it using the language modeling task on several benchmark datasets. The
results show that our algorithm significantly reduces the model size and speeds
up the training process, without sacrifice of accuracy (it achieves similar, if not
better, perplexity as compared to state-of-the-art language models). Remarkably,
on the One-Billion-Word benchmark Dataset, our algorithm achieves comparable
perplexity to previous language models, whilst reducing the model size by a factor
of 40-100, and speeding up the training process by a factor of 2. We name our
proposed algorithm LightRNN to reflect its very small model size and very high
training speed.

1

Introduction

Recently recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been used in many natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, such as language modeling [14], machine translation [23], sentiment analysis [24],
and question answering [26]. A popular RNN architecture is long short-term memory (LSTM)
[8, 11, 22], which can model long-term dependence and resolve the gradient-vanishing problem
by using memory cells and gating functions. With these elements, LSTM RNNs have achieved
state-of-the-art performance in several NLP tasks, although almost learning from scratch.
While RNNs are becoming increasingly popular, they have a known limitation: when applied to
textual corpora with large vocabularies, the size of the model will become very big. For instance,
when using RNNs for language modeling, a word is first mapped from a one-hot vector (whose
dimension is equal to the size of the vocabulary) to an embedding vector by an input-embedding
matrix. Then, to predict the probability of the next word, the top hidden layer is projected by an
output-embedding matrix onto a probability distribution over all the words in the vocabulary. When
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

