Accelerating Stochastic Composition Optimization
Mengdi Wang⇤ , Ji Liu⇤ , and Ethan X. Fang
Princeton University, University of Rochester, Pennsylvania State University
mengdiw@princeton.edu, ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com, xxf13@psu.edu

Abstract
Consider the stochastic composition optimization problem where the objective is a
composition of two expected-value functions. We propose a new stochastic firstorder method, namely the accelerated stochastic compositional proximal gradient
(ASC-PG) method, which updates based on queries to the sampling oracle using
two different timescales. The ASC-PG is the first proximal gradient method for
the stochastic composition problem that can deal with nonsmooth regularization
penalty. We show that the ASC-PG exhibits faster convergence than the best known
algorithms, and that it achieves the optimal sample-error complexity in several
important special cases. We further demonstrate the application of ASC-PG to
reinforcement learning and conduct numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The popular stochastic gradient methods are well suited for minimizing expected-value objective
functions or the sum of a large number of loss functions. Stochastic gradient methods find wide
applications in estimation, online learning, and training of deep neural networks. Despite their
popularity, they do not apply to the minimization of a nonlinear function involving expected values or
a composition between two expected-value functions.
In this paper, we consider the stochastic composition problem, given by
min

x2<n

H(x) := Ev (fv (Ew (gw (x)))) +R(x)
|
{z
}

(1)

=:F (x)

where (f g)(x) = f (g(x)) denotes the function composition, gw (·) : <n 7! <m and
fv (·) : <m 7! < are continuously differentiable functions, v, w are random variables, and
R(x) : <n 7! < [ {+1} is an extended real-valued closed convex function. We assume throughout
that there exists at least one optimal solution x⇤ to problem (1). We focus on the case where fv and
gw are smooth, but we allow R to be a nonsmooth penalty such as the `1 -norm. We do no require
either the outer function fv or the inner function gw to be convex or monotone. As a result, the
composition problem cannot be reformulated into a saddle point problem in general.
Our algorithmic objective is to develop efficient algorithms for solving problem (1) based on random
evaluations of fv , gw and their gradients. Our theoretical objective is to analyze the rate of convergence for the stochastic algorithm and to improve it when possible. In the online setting, the iteration
complexity of our stochastic methods can be interpreted as a sample-error complexity upper bound
for estimating the optimal solution of problem (1).
1.1

Motivating Examples

One motivating example is reinforcement learning [Sutton and Barto, 1998]. Consider a controllable
Markov chain with states 1, . . . , S. Estimating the value-per-state of a fixed control policy ⇡ is known
⇤

Equal contribution.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

