Fundamental Limits of Budget-Fidelity Trade-off in
Label Crowdsourcing

Farshad Lahouti
Electrical Engineering Department, California Institute of Technology
lahouti@caltech.edu
Babak Hassibi
Electrical Engineering Department, California Institute of Technology
hassibi@caltech.edu

Abstract
Digital crowdsourcing (CS) is a modern approach to perform certain large projects
using small contributions of a large crowd. In CS, a taskmaster typically breaks
down the project into small batches of tasks and assigns them to so-called workers
with imperfect skill levels. The crowdsourcer then collects and analyzes the results
for inference and serving the purpose of the project. In this work, the CS problem,
as a human-in-the-loop computation problem, is modeled and analyzed in an
information theoretic rate-distortion framework. The purpose is to identify the
ultimate ﬁdelity that one can achieve by any form of query from the crowd and any
decoding (inference) algorithm with a given budget. The results are established
by a joint source channel (de)coding scheme, which represent the query scheme
and inference, over parallel noisy channels, which model workers with imperfect
skill levels. We also present and analyze a query scheme dubbed k-ary incidence
coding and study optimized query pricing in this setting.

1

Introduction

Digital crowdsourcing (CS) is a modern approach to perform certain large projects using small
contributions of a large crowd. Crowdsourcing is usually used when the tasks involved may better suite
humans rather than machines or in situations where they require some form of human participation.
As such crowdsourcing is categorized as a form of human-based computation or human-in-the-loop
computation system. This article examines the fundamental performance limits of crowdsourcing
and sheds light on the design of optimized crowdsourcing systems.
Crowdsourcing is used in many machine learning projects for labeling of large sets of unlabeled
data and Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) serves as a popular platform to this end. Crowdsourcing
is also useful in very subjective matters such as rating of different goods and services, as is now
widely popular in different online rating platforms and applications such as Yelp. Another example is
if we wish to classify a large number of images as suitable or unsuitable for children. In so-called
citizen research projects, a large number of –often human deployed or operated– sensors contribute
to accomplish a wide array of crowdsensing objectives, e.g., [2] and [3].
In crowdsourcing, a taskmaster typically breaks down the project into small batches of tasks, recruits
so-called workers and assigns them the tasks accordingly. The crowdsourcer then collects and
analyzes the results collectively to address the purpose of the project. The worker’s pay is often
low or non-existent. In cases such as labeling, the work is typically tedious and hence the workers
usually handle only a small batch of work in a given project. The workers are often non-specialists
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

