Tagger: Deep Unsupervised Perceptual Grouping

Klaus Greff* , Antti Rasmus, Mathias Berglund, Tele Hotloo Hao,
Jürgen Schmidhuber* , Harri Valpola
The Curious AI Company {antti,mathias,hotloo,harri}@cai.fi
*
IDSIA {klaus,juergen}@idsia.ch

Abstract
We present a framework for efficient perceptual inference that explicitly reasons
about the segmentation of its inputs and features. Rather than being trained for
any specific segmentation, our framework learns the grouping process in an unsupervised manner or alongside any supervised task. We enable a neural network to
group the representations of different objects in an iterative manner through a differentiable mechanism. We achieve very fast convergence by allowing the system
to amortize the joint iterative inference of the groupings and their representations.
In contrast to many other recently proposed methods for addressing multi-object
scenes, our system does not assume the inputs to be images and can therefore directly handle other modalities. We evaluate our method on multi-digit classification
of very cluttered images that require texture segmentation. Remarkably our method
achieves improved classification performance over convolutional networks despite
being fully connected, by making use of the grouping mechanism. Furthermore,
we observe that our system greatly improves upon the semi-supervised result of a
baseline Ladder network on our dataset. These results are evidence that grouping
is a powerful tool that can help to improve sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Humans naturally perceive the world as being structured into different
objects, their properties and relation to each other. This phenomenon
which we refer to as perceptual grouping is also known as amodal
perception in psychology. It occurs effortlessly and includes a segmentation of the visual input, such as that shown in in Figure 1. This
grouping also applies analogously to other modalities, for example
in solving the cocktail party problem (audio) or when separating the
sensation of a grasped object from the sensation of fingers touching
each other (tactile). Even more abstract features such as object class,
color, position, and velocity are naturally grouped together with the
inputs to form coherent objects. This rich structure is crucial for many
real-world tasks such as manipulating objects or driving a car, where
awareness of different objects and their features is required.
In this paper, we introduce a framework for learning efficient iterative inference of such perceptual grouping which we call iTerative
Amortized Grouping (TAG). This framework entails a mechanism for
iteratively splitting the inputs and internal representations into several
different groups. We make no assumptions about the structure of this
segmentation and rather train the model end-to-end to discover which
Figure 1: An example of perare the relevant features and how to perform the splitting.
ceptual grouping for vision.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

