Learning Deep Embeddings with Histogram Loss

Evgeniya Ustinova and Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia

Abstract
We suggest a loss for learning deep embeddings. The new loss does not introduce
parameters that need to be tuned and results in very good embeddings across a range
of datasets and problems. The loss is computed by estimating two distribution of
similarities for positive (matching) and negative (non-matching) sample pairs, and
then computing the probability of a positive pair to have a lower similarity score
than a negative pair based on the estimated similarity distributions. We show that
such operations can be performed in a simple and piecewise-differentiable manner
using 1D histograms with soft assignment operations. This makes the proposed
loss suitable for learning deep embeddings using stochastic optimization. In the
experiments, the new loss performs favourably compared to recently proposed
alternatives.

1

Introduction

Deep feed-forward embeddings play a crucial role across a wide range of tasks and applications in
image retrieval [1, 8, 15], biometric verification [3, 5, 13, 17, 22, 25, 28], visual product search [21],
finding sparse and dense image correspondences [20, 29], etc. Under this approach, complex input
patterns (e.g. images) are mapped into a high-dimensional space through a chain of feed-forward
transformations, while the parameters of the transformations are learned from a large amount of
supervised data. The objective of the learning process is to achieve the proximity of semanticallyrelated patterns (e.g. faces of the same person) and avoid the proximity of semantically-unrelated (e.g.
faces of different people) in the target space. In this work, we focus on simple similarity measures
such as Euclidean distance or scalar products, as they allow fast evaluation, the use of approximate
search methods, and ultimately lead to faster and more scalable systems.
Despite the ubiquity of deep feed-forward embeddings, learning them still poses a challenge and is
relatively poorly understood. While it is not hard to write down a loss based on tuples of training
points expressing the above-mentioned objective, optimizing such a loss rarely works “out of the
box” for complex data. This is evidenced by the broad variety of losses, which can be based on pairs,
triplets or quadruplets of points, as well as by a large number of optimization tricks employed in
recent works to reach state-of-the-art, such as pretraining for the classification task while restricting
fine-tuning to top layers only [13, 25], combining the embedding loss with the classification loss [22],
using complex data sampling such as mining “semi-hard” training triplets [17]. Most of the proposed
losses and optimization tricks come with a certain number of tunable parameters, and the quality of
the final embedding is often sensitive to them.
Here, we propose a new loss function for learning deep embeddings. In designing this function
we strive to avoid highly-sensitive parameters such as margins or thresholds of any kind. While
processing a batch of data points, the proposed loss is computed in two stages. Firstly, the two
one-dimensional distributions of similarities in the embedding space are estimated, one corresponding
to similarities between matching (positive) pairs, the other corresponding to similarities between
non-matching (negative) pairs. The distributions are estimated in a simple non-parametric ways
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

