A Probabilistic Framework for Deep Learning
Ankit B. Patel
Baylor College of Medicine, Rice University
ankitp@bcm.edu,abp4@rice.edu

Tan Nguyen
Rice University
mn15@rice.edu

Richard G. Baraniuk
Rice University
richb@rice.edu

Abstract
We develop a probabilistic framework for deep learning based on the Deep Rendering Mixture Model (DRMM), a new generative probabilistic model that explicitly
capture variations in data due to latent task nuisance variables. We demonstrate
that max-sum inference in the DRMM yields an algorithm that exactly reproduces
the operations in deep convolutional neural networks (DCNs), providing a first
principles derivation. Our framework provides new insights into the successes and
shortcomings of DCNs as well as a principled route to their improvement. DRMM
training via the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is a powerful alternative
to DCN back-propagation, and initial training results are promising. Classification
based on the DRMM and other variants outperforms DCNs in supervised digit
classification, training 2-3⇥ faster while achieving similar accuracy. Moreover, the
DRMM is applicable to semi-supervised and unsupervised learning tasks, achieving results that are state-of-the-art in several categories on the MNIST benchmark
and comparable to state of the art on the CIFAR10 benchmark.

1

Introduction

Humans are adept at a wide array of complicated sensory inference tasks, from recognizing objects
in an image to understanding phonemes in a speech signal, despite significant variations such as
the position, orientation, and scale of objects and the pronunciation, pitch, and volume of speech.
Indeed, the main challenge in many sensory perception tasks in vision, speech, and natural language
processing is a high amount of such nuisance variation. Nuisance variations complicate perception
by turning otherwise simple statistical inference problems with a small number of variables (e.g.,
class label) into much higher-dimensional problems. The key challenge in developing an inference
algorithm is then how to factor out all of the nuisance variation in the input. Over the past few decades,
a vast literature that approaches this problem from myriad different perspectives has developed, but
the most difficult inference problems have remained out of reach.
Recently, a new breed of machine learning algorithms have emerged for high-nuisance inference
tasks, achieving super-human performance in many cases. A prime example of such an architecture
is the deep convolutional neural network (DCN), which has seen great success in tasks like visual
object recognition and localization, speech recognition and part-of-speech recognition.
The success of deep learning systems is impressive, but a fundamental question remains: Why do they
work? Intuitions abound to explain their success. Some explanations focus on properties of feature
invariance and selectivity developed over multiple layers, while others credit raw computational
power and the amount of available training data. However, beyond these intuitions, a coherent
theoretical framework for understanding, analyzing, and synthesizing deep learning architectures has
remained elusive.
In this paper, we develop a new theoretical framework that provides insights into both the successes
and shortcomings of deep learning systems, as well as a principled route to their design and improvement. Our framework is based on a generative probabilistic model that explicitly captures variation
due to latent nuisance variables. The Rendering Mixture Model (RMM) explicitly models nuisance
variation through a rendering function that combines task target variables (e.g., object class in an
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

