Probabilistic Inference with Generating Functions for
Poisson Latent Variable Models
Kevin Winner1 and Daniel Sheldon1,2
{kwinner,sheldon}@cs.umass.edu
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College

Abstract
Graphical models with latent count variables arise in a number of fields. Standard
exact inference techniques such as variable elimination and belief propagation
do not apply to these models because the latent variables have countably infinite
support. As a result, approximations such as truncation or MCMC are employed.
We present the first exact inference algorithms for a class of models with latent
count variables by developing a novel representation of countably infinite factors
as probability generating functions, and then performing variable elimination with
generating functions. Our approach is exact, runs in pseudo-polynomial time, and
is much faster than existing approximate techniques. It leads to better parameter
estimates for problems in population ecology by avoiding error introduced by
approximate likelihood computations.

1

Introduction

A key reason for the success of graphical models is the existence of fast algorithms that exploit the
graph structure to perform inference, such as Pearl’s belief propagation [19] and related propagation
algorithms [13, 16, 23] (which we refer to collectively as “message passing” algorithms), and variable
elimination [27]. For models with a simple enough graph structure, these algorithms can compute
marginal probabilities exponentially faster than direct summation.
However, these fast exact inference methods apply only to a relatively small class of models—those
for which the basic operations of marginalization, conditioning, and multiplication of constituent
factors can be done efficiently. In most cases, this means that the user is limited to models where the
variables are either discrete (and finite) or Gaussian, or they must resort to some approximate form of
inference. Why are Gaussian and discrete models tractable while others are not? The key issue is one
of representation. If we start with factors that are all discrete or all Gaussian, then: (1) factors can be
represented exactly and compactly, (2) conditioning, marginalization, and multiplication can be done
efficiently in the compact representation, and (3) each operation produces new factors of the same
type, so they can also be represented exactly and compactly.
Many models fail the restriction of being discrete or Gaussian even though they are qualitatively
“easy”. The goal of this paper is to expand the class of models amenable to fast exact inference
by developing and exploiting a novel representation for factors with properties similar to the three
above. In particular, we investigate models with latent count variables, and we develop techniques to
represent and manipulate factors using probability generating functions.
Figure 1 provides a simple example to illustrate the main ideas. It shows a model that is commonly
used to interpret field surveys in ecology, where it is known as an N-mixture model [22]. The latent
variable n ⇠ Poisson( ) represents the unknown number of individual animals at a given site.
Repeated surveys are conducted at the site during which the observer detects each individual with
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

