Mistake Bounds for Binary Matrix Completion
Mark Herbster
University College London
Department of Computer Science
London WC1E 6BT, UK
m.herbster@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Stephen Pasteris
University College London
Department of Computer Science
London WC1E 6BT, UK
s.pasteris@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
16163 Genoa, Italy
and
University College London
Department of Computer Science
London WC1E 6BT, UK
m.pontil@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the problem of completing a binary matrix in an online learning setting.
On each trial we predict a matrix entry and then receive the true entry. We propose
a Matrix Exponentiated Gradient algorithm [1] to solve this problem. We provide a
mistake bound for the algorithm, which scales with the margin complexity [2, 3] of
the underlying matrix. The bound suggests an interpretation where each row of
the matrix is a prediction task over a finite set of objects, the columns. Using this
we show that the algorithm makes a number of mistakes which is comparable up
to a logarithmic factor to the number of mistakes made by the Kernel Perceptron
with an optimal kernel in hindsight. We discuss applications of the algorithm to
predicting as well as the best biclustering and to the problem of predicting the
labeling of a graph without knowing the graph in advance.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of predicting online the entries in an m ⇥ n binary matrix U . We formulate
this as the following game: nature queries an entry (i1 , j1 ); the learner predicts ŷ1 2 { 1, 1} as the
matrix entry; nature presents a label y1 = Ui1 ,j1 ; nature queries the entry (i2 , j2 ); the learner predicts
ŷ2 ; and so forth. The learner’s goal is to minimize the total number of mistakes M = |{t : ŷt 6= yt }|.
If nature is adversarial, the learner will always mispredict, but if nature is regular or simple, there is
hope that a learner may make only a few mispredictions.
In our setting we are motivated by the following interpretation of matrix completion. Each of the
m rows represents a task (or binary classifier) and each of the n columns is associated with an
object (or input). A task is the problem of predicting the binary label of each of the objects. For a
single task, if we were given a kernel matrix between the objects in advance we could then use the
Kernel Perceptron algorithm to sequentially label the objects and this algorithm would incur O(1/ 2 )
mistakes, where is the margin of the best linear classifier in the inner product space induced by
the kernel. Unfortunately, in our setup, we do not know a good kernel in advance. However, we will
show that a remarkable property of our algorithm is that it enjoys, up to logarithmic factors, a mistake
bound of O(1/ 2 ) per task, where is the largest possible margin (over the choice of the kernel)
which is achieved on all tasks.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

