Tight Complexity Bounds for Optimizing Composite
Objectives
Blake Woodworth
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
blake@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We provide tight upper and lower bounds on the complexity of minimizing the
average of m convex functions using gradient and prox oracles of the component
functions. We show a significant gap between the complexity of deterministic vs
randomized optimization. For smooth functions, we show that accelerated gradient descent (AGD) and an accelerated variant of SVRG are optimal in the deterministic and randomized settings respectively, and that a gradient oracle is sufficient for the optimal rate. For non-smooth functions, having access to prox oracles
reduces the complexity and we present optimal methods based on smoothing that
improve over methods using just gradient accesses.

1

Introduction

We consider minimizing the average of m
(

2 convex functions:
)
m
1 X
min F (x) :=
fi (x)
x2X
m i=1

(1)

where X ✓ Rd is a closed, convex set, and where the algorithm is given access to the following
gradient (or subgradient in the case of non-smooth functions) and prox oracle for the components:
⇥
⇤
hF (x, i, ) = fi (x), rfi (x), proxfi (x, )
(2)
where

⇢

proxfi (x, ) = arg min fi (u) +
u2X

2

kx

uk

2

(3)

A natural question is how to leverage the prox oracle, and how much benefit it provides over gradient
access alone. The prox oracle is potentially much more powerful, as it provides global, rather then
local, information about the function. For example, for a single function (m = 1), one prox oracle
call (with = 0) is sufficient for exact optimization. Several methods have recently been suggested
for optimizing a sum or average of several functions using prox accesses to each component, both in
the distributed setting where each components might be handled on a different machine (e.g. ADMM
[7], DANE [18], DISCO [20]) or for functions that can be decomposed into several “easy” parts
(e.g. PRISMA [13]). But as far as we are aware, no meaningful lower bound was previously known
on the number of prox oracle accesses required even for the average of two functions (m = 2).
The optimization of composite objectives of the form (1) has also been extensively studied in the
context of minimizing empirical risk over m samples. Recently, stochastic methods such as SDCA
[16], SAG [14], SVRG [8], and other variants, have been presented which leverage the finite nature
of the problem to reduce the variance in stochastic gradient estimates and obtain guarantees that
dominate both batch and stochastic gradient descent. As methods with improved complexity, such
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

