Testing for Differences in Gaussian Graphical Models:
Applications to Brain Connectivity

Eugene Belilovsky 1,2,3 , Gael Varoquaux2 , Matthew Blaschko3
1
University of Paris-Saclay, 2 INRIA, 3 KU Leuven
{eugene.belilovsky, gael.varoquaux } @inria.fr
matthew.blaschko@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Functional brain networks are well described and estimated from data with Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs), e.g. using sparse inverse covariance estimators.
Comparing functional connectivity of subjects in two populations calls for comparing these estimated GGMs. Our goal is to identify differences in GGMs known
to have similar structure. We characterize the uncertainty of differences with
confidence intervals obtained using a parametric distribution on parameters of a
sparse estimator. Sparse penalties enable statistical guarantees and interpretable
models even in high-dimensional and low-sample settings. Characterizing the
distributions of sparse models is inherently challenging as the penalties produce
a biased estimator. Recent work invokes the sparsity assumptions to effectively
remove the bias from a sparse estimator such as the lasso. These distributions can
be used to give confidence intervals on edges in GGMs, and by extension their
differences. However, in the case of comparing GGMs, these estimators do not
make use of any assumed joint structure among the GGMs. Inspired by priors from
brain functional connectivity we derive the distribution of parameter differences
under a joint penalty when parameters are known to be sparse in the difference.
This leads us to introduce the debiased multi-task fused lasso, whose distribution
can be characterized in an efficient manner. We then show how the debiased lasso
and multi-task fused lasso can be used to obtain confidence intervals on edge
differences in GGMs. We validate the techniques proposed on a set of synthetic
examples as well as neuro-imaging dataset created for the study of autism.

1

Introduction

Gaussian graphical models describe well interactions in many real-world systems. For instance,
correlations in brain activity reveal brain interactions between distant regions, a process know as
functional connectivity. Functional connectivity is an interesting probe on brain mechanisms as
it persists in the absence of tasks (the so-called “resting-state”) and is thus applicable to study
populations of impaired subjects, as in neurologic or psychiatric diseases [3]. From a formal
standpoint, Gaussian graphical models are well suited to estimate brain connections from functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) signals [28, 33]. A set of brain regions and related functional
connections is then called a functional connectome [31, 3]. Its variation across subjects can capture
cognition [26, 27] or pathology [17, 3]. However, the effects of pathologies are often very small, as
resting-state fMRI is a weakly-constrained and noisy imaging modality, and the number of subjects
in a study is often small given the cost of imaging. Statistical power is then a major concern [2]. The
statistical challenge is to increase the power to detect differences between Gaussian graphical models
in the small-sample regime.
In these settings, estimation and comparison of Gaussian graphical models fall in the range of
high-dimensional statistics: the number of degrees of freedom in the data is small compared to
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

