Adaptive Concentration Inequalities
for Sequential Decision Problems

Shengjia Zhao
Tsinghua University
zhaosj12@stanford.edu

Enze Zhou
Tsinghua University
zhouez_thu_12@126.com

Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI
AshishS@allenai.org

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
A key challenge in sequential decision problems is to determine how many samples are needed for an agent to make reliable decisions with good probabilistic
guarantees. We introduce Hoeffding-like concentration inequalities that hold for
a random, adaptively chosen number of samples. Our inequalities are tight under
natural assumptions and can greatly simplify the analysis of common sequential
decision problems. In particular, we apply them to sequential hypothesis testing,
best arm identification, and sorting. The resulting algorithms rival or exceed the
state of the art both theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Many problems in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) involve designing agents
that interact with stochastic environments. The environment is typically modeled with a collection
of random variables. A common assumption is that the agent acquires information by observing
samples from these random variables. A key problem is to determine the number of samples that are
required for the agent to make sound inferences and decisions based on the data it has collected.
Many abstract problems fit into this general framework, including sequential hypothesis testing, e.g.,
testing for positiveness of the mean [18, 6], analysis of streaming data [19], best arm identification
for multi-arm bandits (MAB) [1, 5, 13], etc. These problems involve the design of a sequential
algorithm that needs to decide, at each step, either to acquire a new sample, or to terminate and output
a conclusion, e.g., decide whether the mean of a random variable is positive or not. The challenge is
that obtaining too many samples will result in inefficient algorithms, while taking too few might lead
to the wrong decision.
Concentration inequalities such as Hoeffding’s inequality [11], Chernoff bound, and Azuma’s inequality [7, 5] are among the main analytic tools. These inequalities are used to bound the probability of a
large discrepancy between sample and population means, for a fixed number of samples n. An agent
can control its risk by making decisions based on conclusions that hold with high confidence, due to
the unlikely occurrence of large deviations. However, these inequalities only hold for a fixed, constant
number of samples that is decided a-priori. On the other hand, we often want to design agents that
make decisions adaptively based on the data they collect. That is, we would like the number of
samples itself to be a random variable. Traditional concentration inequalities, however, often do
not hold when the number of samples is stochastic. Existing analysis requires ad-hoc strategies to
bypass this issue, such as union bounding the risk over time [18, 17, 13]. These approaches can lead
to suboptimal algorithms.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

