Stochastic Multiple Choice Learning for
Training Diverse Deep Ensembles

Stefan Lee
Virginia Tech
steflee@vt.edu

Senthil Purushwalkam
Carnegie Mellon University
spurushw@andrew.cmu.edu
David Crandall
Indiana University
djcran@indiana.edu

Michael Cogswell
Virginia Tech
cogswell@vt.edu

Viresh Ranjan
Virginia Tech
rviresh@vt.edu

Dhruv Batra
Virginia Tech
dbatra@vt.edu

Abstract
Many practical perception systems exist within larger processes that include interactions with users or additional components capable of evaluating the quality of
predicted solutions. In these contexts, it is beneficial to provide these oracle mechanisms with multiple highly likely hypotheses rather than a single prediction. In this
work, we pose the task of producing multiple outputs as a learning problem over an
ensemble of deep networks – introducing a novel stochastic gradient descent based
approach to minimize the loss with respect to an oracle. Our method is simple
to implement, agnostic to both architecture and loss function, and parameter-free.
Our approach achieves lower oracle error compared to existing methods on a wide
range of tasks and deep architectures. We also show qualitatively that the diverse
solutions produced often provide interpretable representations of task ambiguity.

1

Introduction

Perception problems rarely exist in a vacuum. Typically, problems in Computer Vision, Natural
Language Processing, and other AI subfields are embedded in larger applications and contexts. For
instance, the task of recognizing and segmenting objects in an image (semantic segmentation [6])
might be embedded in an autonomous vehicle [7], while the task of describing an image with a
sentence (image captioning [18]) might be part of a system to assist visually-impaired users [22, 30].
In these scenarios, the goal of perception is often not to generate a single output but a set of plausible
hypotheses for a ‘downstream’ process, such as a verification component or a human operator. These
downstream mechanisms may be abstracted as oracles that have the capability to pick the correct
solution from this set. Such a learning setting is called Multiple Choice Learning (MCL) [8], where
the goal for the learner is to minimize oracle loss achieved by a set of M solutions. More formally,
given a dataset of input-output pairs {(xi , yi ) | xi ∈ X , yi ∈ Y}, the goal of classical supervised
learning is to search for a mapping F : X → Y that minimizes a task-dependent loss ` : Y ×Y → R+
capturing the error between the actual labeling yi and predicted labeling ŷi . In this setting, the learned
function f makes a single prediction for each input and pays a penalty for that prediction. In contrast,
Multiple Choice Learning seeks to learn a mapping g : X → Y M that produces M solutions
Ŷi = (ŷi1 , . . . , ŷiM ) such that oracle loss minm ` (yi , ŷim ) is minimized.
In this work, we fix the form of this mapping g to be the union of outputs from an ensemble of
predictors such that g(x) = {f1 (x), f2 (x), . . . , fM (x)}, and address the task of training ensemble
members f1 , . . . , fM such that g minimizes oracle loss. Under our formulation, different ensemble
members are free to specialize on subsets of the data distribution, so that collectively they produce a
set of outputs which covers the space of high probability predictions well.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

