Structure-Blind Signal Recovery

Dmitry Ostrovsky∗ Zaid Harchaoui† Anatoli Juditsky∗ Arkadi Nemirovski‡
firstname.lastname@imag.fr

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering a signal observed in Gaussian noise. If
the set of signals is convex and compact, and can be specified beforehand, one
can use classical linear estimators that achieve a risk within a constant factor of
the minimax risk. However, when the set is unspecified, designing an estimator
that is blind to the hidden structure of the signal remains a challenging problem.
We propose a new family of estimators to recover signals observed in Gaussian
noise. Instead of specifying the set where the signal lives, we assume the existence
of a well-performing linear estimator. Proposed estimators enjoy exact oracle
inequalities and can be efficiently computed through convex optimization. We
present several numerical illustrations that show the potential of the approach.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of recovering a complex-valued signal (xt )t∈Z from the noisy observations
yτ = xτ + σζτ ,

−n ≤ τ ≤ n.

(1)

Here n ∈ Z+ , and ζτ ∼ CN (0, 1) are i.i.d. standard complex-valued Gaussian random variables,
meaning that ζ0 = ξ01 + ıξ02 with i.i.d. ξ01 , ξ02 ∼ N (0, 1). Our goal is to recover xt , 0 ≤ t ≤ n, given
the sequence of observations yt−n , ..., yt up to instant t, a task usually referred to as (pointwise) filtering in machine learning, statistics, and signal processing [5].
The traditional approach to this problem considers linear estimators, or linear filters, which write as
x
bt =

n
X

φτ yt−τ ,

0 ≤ t ≤ n.

τ =0

Linear estimators have been thoroughly studied in various forms, they are both theoretically attractive [7, 3, 2, 16, 17, 11, 13] and easy to use in practice. If the set X of signals is well-specified, one
can usually compute a (nearly) minimax on X linear estimator in a closed form. In particular, if X
is a class of smooth signals, such as a Hölder or a Sobolev ball, then the corresponding estimator is
given by the kernel estimator with the properly set bandwidth parameter [16] and is minimax among
all possible estimators. Moreover, as shown by [6, 2], if only X is convex, compact, and centrally
symmetric, the risk of the best linear estimator of xt is within a small constant factor of the minimax
risk over X . Besides, if the set X can be specified in a computationally tractable way, which clearly
is still a weaker assumption than classical smoothness assumptions, the best linear estimator can be
efficiently computed by solving a convex optimization problem on X . In other words, given a computationally tractable set X on the input, one can compute a nearly-minimax linear estimator and
the corresponding (nearly-minimax) risk over X . The strength of this approach, however, comes at
∗

LJK, University of Grenoble Alpes, 700 Avenue Centrale, 38401 Domaine Universitaire de Saint-Martind’Hères, France.
†
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
‡
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

