Bayesian Optimization with a Finite Budget:
An Approximate Dynamic Programming Approach

Remi R. Lam
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
rlam@mit.edu

Karen E. Willcox
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
kwillcox@mit.edu

David H. Wolpert
Santa Fe Institute
Santa Fe, NM
dhw@santafe.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing an expensive objective function when a
finite budget of total evaluations is prescribed. In that context, the optimal solution
strategy for Bayesian optimization can be formulated as a dynamic programming instance. This results in a complex problem with uncountable, dimension-increasing
state space and an uncountable control space. We show how to approximate the
solution of this dynamic programming problem using rollout, and propose rollout
heuristics specifically designed for the Bayesian optimization setting. We present
numerical experiments showing that the resulting algorithm for optimization with
a finite budget outperforms several popular Bayesian optimization algorithms.

1

Introduction

Optimizing an objective function is a central component of many algorithms in machine learning
and engineering. It is also essential to many scientific models, concerning everything from human
behavior, to protein folding, to population biology. Often, the objective function to optimize is
non-convex and does not have a known closed-form expression. In addition, the evaluation of this
function can be expensive, involving a time-consuming computation (e.g., training a neural network,
numerically solving a set of partial differential equations, etc.) or a costly experiment (e.g., drilling a
borehole, administering a treatment, etc.). Accordingly, there is often a finite budget specifying the
maximum number of evaluations of the objective function allowed to perform the optimization.
Bayesian optimization (BO) has become a popular optimization technique for solving problems
governed by such expensive objective functions [17, 9, 2]. BO iteratively updates a statistical model
and uses it as a surrogate for the objective function. At each iteration, this statistical model is used to
select the next design to evaluate. Most BO algorithms are greedy, ignoring how the design selected
at a given iteration will affect the future steps of the optimization. Thus, the decisions made are
typically one-step optimal. Because of this shortsightedness, such algorithms balance, in a greedy
fashion, the BO exploration-exploitation trade-off: evaluating designs to improve the statistical model
or to find the optimizer of the objective function.
In contrast to greedy algorithms, a lookahead approach is aware of the remaining evaluations and can
balance the exploration-exploitation trade-off in a principled way. A lookahead approach builds an
optimal strategy that maximizes a long-term reward over several steps. That optimal strategy is the
solution of a challenging dynamic programming (DP) problem whose complexity stems, in part, from
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

