A scalable end-to-end Gaussian process adapter for
irregularly sampled time series classification

Steven Cheng-Xian Li
Benjamin Marlin
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
{cxl,marlin}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We present a general framework for classification of sparse and irregularly-sampled
time series. The properties of such time series can result in substantial uncertainty
about the values of the underlying temporal processes, while making the data
difficult to deal with using standard classification methods that assume fixeddimensional feature spaces. To address these challenges, we propose an uncertaintyaware classification framework based on a special computational layer we refer to
as the Gaussian process adapter that can connect irregularly sampled time series
data to any black-box classifier learnable using gradient descent. We show how
to scale up the required computations based on combining the structured kernel
interpolation framework and the Lanczos approximation method, and how to
discriminatively train the Gaussian process adapter in combination with a number
of classifiers end-to-end using backpropagation.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we propose a general framework for classification of sparse and irregularly-sampled
time series. An irregularly-sampled time series is a sequence of samples with irregular intervals
between their observation times. These intervals can be large when the time series are also sparsely
sampled. Such time series data are studied in various areas including climate science [22], ecology
[4], biology [18], medicine [15] and astronomy [21]. Classification in this setting is challenging both
because the data cases are not naturally defined in a fixed-dimensional feature space due to irregular
sampling and variable numbers of samples, and because there can be substantial uncertainty about
the underlying temporal processes due to the sparsity of observations.
Recently, Li and Marlin [13] introduced the mixture of expected Gaussian kernels (MEG) framework,
an uncertainty-aware kernel for classifying sparse and irregularly sampled time series. Classification
with MEG kernels is shown to outperform models that ignore uncertainty due to sparse and irregular
sampling. On the other hand, various deep learning models including convolutional neural networks
[12] have been successfully applied to fields such as computer vision and natural language processing,
and have been shown to achieve state-of-the-art results on various tasks. Some of these models
have desirable properties for time series classification, but cannot be directly applied to sparse and
irregularly sampled time series.
Inspired by the MEG kernel, we propose an uncertainty-aware classification framework that enables
learning black-box classification models from sparse and irregularly sampled time series data. This
framework is based on the use of a computational layer that we refer to as the Gaussian process
(GP) adapter. The GP adapter uses Gaussian process regression to transform the irregular time series
data into a uniform representation, allowing sparse and irregularly sampled data to be fed into any
black-box classifier learnable using gradient descent while preserving uncertainty. However, the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

