Coevolutionary Latent Feature Processes for
Continuous-Time User-Item Interactions
Yichen Wang⇧ , Nan Du⇤ , Rakshit Trivedi⇧ , Le Song⇧
⇤
Google Research
⇧
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
{yichen.wang, rstrivedi}@gatech.edu, dunan@google.com
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Matching users to the right items at the right time is a fundamental task in recommendation systems. As users interact with different items over time, users’ and
items’ feature may evolve and co-evolve over time. Traditional models based on
static latent features or discretizing time into epochs can become ineffective for
capturing the fine-grained temporal dynamics in the user-item interactions. We
propose a coevolutionary latent feature process model that accurately captures the
coevolving nature of users’ and items’ feature. To learn parameters, we design
an efficient convex optimization algorithm with a novel low rank space sharing
constraints. Extensive experiments on diverse real-world datasets demonstrate significant improvements in user behavior prediction compared to state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Online social platforms and service websites, such as Reddit, Netflix and Amazon, are attracting
thousands of users every minute. Effectively recommending the appropriate service items is a
fundamentally important task for these online services. By understanding the needs of users and
serving them with potentially interesting items, these online platforms can improve the satisfaction of
users, and boost the activities or revenue of the sites due to increased user postings, product purchases,
virtual transactions, and/or advertisement clicks [30, 9].
As the famous saying goes “You are what you eat and you think what you read”, both users’ interests
and items’ semantic features are dynamic and can evolve over time [18, 4]. The interactions between
users and service items play a critical role in driving the evolution of user interests and item features.
For example, for movie streaming services, a long-time fan of comedy watches an interesting science
fiction movie one day, and starts to watch more science fiction movies in place of comedies. Likewise,
a single movie may also serve different segment of audiences at different times. For example, a movie
initially targeted for an older generation may become popular among the younger generation, and the
features of this movie need to be redefined.
Another important aspect is that users’ interests and items’ features can co-evolve over time, that
is, their evolutions are intertwined and can influence each other. For instance, in online discussion
forums, such as Reddit, although a group (item) is initially created for political topics, users with very
different interest profiles can join this group (user ! item). Therefore, the participants can shape
the actual direction (or features) of the group through their postings and responses. It is not unlikely
that this group can eventually become one about education simply because most users here concern
about education (item ! user). As the group is evolving towards topics on education, some users
may become more attracted to education topics, and to the extent that they even participate in other
dedicated groups on education. On the opposite side, some users may gradually gain interests in
sports groups, lose interests in political topics and become inactive in this group. Such coevolutionary
nature of user-item interactions raises very interesting questions on how to model them elegantly and
how to learn them from observed interaction data.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

