Regularization With Stochastic Transformations and
Perturbations for Deep Semi-Supervised Learning

Mehdi Sajjadi

Mehran Javanmardi

Tolga Tasdizen

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Utah
{mehdi, mehran, tolga}@sci.utah.edu

Abstract
Effective convolutional neural networks are trained on large sets of labeled data.
However, creating large labeled datasets is a very costly and time-consuming
task. Semi-supervised learning uses unlabeled data to train a model with higher
accuracy when there is a limited set of labeled data available. In this paper,
we consider the problem of semi-supervised learning with convolutional neural
networks. Techniques such as randomized data augmentation, dropout and random
max-pooling provide better generalization and stability for classifiers that are
trained using gradient descent. Multiple passes of an individual sample through the
network might lead to different predictions due to the non-deterministic behavior
of these techniques. We propose an unsupervised loss function that takes advantage
of the stochastic nature of these methods and minimizes the difference between
the predictions of multiple passes of a training sample through the network. We
evaluate the proposed method on several benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [1, 2] achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on a variety of
computer vision tasks, including classification, object localization, detection, recognition and scene
labeling [3, 4]. The advantage of ConvNets partially originates from their complexity (large number
of parameters), but this can result in overfitting without a large amount of training data. However,
creating a large labeled dataset is very costly. A notable example is the ’ImageNet’ [5] dataset with
1000 category and more than 1 million training images. The state-of-the-art accuracy of this dataset
is improved every year using ConvNet-based methods (e.g., [6, 7]). This dataset is the result of
significant manual effort. However, with around 1000 images per category, it barely contains enough
training samples to prevent the ConvNet from overfitting [7]. On the other hand, unlabeled data is
cheap to collect. For example, there are numerous online resources for images and video sequences
of different types. Therefore, there has been an increased interest in exploiting the readily available
unlabeled data to improve the performance of ConvNets.
Randomization plays an important role in the majority of learning systems. Stochastic gradient
descent, dropout [8], randomized data transformation and augmentation [9] and many other training
techniques that are essential for fast convergence and effective generalization of the learning functions
introduce some non-deterministic behavior to the learning system. Due to these uncertainties, passing
a single data sample through a learning system multiple times might lead to different predictions.
Based on this observation, we introduce an unsupervised loss function optimized by gradient descent
that takes advantage of this randomization effect and minimizes the difference in predictions of
multiple passes of a data sample through the network during the training phase, which leads to better
generalization in testing time. The proposed unsupervised loss function specifically regularizes the
network based on the variations caused by randomized data augmentation, dropout and randomized
max-pooling schemes. This loss function can be combined with any supervised loss function. In this
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

