Barzilai-Borwein Step Size for Stochastic Gradient
Descent
Conghui Tan
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
chtan@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Shiqian Ma
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
sqma@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Yu-Hong Dai
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
dyh@lsec.cc.ac.cn

Yuqiu Qian
The University of Hong Kong
qyq79@connect.hku.hk

Abstract
One of the major issues in stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods is how to
choose an appropriate step size while running the algorithm. Since the traditional
line search technique does not apply for stochastic optimization methods, the
common practice in SGD is either to use a diminishing step size, or to tune a step
size by hand, which can be time consuming in practice. In this paper, we propose
to use the Barzilai-Borwein (BB) method to automatically compute step sizes
for SGD and its variant: stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG) method,
which leads to two algorithms: SGD-BB and SVRG-BB. We prove that SVRG-BB
converges linearly for strongly convex objective functions. As a by-product, we
prove the linear convergence result of SVRG with Option I proposed in [10], whose
convergence result has been missing in the literature. Numerical experiments
on standard data sets show that the performance of SGD-BB and SVRG-BB is
comparable to and sometimes even better than SGD and SVRG with best-tuned
step sizes, and is superior to some advanced SGD variants.

1

Introduction

The following optimization problem, which minimizes the sum of cost functions over samples from a
finite training set, appears frequently in machine learning:
n

1X
fi (x),
min F (x) ≡
n i=1

(1)

where n is the sample size, and each fi : Rd → R is the cost function corresponding to the i-th sample
data. Throughout this paper, we assume that each fi is convex and differentiable, and the function F
is strongly convex. Problem (1) is challenging when n is extremely large so that computing F (x) and
∇F (x) for given x is prohibited. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method and its variants have
been the main approaches for solving (1). In the t-th iteration of SGD, a random training sample it is
chosen from {1, 2, . . . , n} and the iterate xt is updated by
xt+1 = xt − ηt ∇fit (xt ),

(2)

where ∇fit (xt ) denotes the gradient of the it -th component function at xt , and ηt > 0 is the step size
(a.k.a. learning rate). In (2), it is usually assumed that ∇fit is an unbiased estimation to ∇F , i.e.,
E[∇fit (xt ) | xt ] = ∇F (xt ).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(3)

