Optimal Binary Classifier Aggregation for General
Losses
Akshay Balsubramani
University of California, San Diego
abalsubr@ucsd.edu

Yoav Freund
University of California, San Diego
yfreund@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of aggregating an ensemble of predictors with known loss
bounds in a semi-supervised binary classification setting, to minimize prediction
loss incurred on the unlabeled data. We find the minimax optimal predictions for
a very general class of loss functions including all convex and many non-convex
losses, extending a recent analysis of the problem for misclassification error. The
result is a family of semi-supervised ensemble aggregation algorithms which are
as efficient as linear learning by convex optimization, but are minimax optimal
without any relaxations. Their decision rules take a form familiar in decision
theory – applying sigmoid functions to a notion of ensemble margin – without the
assumptions typically made in margin-based learning.

1

Introduction

Consider a binary classification problem, in which we are given an ensemble of individual classifiers
to aggregate into the most accurate predictor possible for data falling into two classes. Our predictions are measured on a large test set of unlabeled data, on which we know the ensemble classifiers’
predictions but not the true test labels. Without using the unlabeled data, the prototypical supervised solution is empirical risk minimization (ERM): measure the errors of the ensemble classifiers
with labeled data, and then simply predict according to the best classifier. But can we learn a better
predictor by using unlabeled data as well?
This problem is central to semi-supervised learning. The authors of this paper recently derived
the worst-case-optimal solution for it when performance is measured with classification error ([1]).
However, this zero-one loss is inappropriate for other common binary classification tasks, such as
estimating label probabilities, and handling false positives and false negatives differently. Such goals
motivate the use of different evaluation losses like log loss and cost-weighted misclassification loss.
In this paper, we generalize the setup of [1] to these loss functions and a large class of others. Like
the earlier work, the choice of loss function completely specifies the minimax optimal ensemble
aggregation algorithm in our setting, which is efficient and scalable.
The algorithm learns weights over the ensemble classifiers by minimizing a convex function. The
optimal prediction on each example in the test set is a sigmoid-like function of a linear combination
of the ensemble predictions, using the learned weighting. Due to the minimax structure, this decision
rule depends solely upon the loss function and upon the structure of the ensemble predictions on data,
with no parameter or model choices.
1.1

Preliminaries

Our setting generalizes that of [1], in which we are given an ensemble H = {h1 , . . . , hp } and unlabeled (test) examples x1 , . . . , xn on which to predict. The ensemble’s predictions on the unlabeled
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

