Learning Supervised PageRank with Gradient-Based
and Gradient-Free Optimization Methods

Lev Bogolubsky1,2 , Gleb Gusev1,5 , Andrei Raigorodskii5,2,1,8 , Aleksey Tikhonov1 , Maksim Zhukovskii1,5
Yandex1 , Moscow State University2 , Buryat State University8
{bogolubsky, gleb57, raigorodsky, altsoph, zhukmax}@yandex-team.ru
Pavel Dvurechensky3,4 , Alexander Gasnikov4,5
Weierstrass Institute3 , Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS4 ,
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology5
pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de, gasnikov@yandex.ru
Yurii Nesterov6,7
Center for Operations Research and Econometrics6 ,
Higher School of Economics7
yurii.nesterov@uclouvain.be

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a non-convex loss-minimization problem of learning
Supervised PageRank models, which can account for features of nodes and edges.
We propose gradient-based and random gradient-free methods to solve this problem.
Our algorithms are based on the concept of an inexact oracle and unlike the state-ofthe-art gradient-based method we manage to provide theoretically the convergence
rate guarantees for both of them. Finally, we compare the performance of the
proposed optimization methods with the state of the art applied to a ranking task.

1

INTRODUCTION

The most acknowledged methods of measuring importance of nodes in graphs are based on random
walk models. Particularly, PageRank [18], HITS [11], and their variants [8, 9, 19] are originally
based on a discrete-time Markov random walk on a link graph. Despite undeniable advantages of
PageRank and its mentioned modifications, these algorithms miss important aspects of the graph
that are not described by its structure. In contrast, a number of approaches allows to account for
different properties of nodes and edges between them by encoding them in restart and transition
probabilities (see [3, 4, 6, 10, 12, 20, 21]). These properties may include, e.g., the statistics about
users’ interactions with the nodes (in web graphs [12] or graphs of social networks [2]), types of
edges (such as URL redirecting in web graphs [20]) or histories of nodes’ and edges’ changes [22].
In the general ranking framework called Supervised PageRank [21], weights of nodes and edges in a
graph are linear combinations of their features with coefficients as the model parameters. The existing
optimization method [21] of learning these parameters and the optimizations methods proposed
in the presented paper have two levels. On the lower level, the following problem is solved: to
estimate the value of the loss function (in the case of zero-order oracle) and its derivatives (in the
case of first-order oracle) for a given parameter vector. On the upper level, the estimations obtained
on the lower level of the optimization methods (which we also call inexact oracle information) are
used for tuning the parameters by an iterative algorithm. Following [6], the authors of Supervised
PageRank consider a non-convex loss-minimization problem for learning the parameters and solve
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

