On Multiplicative Integration with
Recurrent Neural Networks
Yuhuai Wu1,∗ , Saizheng Zhang2,∗ , Ying Zhang2 , Yoshua Bengio2,4 and Ruslan Salakhutdinov3,4
1
University of Toronto, 2 MILA, Université de Montréal, 3 Carnegie Mellon University, 4 CIFAR
ywu@cs.toronto.edu,2 {firstname.lastname}@umontreal.ca,rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a general and simple structural design called “Multiplicative Integration” (MI) to improve recurrent neural networks (RNNs). MI changes the way in
which information from difference sources flows and is integrated in the computational building block of an RNN, while introducing almost no extra parameters.
The new structure can be easily embedded into many popular RNN models, including LSTMs and GRUs. We empirically analyze its learning behaviour and conduct
evaluations on several tasks using different RNN models. Our experimental results
demonstrate that Multiplicative Integration can provide a substantial performance
boost over many of the existing RNN models.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been a resurgence of new structural designs for recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
[1, 2, 3]. Most of these designs are derived from popular structures including vanilla RNNs, Long
Short Term Memory networks (LSTMs) [4] and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) [5]. Despite of their
varying characteristics, most of them share a common computational building block, described by the
following equation:
φ(Wx + Uz + b),
(1)
where x ∈ Rn and z ∈ Rm are state vectors coming from different information sources, W ∈ Rd×n
and U ∈ Rd×m are state-to-state transition matrices, and b is a bias vector. This computational
building block serves as a combinator for integrating information flow from the x and z by a sum
operation “+”, followed by a nonlinearity φ. We refer to it as the additive building block. Additive
building blocks are widely implemented in various state computations in RNNs (e.g. hidden state
computations for vanilla-RNNs, gate/cell computations of LSTMs and GRUs.
In this work, we propose an alternative design for constructing the computational building block by
changing the procedure of information integration. Specifically, instead of utilizing sum operation
“+", we propose to use the Hadamard product “ ” to fuse Wx and Uz:
φ(Wx

Uz + b)

(2)

The result of this modification changes the RNN from first order to second order [6], while introducing
no extra parameters. We call this kind of information integration design a form of Multiplicative
Integration. The effect of multiplication naturally results in a gating type structure, in which Wx
and Uz are the gates of each other. More specifically, one can think of the state-to-state computation
Uz (where for example z represents the previous state) as dynamically rescaled by Wx (where
for example x represents the input). Such rescaling does not exist in the additive building block, in
which Uz is independent of x. This relatively simple modification brings about advantages over the
additive building block as it alters RNN’s gradient properties, which we discuss in detail in the next
section, as well as verify through extensive experiments.
∗

Equal contribution.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

