Communication-Optimal Distributed Clustering∗

Jiecao Chen
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47401
jiecchen@indiana.edu

He Sun
University of Bristol
Bristol, BS8 1UB, UK
h.sun@bristol.ac.uk

David P. Woodruff
IBM Research Almaden
San Jose, CA 95120
dpwoodru@us.ibm.com

Qin Zhang
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47401
qzhangcs@indiana.edu

Abstract
Clustering large datasets is a fundamental problem with a number of applications
in machine learning. Data is often collected on different sites and clustering needs
to be performed in a distributed manner with low communication. We would
like the quality of the clustering in the distributed setting to match that in the
centralized setting for which all the data resides on a single site. In this work, we
study both graph and geometric clustering problems in two distributed models:
(1) a point-to-point model, and (2) a model with a broadcast channel. We give
protocols in both models which we show are nearly optimal by proving almost
matching communication lower bounds. Our work highlights the surprising power
of a broadcast channel for clustering problems; roughly speaking, to spectrally
cluster n points or n vertices in a graph distributed across s servers, for a worst-case
partitioning the communication complexity in a point-to-point model is n · s, while
in the broadcast model it is n + s. A similar phenomenon holds for the geometric
setting as well. We implement our algorithms and demonstrate this phenomenon
on real life datasets, showing that our algorithms are also very efficient in practice.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in machine learning with widespread applications in data mining,
computer vision, and social network analysis. Example applications of clustering include grouping
similar webpages by search engines, finding users with common interests in a social network, and
identifying different objects in a picture or video. For these applications, one can model the objects
that need to be clustered as points in Euclidean space Rd , where the similarities of two objects are
represented by the Euclidean distance between the two points. Then the task of clustering is to choose
k points as centers, so that the total distance between all input points to their corresponding closest
center is minimized. Depending on different distance objective functions, three typical problems
have been studied: k-means, k-median, and k-center.
The other popular approach for clustering is to model the input data as vertices of a graph, and the
similarity between two objects is represented by the weight of the edge connecting the corresponding
vertices. For this scenario, one is asked to partition the vertices into clusters so that the “highly
connected” vertices belong to the same cluster. A widely-used approach for graph clustering is
spectral clustering, which embeds the vertices of a graph into the points in Rk through the bottom k
eigenvectors of the graph’s Laplacian matrix, and applies k-means on the embedded points.
∗

Full version appears on arXiv, 2017, under the same title.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

