Visual Dynamics: Probabilistic Future Frame
Synthesis via Cross Convolutional Networks

Tianfan Xue*1 Jiajun Wu*1 Katherine L. Bouman1 William T. Freeman1,2
1
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Google Research
{tfxue, jiajunwu, klbouman, billf}@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of synthesizing a number of likely future frames from a
single input image. In contrast to traditional methods, which have tackled this
problem in a deterministic or non-parametric way, we propose to model future
frames in a probabilistic manner. Our probabilistic model makes it possible for us
to sample and synthesize many possible future frames from a single input image.
To synthesize realistic movement of objects, we propose a novel network structure,
namely a Cross Convolutional Network; this network encodes image and motion
information as feature maps and convolutional kernels, respectively. In experiments,
our model performs well on synthetic data, such as 2D shapes and animated game
sprites, as well as on real-world video frames. We also show that our model can be
applied to visual analogy-making, and present an analysis of the learned network
representations.

1

Introduction

From just a single snapshot, humans are often able to imagine how a scene will visually change
over time. For instance, due to the pose of the girl in Figure 1, most would predict that her arms
are stationary but her leg is moving. However, the exact motion is often unpredictable due to an
intrinsic ambiguity. Is the girl’s leg moving up or down? In this work, we study the problem of
visual dynamics: modeling the conditional distribution of future frames given an observed image.
We propose to tackle this problem using a probabilistic, content-aware motion prediction model that
learns this distribution without using annotations. Sampling from this model allows us to visualize
the many possible ways that an input image is likely to change over time.
Modeling the conditional distribution of future frames given only a single image as input is a very
challenging task for a number of reasons. First, natural images come from a very high dimensional
distribution that is difficult to model. Designing a generative model for realistic images is a very
challenging problem. Second, in order to properly predict motion distributions, the model must first
learn about image parts and the correlation of their respective motions in an unsupervised fashion.
In this work, we tackle the visual dynamics problem using a neural network structure, based on a
variational autoencoder [Kingma and Welling, 2014] and our newly proposed cross convolutional layer.
During training, the network observes a set of consecutive image pairs in videos, and automatically
infers the relationship between them without any supervision. During testing, the network then
predicts the conditional distribution, P (J|I), of future RGB images J (Figure 1b) given an RGB
input image I that was not in the training set (Figure 1a). Using this distribution, the network is able
to synthesize multiple different image samples corresponding to possible future frames of the input
image (Figure 1c). Our network contains a number of key components that contribute to its success:
• We use a conditional variational autoencoder to model the complex conditional distribution
of future frames [Kingma and Welling, 2014, Yan et al., 2016]. This allows us to approximate
a sample, J, from the distribution of future images by using a trainable function J = f (I, z).
∗ indicates equal contributions.

