Truncated Variance Reduction: A Unified Approach
to Bayesian Optimization and Level-Set Estimation
Ilija Bogunovic1 , Jonathan Scarlett1 , Andreas Krause2 , Volkan Cevher1
1
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS), EPFL
2
Learning and Adaptive Systems Group, ETH Zürich
{ilija.bogunovic,jonathan.scarlett,volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch, krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a new algorithm, truncated variance reduction (T RU VA R), that treats
Bayesian optimization (BO) and level-set estimation (LSE) with Gaussian processes in a unified fashion. The algorithm greedily shrinks a sum of truncated
variances within a set of potential maximizers (BO) or unclassified points (LSE),
which is updated based on confidence bounds. T RU VA R is effective in several
important settings that are typically non-trivial to incorporate into myopic algorithms, including pointwise costs and heteroscedastic noise. We provide a general
theoretical guarantee for T RU VA R covering these aspects, and use it to recover
and strengthen existing results on BO and LSE. Moreover, we provide a new result
for a setting where one can select from a number of noise levels having associated
costs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm on both synthetic and
real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) [1] provides a powerful framework for automating design problems,
and finds applications in robotics, environmental monitoring, and automated machine learning, just
to name a few. One seeks to find the maximum of an unknown reward function that is expensive
to evaluate, based on a sequence of suitably-chosen points and noisy observations. Numerous BO
algorithms have been presented previously; see Section 1.1 for an overview.
Level-set estimation (LSE) [2] is closely related to BO, with the added twist that instead of seeking
a maximizer, one seeks to classify the domain into points that lie above or below a certain threshold. This is of considerable interest in applications such as environmental monitoring and sensor
networks, allowing one to find all “sufficiently good” points rather than the best point alone.
While BO and LSE are closely related, they are typically studied in isolation. In this paper, we provide a unified treatment of the two via a new algorithm, Truncated Variance Reduction (T RU VA R),
which enjoys theoretical guarantees, good computational complexity, and the versatility to handle
important settings such as pointwise costs, non-constant noise, and multi-task scenarios. The main
result of this paper applies to the former two settings, and even the fixed-noise and unit-cost case,
we refine existing bounds via a significantly improved dependence on the noise level.
1.1 Previous Work
Three popular myopic techniques for Bayesian optimization are expected improvement (EI), probability of improvement (PI), and Gaussian process upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) [1, 3], each
of which chooses the point maximizing an acquisition function depending directly on the current
posterior mean and variance. In [4], the GP-UCB-PE algorithm was presented for BO, choosing
the highest-variance point within a set of potential maximizers that is updated based on confidence
bounds. Another relevant BO algorithm is BaMSOO [5], which also keeps track of potential maximizers, but instead chooses points based on a global optimization technique called simultaneous
1

