Flexible Models for Microclustering with
Application to Entity Resolution

Giacomo Zanella∗
Department of Decision Sciences
Bocconi University

Brenda Betancourt∗
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University

giacomo.zanella@unibocconi.it

bb222@stat.duke.edu

Hanna Wallach
Microsoft Research
hanna@dirichlet.net

Jeffrey Miller
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University

Abbas Zaidi
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University

jwmiller@hsph.harvard.edu

amz19@stat.duke.edu

Rebecca C. Steorts
Departments of Statistical Science and Computer Science
Duke University
beka@stat.duke.edu

Abstract
Most generative models for clustering implicitly assume that the number of data
points in each cluster grows linearly with the total number of data points. Finite
mixture models, Dirichlet process mixture models, and Pitman–Yor process mixture
models make this assumption, as do all other infinitely exchangeable clustering
models. However, for some applications, this assumption is inappropriate. For
example, when performing entity resolution, the size of each cluster should be
unrelated to the size of the data set, and each cluster should contain a negligible
fraction of the total number of data points. These applications require models that
yield clusters whose sizes grow sublinearly with the size of the data set. We address
this requirement by defining the microclustering property and introducing a new
class of models that can exhibit this property. We compare models within this class
to two commonly used clustering models using four entity-resolution data sets.

1

Introduction

Many clustering applications require models that assume cluster sizes grow linearly with the size of the
data set. These applications include topic modeling, inferring population structure, and discriminating
among cancer subtypes. Infinitely exchangeable clustering models, including finite mixture models,
Dirichlet process mixture models, and Pitman–Yor process mixture models, all make this lineargrowth assumption, and have seen numerous successes when used in these contexts. For other clustering applications, such as entity resolution, this assumption is inappropriate. Entity resolution (including record linkage and de-duplication) involves identifying duplicate2 records in noisy databases [1, 2],
traditionally by directly linking records to one another. Unfortunately, this traditional approach is
computationally infeasible for large data sets—a serious limitation in “the age of big data” [1, 3]. As a
∗

Giacomo Zanella and Brenda Betancourt are joint first authors.
In the entity resolution literature, the term “duplicate records” does not mean that the records are identical,
but rather that the records are corrupted, degraded, or otherwise noisy representations of the same entity.
2

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

