Reconstructing Parameters of Spreading Models
from Partial Observations
Andrey Y. Lokhov
Center for Nonlinear Studies and Theoretical Division T-4
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
lokhov@lanl.gov

Abstract
Spreading processes are often modelled as a stochastic dynamics occurring on top
of a given network with edge weights corresponding to the transmission probabilities. Knowledge of veracious transmission probabilities is essential for prediction,
optimization, and control of diffusion dynamics. Unfortunately, in most cases the
transmission rates are unknown and need to be reconstructed from the spreading
data. Moreover, in realistic settings it is impossible to monitor the state of each
node at every time, and thus the data is highly incomplete. We introduce an efficient
dynamic message-passing algorithm, which is able to reconstruct parameters of the
spreading model given only partial information on the activation times of nodes in
the network. The method is generalizable to a large class of dynamic models, as
well to the case of temporal graphs.

1

Introduction

Knowledge of the underlying parameters of the spreading model is crucial for understanding the
global properties of the dynamics and for development of effective control strategies for an optimal dissemination or mitigation of diffusion [1, 2]. However, in many realistic settings effective
transmission probabilities are not known a priori and need to be recovered from a limited number of
realizations of the process. Examples of such situations include spreading of a disease [3], propagation
of information and opinions in a social network [4], correlated infrastructure failures [5], or activation
cascades in biological and neural networks [6]: precise model and parameters, as well as propagation
paths are often unknown, and one is left at most with several observed diffusion traces. It can be
argued that for many interesting systems, even the functional form of the dynamic model is uncertain.
Nevertheless, the reconstruction problem still makes sense in this case: the common approach is to
assume some simple and reasonable form of the dynamics, and recover the parameters of the model
which explain the data in the most accurate and minimalistic way; this is crucial for understanding
the basic mechanisms of the spreading process, as well as for making further predictions without
overfitting. For example, if only a small number of samples is available, a few-parameter model
should be used.
In practice, it is very costly or even impossible to record the state of each node at every time step of
the dynamics: we might only have access to a subset of nodes, or monitor the state of the system
at particular times. For instance, surveys may give some information on the health or awareness of
certain individuals, but there is no way to get a detailed account for the whole population; neural
avalanches are usually recorded in cortical slices, representing only a small part of the brain; it is
costly to deploy measurement devices on each unit of a complex infrastructure system; finally, hidden
nodes play an important role in the artificial learning architectures. This is precisely the setting
that we address in this article: reconstruction of parameters of a propagation model in the presence
of nodes with hidden information, and/or partial information in time. It is not surprising that this
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

