Latent Attention For If-Then Program Synthesis

Xinyun Chen∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Chang Liu

Richard Shin
UC Berkeley

Dawn Song

Mingcheng Chen†
UIUC

Abstract
Automatic translation from natural language descriptions into programs is a longstanding challenging problem. In this work, we consider a simple yet important sub-problem: translation from textual descriptions to If-Then programs. We
devise a novel neural network architecture for this task which we train end-toend. Specifically, we introduce Latent Attention, which computes multiplicative
weights for the words in the description in a two-stage process with the goal of
better leveraging the natural language structures that indicate the relevant parts for
predicting program elements. Our architecture reduces the error rate by 28.57%
compared to prior art [3]. We also propose a one-shot learning scenario of If-Then
program synthesis and simulate it with our existing dataset. We demonstrate a
variation on the training procedure for this scenario that outperforms the original
procedure, significantly closing the gap to the model trained with all data.

1

Introduction

A touchstone problem for computational linguistics is to translate natural language descriptions into
executable programs. Over the past decade, there has been an increasing number of attempts to
address this problem from both the natural language processing community and the programming
language community. In this paper, we focus on a simple but important subset of programs containing only one If-Then statement.
An If-Then program, which is also called a recipe, specifies a trigger and an action function, representing a program which will take the action when the trigger condition is met. On websites, such
as IFTTT.com, a user often provides a natural language description of the recipe’s functionality as
well. Recent work [16, 3, 7] studied the problem of automatically synthesizing If-Then programs
from their descriptions. In particular, LSTM-based sequence-to-sequence approaches [7] and an
approach of ensembling a neural network and logistic regression [3] were proposed to deal with this
problem. In [3], however, the authors claim that the diversity of vocabulary and sentence structures
makes it difficult for an RNN to learn useful representations, and their ensemble approach indeed
shows better performance than the LSTM-based approach [7] on the function prediction task (see
Section 2).
In this paper, we introduce a new attention architecture, called Latent Attention, to overcome this
difficulty. With Latent Attention, a weight is learned on each token to determine its importance for
prediction of the trigger or the action. Unlike standard attention methods, Latent Attention computes
the token weights in a two-step process, which aims to better capture the sentence structure. We show
that by employing Latent Attention over outputs of a bi-directional LSTM, our new Latent Attention
model can improve over the best prior result [3] by 5 percentage points from 82.5% to 87.5% when
predicting the trigger and action functions together, reducing the error rate of [3] by 28.57%.
Besides the If-Then program synthesis task proposed by [16], we are also interested in a new scenario. When a new trigger or action is released, the training data will contain few corresponding
∗
†

Part of the work was done while visiting UC Berkeley.
Work was done while visiting UC Berkeley. Mingcheng Chen is currently working at Google [X].

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

