Object based Scene Representations using Fisher
Scores of Local Subspace Projections

Mandar Dixit and Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{mdixit, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Several works have shown that deep CNNs can be easily transferred across datasets,
e.g. the transfer from object recognition on ImageNet to object detection on Pascal
VOC. Less clear, however, is the ability of CNNs to transfer knowledge across tasks.
A common example of such transfer is the problem of scene classification, that
should leverage localized object detections to recognize holistic visual concepts.
While this problems is currently addressed with Fisher vector representations, these
are now shown ineffective for the high-dimensional and highly non-linear features
extracted by modern CNNs. It is argued that this is mostly due to the reliance on
a model, the Gaussian mixture of diagonal covariances, which has a very limited
ability to capture the second order statistics of CNN features. This problem is
addressed by the adoption of a better model, the mixture of factor analyzers (MFA),
which approximates the non-linear data manifold by a collection of local sub-spaces.
The Fisher score with respect to the MFA (MFA-FS) is derived and proposed as an
image representation for holistic image classifiers. Extensive experiments show
that the MFA-FS has state of the art performance for object-to-scene transfer and
this transfer actually outperforms the training of a scene CNN from a large scene
dataset. The two representations are also shown to be complementary, in the sense
that their combination outperforms each of the representations by itself. When
combined, they produce a state-of-the-art scene classifier.

1

Introduction

In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on large scale datasets have achieved
remarkable performance on traditional vision problems such as image classification [8, 18, 26], object
detection and localization [5, 16] and others. The success of CNNs can be attributed to their ability
to learn highly discriminative, non-linear, visual transformations with the help of supervised backpropagation [9]. Beyond the impressive, sometimes even superhuman, results on certain datasets,
a remarkable property of these classifiers is the solution of the dataset bias problem [20] that has
plagued computer vision for decades. It has now been shown many times that a network trained to
solve a task on a certain dataset (e.g. object recognition on ImageNet) can be very easily fine-tuned to
solve a related problem on another dataset (e.g. object detection on the Pascal VOC or MS-COCO).
Less clear, however, is the robustness of current CNNs to the problem of task bias, i.e. their ability to
generalize accross tasks. Given the large number of possible vision tasks, it is impossible to train a
CNN from scratch for each. In fact, it is likely not even feasible to collect the large number of images
needed to train effective deep CNNs for every task. Hence, there is a need to investigate the problem
of task transfer.
In this work, we consider a very common class of such problems, where a classifier trained on a class
of instances is to be transferred to a second class of instances, which are loose combinations of the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

