Large Margin Discriminant Dimensionality
Reduction in Prediction Space

Mohammad Saberian
Netflix
esaberian@netflix.com
Can Xu
Google
canxu@google.com

Jose Costa Pereira
INESCTEC
jose.c.pereira@inesctec.pt

Jian Yang
Yahoo Research
jianyang@yahoo-inc.com

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego
nvasconcelos@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this paper we establish a duality between boosting and SVM, and use this
to derive a novel discriminant dimensionality reduction algorithm. In particular,
using the multiclass formulation of boosting and SVM we note that both use
a combination of mapping and linear classification to maximize the multiclass
margin. In SVM this is implemented using a pre-defined mapping (induced by
the kernel) and optimizing the linear classifiers. In boosting the linear classifiers
are pre-defined and the mapping (predictor) is learned through a combination of
weak learners. We argue that the intermediate mapping, i.e. boosting predictor, is
preserving the discriminant aspects of the data and that by controlling the dimension
of this mapping it is possible to obtain discriminant low dimensional representations
for the data. We use the aforementioned duality and propose a new method, Large
Margin Discriminant Dimensionality Reduction (LADDER) that jointly learns the
mapping and the linear classifiers in an efficient manner. This leads to a data-driven
mapping which can embed data into any number of dimensions. Experimental
results show that this embedding can significantly improve performance on tasks
such as hashing and image/scene classification.

1

Introduction

Boosting and support vector machines (SVM) are widely popular techniques for learning classifiers.
While both methods are maximizing the margin, there are a number of differences that distinguish
them; e.g. while SVM selects a number of examples to assemble the decision boundary, boosting
achieves this by combining a set of weak learners. In this work we propose a new duality between
boosting and SVM which follows from their multiclass formulations. It shows that both methods
seek a linear decision rule by maximizing the margin after transforming input data to an intermediate
space. In particular, kernel-SVM (K-SVM) [39] first selects a transformation (induced by the kernel)
that maps data points into an intermediate space, and then learns a set of linear decision boundaries
that maximize the margin. This is depicted in Figure 1-bottom. In contrast, multiclass boosting
(MCBoost) [34] relies on a set of pre-defined codewords in an intermediate space, and then learns a
mapping to this space such that it maximizes the margin with respect to the boundaries defined by
those codewords. See Figure 1-top. Therefore, both boosting and SVM follow a two-step procedure:
(i) mapping data to some intermediate space, and (ii) determine the boundaries that separate the
classes. There are, however, two notable differences: 1) while K-SVM aims to learn only the
boundaries, MCBoost effort is on learning the mapping and 2) in K-SVM the intermediate space
typically has infinite dimensions, while in MCBoost the space has M or M − 1 dimensions, where
M is the number of classes.
1

