Higher-Order Factorization Machines
Mathieu Blondel, Akinori Fujino, Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Japan

Masakazu Ishihata
Hokkaido University
Japan

Abstract
Factorization machines (FMs) are a supervised learning approach that can use
second-order feature combinations even when the data is very high-dimensional.
Unfortunately, despite increasing interest in FMs, there exists to date no efficient
training algorithm for higher-order FMs (HOFMs). In this paper, we present
the first generic yet efficient algorithms for training arbitrary-order HOFMs. We
also present new variants of HOFMs with shared parameters, which greatly reduce model size and prediction times while maintaining similar accuracy. We
demonstrate the proposed approaches on four different link prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Factorization machines (FMs) [13, 14] are a supervised learning approach that can use second-order
feature combinations efficiently even when the data is very high-dimensional. The key idea of FMs is
to model the weights of feature combinations using a low-rank matrix. This has two main benefits.
First, FMs can achieve empirical accuracy on a par with polynomial regression or kernel methods
but with smaller and faster to evaluate models [4]. Second, FMs can infer the weights of feature
combinations that were not observed in the training set. This second property is crucial for instance
in recommender systems, a domain where FMs have become increasingly popular [14, 16]. Without
the low-rank property, FMs would fail to generalize to unseen user-item interactions.
Unfortunately, although higher-order FMs (HOFMs) were briefly mentioned in the original work of
[13, 14], there exists to date no efficient algorithm for training arbitrary-order HOFMs. In fact, even
just computing predictions given the model parameters naively takes polynomial time in the number
of features. For this reason, HOFMs have, to our knowledge, never been applied to any problem. In
addition, HOFMs, as originally defined in [13, 14], model each degree in the polynomial expansion
with a different matrix and therefore require the estimation of a large number of parameters.
In this paper, we propose the first efficient algorithms for training arbitrary-order HOFMs. To do
so, we rely on a link between FMs and the so-called ANOVA kernel [4]. We propose linear-time
dynamic programming algorithms for evaluating the ANOVA kernel and computing its gradient.
Based on these, we propose stochastic gradient and coordinate descent algorithms for arbitrary-order
HOFMs. To reduce the number of parameters, as well as prediction times, we also introduce two new
kernels derived from the ANOVA kernel, allowing us to define new variants of HOFMs with shared
parameters. We demonstrate the proposed approaches on four different link prediction tasks.

2

Factorization machines (FMs)

Second-order FMs. Factorization machines (FMs) [13, 14] are an increasingly popular method
for efficiently using second-order feature combinations in classification or regression tasks even
when the data is very high-dimensional. Let w ∈ Rd and P ∈ Rd×k , where k ∈ N is a rank
hyper-parameter. We denote the rows of P by p̄j and its columns by ps , for j ∈ [d] and s ∈ [k],
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

