Achieving the KS threshold in the general stochastic
block model with linearized acyclic belief propagation

Emmanuel Abbe
Applied and Computational Mathematics and EE Dept.
Princeton University
eabbe@princeton.edu

Colin Sandon
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
sandon@princeton.edu

Abstract
The stochastic block model (SBM) has long been studied in machine learning and
network science as a canonical model for clustering and community detection. In
the recent years, new developments have demonstrated the presence of threshold
phenomena for this model, which have set new challenges for algorithms. For
the detection problem in symmetric SBMs, Decelle et al. conjectured that the
so-called Kesten-Stigum (KS) threshold can be achieved efficiently. This was
proved for two communities, but remained open for three and more communities.
We prove this conjecture here, obtaining a general result that applies to arbitrary
SBMs with linear size communities. The developed algorithm is a linearized
acyclic belief propagation (ABP) algorithm, which mitigates the effects of cycles
while provably achieving the KS threshold in O(n ln n) time. This extends prior
methods by achieving universally the KS threshold while reducing or preserving the
computational complexity. ABP is also connected to a power iteration method on a
generalized nonbacktracking operator, formalizing the spectral-message passing
interplay described in Krzakala et al., and extending results from Bordenave et al.

1

Introduction

The stochastic block model (SBM) is widely used as a model for community detection and as a
benchmark for clustering algorithms. The model emerged in multiple scientific communities, in
machine learning and statistics under the SBM [1, 2, 3, 4], in computer science as the planted partition
model [5, 6, 7], and in mathematics as the inhomogeneous random graph model [8]. Although the
model was defined as far back as the 80s, mainly studied for the exact recovery problem, it resurged
in the recent years due in part to fascinating conjectures on the detection problem, established in
[9] (and backed in [10]) from deep but non-rigorous statistical physics arguments. For efficient
algorithms, the following was conjectured:
Conjecture 1. (See formal definitions below) In the stochastic block model with n vertices, k
balanced communities, edge probability a/n inside the communities and b/n across, it is possible to
detect communities in polynomial time if and only if
(a − b)2
> 1.
k(a + (k − 1)b)

(1)

In other words, the problem of detecting efficiently communities is conjectured to have a sharp
threshold at the above, which is called the Kesten-Stigum (KS) threshold. Establishing such thresholds
is of primary importance for the developments of algorithms. A prominent example is Shannon’s
coding theorem, that gives a sharp threshold for coding algorithms at the channel capacity, and
which has led the development of coding algorithms used in communication standards. In the area of
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

