Clustering with Same-Cluster Queries

Hassan Ashtiani , Shrinu Kushagra and Shai Ben-David
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
{mhzokaei,skushagr,shai}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We propose a framework for Semi-Supervised Active Clustering framework
(SSAC), where the learner is allowed to interact with a domain expert, asking
whether two given instances belong to the same cluster or not. We study the query
and computational complexity of clustering in this framework. We consider a
setting where the expert conforms to a center-based clustering with a notion of
margin. We show that there is a trade off between computational complexity and
query complexity; We prove that for the case of k-means clustering (i.e., when the
expert conforms to a solution of k-means), having access to relatively few such
queries allows efficient solutions to otherwise NP hard problems.
In particular, we provide a probabilistic polynomial-time (BPP) algorithm for
clustering in this setting that asks O k 2 log k + k log n) same-cluster queries and
runs with time complexity O kn log n) (where k is the number of clusters and
n is the number of instances). The algorithm succeeds with high probability for
data satisfying margin conditions under which, without queries, we show that the
problem is NP hard. We also prove a lower bound on the number of queries needed
to have a computationally efficient clustering algorithm in this setting.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a challenging task particularly due to two impediments. The first problem is that
clustering, in the absence of domain knowledge, is usually an under-specified task; the solution
of choice may vary significantly between different intended applications. The second one is that
performing clustering under many natural models is computationally hard.
Consider the task of dividing the users of an online shopping service into different groups. The result
of this clustering can then be used for example in suggesting similar products to the users in the same
group, or for organizing data so that it would be easier to read/analyze the monthly purchase reports.
Those different applications may result in conflicting solution requirements. In such cases, one needs
to exploit domain knowledge to better define the clustering problem.
Aside from trial and error, a principled way of extracting domain knowledge is to perform clustering
using a form of ‘weak’ supervision. For example, Balcan and Blum [BB08] propose to use an
interactive framework with ’split/merge’ queries for clustering. In another work, Ashtiani and
Ben-David [ABD15] require the domain expert to provide the clustering of a ’small’ subset of data.
At the same time, mitigating the computational problem of clustering is critical. Solving most of
the common optimization formulations of clustering is NP-hard (in particular, solving the popular
k-means and k-median clustering problems). One approach to address this issues is to exploit the
fact that natural data sets usually exhibit some nice properties and likely to avoid the worst-case
scenarios. In such cases, optimal solution to clustering may be found efficiently. The quest for notions
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

