Interaction Networks for Learning about Objects,
Relations and Physics

Anonymous Author(s)
Affiliation
Address
email

Abstract
Reasoning about objects, relations, and physics is central to human intelligence, and
a key goal of artificial intelligence. Here we introduce the interaction network, a
model which can reason about how objects in complex systems interact, supporting
dynamical predictions, as well as inferences about the abstract properties of the
system. Our model takes graphs as input, performs object- and relation-centric
reasoning in a way that is analogous to a simulation, and is implemented using
deep neural networks. We evaluate its ability to reason about several challenging
physical domains: n-body problems, rigid-body collision, and non-rigid dynamics.
Our results show it can be trained to accurately simulate the physical trajectories of
dozens of objects over thousands of time steps, estimate abstract quantities such
as energy, and generalize automatically to systems with different numbers and
configurations of objects and relations. Our interaction network implementation
is the first general-purpose, learnable physics engine, and a powerful general
framework for reasoning about object and relations in a wide variety of complex
real-world domains.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

16

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

1

Introduction

Representing and reasoning about objects, relations and physics is a “core” domain of human common
sense knowledge [25], and among the most basic and important aspects of intelligence [27, 15]. Many
everyday problems, such as predicting what will happen next in physical environments or inferring
underlying properties of complex scenes, are challenging because their elements can be composed
in combinatorially many possible arrangements. People can nevertheless solve such problems by
decomposing the scenario into distinct objects and relations, and reasoning about the consequences
of their interactions and dynamics. Here we introduce the interaction network – a model that can
perform an analogous form of reasoning about objects and relations in complex systems.
Interaction networks combine three powerful approaches: structured models, simulation, and deep
learning. Structured models [7] can exploit rich, explicit knowledge of relations among objects,
independent of the objects themselves, which supports general-purpose reasoning across diverse
contexts. Simulation is an effective method for approximating dynamical systems, predicting how the
elements in a complex system are influenced by interactions with one another, and by the dynamics
of the system. Deep learning [23, 16] couples generic architectures with efficient optimization
algorithms to provide highly scalable learning and inference in challenging real-world settings.
Interaction networks explicitly separate how they reason about relations from how they reason about
objects, assigning each task to distinct models which are: fundamentally object- and relation-centric;
and independent of the observation modality and task specification (see Model section 2 below
and Fig. 1a). This lets interaction networks automatically generalize their learning across variable
numbers of arbitrarily ordered objects and relations, and also recompose their knowledge of entities
Submitted to 30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016). Do not distribute.

