Using Social Dynamics to Make Individual Predictions:
Variational Inference with a Stochastic Kinetic Model
Zhen Xu, Wen Dong, and Sargur Srihari
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
{zxu8,wendong,srihari}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Social dynamics is concerned primarily with interactions among individuals and the
resulting group behaviors, modeling the temporal evolution of social systems via
the interactions of individuals within these systems. In particular, the availability of
large-scale data from social networks and sensor networks offers an unprecedented
opportunity to predict state-changing events at the individual level. Examples
of such events include disease transmission, opinion transition in elections, and
rumor propagation. Unlike previous research focusing on the collective effects
of social systems, this study makes efficient inferences at the individual level. In
order to cope with dynamic interactions among a large number of individuals, we
introduce the stochastic kinetic model to capture adaptive transition probabilities
and propose an efficient variational inference algorithm the complexity of which
grows linearly — rather than exponentially— with the number of individuals.
To validate this method, we have performed epidemic-dynamics experiments on
wireless sensor network data collected from more than ten thousand people over
three years. The proposed algorithm was used to track disease transmission and
predict the probability of infection for each individual. Our results demonstrate
that this method is more efficient than sampling while nonetheless achieving high
accuracy.

1

Introduction

The field of social dynamics is concerned primarily with interactions among individuals and the
resulting group behaviors. Research in social dynamics models the temporal evolution of social
systems via the interactions of the individuals within these systems [9]. For example, opinion
dynamics can model the opinion state transitions of an entire population in an election scenario [3],
and epidemic dynamics can predict disease outbreaks ahead of time [10]. While traditional socialdynamics models focus primarily on the macroscopic effects of social systems, often we instead
wish to know the answers to more specific questions. Given the movement and behavior history
of a subject with Ebola, can we tell how many people should be tested or quarantined? City-size
quarantine is not necessary, but family-size quarantine is insufficient. We aim to model a method to
evaluate the paths of illness transmission and the risks of infection for individuals, so that limited
medical resources can be most efficiently distributed.
The rapid growth of both social networks and sensor networks offers an unprecedented opportunity
to collect abundant data at the individual level. From these data we can extract temporal interactions
among individuals, such as meeting or taking the same class. To take advantage of this opportunity, we model social dynamics from an individual perspective. Although such an approach has
considerable potential, in practice it is difficult to model the dynamic interactions and handle the
costly computations when a large number of individuals are involved. In this paper, we introduce an
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

