Scaled Least Squares Estimator for GLMs
in Large-Scale Problems
Murat A. Erdogdu
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
erdogdu@stanford.edu

Mohsen Bayati
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
bayati@stanford.edu

Lee H. Dicker
Department of Statistics and Biostatistics
Rutgers University and Amazon ⇤
ldicker@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of efficiently estimating the coefficients of generalized linear
models (GLMs) in the large-scale setting where the number of observations n is
much larger than the number of predictors p, i.e. n
p
1. We show that in
GLMs with random (not necessarily Gaussian) design, the GLM coefficients are
approximately proportional to the corresponding ordinary least squares (OLS) coefficients. Using this relation, we design an algorithm that achieves the same accuracy
as the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) through iterations that attain up to a
cubic convergence rate, and that are cheaper than any batch optimization algorithm
by at least a factor of O(p). We provide theoretical guarantees for our algorithm,
and analyze the convergence behavior in terms of data dimensions. Finally, we
demonstrate the performance of our algorithm through extensive numerical studies
on large-scale real and synthetic datasets, and show that it achieves the highest
performance compared to several other widely used optimization algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of efficiently estimating the coefficients of generalized linear models (GLMs)
when the number of observations n is much larger than the dimension of the coefficient vector p,
(n
p
1). GLMs play a crucial role in numerous machine learning and statistics problems, and
provide a miscellaneous framework for many regression and classification tasks. Celebrated examples
include ordinary least squares, logistic regression, multinomial regression and many applications
involving graphical models [MN89, WJ08, KF09].
The standard approach to estimating the regression coefficients in a GLM is the maximum likelihood
method. Under standard assumptions on the link function, the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)
can be written as the solution to a convex minimization problem [MN89]. Due to the non-linear
structure of the MLE problem, the resulting optimization task requires iterative methods. The most
commonly used optimization technique for computing the MLE is the Newton-Raphson method,
which may be viewed as a reweighted least squares algorithm [MN89]. This method uses a second
order approximation to benefit from the curvature of the log-likelihood and achieves locally quadratic
convergence. A drawback of this approach is its excessive per-iteration cost of O(np2 ). To remedy
this, Hessian-free Krylov sub-space based methods such as conjugate gradient and minimal residual
are used, but the resulting direction is imprecise [HS52, PS75, Mar10]. On the other hand, first order
⇤

Work conducted while at Rutgers University

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

