Learning the Number of Neurons in Deep Networks

Jose M. Alvarez∗
Data61 @ CSIRO
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
jose.alvarez@data61.csiro.au

Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Nowadays, the number of layers and of neurons in each layer of a deep network
are typically set manually. While very deep and wide networks have proven
effective in general, they come at a high memory and computation cost, thus
making them impractical for constrained platforms. These networks, however,
are known to have many redundant parameters, and could thus, in principle, be
replaced by more compact architectures. In this paper, we introduce an approach to
automatically determining the number of neurons in each layer of a deep network
during learning. To this end, we propose to make use of a group sparsity regularizer
on the parameters of the network, where each group is defined to act on a single
neuron. Starting from an overcomplete network, we show that our approach can
reduce the number of parameters by up to 80% while retaining or even improving
the network accuracy.

1

Introduction

Thanks to the growing availability of large-scale datasets and computation power, Deep Learning
has recently generated a quasi-revolution in many fields, such as Computer Vision and Natural
Language Processing. Despite this progress, designing a deep architecture for a new task essentially
remains a dark art. It involves defining the number of layers and of neurons in each layer, which,
together, determine the number of parameters, or complexity, of the model, and which are typically
set manually by trial and error.
A recent trend to avoid this issue consists of building very deep [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014] or
ultra deep [He et al., 2015] networks, which have proven more expressive. This, however, comes at
a significant cost in terms of memory requirement and speed, which may prevent the deployment
of such networks on constrained platforms at test time and complicate the learning process due to
exploding or vanishing gradients.
Automatic model selection has nonetheless been studied in the past, using both constructive and
destructive approaches. Starting from a shallow architecture, constructive methods work by incrementally incorporating additional parameters [Bello, 1992] or, more recently, layers to the network [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014]. The main drawback of this approach stems from the fact
that shallow networks are less expressive than deep ones, and may thus provide poor initialization
when adding new layers. By contrast, destructive techniques exploit the fact that very deep models
include a significant number of redundant parameters [Denil et al., 2013, Cheng et al., 2015], and thus,
given an initial deep network, aim at reducing it while keeping its representation power. Originally,
this has been achieved by removing the parameters [LeCun et al., 1990, Hassibi et al., 1993] or
the neurons [Mozer and Smolensky, 1988, Ji et al., 1990, Reed, 1993] that have little influence on
the output. While effective this requires analyzing every parameter/neuron independently, e.g., via
the network Hessian, and thus does not scale well to large architectures. Therefore, recent trends
∗

http://www.josemalvarez.net.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

