Optimal Architectures in a Solvable Model of Deep
Networks
Jonathan Kadmon
The Racah Institute of Physics and ELSC
The Hebrew University, Israel
jonathan.kadmon@mail.huji.ac.il

Haim Sompolinsky
The Racah Institute of Physics and ELSC
The Hebrew University, Israel
and
Center for Brain Science
Harvard University

Abstract
Deep neural networks have received a considerable attention due to the success
of their training for real world machine learning applications. They are also
of great interest to the understanding of sensory processing in cortical sensory
hierarchies. The purpose of this work is to advance our theoretical understanding of
the computational benefits of these architectures. Using a simple model of clustered
noisy inputs and a simple learning rule, we provide analytically derived recursion
relations describing the propagation of the signals along the deep network. By
analysis of these equations, and defining performance measures, we show that
these model networks have optimal depths. We further explore the dependence of
the optimal architecture on the system parameters.

1

Introduction

The use of deep feedforward neural networks in machine learning applications has become widespread
and has drawn considerable research attention in the past few years. Novel approaches for training
these structures to perform various computation are in constant development. However, there is still a
gap between our ability to produce and train deep structures to complete a task and our understanding
of the underlying computations. One interesting class of previously proposed models uses a series of
sequential of de-noising autoencoders (dA) to construct a deep architectures [5, 14]. At it base, the
dA receives a noisy version of a pre-learned pattern and retrieves the noiseless representation. Other
methods of constructing deep networks by unsupervised methods have been proposed including
the use of Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) [3, 12, 7]. Deep architectures have been of
interest also to neuroscience as many biological sensory systems (e.g., vision, audition, olfaction and
somatosensation, see e.g. [9, 13]) are organized in hierarchies of multiple processing stages. Despite
the impressive recent success in training deep networks, fundamental understanding of the merits and
limitations of signal processing in such architectures is still lacking.
A theory of deep network entails two dynamical processes. One is the dynamics of weight matrices
during learning. This problem is challenging even for linear architectures and progress has been
made recently on this front (see e.g. [11]). The other dynamical process is the propagation of the
signal and the information it carries through the nonlinear feedforward stages. In this work we
focus on the second challenge, by analyzing the ’signal and noise’ neural dynamics in a solvable
model of deep networks. We assume a simple clustered structure of inputs where inputs take the
form of corrupted versions of a discrete set of cluster centers or ’patterns’. The goal of the multiple
processing layer is to reformat the inputs such that the noise is suppressed allowing for a linear
readout to perform classification tasks based on the top representations. We assume a simple learning
rule for the synaptic matrices, the well known Pseudo-Inverse rule [10]. The advantage of this choice,
beside its mathematics tractability, is the capacity for storing patterns. In particular, when the input
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

