Quantum Perceptron Models

Nathan Wiebe
Microsoft Research
Redmond WA, 98052
nawiebe@microsoft.com

Ashish Kapoor
Microsoft Research
Redmond WA, 98052
akapoor@microsoft.com

Krysta M Svore
Microsoft Research
Redmond WA, 98052
ksvore@microsoft.com

Abstract
We demonstrate how quantum computation can provide non-trivial improvements
in the computational and statistical complexity of the perceptron model. We
develop two quantum algorithms for perceptron learning. The first algorithm
exploits quantum information processing to determine a separating hyperplane
√
using a number of steps sublinear in the number of data points N , namely O( N ).
The second algorithm illustrates how the classical mistake bound of O( γ12 ) can be
further improved to O( √1γ ) through quantum means, where γ denotes the margin.
Such improvements are achieved through the application of quantum amplitude
amplification to the version space interpretation of the perceptron model.

1

Introduction

Quantum computation is an emerging technology that utilizes quantum effects to achieve significant,
and in some cases exponential, speed-ups of algorithms over their classical counterparts. The growing
importance of machine learning has in recent years led to a host of studies that investigate the promise
of quantum computers for machine learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
While a number of important quantum speedups have been found, the majority of these speedups
are due to replacing a classical subroutine with an equivalent albeit faster quantum algorithm.
The true potential of quantum algorithms may therefore remain underexploited since quantum
algorithms have been constrainted to follow the same methodology behind traditional machine
learning methods [10, 8, 9]. Here we consider an alternate approach: we devise a new machine
learning algorithm that is tailored to the speedups that quantum computers can provide.
We illustrate our approach by focusing on perceptron training [11]. The perceptron is a fundamental
building block for various machine learning models including neural networks and support vector
machines [12]. Unlike many other machine learning algorithms, tight bounds are known for the
computational and statistical complexity of traditional perceptron training. Consequently, we are
able to rigorously show different performance improvements that stem from either using quantum
computers to improve traditional perceptron training or from devising a new form of perceptron
training that aligns with the capabilities of quantum computers.
We provide two quantum approaches to perceptron training. The first approach focuses on the
computational aspect of the problem and the proposed method quadratically reduces the scaling of
the complexity of training with respect to the number of training vectors. The second algorithm
focuses on statistical efficiency. In particular, we use the mistake bounds for traditional perceptron
training methods and ask if quantum computation lends any advantages. To this end, we propose an
algorithm that quadratically improves the scaling of the training algorithm with respect to the margin
between the classes in the training data. The latter algorithm combines quantum amplitude estimation
in the version space interpretation of the perceptron learning problem. Our approaches showcase the
trade-offs that one can consider in developing quantum algorithms, and the ultimate advantages of
performing learning tasks on a quantum computer.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

