High Dimensional Structured Superposition Models

Arindam Banerjee
Dept of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
banerjee@cs.umn.edu

Qilong Gu
Dept of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
guxxx396@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
High dimensional superposition models characterize observations using parameters
which can be written as a sum of multiple component parameters, each with its
own structure, e.g., sum of low rank and sparse matrices, sum of sparse and rotated
sparse vectors, etc. In this paper, we consider general superposition models which
allow sum of any number of component parameters, and each component structure
can be characterized by any norm. We present a simple estimator for such models,
give a geometric condition under which the components can be accurately estimated,
characterize sample complexity of the estimator, and give high probability nonasymptotic bounds on the componentwise estimation error. We use tools from
empirical processes and generic chaining for the statistical analysis, and our results,
which substantially generalize prior work on superposition models, are in terms of
Gaussian widths of suitable sets.

1

Introduction

For high-dimensional structured estimation problems [3, 15], considerable advances have been made
in accurately estimating a sparse or structured parameter θ ∈ Rp even when the sample size n is
far smaller than the ambient dimensionality of θ, i.e., n  p. Instead of a single structure, such as
sparsity or low rank, recent years have seen interest in parameter estimation when the parameter θ is
Pk
a superposition or sum of multiple different structures, i.e., θ = i=1 θi , where θ1 may be sparse, θ2
may be low rank, and so on [1, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 23, 24].
In this paper, we substantially generalize the non-asymptotic estimation error analysis for such
superposition models such that (i) the parameter θ can be the superposition of any number of
component parameters θi , and (ii) the structure in each θi can be captured by any suitable norm
Ri (θi ). We will analyze the following linear measurement based superposition model
y=X

k
X

θi + ω ,

(1)

i=1

where X ∈ Rn×p is a random sub-Gaussian design or compressive matrix, k is the number of
components, θi is one component of the unknown parameters, y ∈ Rn is the response vector, and
ω ∈ Rn is random noise independent of X. The structure in each component θi is captured by any
suitable norm Ri (·), such that Ri (θi ) has a small value, e.g., sparsity captured by kθi k1 , low-rank
(for matrix θi ) captured by the nuclear norm kθi k∗ , etc. Popular models such as Morphological
Component Analysis (MCA) [10] and Robust PCA [6, 9] can be viewed as a special cases of this
framework (see Section D).
The superposition estimation problem can be posed as follows: Given (y, X) generated following (1),
estimate component parameters {θ̂i } such that all the component-wise estimation errors ∆i = θ̂i −θi∗ ,
where θi∗ is the population mean, are small. Ideally, we want to obtain high-probability non-asymptotic
Pk
bounds on the total componentwise error measured as i=1 kθ̂i − θi∗ k2 , with the bound improving
(getting smaller) with increase in the number n of samples.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

