Reward Augmented Maximum Likelihood
for Neural Structured Prediction
Mohammad Norouzi
Samy Bengio
Zhifeng Chen
Navdeep Jaitly
Mike Schuster
Yonghui Wu
Dale Schuurmans
{mnorouzi, bengio, zhifengc, ndjaitly}@google.com
{schuster, yonghui, schuurmans}@google.com
Google Brain

Abstract
A key problem in structured output prediction is direct optimization of the task
reward function that matters for test evaluation. This paper presents a simple and
computationally efficient approach to incorporate task reward into a maximum likelihood framework. By establishing a link between the log-likelihood and expected
reward objectives, we show that an optimal regularized expected reward is achieved
when the conditional distribution of the outputs given the inputs is proportional
to their exponentiated scaled rewards. Accordingly, we present a framework to
smooth the predictive probability of the outputs using their corresponding rewards.
We optimize the conditional log-probability of augmented outputs that are sampled
proportionally to their exponentiated scaled rewards. Experiments on neural sequence to sequence models for speech recognition and machine translation show
notable improvements over a maximum likelihood baseline by using reward augmented maximum likelihood (RML), where the rewards are defined as the negative
edit distance between the outputs and the ground truth labels.

1

Introduction

Structured output prediction is ubiquitous in machine learning. Recent advances in natural language
processing, machine translation, and speech recognition hinge on the development of better discriminative models for structured outputs and sequences. The foundations of learning structured
output models were established by the seminal work on conditional random fields (CRFs) [17] and
structured large margin methods [32], which demonstrate how generalization performance can be
significantly improved when one considers the joint effects of the predictions across multiple output
components. These models have evolved into their deep neural counterparts [29, 1] through the use
of recurrent neural networks (RNN) with LSTM [13] cells and attention mechanisms [2].
A key problem in structured output prediction has always been to enable direct optimization of the
task reward (loss) used for test evaluation. For example, in machine translation one seeks better BLEU
scores, and in speech recognition better word error rates. Not surprisingly, almost all task reward
metrics are not differentiable, hence hard to optimize. Neural sequence models (e.g. [29, 2]) optimize
conditional log-likelihood, i.e. the conditional log-probability of the ground truth outputs given
corresponding inputs. These models do not explicitly consider the task reward during training, hoping
that conditional log-likelihood serves as a good surrogate for the task reward. Such methods make no
distinction between alternative incorrect outputs: log-probability is only measured on the ground truth
input-output pairs, and all alternative outputs are equally penalized through normalization, whether
near or far from the ground truth target. We believe one can improve upon maximum likelihood (ML)
sequence models if the difference in the rewards of alternative outputs is taken into account.
Standard ML training, despite its limitations, has enabled the training of deep RNN models, leading to
revolutionary advances in machine translation [29, 2, 21] and speech recognition [5–7]. A key property

