CliqueCNN: Deep Unsupervised Exemplar Learning

Miguel A. Bautista∗ , Artsiom Sanakoyeu∗ , Ekaterina Sutter, Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Exemplar learning is a powerful paradigm for discovering visual similarities in
an unsupervised manner. In this context, however, the recent breakthrough in
deep learning could not yet unfold its full potential. With only a single positive
sample, a great imbalance between one positive and many negatives, and unreliable
relationships between most samples, training of Convolutional Neural networks is
impaired. Given weak estimates of local distance we propose a single optimization
problem to extract batches of samples with mutually consistent relations. Conflicting relations are distributed over different batches and similar samples are grouped
into compact cliques. Learning exemplar similarities is framed as a sequence of
clique categorization tasks. The CNN then consolidates transitivity relations within
and between cliques and learns a single representation for all samples without
the need for labels. The proposed unsupervised approach has shown competitive
performance on detailed posture analysis and object classification.

1

Introduction

Visual similarity learning is the foundation for numerous computer vision subtasks ranging from
low-level image processing to high-level object recognition or posture analysis. A common paradigm
has been category-level recognition, where categories and the similarities of all their instances
to other classes are jointly modeled. However, large intra-class variability has recently spurred
exemplar methods [15, 11], which split this problem into simpler sub-tasks. Therefore, separate
exemplar classifiers are trained by learning the similarities of individual exemplars against a large
set of negatives. The exemplar paradigm has been successfully employed in diverse areas such as
segmentation [11], grouping [10], instance retrieval [2, 19], and object recognition [15, 5]. Learning
similarities is also of particular importance for posture analysis [8] and video parsing [17].
Among the many approaches for similarity learning, supervised techniques have been particularly
popular in the vision community, leading to the formulation as a ranking [23], regression [6], and
classification [17] task. With the recent advances of convolutional neural networks (CNN), two-stream
architectures [25] and ranking losses [21] have shown great improvements. However, to achieve their
performance gain, CNN architectures require millions of samples of supervised training data or at
least the fine-tuning [3] on large datasets such as PASCAL VOC. Although the amount of accessible
image data is increasing at an enormous rate, supervised labeling of similarities is very costly. In
addition, not only similarities between images are important, but especially between objects and their
parts. Annotating the fine-grained similarities between all these entities is hopelessly complex, in
particular for the large datasets typically used for training CNNs.
Unsupervised deep learning of similarities that does not requiring any labels for pre-training or
fine-tuning is, therefore, of great interest to the vision community. This way we can utilize large
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Project on GitHub: https://github.com/asanakoy/cliquecnn

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

