Identification and Overidentification of
Linear Structural Equation Models

Bryant Chen
University of California, Los Angeles
Computer Science Department
Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1596, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problems of identifying linear structural equation
models and discovering the constraints they imply. We first extend the half-trek
criterion to cover a broader class of models and apply our extension to finding
testable constraints implied by the model. We then show that any semi-Markovian
linear model can be recursively decomposed into simpler sub-models, resulting
in improved identification and constraint discovery power. Finally, we show that,
unlike the existing methods developed for linear models, the resulting method
subsumes the identification and constraint discovery algorithms for non-parametric
models.

1

Introduction

Many researchers, particularly in economics, psychology, and the social sciences, use linear structural
equation models (SEMs) to describe the causal and statistical relationships between a set of variables,
predict the effects of interventions and policies, and to estimate parameters of interest. When modeling
using linear SEMs, researchers typically specify the causal structure (i.e. exclusion restrictions and
independence restrictions between error terms) from domain knowledge, leaving the structural
coefficients (representing the strength of the causal relationships) as free parameters to be estimated
from data. If these coefficients are known, then total effects, direct effects, and counterfactuals
can be computed from them directly (Balke and Pearl, 1994). However, in some cases, the causal
assumptions embedded in the model are not enough to uniquely determine one or more coefficients
from the probability distribution, and therefore, cannot be estimated using data. In such cases, we say
that the coefficient is not identified or not identifiable1 .
In other cases, a coefficient may be overidentified in addition to being identified, meaning that there
are at least two minimal sets of logically independent assumptions in the model that are sufficient
for identifying a coefficient, and the identified expressions for the coefficient are distinct functions
of the covariance matrix (Pearl, 2004). As a result, the model imposes a testable constraint on the
probability distribution that the two (or more) identified expressions for the coefficient are equal.
As compact and transparent representations of the model’s structure, causal graphs provide a convenient tool to aid in the identification of coefficients. First utilized as a causal inference tool by
Wright (1921), graphs have more recently been applied to identify causal effects in non-parametric
causal models (Pearl, 2009) and enabled the development of causal effect identification algorithms
that are complete for non-parametric models (Huang and Valtorta, 2006; Shpitser and Pearl, 2006).
These algorithms can be applied to the identification of coefficients in linear SEMs by identifying
non-parametric direct effects, which are closely related to structural coefficients (Tian, 2005; Chen
and Pearl, 2014). Algorithms designed specifically for the identification of linear SEMs were de1

We will also use the term “identified" with respect to individual variables and the model as a whole.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

