Confusions over Time: An Interpretable Bayesian
Model to Characterize Trends in Decision Making

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
himalv@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose Confusions over Time (CoT), a novel generative framework which
facilitates a multi-granular analysis of the decision making process. The CoT
not only models the confusions or error properties of individual decision makers
and their evolution over time, but also allows us to obtain diagnostic insights into
the collective decision making process in an interpretable manner. To this end,
the CoT models the confusions of the decision makers and their evolution over
time via time-dependent confusion matrices. Interpretable insights are obtained
by grouping similar decision makers (and items being judged) into clusters and
representing each such cluster with an appropriate prototype and identifying the
most important features characterizing the cluster via a subspace feature indicator
vector. Experimentation with real world data on bail decisions, asthma treatments,
and insurance policy approval decisions demonstrates that CoT can accurately
model and explain the confusions of decision makers and their evolution over
time.

1

Introduction

Several diverse domains such as judiciary, health care, and insurance rely heavily on human decision
making. Since decisions of judges, doctors, and other decision makers impact millions of people, it is
important to reduce errors in judgement. The first step towards reducing such errors and improving
the quality of decision making is to diagnose the errors being made by the decision makers. It is
crucial to not only identify the errors made by individual decision makers and how they change over
time, but also to determine common patterns of errors encountered in the collective decision making
process. This turns out to be quite challenging in practice partly because there is no ground truth
which captures the optimal decision in a given scenario.
Prior research has mainly focussed on modeling decisions of individual decision makers [2, 12]. For
instance, the Dawid-Skene model [2] assumes that each item (eg., a patient) has an underlying true
label (eg., a particular treatment) and a decision maker’s evaluation of the item will be masked by
her own biases and confusions. Confusions of each individual decision maker j are modeled using a
latent confusion matrix Θj , where an entry in the (p, q) cell denotes the probability that an item with
true label p will be assigned a label q by the decision maker j. The true labels of items and latent
confusion matrices of decision makers are jointly inferred as part of the inference process. However,
a major drawback of the Dawid-Skene framework and several of its extensions [16, 17, 12] is that
they do not provide any diagnostic insights into the collective decision making process. Furthermore,
none of these approaches account for temporal changes in the confusions of decision makers.
Here, we propose a novel Bayesian framework, Confusions over Time (CoT), which jointly: 1)
models the confusions of individual decision makers 2) captures the temporal dynamics of their
decision making 3) provides interpretable insights into the collective decision making process, and 4)
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

