Professor Forcing: A New Algorithm for Training
Recurrent Networks
Anirudh Goyal∗, Alex Lamb∗ , Ying Zhang, Saizheng Zhang,
Aaron Courville and Yoshua Bengio1
MILA, Université de Montréal, 1 CIFAR
{anirudhgoyal9119, alex6200, ying.zhlisa, saizhenglisa,
aaron.courville, yoshua.umontreal}@gmail.com

Abstract
The Teacher Forcing algorithm trains recurrent networks by supplying observed
sequence values as inputs during training and using the network’s own one-stepahead predictions to do multi-step sampling. We introduce the Professor Forcing
algorithm, which uses adversarial domain adaptation to encourage the dynamics of
the recurrent network to be the same when training the network and when sampling
from the network over multiple time steps. We apply Professor Forcing to language
modeling, vocal synthesis on raw waveforms, handwriting generation, and image
generation. Empirically we find that Professor Forcing acts as a regularizer, improving test likelihood on character level Penn Treebank and sequential MNIST.
We also find that the model qualitatively improves samples, especially when sampling for a large number of time steps. This is supported by human evaluation of
sample quality. Trade-offs between Professor Forcing and Scheduled Sampling are
discussed. We produce T-SNEs showing that Professor Forcing successfully makes
the dynamics of the network during training and sampling more similar.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have become to be the generative models of choice for sequential
data (Graves, 2012) with impressive results in language modeling (Mikolov, 2010; Mikolov and
Zweig, 2012), speech recognition (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Chorowski et al., 2015), Machine Translation (Cho et al., 2014a; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014), handwriting generation (Graves,
2013), image caption generation (Xu et al., 2015; Chen and Lawrence Zitnick, 2015), etc.
The RNN models the data via a fully-observed directed graphical model: it decomposes the distribution over the discrete time sequence y1 , y2 , . . . yT into an ordered product of conditional distributions
over tokens
T
Y
P (y1 , y2 , . . . yT ) = P (y1 )
P (yt | y1 , . . . yt−1 ).
t=1

By far the most popular training strategy is via the maximum likelihood principle. In the RNN
literature, this form of training is also known as teacher forcing (Williams and Zipser, 1989), due to
the use of the ground-truth samples yt being fed back into the model to be conditioned on for the
prediction of later outputs. These fed back samples force the RNN to stay close to the ground-truth
sequence.
When using the RNN for prediction, the ground-truth sequence is not available conditioning and
we sample from the joint distribution over the sequence by sampling each yt from its conditional
∗

Indicates first authors. Ordering determined by coin flip.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

