A Simple Practical Accelerated Method for Finite
Sums
Aaron Defazio
Ambiata, Sydney Australia

Abstract
We describe a novel optimization method for finite sums (such as empirical risk
minimization problems) building on the recently introduced SAGA method. Our
method achieves an accelerated convergence rate on strongly convex smooth problems. Our method has only one parameter (a step size), and is radically simpler
than other accelerated methods for finite sums. Additionally it can be applied
when the terms are non-smooth, yielding a method applicable in many areas where
operator splitting methods would traditionally be applied.

Introduction
A large body of recent developments in optimization have focused on minimization of convex finite
sums of the form:
n
1X
f (x) =
fi (x),
n i=1
a very general class of problems including the empirical risk minimization (ERM) framework as a
special case. Any function h can be written in this form by setting f1 (x) = h(x) and fi = 0 for
i 6= 1, however when each fi is sufficiently regular in a way that can be made precise, it is possible to
optimize such sums more efficiently than by treating them as black box functions.
In most cases recently developed methods such as SAG [Schmidt et al., 2013] can find an -minimum
faster than either stochastic gradient descent or accelerated black-box approaches, both in theory and
in practice. We call this class of methods fast incremental gradient methods (FIG).
FIG methods are randomized methods similar to SGD, however unlike SGD they are able to achieve
linear convergence rates under Lipschitz-smooth and strong convexity conditions [Mairal, 2014,
Defazio et al., 2014b, Johnson and Zhang, 2013, Konečný and Richtárik, 2013]. The linear rate in the
first wave of FIG methods directly depended on the condition number L/µ of the problem, whereas
recently several methods have been developed that depend on the square-root of the condition number
[Lan and Zhou, 2015, Lin et al., 2015, Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang, 2013c, Nitanda, 2014], at least
when n is not too large. Analogous to the black-box case, these methods are known as accelerated
methods.
In this work we develop another accelerated method, which is conceptually simpler and requires
less tuning than existing accelerated methods. The method we give is a primal approach, however it
makes use of a proximal operator oracle for each fi instead of a gradient oracle, unlike other primal
approaches. The proximal operator is also used by dual methods such as some variants of SDCA
[Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang, 2013a].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

