Pruning Random Forests for Prediction on a Budget

Feng Nan
Systems Engineering
Boston University
fnan@bu.edu

Joseph Wang
Electrical Engineering
Boston University
joewang@bu.edu

Venkatesh Saligrama
Electrical Engineering
Boston University
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose to prune a random forest (RF) for resource-constrained prediction. We
first construct a RF and then prune it to optimize expected feature cost & accuracy.
We pose pruning RFs as a novel 0-1 integer program with linear constraints that
encourages feature re-use. We establish total unimodularity of the constraint set
to prove that the corresponding LP relaxation solves the original integer program.
We then exploit connections to combinatorial optimization and develop an efficient
primal-dual algorithm, scalable to large datasets. In contrast to our bottom-up
approach, which benefits from good RF initialization, conventional methods are
top-down acquiring features based on their utility value and is generally intractable,
requiring heuristics. Empirically, our pruning algorithm outperforms existing
state-of-the-art resource-constrained algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many modern classification systems, including internet applications (such as web-search engines,
recommendation systems, and spam filtering) and security & surveillance applications (such as widearea surveillance and classification on large video corpora), face the challenge of prediction-time
budget constraints [21]. Prediction-time budgets can arise due to monetary costs associated with
acquiring information or computation time (or delay) involved in extracting features and running the
algorithm. We seek to learn a classifier by training on fully annotated training datasets that maintains
high-accuracy while meeting average resource constraints during prediction-time. We consider a
system that adaptively acquires features as needed depending on the instance(example) for high
classification accuracy with reduced feature acquisition cost.
We propose a two-stage algorithm. In the first stage, we train a random forest (RF) of trees using
an impurity function such as entropy or more specialized cost-adaptive impurity [16]. Our second
stage takes a RF as input and attempts to jointly prune each tree in the forest to meet global resource
constraints. During prediction-time, an example is routed through all the trees in the ensemble to the
corresponding leaf nodes and the final prediction is based on a majority vote. The total feature cost
for a test example is the sum of acquisition costs of unique features1 acquired for the example in the
entire ensemble of trees in the forest. 2
We derive an efficient scheme to learn a globally optimal pruning of a RF minimizing the
empirical error and incurred average costs. We formulate the pruning problem as a 0-1 integer linear program that incorporates feature-reuse constraints. By establishing total unimodularity of the constraint set, we show that solving the linear program relaxation of the integer program yields the optimal solution to the integer program resulting in a polynomial
1
When an example arrives at an internal node, the feature associated with the node is used to direct the
example. If the feature has never been acquired for the example an acquisition cost is incurred. Otherwise, no
acquisition cost is incurred as we assume that feature values are stored once computed.
2
For time-sensitive cases such as web-search we parallelize the implementation by creating parallel jobs
across all features and trees. We can then terminate jobs based on what features are returned.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

