Unsupervised Learning from Noisy Networks with
Applications to Hi-C Data
Bo Wang1⇤, Junjie Zhu2 , Oana Ursu3 , Armin Pourshafeie4 , Serafim Batzoglou1 and Anshul Kundaje3,1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
3
Department of Genetics, Stanford University
4
Department of Physics, Stanford University

Abstract
Complex networks play an important role in a plethora of disciplines in natural
sciences. Cleaning up noisy observed networks poses an important challenge in
network analysis. Existing methods utilize labeled data to alleviate the noise the
noise levels. However, labeled data is usually expensive to collect while unlabeled
data can be gathered cheaply. In this paper, we propose an optimization framework
to mine useful structures from noisy networks in an unsupervised manner. The key
feature of our optimization framework is its ability to utilize local structures as
well as global patterns in the network. We extend our method to incorporate multiresolution networks in order to add further resistance in the presence of high-levels
of noise. The framework is generalized to utilize partial labels in order to further
enhance the performance. We empirically test the effectiveness of our method in
denoising a network by demonstrating an improvement in community detection
results on multi-resolution Hi-C data both with and without Capture-C-generated
partial labels.

1

Introduction

Complex networks emerge in a plethora of disciplines including computer science, social sciences,
biology and etc. They entail non-trivial topological features and patterns critical to understanding
interactions within complicated systems. However, observed networks from data are typically noisy
due to imperfect measurements. The adverse effects of noise pose a critical challenge in unraveling
clear structures and dynamics in the networks. Therefore, network denoising can strongly influence
how the networks are interpreted, and can significantly improve the outcome of down-stream analysis
such as global and local community detection.
The goal of community detection is to identify meaningful structures/communities underlying the
provided samples in an unsupervised manner. While the performance of community detection
algorithms can worsen due to noise [1], one may use prior knowledge about the structure of the
communities, such as the presence of clusters, to recover local networks [25]. In addition to the
special structure that one may expect in a network, a small portion of high confidence links may be
available. The combination of the special structure and the confident links can be used to denoise
the network that might include both noisy or missing links. How to incorporate multiple sources
of information to construct a network has been widely studied in the context of data fusion or data
aggregation [3].
Biology offers a special case where overall structure of the network of interest might be known
from the science but the data may be riddled with noise. One example of this is the 3D structure, or
folding, of DNA. In biology, this structure is important as, among other things, the DNA topology
⇤

bowang87@stanford.edu

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

