Supervised Word Mover’s Distance

Gao Huang∗ , Chuan Guo∗
Cornell University
{gh349,cg563}@cornell.edu
Yu Sun, Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University
{ys646,kqw4}@cornell.edu

Matt J. Kusner†
Alan Turing Institute, University of Warwick
mkusner@turing.ac.uk
Fei Sha
University of California, Los Angeles
feisha@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recently, a new document metric called the word mover’s distance (WMD) has
been proposed with unprecedented results on kNN-based document classification.
The WMD elevates high-quality word embeddings to a document metric by formulating the distance between two documents as an optimal transport problem
between the embedded words. However, the document distances are entirely unsupervised and lack a mechanism to incorporate supervision when available. In
this paper we propose an efficient technique to learn a supervised metric, which
we call the Supervised-WMD (S-WMD) metric. The supervised training minimizes the stochastic leave-one-out nearest neighbor classification error on a perdocument level by updating an affine transformation of the underlying word embedding space and a word-imporance weight vector. As the gradient of the original WMD distance would result in an inefficient nested optimization problem, we
provide an arbitrarily close approximation that results in a practical and efficient
update rule. We evaluate S-WMD on eight real-world text classification tasks on
which it consistently outperforms almost all of our 26 competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Document distances are a key component of many text retrieval tasks such as web-search ranking
[24], book recommendation [16], and news categorization [25]. Because of the variety of potential applications, there has been a wealth of work towards developing accurate document distances
[2, 4, 11, 27]. In large part, prior work focused on extracting meaningful document representations,
starting with the classical bag of words (BOW) and term frequency-inverse document frequency
(TF-IDF) representations [30]. These sparse, high-dimensional representations are frequently nearly
orthogonal [17] and a pair of similar documents may therefore have nearly the same distance as a
pair that are very different. It is possible to design more meaningful representations through eigendecomposing the BOW space with Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) [11], or learning a probabilistic
clustering of BOW vectors with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [2]. Other work generalizes LDA
[27] or uses denoising autoencoders [4] to learn a suitable document representation.
Recently, Kusner et al. [19] proposed the Word Mover’s Distance (WMD), a new distance for text
documents that leverages word embeddings [22]. Given these high-quality embeddings, the WMD
defines the distances between two documents as the optimal transport cost of moving all words from
one document to another within the word embedding space. This approach was shown to lead to
state-of-the-art error rates in k-nearest neighbor (kNN) document classification.
∗
†

Authors contributing equally
This work was done while the author was a student at Washington University in St. Louis

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

