Stochastic Online AUC Maximization
Yiming Ying† , Longyin Wen‡ , Siwei Lyu‡
†
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
SUNY at Albany, Albany, NY, 12222, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science
SUNY at Albany, Albany, NY, 12222, USA

Abstract
Area under ROC (AUC) is a metric which is widely used for measuring the
classification performance for imbalanced data. It is of theoretical and practical
interest to develop online learning algorithms that maximizes AUC for large-scale
data. A specific challenge in developing online AUC maximization algorithm is that
the learning objective function is usually defined over a pair of training examples
of opposite classes, and existing methods achieves on-line processing with higher
space and time complexity. In this work, we propose a new stochastic online
algorithm for AUC maximization. In particular, we show that AUC optimization
can be equivalently formulated as a convex-concave saddle point problem. From
this saddle representation, a stochastic online algorithm (SOLAM) is proposed
which has time and space complexity of one datum. We establish theoretical
convergence of SOLAM with high probability and demonstrate its effectiveness
on standard benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) [8] is a widely used metric for measuring classification performance. Unlike misclassification error that reflects a classifier’s ability to classify a single randomly
chosen example, AUC concerns the overall performance of a functional family of classifiers and
quantifies their ability of correctly ranking any positive instance with regards to a randomly chosen
negative instance. Most algorithms optimizing AUC for classification [5, 9, 12, 17] are for batch
learning, where we assume all training data are available.
On the other hand, online learning algorithms [1, 2, 3, 16, 19, 22], have been proven to be very
efficient to deal with large-scale datasets. However, most studies of online learning focus on the
misclassification error or its surrogate loss, in which the objective function depends on a sum of
losses over individual examples. It is thus desirable to develop online learning algorithms to optimize
the AUC metric. The main challenge for an online AUC algorithm is that the objective function of
AUC maximization depends on a sum of pairwise losses between instances from different classes
which is quadratic in the number of training examples. As such, directly deploying the existing online
algorithms will require to store all training data received, making it not feasible for large-scale data
analysis.
Several recent works [6, 11, 18, 20, 21] have studied a type of online AUC maximization method that
updates the classifier upon the arrival of each new training example. However, this type of algorithms
need to access all previous examples at iteration t, and has O(td) space and per-iteration complexity
where d is the dimension of the data. The scaling of per-iteration space and time complexity is an
undesirable property for online applications that have to use fixed resources. This problem is partially
alleviated by the use of buffers of a fixed size s in [11, 21], which reduces the per-iteration space and
time complexity to O(sd). Although this change makes the per-iteration space and time complexity
independent of the number of iterations, in practice, to reduce variance in learning performance, the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

