Hierarchical Deep Reinforcement Learning:
Integrating Temporal Abstraction and
Intrinsic Motivation
Tejas D. Kulkarni∗
DeepMind, London
tejasdkulkarni@gmail.com

Karthik R. Narasimhan∗
CSAIL, MIT
karthikn@mit.edu

Ardavan Saeedi
CSAIL, MIT
ardavans@mit.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
BCS, MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Learning goal-directed behavior in environments with sparse feedback is a major
challenge for reinforcement learning algorithms. One of the key difficulties is insufficient exploration, resulting in an agent being unable to learn robust policies.
Intrinsically motivated agents can explore new behavior for their own sake rather
than to directly solve external goals. Such intrinsic behaviors could eventually
help the agent solve tasks posed by the environment. We present hierarchicalDQN (h-DQN), a framework to integrate hierarchical action-value functions, operating at different temporal scales, with goal-driven intrinsically motivated deep
reinforcement learning. A top-level q-value function learns a policy over intrinsic
goals, while a lower-level function learns a policy over atomic actions to satisfy
the given goals. h-DQN allows for flexible goal specifications, such as functions
over entities and relations. This provides an efficient space for exploration in
complicated environments. We demonstrate the strength of our approach on two
problems with very sparse and delayed feedback: (1) a complex discrete stochastic decision process with stochastic transitions, and (2) the classic ATARI game –
‘Montezuma’s Revenge’.

1

Introduction

Learning goal-directed behavior with sparse feedback from complex environments is a fundamental
challenge for artificial intelligence. Learning in this setting requires the agent to represent knowledge at multiple levels of spatio-temporal abstractions and to explore the environment efficiently.
Recently, non-linear function approximators coupled with reinforcement learning [14, 16, 23] have
made it possible to learn abstractions over high-dimensional state spaces, but the task of exploration
with sparse feedback still remains a major challenge. Existing methods like Boltzmann exploration
and Thomson sampling [31, 19] offer significant improvements over -greedy, but are limited due to
the underlying models functioning at the level of basic actions. In this work, we propose a framework that integrates deep reinforcement learning with hierarchical action-value functions (h-DQN),
where the top-level module learns a policy over options (subgoals) and the bottom-level module
learns policies to accomplish the objective of each option. Exploration in the space of goals enables
efficient exploration in problems with sparse and delayed rewards. Additionally, our experiments
indicate that goals expressed in the space of entities and relations can help constraint the exploration
space for data efficient deep reinforcement learning in complex environments.
∗

Equal Contribution. Work done while Tejas Kulkarni was affiliated with MIT.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

