Asynchronous Parallel Greedy Coordinate Descent
Yang You ⇧, + XiangRu Lian†, + Ji Liu † Hsiang-Fu Yu ‡
Inderjit S. Dhillon ‡ James Demmel ⇧ Cho-Jui Hsieh ⇤
+
⇤
†
equally contributed
University of California, Davis
University of Rochester
‡
⇧
University of Texas, Austin
University of California, Berkeley
youyang@cs.berkeley.edu, xiangru@yandex.com, jliu@cs.rochester.edu
{rofuyu,inderjit}@cs.utexas.edu, demmel@eecs.berkeley.edu
chohsieh@cs.ucdavis.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose and study an Asynchronous parallel Greedy Coordinate
Descent (Asy-GCD) algorithm for minimizing a smooth function with bounded
constraints. At each iteration, workers asynchronously conduct greedy coordinate
descent updates on a block of variables. In the first part of the paper, we analyze the
theoretical behavior of Asy-GCD and prove a linear convergence rate. In the second
part, we develop an efficient kernel SVM solver based on Asy-GCD in the shared
memory multi-core setting. Since our algorithm is fully asynchronous—each core
does not need to idle and wait for the other cores—the resulting algorithm enjoys
good speedup and outperforms existing multi-core kernel SVM solvers including
asynchronous stochastic coordinate descent and multi-core LIBSVM.

1

Introduction

Asynchronous parallel optimization has recently become a popular way to speedup machine learning
algorithms using multiple processors. The key idea of asynchronous parallel optimization is to allow
machines work independently without waiting for the synchronization points. It has many successful
applications including linear SVM [13, 19], deep neural networks [7, 15], matrix completion [19, 31],
linear programming [26], and its theoretical behavior has been deeply studied in the past few
years [1, 9, 16].
The most widely used asynchronous optimization algorithms are stochastic gradient method (SG) [7,
9, 19] and coordinate descent (CD) [1, 13, 16], where the workers keep selecting a sample or a
variable randomly and conduct the corresponding update asynchronously. Although these stochastic
algorithms have been studied deeply, in some important machine learning problems a “greedy”
approach can achieve much faster convergence speed. A very famous example is greedy coordinate
descent: instead of randomly choosing a variable, at each iteration the algorithm selects the most
important variable to update. If this selection step can be implemented efficiently, greedy coordinate
descent can often make bigger progress compared with stochastic coordinate descent, leading to a
faster convergence speed. For example, the decomposition method (a variant of greedy coordinate
descent) is widely known as best solver for kernel SVM [14, 21], which is implemented in LIBSVM
and SVMLight. Other successful applications can be found in [8, 11, 29].
In this paper, we study asynchronous greedy coordinate descent algorithm framework. The variable is
partitioned into subsets, and each worker asynchronously conducts greedy coordinate descent in one
of the blocks. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to present a theoretical analysis or practical
applications of this asynchronous parallel algorithm. In the first part of the paper, we formally define
the asynchronous greedy coordinate descent procedure, and prove a linear convergence rate under
mild assumption. In the second part of the paper, we discuss how to apply this algorithm to solve the
kernel SVM problem on multi-core machines. Our algorithm achieves linear speedup with number of
cores, and performs better than other multi-core SVM solvers.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

