DISCO Nets: DISsimilarity COefficient Networks

Diane Bouchacourt
University of Oxford
diane@robots.ox.ac.uk

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford
pawan@robots.ox.ac.uk

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research Cambridge
sebastian.nowozin@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a new type of probabilistic model which we call DISsimilarity COefficient Networks (DISCO Nets). DISCO Nets allow us to efficiently sample from a
posterior distribution parametrised by a neural network. During training, DISCO
Nets are learned by minimising the dissimilarity coefficient between the true distribution and the estimated distribution. This allows us to tailor the training to the loss
related to the task at hand. We empirically show that (i) by modeling uncertainty on
the output value, DISCO Nets outperform equivalent non-probabilistic predictive
networks and (ii) DISCO Nets accurately model the uncertainty of the output,
outperforming existing probabilistic models based on deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

We are interested in the class of problems that require the prediction of a structured output y ∈ Y
given an input x ∈ X . Complex applications often have large uncertainty on the correct value of y.
For example, consider the task of hand pose estimation from depth images, where one wants to
accurately estimate the pose y of a hand given a depth image x. The depth image often has some
occlusions and missing depth values and this results in some uncertainty on the pose of the hand. It is,
therefore, natural to use probabilistic models that are capable of representing this uncertainty. Often,
the capacity of the model is restricted and cannot represent the true distribution perfectly. In this case,
the choice of the learning objective influences final performance. Similar to Lacoste-Julien et al. [12],
we argue that the learning objective should be tailored to the evaluation loss in order to obtain the best
performance with respect to this loss. In details, we denote by ∆training the loss function employed
during model training, and by ∆task the loss employed to evaluate the model’s performance.
We present a simple example to illustrate the point made above. We consider a data distribution that is a mixture of two bidimensional Gaussians. We now consider two models to capture
the data probability distribution. Each model is able to represent a bidimensional Gaussian
distribution with diagonal covariance parametrised by (µ1 , µ2 , σ1 , σ2 ). In this case, neither of
the models will be able to recover the true data distribution since they do not have the ability to
represent a mixture of Gaussians. In other words, we cannot avoid model error, similarly to the
real data scenario. Each model uses its own training loss ∆training . Model A employs a loss that
emphasises on the first dimension of the data, specified for x = (x1 , x2 ), x0 = (x01 , x02 ) ∈ R2
1
by ∆A (x − x0 ) = (10 × (x1 − x01 )2 + 0.1 × (x2 − x02 )2 ) /2 . Model B does the opposite and employs
1
the loss function ∆B (x − x0 ) = (0.1 × (x1 − x01 )2 + 10 × (x2 − x02 )2 ) /2 . Each model performs a
grid search over the best parameters values for (µ1 , µ2 , σ1 , σ2 ). Figure 1 shows the contours of the
Mixture of Gaussians distribution of the data (in black), and the contour of the Gaussian fitted by
each model (in red and green). Detailed setting of this example is available in the supplementary
material.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

