Large-Scale Price Optimization via Network Flow

Shinji Ito
NEC Corporation
s-ito@me.jp.nec.com

Ryohei Fujimaki
NEC Corporation
rfujimaki@nec-labs.com

Abstract
This paper deals with price optimization, which is to find the best pricing strategy
that maximizes revenue or profit, on the basis of demand forecasting models.
Though recent advances in regression technologies have made it possible to reveal
price-demand relationship of a large number of products, most existing price
optimization methods, such as mixed integer programming formulation, cannot
handle tens or hundreds of products because of their high computational costs. To
cope with this problem, this paper proposes a novel approach based on network
flow algorithms. We reveal a connection between supermodularity of the revenue
and cross elasticity of demand. On the basis of this connection, we propose an
efficient algorithm that employs network flow algorithms. The proposed algorithm
can handle hundreds or thousands of products, and returns an exact optimal solution
under an assumption regarding cross elasticity of demand. Even if the assumption
does not hold, the proposed algorithm can efficiently find approximate solutions as
good as other state-of-the-art methods, as empirical results show.

1

Introduction

Price optimization is a central research topic with respect to revenue management in marketing
science [10, 16, 18]. The goal is to find the best price strategy (a set of prices for multiple products)
that maximizes revenue or profit. There is a lot of literature regarding price optimization [1, 5, 10,
13, 17, 18, 20], and significant success has been achieved in industries such as online retail [7],
fast-fashion [5], hotels [13, 14], and airlines [16]. One key component in price optimization is
demand modeling, which reveals relationships between price and demand. Though traditional studies
have focused more on a single price-demand relationship, such as price elasticity of demand [13, 14]
and the law of diminishing marginal utility [16], multi-product relationships such as cross price
elasticity of demand [15] have recently received increased attention [5, 17]. Recent advances in
regression technologies (non-linear, sparse, etc.) make demand modeling over tens or even hundreds
of products possible, and data oriented demand modeling has become more and more important.
Given demand models of multiple products, the role of optimization is to find the best price strategy.
Most existing studies for multi-product price optimization employ mixed-integer programming [5, 13,
14] due to the discrete nature of individual prices, but their methods cannot be applied to large scale
problems with tens or hundreds of products since their computational costs exponentially increases
over increasing numbers of products. Though restricting demand models might make optimization
problems tractable [5, 7], such approaches cannot capture complicated price-demand relationships
and often result in poor performance. Ito and Fujimaki [9] have recently proposed a prescriptive
price optimization framework to efficiently solve multi-product price optimization with non-linear
demand models. In this prescriptive price optimization, the problem is transformed into a sort of
binary quadratic programming problem, and they have proposed an efficient relaxation method
based on semi-definite programming (SDP). Although their approach has significantly improved
computational efficiency over that of mixed-integer approaches, the computational complexity of
their SDP formulation requires O(M 6 ) in theory, where M is the number of products, and it is not
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

