Efficient Neural Codes under Metabolic Constraints
Zhuo Wang ∗†
Department of Mathematics
University of Pennsylvania
wangzhuo@nyu.edu

Xue-Xin Wei ∗‡
Department of Psychology
University of Pennsylvania
weixxpku@gmail.com

Alan A. Stocker
Department of Psychology
University of Pennsylvania
astocker@sas.upenn.edu

Daniel D. Lee
Department of Electrical and System Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
ddlee@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Neural codes are inevitably shaped by various kinds of biological constraints, e.g.
noise and metabolic cost. Here we formulate a coding framework which explicitly
deals with noise and the metabolic costs associated with the neural representation of
information, and analytically derive the optimal neural code for monotonic response
functions and arbitrary stimulus distributions. For a single neuron, the theory
predicts a family of optimal response functions depending on the metabolic budget
and noise characteristics. Interestingly, the well-known histogram equalization
solution can be viewed as a special case when metabolic resources are unlimited.
For a pair of neurons, our theory suggests that under more severe metabolic
constraints, ON-OFF coding is an increasingly more efficient coding scheme
compared to ON-ON or OFF-OFF. The advantage could be as large as one-fold,
substantially larger than the previous estimation. Some of these predictions could
be generalized to the case of large neural populations. In particular, these analytical
results may provide a theoretical basis for the predominant segregation into ONand OFF-cells in early visual processing areas. Overall, we provide a unified
framework for optimal neural codes with monotonic tuning curves in the brain, and
makes predictions that can be directly tested with physiology experiments.

1

Introduction

The efficient coding hypothesis [1, 2] plays a fundamental role in understanding neural codes,
particularly in early sensory processing. Going beyond the original idea of redundancy reduction by
Horace Barlow [2], efficient coding has become a general conceptual framework for studying optimal
neural coding [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Efficient coding theory hypothesizes that the
neural code is organized in a way such that maximal information is conveyed about the stimulus
variable. Notably, any formulation of efficient coding necessarily relies on a set of constraints due
to real world limitations imposed on neural systems. For example, neural noise, metabolic energy
budgets, tuning curve characteristics and the size of the neural population all can have impacts on the
quality of the neural code.
Most previous studies have only considered a small subset of these constraints. For example, the
original redundancy reduction argument proposed by Barlow has focused on utilizing the dynamical
∗

equal contribution
current affiliation: Center for Neural Science, New York University
‡
current affiliation: Department of Statistics and Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University
†

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

