General Tensor Spectral Co-clustering
for Higher-Order Data

Tao Wu
Purdue University
wu577@purdue.edu

Austin R. Benson
Stanford University
arbenson@stanford.edu

David F. Gleich
Purdue University
dgleich@purdue.edu

Abstract
Spectral clustering and co-clustering are well-known techniques in data analysis,
and recent work has extended spectral clustering to square, symmetric tensors
and hypermatrices derived from a network. We develop a new tensor spectral
co-clustering method that simultaneously clusters the rows, columns, and slices
of a nonnegative three-mode tensor and generalizes to tensors with any number of
modes. The algorithm is based on a new random walk model which we call the
super-spacey random surfer. We show that our method out-performs state-of-the-art
co-clustering methods on several synthetic datasets with ground truth clusters and
then use the algorithm to analyze several real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in machine learning that aims to assign closely related entities to
the same group. Traditional methods optimize some aggregate measure of the strength of pairwise
relationships (e.g., similarities) between items. Spectral clustering is a particularly powerful technique
for computing the clusters when the pairwise similarities are encoded into the adjacency matrix of a
graph. However, many graph-like datasets are more naturally described by higher-order connections
among several entities. For instance, multilayer or multiplex networks describe the interactions
between several graphs simultaneously with node-node-layer relationships [17]. Nonnegative tensors
are a common representation for many of these higher-order datasets. For instance the i, j, k entry in
a third-order tensor might represent the similarity between items i and j in layer k.
Here we develop the General Tensor Spectral Co-clustering (GTSC) framework for clustering tensor
data. The algorithm takes as input a nonnegative tensor, which may be sparse, non-square, and
asymmetric, and outputs subsets of indices from each dimension (co-clusters). Underlying our
method is a new stochastic process that models higher-order Markov chains, which we call a superspacey random walk. This is used to generalize ideas from spectral clustering based on random walks.
We introduce a variant on the well-known conductance measure from spectral graph partitioning [24]
that we call biased conductance and describe how this provides a tensor partition quality metric; this
is akin to Chung’s use of circulations to spectrally-partition directed graphs [7]. Essentially, biased
conductance is the exit probability from a set following our new super-spacey random walk model.
We use experiments on both synthetic and real-world problems to validate the effectiveness of our
method1 . For the synthetic experiments, we devise a “planted cluster” model for tensors and show that
GTSC has superior performance compared to other state-of-the-art clustering methods in recovering
the planted clusters. In real-world tensor data experiments, we find that our GTSC framework
identifies stop-words and semantically independent sets in n-gram tensors as well as worldwide and
regional airlines and airports in a flight multiplex network.
1

Code and data for this paper are available at: https://github.com/wutao27/GtensorSC

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

