Error Analysis of Generalized Nyström Kernel
Regression

Hong Chen
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019
chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn

Haifeng Xia
Mathematics and Statistics
Huazhong Agricultural University
Wuhan 430070,China
haifeng.xia0910@gmail.com

Weidong Cai
School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Heng Huang
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019
heng@uta.edu

Abstract
Nyström method has been successfully used to improve the computational efficiency of kernel ridge regression (KRR). Recently, theoretical analysis of Nyström
KRR, including generalization bound and convergence rate, has been established
based on reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) associated with the symmetric
positive semi-definite kernel. However, in real world applications, RKHS is not
always optimal and kernel function is not necessary to be symmetric or positive
semi-definite. In this paper, we consider the generalized Nyström kernel regression
(GNKR) with `2 coefficient regularization, where the kernel just requires the continuity and boundedness. Error analysis is provided to characterize its generalization
performance and the column norm sampling strategy is introduced to construct the
refined hypothesis space. In particular, the fast learning rate with polynomial decay
is reached for the GNKR. Experimental analysis demonstrates the satisfactory
performance of GNKR with the column norm sampling.

1

Introduction

The high computational complexity makes kernel methods unfeasible to deal with large-scale data.
Recently, the Nyström method and its alternatives (e.g., the random Fourier feature technique [15],
the sketching method [25]) have been used to scale up kernel ridge regression (KRR) [4, 23, 27]. The
key step of Nyström method is to construct a subsampled matrix, which only contains part columns
of the original empirical kernel matrix. Therefore, the sampling criterion on the matrix column
affects heavily on the learning performance. The subsampling strategies of Nyström method can be
categorized into two types: uniform sampling and non-uniform sampling. The uniform sampling is
the simplest strategy, which has shown satisfactory performance on some applications [16, 23, 24].
From different theoretical aspects, several non-uniform sampling approaches have been proposed
such as the square `2 column-norm sampling [3, 4], the leverage score sampling [5, 8, 12], and the
adaptive sampling [11]. Besides the sampling strategies, there exist learning bounds for Nyström
kernel regression from three measurements: the matrix approximation [4, 5, 11], the coefficient
approximation [9, 10], and the excess generalization error [2, 16, 24].
Despite rapid progress on theory and applications, the following critical issues should be further
addressed for Nyström kernel regression.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

