Protein contact prediction from amino acid
co-evolution using convolutional networks for
graph-valued images

Vladimir Golkov1 , Marcin J. Skwark2 , Antonij Golkov3 , Alexey Dosovitskiy4 ,
Thomas Brox4 , Jens Meiler2 , and Daniel Cremers1
1
Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
3
University of Augsburg, Germany
4
University of Freiburg, Germany
golkov@cs.tum.edu, marcin@skwark.pl, antonij.golkov@student.uni-augsburg.de,
{dosovits,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de, jens.meiler@vanderbilt.edu, cremers@tum.de

Abstract
Proteins are responsible for most of the functions in life, and thus are the central
focus of many areas of biomedicine. Protein structure is strongly related to protein function, but is difficult to elucidate experimentally, therefore computational
structure prediction is a crucial task on the way to solve many biological questions.
A contact map is a compact representation of the three-dimensional structure of a
protein via the pairwise contacts between the amino acids constituting the protein.
We use a convolutional network to calculate protein contact maps from detailed
evolutionary coupling statistics between positions in the protein sequence. The
input to the network has an image-like structure amenable to convolutions, but every “pixel” instead of color channels contains a bipartite undirected edge-weighted
graph. We propose several methods for treating such “graph-valued images” in a
convolutional network. The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods
by a considerable margin.

1

Introduction

Proteins perform most of the functions in the cells of living organisms, acting as enzymes to perform
complex chemical reactions, recognizing foreign particles, conducting signals, and building cell
scaffolds – to name just a few. Their function is dictated by their three-dimensional structure, which
can be quite involved, despite the fact that proteins are linear polymers composed of only 20 different
types of amino acids. The sequence of amino acids dictates the three-dimensional structure and
related proteins share both structure and function. Predicting protein structure from amino acid
sequence remains a problem that is still largely unsolved.
1.1

Protein structure and contact maps

The primary structure of a protein refers to the linear sequence of the amino acid residues that
constitute the protein, as encoded by the corresponding gene. During or after its biosynthesis, a
protein spatially folds into an energetically favourable conformation. Locally it folds into so-called
secondary structure (α-helices and β-strands). The global three-dimensional structure into which the
entire protein folds is referred to as the tertiary structure. Fig. 1a depicts the tertiary structure of a
protein consisting of several α-helices.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

