PAC-Bayesian Theory Meets Bayesian Inference
Pascal Germain† Francis Bach† Alexandre Lacoste‡ Simon Lacoste-Julien†
†
INRIA Paris - École Normale Supérieure, firstname.lastname@inria.fr
‡
Google, allac@google.com

Abstract
We exhibit a strong link between frequentist PAC-Bayesian risk bounds and the
Bayesian marginal likelihood. That is, for the negative log-likelihood loss function, we show that the minimization of PAC-Bayesian generalization risk bounds
maximizes the Bayesian marginal likelihood. This provides an alternative explanation to the Bayesian Occam’s razor criteria, under the assumption that the data
is generated by an i.i.d. distribution. Moreover, as the negative log-likelihood is
an unbounded loss function, we motivate and propose a PAC-Bayesian theorem
tailored for the sub-gamma loss family, and we show that our approach is sound on
classical Bayesian linear regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Since its early beginning [24, 34], the PAC-Bayesian theory claims to provide “PAC guarantees
to Bayesian algorithms” (McAllester [24]). However, despite the amount of work dedicated to
this statistical learning theory—many authors improved the initial results [8, 21, 25, 30, 35] and/or
generalized them for various machine learning setups [4, 12, 15, 20, 28, 31, 32, 33]—it is mostly used
as a frequentist method. That is, under the assumptions that the learning samples are i.i.d.-generated
by a data-distribution, this theory expresses probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds on the
generalization risk. In other words, with probability 1 , the generalization risk is at most " away
from the training risk. The Bayesian side of PAC-Bayes comes mostly from the fact that these bounds
are expressed on the averaging/aggregation/ensemble of multiple predictors (weighted by a posterior
distribution) and incorporate prior knowledge. Although it is still sometimes referred as a theory that
bridges the Bayesian and frequentist approach [e.g., 16], it has been merely used to justify Bayesian
methods until now.1
In this work, we provide a direct connection between Bayesian inference techniques [summarized
by 5, 13] and PAC-Bayesian risk bounds in a general setup. Our study is based on a simple
but insightful connection between the Bayesian marginal likelihood and PAC-Bayesian bounds
(previously mentioned by Grünwald [14]) obtained by considering the negative log-likelihood loss
function (Section 3). By doing so, we provide an alternative explanation for the Bayesian Occam’s
razor criteria [18, 22] in the context of model selection, expressed as the complexity-accuracy
trade-off appearing in most PAC-Bayesian results. In Section 4, we extend PAC-Bayes theorems
to regression problems with unbounded loss, adapted to the negative log-likelihood loss function.
Finally, we study the Bayesian model selection from a PAC-Bayesian perspective (Section 5), and
illustrate our finding on classical Bayesian regression tasks (Section 6).

2

PAC-Bayesian Theory

We denote the learning sample (X, Y )={(xi , yi )}ni=1 2(X ⇥Y)n , that contains n input-output pairs.
The main assumption of frequentist learning theories—including PAC-Bayes—is that (X, Y ) is
1

Some existing connections [3, 6, 14, 19, 29, 30, 36] are discussed in Appendix A.1.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

