DECOrrelated feature space partitioning for
distributed sparse regression

Xiangyu Wang
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University
wwrechard@gmail.com

David Dunson
Dept. of Statistical Science
Duke University
dunson@stat.duke.edu

Chenlei Leng
Dept. of Statistics
University of Warwick
C.Leng@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Fitting statistical models is computationally challenging when the sample size or
the dimension of the dataset is huge. An attractive approach for down-scaling the
problem size is to first partition the dataset into subsets and then fit using distributed
algorithms. The dataset can be partitioned either horizontally (in the sample space)
or vertically (in the feature space). While the majority of the literature focuses on
sample space partitioning, feature space partitioning is more effective when p  n.
Existing methods for partitioning features, however, are either vulnerable to high
correlations or inefficient in reducing the model dimension. In this paper, we solve
these problems through a new embarrassingly parallel framework named DECO
for distributed variable selection and parameter estimation. In DECO, variables
are first partitioned and allocated to m distributed workers. The decorrelated
subset data within each worker are then fitted via any algorithm designed for
high-dimensional problems. We show that by incorporating the decorrelation step,
DECO can achieve consistent variable selection and parameter estimation on each
subset with (almost) no assumptions. In addition, the convergence rate is nearly
minimax optimal for both sparse and weakly sparse models and does NOT depend
on the partition number m. Extensive numerical experiments are provided to
illustrate the performance of the new framework.

1

Introduction

In modern science and technology applications, it has become routine to collect complex datasets
with a huge number p of variables and/or enormous sample size n. Most of the emphasis in the
literature has been on addressing large n problems, with a common strategy relying on partitioning
data samples into subsets and fitting a model containing all the variables to each subset [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
In scientific applications, it is much more common to have huge p small n data sets. In such cases,
a sensible strategy is to break the features into groups, fit a model separately to each group, and
combine the results. We refer to this strategy as feature space partitioning, and to the large n strategy
as sample space partitioning.
There are several recent attempts on parallel variable selection by partitioning the feature space. [7]
proposed a Bayesian split-and-merge (SAM) approach in which variables are first partitioned into
subsets and then screened over each subset. A variable selection procedure is then performed on the
variables that survive for selecting the final model. One caveat for this approach is that the algorithm
cannot guarantee the efficiency of screening, i.e., the screening step taken on each subset might select
a large number of unimportant but correlated variables [7], so SAM could be ineffective in reducing
the model dimension. Inspired by a group test, [8] proposed a parallel feature selection algorithm by
repeatedly fitting partial models on a set of re-sampled features, and then aggregating the residuals to
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

