Fairness in Learning: Classic and Contextual Bandits ∗

Matthew Joseph

Michael Kearns

Jamie Morgenstern

Aaron Roth

University of Pennsylvania, Department of Computer and Information Science
majos, mkearns, jamiemor, aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
We introduce the study of fairness in multi-armed bandit problems. Our fairness
definition demands that, given a pool of applicants, a worse applicant is never
favored over a better one, despite a learning algorithm’s uncertainty over the true
payoffs. In the classic stochastic bandits problem we provide a provably fair
algorithm based on “chained” confidence intervals, and prove a cumulative regret
bound with a cubic dependence on the number of arms. We further show that
any fair algorithm must have such a dependence, providing a strong separation
between fair and unfair learning that extends to the general contextual case. In
the general contextual case, we prove a tight connection between fairness and the
KWIK (Knows What It Knows) learning model: a KWIK algorithm for a class of
functions can be transformed into a provably fair contextual bandit algorithm and
vice versa. This tight connection allows us to provide a provably fair algorithm
for the linear contextual bandit problem with a polynomial dependence on the
dimension, and to show (for a different class of functions) a worst-case exponential
gap in regret between fair and non-fair learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Automated techniques from statistics and machine learning are increasingly being used to make
decisions that have important consequences on people’s lives, including hiring [24], lending [10],
policing [25], and even criminal sentencing [7]. These high stakes uses of machine learning have led
to increasing concern in law and policy circles about the potential for (often opaque) machine learning
techniques to be discriminatory or unfair [13, 6]. At the same time, despite the recognized importance
of this problem, very little is known about technical solutions to the problem of “unfairness”, or the
extent to which “fairness” is in conflict with the goals of learning.
In this paper, we consider the extent to which a natural fairness notion is compatible with learning in
a bandit setting, which models many of the applications of machine learning mentioned above. In
this setting, the learner is a sequential decision maker, which must choose at each time step t which
decision to make from a finite set of k “arms". The learner then observes a stochastic reward from
(only) the arm chosen, and is tasked with maximizing total earned reward (equivalently, minimizing
total regret) by learning the relationships between arms and rewards over time. This models, for
example, the problem of learning the association between loan applicants and repayment rates over
time by repeatedly granting loans and observing repayment.
We analyze two variants of the setting: in the classic case, the learner’s only source of information
comes from choices made in previous rounds. In the contextual case, before each round the learner
additionally observes some potentially informative context for each arm (for example representing
the content of an individual’s loan application), and the expected reward is some unknown function of
∗

A full technical version of this paper is available on arXiv [17].

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

