Tensor Switching Networks

Chuan-Yung Tsai∗, Andrew Saxe∗, David Cox
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
{chuanyungtsai,asaxe,davidcox}@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We present a novel neural network algorithm, the Tensor Switching (TS) network,
which generalizes the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) nonlinearity to tensor-valued
hidden units. The TS network copies its entire input vector to different locations in
an expanded representation, with the location determined by its hidden unit activity.
In this way, even a simple linear readout from the TS representation can implement
a highly expressive deep-network-like function. The TS network hence avoids the
vanishing gradient problem by construction, at the cost of larger representation size.
We develop several methods to train the TS network, including equivalent kernels
for infinitely wide and deep TS networks, a one-pass linear learning algorithm, and
two backpropagation-inspired representation learning algorithms. Our experimental
results demonstrate that the TS network is indeed more expressive and consistently
learns faster than standard ReLU networks.

1

Introduction

Deep networks [1, 2] continue to post impressive successes in a wide range of tasks, and the Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) [3, 4] is arguably the most used simple nonlinearity. In this work we develop a
novel deep learning algorithm, the Tensor Switching (TS) network, which generalizes the ReLU such
that each hidden unit conveys a tensor, instead of scalar, yielding a more expressive model. Like the
ReLU network, the TS network is a linear function of its input, conditioned on the activation pattern
of its hidden units. By separating the decision to activate from the analysis performed when active,
even a linear classifier can reach back across all layers to the input of the TS network, implementing
a deep-network-like function while avoiding the vanishing gradient problem [5], which can otherwise
significantly slow down learning in deep networks. The trade-off is the representation size.
We exploit the properties of TS networks to develop several methods suitable for learning in different
scaling regimes, including their equivalent kernels for SVMs on small to medium datasets, a one-pass
linear learning algorithm which visits each data point only once for use with very large but simpler
datasets, and two backpropagation-inspired representation learning algorithms for more generic use.
Our experimental results show that TS networks are indeed more expressive and consistently learn
faster than standard ReLU networks.
Related work is briefly summarized as follows. With respect to improving the nonlinearities, the idea
of severing activation and analysis weights (or having multiple sets of weights) in each hidden layer
has been studied in [6, 7, 8]. Reordering activation and analysis is proposed by [9]. On tackling the
vanishing gradient problem, tensor methods are used by [10] to train single-hidden-layer networks.
Convex learning and inference in various deep architectures can be found in [11, 12, 13] too. Finally,
conditional linearity of deep ReLU networks is also used by [14], mainly to analyze their performance.
In comparison, the TS network does not simply reorder or sever activation and analysis within each
hidden layer. Instead, it is a cross-layer generalization of these concepts, which can be applied with
most of the recent deep learning architectures [15, 9], not only to increase their expressiveness, but
also to help avoiding the vanishing gradient problem (see Sec. 2.3).
∗

Equal contribution.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

