Learning Infinite RBMs with Frank-Wolfe

∗

Wei Ping∗
Qiang Liu†
Alexander Ihler∗
†
Computer Science, UC Irvine
Computer Science, Dartmouth College
{wping,ihler}@ics.uci.edu qliu@cs.dartmouth.edu

Abstract
In this work, we propose an infinite restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM), whose
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) corresponds to a constrained convex optimization. We consider the Frank-Wolfe algorithm to solve the program, which
provides a sparse solution that can be interpreted as inserting a hidden unit at each
iteration, so that the optimization process takes the form of a sequence of finite
models of increasing complexity. As a side benefit, this can be used to easily and
efficiently identify an appropriate number of hidden units during the optimization.
The resulting model can also be used as an initialization for typical state-of-the-art
RBM training algorithms such as contrastive divergence, leading to models with
consistently higher test likelihood than random initialization.

1

Introduction

Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) are two-layer latent variable models that use a layer of
hidden units h to model the distribution of visible units v [Smolensky, 1986, Hinton, 2002]. RBMs
have been widely used to capture complex distributions in numerous application domains, including
image modeling [Krizhevsky et al., 2010], human motion capture [Taylor et al., 2006] and collaborative filtering [Salakhutdinov et al., 2007], and are also widely used as building blocks for deep
generative models, such as deep belief networks [Hinton et al., 2006] and deep Boltzmann machines
[Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009]. Due to the intractability of the likelihood function, RBMs are
usually learned using the contrastive divergence (CD) algorithm [Hinton, 2002, Tieleman, 2008],
which approximates the gradient of the likelihood using a Gibbs sampler.
One practical problem when using a RBM is that we need to decide the size of the hidden layer
(number of hidden units) before performing learning, and it can be challenging to decide what is
the optimal size. One simple heuristic is to search the ‘best” number of hidden units using cross
validation or testing likelihood within a pre-defined candidate set. Unfortunately, this is extremely
time consuming; it involves running a full training algorithm (e.g., CD) for each possible size, and
thus we can only search over a relatively small set of sizes using this approach.
In addition, because the log-likelihood of the RBM is highly non-convex, its performance is sensitive
to the initialization of the learning algorithm. Although random initializations (to relatively small
values) are routinely used in practice with algorithms like CD, it would be valuable to explore more
robust algorithms that are less sensitive to the initialization, as well as smarter initialization strategies
to obtain better results.
In this work, we propose a fast, greedy algorithm for training RBMs by inserting one hidden unit at
each iteration. Our algorithm provides an efficient way to determine the size of the hidden layer in
an adaptive fashion, and can also be used as an initialization for a full CD-like learning algorithm.
Our method is based on constructing a convex relaxation of the RBM that is parameterized by a
distribution over the weights of the hidden units, for which the training problem can be framed as
a convex functional optimization and solved using an efficient Frank-Wolfe algorithm [Frank and
Wolfe, 1956, Jaggi, 2013] that effectively adds one hidden unit at each iteration by solving a relatively
fast inner loop optimization.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

