Optimal Sparse Linear Encoders and Sparse PCA

Malik Magdon-Ismail
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12211
magdon@cs.rpi.edu

Christos Boutsidis
New York, NY
christos.boutsidis@gmail.com

Abstract
Principal components analysis (PCA) is the optimal linear encoder of data. Sparse
linear encoders (e.g., sparse PCA) produce more interpretable features that can
promote better generalization. (i) Given a level of sparsity, what is the best approximation to PCA? (ii) Are there efficient algorithms which can achieve this
optimal combinatorial tradeoff? We answer both questions by providing the first
polynomial-time algorithms to construct optimal sparse linear auto-encoders; additionally, we demonstrate the performance of our algorithms on real data.

1

Introduction

The data matrix is X ∈ Rn×d (a row xiT ∈ R1×d is a data point in d dimensions). auto-encoders
transform (encode) the data into a low dimensional feature space and then lift (decode) it back to
the original space, reconstructing the data through a bottleneck. If the reconstruction is close to the
original, then the encoder preserved most of the information using just a small number of features.
Auto-encoders are important in machine learning because they perform information preserving dimension reduction. Our focus is the linear auto-encoder, which, for k < d, is a pair of linear
mappings h : Rd 7→ Rk and g : Rk 7→ Rd , specified by an encoder matrix H ∈ Rd×k and a decoder
matrix G ∈ Rk×d . For data point x ∈ Rd , the encoded feature is z = h(x) = H T x ∈ Rk and the
reconstructed datum is x̂ = g(z) = G T z ∈ Rd . The reconstructed data matrix is X̂ = XHG. The
pair (H, G) is a good auto-encoder if X̂ ≈ X under some loss metric (we use squared loss):
Definition 1 (Loss ℓ(H, X)). The loss of encoder H is the minimum possible Frobenius reconstruction error (over all linear decoders G) when using H as encoder for X:
2
2
ℓ(H, X) = minG∈Rk×d kX − XHGkF = kX − XH(XH)† XkF .
The loss is defined for an encoder H alone, by choosing the decoder optimally. The literature
considers primarily the symmetric auto-encoder which places the additional restriction that G = H†
[18]. To get the most useful features, one should not place unnecessary constraints on the decoder.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is the most famous linear auto-encoder, because it is optimal
2
(and symmetric). Since rank(XHG) ≤ k, the loss is bounded by ℓ(H, X) ≥ kX − Xk kF (Xk is
T
its best rank-k approximation to X). By the Eckart-Young theorem Xk = XVk Vk , where Vk ∈
Rd×k is the matrix whose columns are the top-k right singular vectors of X (see, for example, eChapter 9 of [14]). Thus, the optimal linear encoder is Hopt = Vk , and the top-k PCA-features are
Zpca = XVk . Since its early beginings, [19], PCA has evolved into a classic tool for data analysis.
While PCA simplifies the data by concentrating the maximum information into a few components,
those components may be hard to interpret. In many applications, it is desirable to “explain” the
features using a few original variables (for example, genes in a biological application or assets in
a financial application). One trades off the fidelity of the features (their ability to reconstruct the
data) with the interpretability of the features using a few original features (sparsity of the encoder
H). We introduce a sparsity parameter r and require that every column of H have at most r non-zero
elements. Every feature in an r-sparse encoding can be “explained” using at most r original features.
We now formally state the sparse linear encoder problem:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

