Fast and accurate spike sorting of high-channel count
probes with KiloSort

Marius Pachitariu1 , Nick Steinmetz1 , Shabnam Kadir1
Matteo Carandini1 and Kenneth Harris1
1
UCL, UK {ucgtmpa, }@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
New silicon technology is enabling large-scale electrophysiological recordings in
vivo from hundreds to thousands of channels. Interpreting these recordings requires scalable and accurate automated methods for spike sorting, which should
minimize the time required for manual curation of the results. Here we introduce
KiloSort, a new integrated spike sorting framework that uses template matching
both during spike detection and during spike clustering. KiloSort models the
electrical voltage as a sum of template waveforms triggered on the spike times,
which allows overlapping spikes to be identified and resolved. Unlike previous
algorithms that compress the data with PCA, KiloSort operates on the raw data
which allows it to construct a more accurate model of the waveforms. Processing
times are faster than in previous algorithms thanks to batch-based optimization
on GPUs. We compare KiloSort to an established algorithm and show favorable
performance, at much reduced processing times. A novel post-clustering merging step based on the continuity of the templates further reduced substantially the
number of manual operations required on this data, for the neurons with nearzero error rates, paving the way for fully automated spike sorting of multichannel
electrode recordings.

1

Introduction

The oldest and most reliable method for recording neural activity involves lowering an electrode
into the brain and recording the local electrical activity around the electrode tip. Action potentials
of single neurons can then be observed as a stereotypical temporal deflection of the voltage, called
a spike waveform. When multiple neurons close to the electrode fire action potentials, their spikes
must be identified and assigned to the correct cell, based on the features of the recorded waveforms, a
process known as spike sorting [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Spike sorting is substantially helped by the ability
to simultaneously measure the voltage at multiple closely-space sites in the extracellular medium.
In this case, the recorded waveforms can be seen to have characteristic spatial shapes, determined
by each cell’s location and physiological characteristics. Together, the spatial and temporal shape of
the waveform provides all the information that can be used to assign a given spike to a cell.
New high-density electrodes, currently being tested, can record from several hundred closely-spaced
recording sites. Fast algorithms are necessary to quickly and accurately spike sort tens of millions
of spikes coming from 100 to 1,000 cells, from recordings performed with such next-generation
electrodes in awake, behaving animals. Here we present a new algorithm which provides accurate
spike sorting results, with run times that scale near-linearly with the number of recording channels.
The algorithm takes advantage of the computing capabilities of low-cost commercially available
graphics processing units (GPUs) to enable approximately realtime spike sorting from 384-channel
probes.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

