Clustering with Bregman Divergences: an Asymptotic
Analysis

Chaoyue Liu, Mikhail Belkin
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
liu.2656@osu.edu, mbelkin@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract
Clustering, in particular k-means clustering, is a central topic in data analysis.
Clustering with Bregman divergences is a recently proposed generalization of
k-means clustering which has already been widely used in applications. In this
paper we analyze theoretical properties of Bregman clustering when the number
of the clusters k is large. We establish quantization rates and describe the limiting
distribution of the centers as k → ∞, extending well-known results for k-means
clustering.

1

Introduction

Clustering and the closely related problem of vector quantization are fundamental problems in
machine learning and data mining. The aim is to partition similar points into "clusters" in order to
organize or compress the data. In many clustering methods these clusters are represented by their
centers or centroids. The set of these centers is often called “the codebook" in the vector quantization
literature. In this setting the goal of clustering is to find an optimal codebook, i.e., a set of centers
which minimizes a clustering loss function also known as the quantization error.
There is vast literature on clustering and vector quantization, see, e.g., [8, 10, 12]. One of the particularly important types of clustering and, arguably, of data analysis methods of any type, is k-means
clustering [16] which aims to minimize the loss function based on the squared Euclidean distance.
This is typically performed using the Lloyd’s algorithm [15], which is an iterative optimization
technique. The Lloyd’s algorithm is simple, easy to implement and is guaranteed to converge in a
finite number of steps. There is an extensive literature on various aspects and properties of k-means
clustering, including applications and theoretical analysis [2, 13, 23]. An important type of analysis is
the asymptotic analysis, which studies the setting when the number of centers is large. This situation
(n  k  0) arises in many applications related to data compression as well as algorithms such as
soft k-means features used in computer vision and other applications, where the number of centers
k is quite large but significantly less than the number of data points n. This situation also arises in
k-means feature-based methods which have seen significant success in computer vision, e.g., [6].
The quantization loss for k-means clustering in the setting k → ∞ is well-known (see [5, 9, 20]). A
less well-known fact shown in [9, 18] is that the discrete set of centers also converges to a measure
closely related to the underlying probability distribution. This fact can be used to reinterpret k-means
feature based methods in terms of a density dependent kernel [21].
More recently, it has been realized that the properties of square Euclidean distance which make the
Lloyd’s algorithm for k-means clustering so simple and efficient are shared by a class of similarity
measures based on Bregman divergence. In an influential paper [3] the authors introduced clustering
based on Bregman divergences, which generalized k-means clustering to that setting and produced
a corresponding generalized version of the Lloyd’s algorithm. That work has lead to a new line
of research on clustering including results on multitask Bregman clustering[24], agglomerative
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

