Understanding the Effective Receptive Field in
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks

Wenjie Luo∗

Yujia Li∗
Raquel Urtasun
Richard Zemel
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{wenjie, yujiali, urtasun, zemel}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We study characteristics of receptive fields of units in deep convolutional networks.
The receptive field size is a crucial issue in many visual tasks, as the output must
respond to large enough areas in the image to capture information about large
objects. We introduce the notion of an effective receptive field, and show that it
both has a Gaussian distribution and only occupies a fraction of the full theoretical
receptive field. We analyze the effective receptive field in several architecture
designs, and the effect of nonlinear activations, dropout, sub-sampling and skip
connections on it. This leads to suggestions for ways to address its tendency to be
too small.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in a wide range of problems
in the last few years. In this paper we focus on their application to computer vision: where they are
the driving force behind the significant improvement of the state-of-the-art for many tasks recently,
including image recognition [10, 8], object detection [17, 2], semantic segmentation [12, 1], image
captioning [20], and many more.
One of the basic concepts in deep CNNs is the receptive field, or field of view, of a unit in a certain
layer in the network. Unlike in fully connected networks, where the value of each unit depends on the
entire input to the network, a unit in convolutional networks only depends on a region of the input.
This region in the input is the receptive field for that unit.
The concept of receptive field is important for understanding and diagnosing how deep CNNs work.
Since anywhere in an input image outside the receptive field of a unit does not affect the value of that
unit, it is necessary to carefully control the receptive field, to ensure that it covers the entire relevant
image region. In many tasks, especially dense prediction tasks like semantic image segmentation,
stereo and optical flow estimation, where we make a prediction for each single pixel in the input image,
it is critical for each output pixel to have a big receptive field, such that no important information is
left out when making the prediction.
The receptive field size of a unit can be increased in a number of ways. One option is to stack more
layers to make the network deeper, which increases the receptive field size linearly by theory, as
each extra layer increases the receptive field size by the kernel size. Sub-sampling on the other hand
increases the receptive field size multiplicatively. Modern deep CNN architectures like the VGG
networks [18] and Residual Networks [8, 6] use a combination of these techniques.
In this paper, we carefully study the receptive field of deep CNNs, focusing on problems in which
there are many output unites. In particular, we discover that not all pixels in a receptive field contribute
equally to an output unit’s response. Intuitively it is easy to see that pixels at the center of a receptive
∗

denotes equal contribution

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

