A Pseudo-Bayesian Algorithm for Robust PCA

Tae-Hyun Oh1
Yasuyuki Matsushita2
In So Kweon1
David Wipf3∗
1
Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
2
Multimedia Engineering, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
thoh.kaist.ac.kr@gmail.com
yasumat@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
iskweon@kaist.ac.kr
davidwip@microsoft.com

Abstract
Commonly used in many applications, robust PCA represents an algorithmic attempt to reduce the sensitivity of classical PCA to outliers. The basic idea is to learn
a decomposition of some data matrix of interest into low rank and sparse components, the latter representing unwanted outliers. Although the resulting problem is
typically NP-hard, convex relaxations provide a computationally-expedient alternative with theoretical support. However, in practical regimes performance guarantees
break down and a variety of non-convex alternatives, including Bayesian-inspired
models, have been proposed to boost estimation quality. Unfortunately though,
without additional a priori knowledge none of these methods can significantly
expand the critical operational range such that exact principal subspace recovery is
possible. Into this mix we propose a novel pseudo-Bayesian algorithm that explicitly compensates for design weaknesses in many existing non-convex approaches
leading to state-of-the-art performance with a sound analytical foundation.

1

Introduction

It is now well-established that principal component analysis (PCA) is quite sensitive to outliers,
with even a single corrupted data element carrying the potential of grossly biasing the recovered
principal subspace. This is particularly true in many relevant applications that rely heavily on lowdimensional representations [8, 13, 27, 33, 22]. Mathematically, such outliers can be described by
the measurement model Y = Z + E, where Y ∈ Rn×m is an observed data matrix, Z = AB> is a
low-rank component with principal subspace equal to span[A], and E is a matrix of unknown sparse
corruptions with arbitrary amplitudes.
Ideally, we would like to remove the effects of E, which would then allow regular PCA to be applied
to Z for obtaining principal components devoid of unwanted bias. For this purpose, robust PCA
(RPCA) algorithms have recently been motivated by the optimization problem
minZ,E max(n, m) · rank[Z] + kEk0 s.t. Y = Z + E,

(1)

where k · k0 denotes the `0 matrix norm (meaning the number of nonzero matrix elements) and the
max(n, m) multiplier ensures that both rank and sparsity terms scale between 0 and nm, reflecting
a priori agnosticism about their relative contributions to Y. The basic idea is that if {Z∗ , E∗ }
minimizes (1), then Z∗ is likely to represent the original uncorrupted data.
As a point of reference, if we somehow knew a priori which elements of E were zero (i.e., no gross
corruptions), then (1) could be effectively reduced to the much simpler matrix completion (MC)
problem [5]
minZ rank[Z] s.t. yij = zij , ∀(i, j) ∈ Ω,
(2)
where Ω denotes the set of indices corresponding with zero-valued elements in E. A major challenge
with RPCA is that an accurate estimate of the support set Ω can be elusive.
∗

This work was done while the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research, Beijing. The first and third authors were supported by
the NRF of Korea grant funded by the Korea government, MSIP (No. 2010-0028680). The second author was partly supported by JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Number JP16H01732.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

