Single-Image Depth Perception in the Wild

Weifeng Chen
Zhao Fu
Dawei Yang
Jia Deng
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{wfchen,zhaofu,ydawei,jiadeng}@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper studies single-image depth perception in the wild, i.e., recovering depth
from a single image taken in unconstrained settings. We introduce a new dataset
“Depth in the Wild” consisting of images in the wild annotated with relative depth
between pairs of random points. We also propose a new algorithm that learns to
estimate metric depth using annotations of relative depth. Compared to the state
of the art, our algorithm is simpler and performs better. Experiments show that
our algorithm, combined with existing RGB-D data and our new relative depth
annotations, significantly improves single-image depth perception in the wild.

Relative Depth
Annotations

RGB-D Data

train

Input Image

Deep Network with
Pixel-wise Prediction

Metric Depth

Figure 1: We crowdsource annotations of relative depth and train a deep network to recover depth
from a single image taken in unconstrained settings (“in the wild”).

1

Introduction

Depth from a single RGB image is a fundamental problem in vision. Recent years have seen rapid
progress thanks to data-driven methods [1, 2, 3], in particular, deep neural networks trained on large
RGB-D datasets [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. But such advances have yet to broadly impact higher-level tasks.
One reason is that many higher-level tasks must operate on images “in the wild”—images taken with
no constraints on cameras, locations, scenes, and objects—but the RGB-D datasets used to train and
evaluate image-to-depth systems are constrained in one way or another.
Current RGB-D datasets were collected by depth sensors [4, 5], which are limited in range and
resolution, and often fail on specular or transparent objects [11]. In addition, because there is no
Flickr for RGB-D images, researchers have to manually capture the images. As a result, current
RGB-D datasets are limited in the diversity of scenes. For example, NYU depth [4] consists mostly of
indoor scenes with no human presence; KITTI [5] consists mostly of road scenes captured from a car;
Make3D [3, 12] consists mostly of outdoor scenes of the Stanford campus (Figure. 2). While these
datasets are pivotal in driving research, it is unclear whether systems trained on them can generalize
to images in the wild.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

