Natural-Parameter Networks:
A Class of Probabilistic Neural Networks
Hao Wang, Xingjian Shi, Dit-Yan Yeung
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hwangaz,xshiab,dyyeung}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Neural networks (NN) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in various applications. Unfortunately in applications where training data is insufficient, they are
often prone to overfitting. One effective way to alleviate this problem is to exploit
the Bayesian approach by using Bayesian neural networks (BNN). Another shortcoming of NN is the lack of flexibility to customize different distributions for the
weights and neurons according to the data, as is often done in probabilistic graphical models. To address these problems, we propose a class of probabilistic neural
networks, dubbed natural-parameter networks (NPN), as a novel and lightweight
Bayesian treatment of NN. NPN allows the usage of arbitrary exponential-family
distributions to model the weights and neurons. Different from traditional NN
and BNN, NPN takes distributions as input and goes through layers of transformation before producing distributions to match the target output distributions. As
a Bayesian treatment, efficient backpropagation (BP) is performed to learn the
natural parameters for the distributions over both the weights and neurons. The
output distributions of each layer, as byproducts, may be used as second-order
representations for the associated tasks such as link prediction. Experiments on
real-world datasets show that NPN can achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Recently neural networks (NN) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in various applications
ranging from computer vision [12] to natural language processing [20]. However, NN trained by
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or its variants is known to suffer from overfitting especially
when training data is insufficient. Besides overfitting, another problem of NN comes from the
underestimated uncertainty, which could lead to poor performance in applications like active learning.
Bayesian neural networks (BNN) offer the promise of tackling these problems in a principled way.
Early BNN works include methods based on Laplace approximation [16], variational inference (VI)
[11], and Monte Carlo sampling [18], but they have not been widely adopted due to their lack of
scalability. Some recent advances in this direction seem to shed light on the practical adoption of
BNN. [8] proposed a method based on VI in which a Monte Carlo estimate of a lower bound on the
marginal likelihood is used to infer the weights. Recently, [10] used an online version of expectation
propagation (EP), called ‘probabilistic back propagation’ (PBP), for the Bayesian learning of NN,
and [4] proposed ‘Bayes by Backprop’ (BBB), which can be viewed as an extension of [8] based on
the ‘reparameterization trick’ [13]. More recently, an interesting Bayesian treatment called ‘Bayesian
dark knowledge’ (BDK) was designed to approximate a teacher network with a simpler student
network based on stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [1].
Although these recent methods are more practical than earlier ones, several outstanding problems
remain to be addressed: (1) most of these methods require sampling either at training time [8, 4, 1] or
at test time [4], incurring much higher cost than a ‘vanilla’ NN; (2) as mentioned in [1], methods
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

