Deep ADMM-Net for Compressive Sensing MRI

Yan Yang
Xi’an Jiaotong University
yangyan92@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Jian Sun
Xi’an Jiaotong University
jiansun@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Huibin Li
Xi’an Jiaotong University
huibinli@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Zongben Xu
Xi’an Jiaotong University
zbxu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Compressive Sensing (CS) is an effective approach for fast Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI). It aims at reconstructing MR image from a small number of undersampled data in k-space, and accelerating the data acquisition in MRI. To improve
the current MRI system in reconstruction accuracy and computational speed, in
this paper, we propose a novel deep architecture, dubbed ADMM-Net. ADMMNet is defined over a data flow graph, which is derived from the iterative procedures in Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) algorithm for
optimizing a CS-based MRI model. In the training phase, all parameters of the
net, e.g., image transforms, shrinkage functions, etc., are discriminatively trained
end-to-end using L-BFGS algorithm. In the testing phase, it has computational
overhead similar to ADMM but uses optimized parameters learned from the training data for CS-based reconstruction task. Experiments on MRI image reconstruction under different sampling ratios in k-space demonstrate that it significantly
improves the baseline ADMM algorithm and achieves high reconstruction accuracies with fast computational speed.

1

Introduction

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive imaging technique providing both functional
and anatomical information for clinical diagnosis. Imaging speed is a fundamental challenge. Fast
MRI techniques are essentially demanded for accelerating data acquisition while still reconstructing
high quality image. Compressive sensing MRI (CS-MRI) is an effective approach allowing for data
sampling rate much lower than Nyquist rate without significantly degrading the image quality [1].
CS-MRI methods first sample data in k-space (i.e., Fourier space), then reconstruct image using
compressive sensing theory. Regularization related to the data prior is a key component in a CSMRI model to reduce imaging artifacts and improve imaging precision. Sparse regularization can be
explored in specific transform domain or general dictionary-based subspace [2]. Total Variation (TV)
regularization in gradient domain has been widely utilized in MRI [3, 4]. Although it is easy and
fast to optimize, it introduces staircase artifacts in reconstructed image. Methods in [5, 6] leverage
sparse regularization in the wavelet domain. Dictionary learning methods rely on a dictionary of
local patches to improve the reconstruction accuracy [7, 8]. The non-local method uses groups of
similar local patches for joint patch-level reconstruction to better preserve image details [9, 10, 11].
In performance, the basic CS-MRI methods run fast but produce less accurate reconstruction results.
The non-local and dictionary learning-based methods generally output higher quality MR images,
but suffer from slow reconstruction speed. In a CS-MRI model, it is commonly challenging to
choose an optimal image transform domain / subspace and the corresponding sparse regularization.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

