Review Networks for Caption Generation

Zhilin Yang, Ye Yuan, Yuexin Wu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, William W. Cohen
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{zhiliny,yey1,yuexinw,rsalakhu,wcohen}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel extension of the encoder-decoder framework, called a review
network. The review network is generic and can enhance any existing encoderdecoder model: in this paper, we consider RNN decoders with both CNN and RNN
encoders. The review network performs a number of review steps with attention
mechanism on the encoder hidden states, and outputs a thought vector after each
review step; the thought vectors are used as the input of the attention mechanism
in the decoder. We show that conventional encoder-decoders are a special case of
our framework. Empirically, we show that our framework improves over state-ofthe-art encoder-decoder systems on the tasks of image captioning and source code
captioning.1

1

Introduction

Encoder-decoder is a framework for learning a transformation from one representation to another. In
this framework, an encoder network first encodes the input into a context vector, and then a decoder
network decodes the context vector to generate the output. The encoder-decoder framework was
recently introduced for sequence-to-sequence learning based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
with applications to machine translation [3, 15], where the input is a text sequence in one language and
the output is a text sequence in the other language. More generally, the encoder-decoder framework
is not restricted to RNNs and text; e.g., encoders based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
are used for image captioning [18]. Since it is often difficult to encode all the necessary information
in a single context vector, an attentive encoder-decoder introduces an attention mechanism to the
encoder-decoder framework. An attention mechanism modifies the encoder-decoder bottleneck by
conditioning the generative process in the decoder on the encoder hidden states, rather than on one
single context vector only. Improvements due to an attention mechanism have been shown on various
tasks, including machine translation [1], image captioning [20], and text summarization [12].
However, there remain two important issues to address for attentive encoder-decoder models. First,
the attention mechanism proceeds in a sequential manner and thus lacks global modeling abilities.
More specifically, at the generation step t, the decoded token is conditioned on the attention results at
the current time step h̃t , but has no information about future attention results h̃t0 with t0 > t. For
example, when there are multiple objects in the image, the caption tokens generated at the beginning
focuses on the first one or two objects and is unaware of the other objects, which is potentially
suboptimal. Second, previous works show that discriminative supervision (e.g., predicting word
occurrences in the caption) is beneficial for generative models [5], but it is not clear how to integrate
discriminative supervision into the encoder-decoder framework in an end-to-end manner.
To address the above questions, we propose a novel architecture, the review network, which extends
existing (attentive) encoder-decoder models. The review network performs a given number of review
steps with attention on the encoder hidden states and outputs a thought vector after each step, where
1

Code and data available at https://github.com/kimiyoung/review_net.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

