Learning Kernels with Random Features

Aman Sinha1
John Duchi1,2
1
Departments of Electrical Engineering and 2 Statistics
Stanford University
{amans,jduchi}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Randomized features provide a computationally efficient way to approximate kernel
machines in machine learning tasks. However, such methods require a user-defined
kernel as input. We extend the randomized-feature approach to the task of learning
a kernel (via its associated random features). Specifically, we present an efficient
optimization problem that learns a kernel in a supervised manner. We prove the
consistency of the estimated kernel as well as generalization bounds for the class
of estimators induced by the optimized kernel, and we experimentally evaluate our
technique on several datasets. Our approach is efficient and highly scalable, and we
attain competitive results with a fraction of the training cost of other techniques.

1

Introduction

An essential element of supervised learning systems is the representation of input data. Kernel
methods [27] provide one approach to this problem: they implicitly transform the data to a new
feature space, allowing non-linear data representations. This representation comes with a cost, as
kernelized learning algorithms require time that grows at least quadratically in the data set size,
and predictions with a kernelized procedure require the entire training set. This motivated Rahimi
and Recht [24, 25] to develop randomized methods that efficiently approximate kernel evaluations
with explicit feature transformations; this approach gives substantial computational benefits for large
training sets and allows the use of simple linear models in the randomly constructed feature space.
Whether we use standard kernel methods or randomized approaches, using the “right” kernel for a
problem can make the difference between learning a useful or useless model. Standard kernel methods
as well as the aforementioned randomized-feature techniques assume the input of a user-defined
kernel—a weakness if we do not a priori know a good data representation. To address this weakness,
one often wishes to learn a good kernel, which requires substantial computation. We combine kernel
learning with randomization, exploiting the computational advantages offered by randomized features
to learn the kernel in a supervised manner. Specifically, we use a simple pre-processing stage for
selecting our random features rather than jointly optimizing over the kernel and model parameters.
Our workflow is straightforward: we create randomized features, solve a simple optimization problem
to select a subset, then train a model with the optimized features. The procedure results in lowerdimensional models than the original random-feature approach for the same performance. We give
empirical evidence supporting these claims and provide theoretical guarantees that our procedure is
consistent with respect to the limits of infinite training data and infinite-dimensional random features.
1.1

Related work

To discuss related work, we first describe the supervised learning problem underlying our approach.
We have a cost c : R × Y → R, where c(·, y) is convex for y ∈ Y, and a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS) of functions F with kernel K. Given a sample {(xi , y i )}ni=1 , the usual `2 -regularized
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

