A Multi-Batch L-BFGS Method for Machine
Learning

Albert S. Berahas
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL
albertberahas@u.northwestern.edu
Jorge Nocedal
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL
j-nocedal@northwestern.edu

Martin Takáč
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA
takac.mt@gmail.com

Abstract
The question of how to parallelize the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method
has received much attention in the literature. In this paper, we focus instead on batch
methods that use a sizeable fraction of the training set at each iteration to facilitate
parallelism, and that employ second-order information. In order to improve the
learning process, we follow a multi-batch approach in which the batch changes
at each iteration. This can cause difficulties because L-BFGS employs gradient
differences to update the Hessian approximations, and when these gradients are
computed using different data points the process can be unstable. This paper shows
how to perform stable quasi-Newton updating in the multi-batch setting, illustrates
the behavior of the algorithm in a distributed computing platform, and studies its
convergence properties for both the convex and nonconvex cases.

1

Introduction

It is common in machine learning to encounter optimization problems involving millions of parameters
and very large datasets. To deal with the computational demands imposed by such applications, high
performance implementations of stochastic gradient and batch quasi-Newton methods have been
developed [1, 11, 9]. In this paper we study a batch approach based on the L-BFGS method [20] that
strives to reach the right balance between efficient learning and productive parallelism.
In supervised learning, one seeks to minimize empirical risk,
F (w) :=

n
n
X
1X
def 1
f (w; xi , y i ) =
fi (w),
n i=1
n i=1

where (xi , y i )ni=1 denote the training examples and f (·; x, y) : Rd → R is the composition of a
prediction function (parametrized by w) and a loss function. The training problem consists of finding
an optimal choice of the parameters w ∈ Rd with respect to F , i.e.,
n

min F (w) =

w∈Rd

1X
fi (w).
n i=1

(1.1)

At present, the preferred optimization method is the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method [23, 5],
and its variants [14, 24, 12], which are implemented either in an asynchronous manner (e.g. when
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

