Bayesian Optimization for Probabilistic Programs
Tom Rainforth† Tuan Anh Le† Jan-Willem van de Meent‡
Michael A. Osborne† Frank Wood†
†
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
‡
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University
{twgr,tuananh,mosb,fwood}@robots.ox.ac.uk, j.vandemeent@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We present the first general purpose framework for marginal maximum a posteriori estimation of probabilistic program variables. By using a series of code
transformations, the evidence of any probabilistic program, and therefore of any
graphical model, can be optimized with respect to an arbitrary subset of its sampled
variables. To carry out this optimization, we develop the first Bayesian optimization
package to directly exploit the source code of its target, leading to innovations in
problem-independent hyperpriors, unbounded optimization, and implicit constraint
satisfaction; delivering significant performance improvements over prominent existing packages. We present applications of our method to a number of tasks including
engineering design and parameter optimization.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic programming systems (PPS) allow probabilistic models to be represented in the form
of a generative model and statements for conditioning on data [4, 9, 10, 16, 17, 29]. Their core
philosophy is to decouple model specification and inference, the former corresponding to the userspecified program code and the latter to an inference engine capable of operating on arbitrary
programs. Removing the need for users to write inference algorithms significantly reduces the burden
of developing new models and makes effective statistical methods accessible to non-experts.
Although significant progress has been made on the problem of general purpose inference of program
variables, less attention has been given to their optimization. Optimization is an essential tool for
effective machine learning, necessary when the user requires a single estimate. It also often forms a
tractable alternative when full inference is infeasible [18]. Moreover, coincident optimization and
inference is often required, corresponding to a marginal maximum a posteriori (MMAP) setting
where one wishes to maximize some variables, while marginalizing out others. Examples of MMAP
problems include hyperparameter optimization, expectation maximization, and policy search [27].
In this paper we develop the first system that extends probabilistic programming (PP) to this more
general MMAP framework, wherein the user specifies a model in the same manner as existing
systems, but then selects some subset of the sampled variables in the program to be optimized, with
the rest marginalized out using existing inference algorithms. The optimization query we introduce
can be implemented and utilized in any PPS that supports an inference method returning a marginal
likelihood estimate. This framework increases the scope of models that can be expressed in PPS and
gives additional flexibility in the outputs a user can request from the program.
MMAP estimation is difficult as it corresponds to the optimization of an intractable integral, such that
the optimization target is expensive to evaluate and gives noisy results. Current PPS inference engines
are typically unsuited to such settings. We therefore introduce BOPP1 (Bayesian optimization for
probabilistic programs) which couples existing inference algorithms from PPS, like Anglican [29],
with a new Gaussian process (GP) [22] based Bayesian optimization (BO) [11, 15, 20, 23] package.
1

Code available at http://www.github.com/probprog/bopp/

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

