Efficient Second Order Online Learning by Sketching

Haipeng Luo
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ USA
haipengl@cs.princeton.edu

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research, New York, NY USA
alekha@microsoft.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

John Langford
Microsoft Research, New York, NY USA
jcl@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose Sketched Online Newton (SON), an online second order learning
algorithm that enjoys substantially improved regret guarantees for ill-conditioned
data. SON is an enhanced version of the Online Newton Step, which, via sketching
techniques enjoys a running time linear in the dimension and sketch size. We
further develop sparse forms of the sketching methods (such as Oja’s rule), making
the computation linear in the sparsity of features. Together, the algorithm eliminates
all computational obstacles in previous second order online learning approaches.

1

Introduction

Online learning methods are highly successful at rapidly reducing the test error on large, highdimensional datasets. First order methods are particularly attractive in such problems as they typically
enjoy computational complexity linear in the input size. However, the convergence of these methods
crucially depends on the geometry of the data; for instance, running the same algorithm on a rotated
set of examples can return vastly inferior results. See Fig. 1 for an illustration.
Second order algorithms such as Online Newton Step [18] have the attractive property of being
invariant to linear transformations of the data, but typically require space and update time quadratic
in the number of dimensions. Furthermore, the dependence on dimension is not improved even
if the examples are sparse. These issues lead to the key question in our work: Can we develop
(approximately) second order online learning algorithms with efficient updates? We show that
the answer is “yes” by developing efficient sketched second order methods with regret guarantees.
Specifically, the three main contributions of this work are:
1. Invariant learning setting and optimal algorithms (Section 2). The typical online regret
minimization setting evaluates against a benchmark that is bounded in some fixed norm (such as the
`2 -norm), implicitly putting the problem in a nice geometry. However, if all the features are scaled
down, it is desirable to compare with accordingly larger weights, which is precluded by an apriori
fixed norm bound. We study an invariant learning setting similar to the paper [33] which compares
the learner to a benchmark only constrained to generate bounded predictions on the sequence of
examples. We show that a variant of the Online Newton Step [18], while quadratic in computation,
stays regret-optimal with a nearly matching lower bound in this more general setting.
2. Improved efficiency via sketching (Section 3). To overcome the quadratic running time, we
next develop sketched variants of the Newton update, approximating the second order information
using a small number of carefully chosen directions, called a sketch. While the idea of data sketching
is widely studied [36], as far as we know our work is the first one to apply it to a general adversarial
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

