Eliciting Categorical Data for Optimal Aggregation
Chien-Ju Ho
Cornell University
ch624@cornell.edu

Rafael Frongillo
CU Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

Yiling Chen
Harvard University
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Models for collecting and aggregating categorical data on crowdsourcing platforms typically fall into two broad categories: those assuming agents honest and
consistent but with heterogeneous error rates, and those assuming agents strategic
and seek to maximize their expected reward. The former often leads to tractable
aggregation of elicited data, while the latter usually focuses on optimal elicitation
and does not consider aggregation. In this paper, we develop a Bayesian model,
wherein agents have differing quality of information, but also respond to incentives. Our model generalizes both categories and enables the joint exploration
of optimal elicitation and aggregation. This model enables our exploration, both
analytically and experimentally, of optimal aggregation of categorical data and
optimal multiple-choice interface design.

1

Introduction

We study the general problem of eliciting and aggregating information for categorical questions. For
example, when posing a classification task to crowd workers who may have heterogeneous skills or
amount of information about the underlying true label, the principle wants to elicit workers’ private
information and aggregate it in a way to maximize the probability that the aggregated information
correctly predicts the underlying true label.
Ideally, in order to maximize the probability of correctly predicting the ground truth, the principal
would want to elicit agents’ full information by asking agents for their entire belief in the form of a
probability distribution over labels. However, this is not always practical, e.g., agents might not be
able to accurately differentiate 92% and 93%. In practice, the principal is often constrained to elicit
agents’ information via a multiple-choice interface, which discretizes agents’ continuous belief into
finite partitions. An example of such an interface is illustrated in Figure 1. Moreover, disregard
of whether full or partial information about agents’ beliefs is elicited, aggregating the information
into a single belief or answer is often done in an ad hoc fashion (e.g. majority voting for simple
multiple-choice questions).
In this work, we explore the joint problem of eliciting and aggregating information for categorical
What’s the texture shown in the image?
data, with a particular focus on how to design the
multiple-choice interface, i.e. how to discretize
agents’ belief space to form discrete choices. The
goal is to maximize the probability of correctly predicting the ground truth while incentivizing agents to
truthfully report their beliefs. This problem is challenging. Changing the interface not only changes
Figure 1: An example of the task interface.
which agent beliefs lead to which responses, but
also influences how to optimally aggregate these responses into a single label. Note that we focus on the abstract level of interface design. We explore
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

