An Architecture for Deep, Hierarchical Generative
Models
Philip Bachman
phil.bachman@maluuba.com

Maluuba Research

Abstract
We present an architecture which lets us train deep, directed generative models
with many layers of latent variables. We include deterministic paths between all
latent variables and the generated output, and provide a richer set of connections
between computations for inference and generation, which enables more effective
communication of information throughout the model during training. To improve
performance on natural images, we incorporate a lightweight autoregressive model
in the reconstruction distribution. These techniques permit end-to-end training of
models with 10+ layers of latent variables. Experiments show that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance on standard image modelling benchmarks,
can expose latent class structure in the absence of label information, and can
provide convincing imputations of occluded regions in natural images.

1

Introduction

Training deep, directed generative models with many layers of latent variables poses a challenging
problem. Each layer of latent variables introduces variance into gradient estimation which, given
current training methods, tends to impede the flow of subtle information about sophisticated structure
in the target distribution. Yet, for a generative model to learn effectively, this information needs to
propagate from the terminal end of a stochastic computation graph, back to latent variables whose
effect on the generated data may be obscured by many intervening sampling steps.
One approach to solving this problem is to use recurrent, sequential stochastic generative processes
with strong interactions between their inference and generation mechanisms, as introduced in the
DRAW model of Gregor et al. [5] and explored further in [1, 19, 22]. Another effective technique is
to use lateral connections for merging bottom-up and top-down information in encoder/decoder type
models. This approach is exemplified by the Ladder Network of Rasmus et al. [17], and has been
developed further for, e.g. generative modelling and image processing in [8, 23].
Models like DRAW owe much of their success to two key properties: they decompose the process
of generating data into many small steps of iterative refinement, and their structure includes direct
deterministic paths between all latent variables and the final output. In parallel, models with lateral
connections permit different components of a model to operate at well-separated levels of abstraction,
thus generating a hierarchy of representations. This property is not explicitly shared by DRAW-like
models, which typically reuse the same set of latent variables throughout the generative process. This
makes it difficult for any of the latent variables, or steps in the generative process, to individually
capture abstract properties of the data. We distinguish between the depth used by DRAW and the
depth made possible by lateral connections by describing them respectively as sequential depth and
hierarchical depth. These two types of depth are complimentary, rather than competing.
Our contributions focus on increasing hierarchical depth without forfeiting trainability. We combine
the benefits of DRAW-like models and Ladder Networks by developing a class of models which we
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

