Stochastic Variational Deep Kernel Learning

Andrew Gordon Wilson*
Cornell University

Zhiting Hu*
CMU

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
CMU

Eric P. Xing
CMU

Abstract
Deep kernel learning combines the non-parametric flexibility of kernel methods
with the inductive biases of deep learning architectures. We propose a novel deep
kernel learning model and stochastic variational inference procedure which generalizes deep kernel learning approaches to enable classification, multi-task learning,
additive covariance structures, and stochastic gradient training. Specifically, we
apply additive base kernels to subsets of output features from deep neural architectures, and jointly learn the parameters of the base kernels and deep network
through a Gaussian process marginal likelihood objective. Within this framework,
we derive an efficient form of stochastic variational inference which leverages local
kernel interpolation, inducing points, and structure exploiting algebra. We show
improved performance over stand alone deep networks, SVMs, and state of the
art scalable Gaussian processes on several classification benchmarks, including an
airline delay dataset containing 6 million training points, CIFAR, and ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Large datasets provide great opportunities to learn rich statistical representations, for accurate
predictions and new scientific insights into our modeling problems. Gaussian processes are promising
for large data problems, because they can grow their information capacity with the amount of available
data, in combination with automatically calibrated model complexity [21, 25].
From a Gaussian process perspective, all of the statistical structure in data is learned through a kernel
function. Popular kernel functions, such as the RBF kernel, provide smoothing and interpolation,
but cannot learn representations necessary for long range extrapolation [22, 25]. With smoothing
kernels, we can only use the information in a large dataset to learn about noise and length-scale
hyperparameters, which tell us only how quickly correlations in our data vary with distance in the
input space. If we learn a short length-scale hyperparameter, then by definition we will only make
use of a small amount of training data near each testing point. If we learn a long length-scale, then
we could subsample the data and make similar predictions.
Therefore to fully use the information in large datasets, we must build kernels with great representational power and useful learning biases, and scale these approaches without sacrificing this
representational ability. Indeed many recent approaches have advocated building expressive kernel
functions [e.g., 22, 9, 26, 25, 17, 31], and emerging research in this direction takes inspiration from
deep learning models [e.g., 28, 5, 3]. However, the scalability, general applicability, and interpretability of such approaches remain a challenge. Recently, Wilson et al. [30] proposed simple and scalable
deep kernels for single-output regression problems, with promising performance on many experiments. But their approach does not allow for stochastic training, multiple outputs, deep architectures
with many output features, or classification. And it is on classification problems, in particular, where
we often have high dimensional input vectors, with little intuition about how these vectors should
correlate, and therefore most want to learn a flexible non-Euclidean similarity metric [1].

*Equal contribution. 30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona,
Spain.

