Collaborative Recurrent Autoencoder:
Recommend while Learning to Fill in the Blanks

Hao Wang, Xingjian Shi, Dit-Yan Yeung
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hwangaz,xshiab,dyyeung}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Hybrid methods that utilize both content and rating information are commonly
used in many recommender systems. However, most of them use either handcrafted
features or the bag-of-words representation as a surrogate for the content information but they are neither effective nor natural enough. To address this problem,
we develop a collaborative recurrent autoencoder (CRAE) which is a denoising
recurrent autoencoder (DRAE) that models the generation of content sequences in
the collaborative filtering (CF) setting. The model generalizes recent advances in
recurrent deep learning from i.i.d. input to non-i.i.d. (CF-based) input and provides
a new denoising scheme along with a novel learnable pooling scheme for the recurrent autoencoder. To do this, we first develop a hierarchical Bayesian model for the
DRAE and then generalize it to the CF setting. The synergy between denoising
and CF enables CRAE to make accurate recommendations while learning to fill
in the blanks in sequences. Experiments on real-world datasets from different
domains (CiteULike and Netflix) show that, by jointly modeling the order-aware
generation of sequences for the content information and performing CF for the
ratings, CRAE is able to significantly outperform the state of the art on both the
recommendation task based on ratings and the sequence generation task based on
content information.

1

Introduction

With the high prevalence and abundance of Internet services, recommender systems are becoming
increasingly important to attract users because they can help users make effective use of the information available. Companies like Netflix have been using recommender systems extensively to target
users and promote products. Existing methods for recommender systems can be roughly categorized
into three classes [13]: content-based methods that use the user profiles or product descriptions only,
collaborative filtering (CF) based methods that use the ratings only, and hybrid methods that make
use of both. Hybrid methods using both types of information can get the best of both worlds and, as a
result, usually outperform content-based and CF-based methods.
Among the hybrid methods, collaborative topic regression (CTR) [20] was proposed to integrate a
topic model and probabilistic matrix factorization (PMF) [15]. CTR is an appealing method in that it
produces both promising and interpretable results. However, CTR uses a bag-of-words representation
and ignores the order of words and the local context around each word, which can provide valuable
information when learning article representation and word embeddings. Deep learning models like
convolutional neural networks (CNN) which use layers of sliding windows (kernels) have the potential
of capturing the order and local context of words. However, the kernel size in a CNN is fixed during
training. To achieve good enough performance, sometimes an ensemble of multiple CNNs with
different kernel sizes has to be used. A more natural and adaptive way of modeling text sequences
would be to use gated recurrent neural network (RNN) models [8, 3, 18]. A gated RNN takes in one
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

