Stochastic Variance Reduction Methods
for Saddle-Point Problems
P. Balamurugan
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris
balamurugan.palaniappan@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris
francis.bach@ens.fr

Abstract
We consider convex-concave saddle-point problems where the objective functions
may be split in many components, and extend recent stochastic variance reduction
methods (such as SVRG or SAGA) to provide the first large-scale linearly convergent algorithms for this class of problems which are common in machine learning.
While the algorithmic extension is straightforward, it comes with challenges and
opportunities: (a) the convex minimization analysis does not apply and we use
the notion of monotone operators to prove convergence, showing in particular
that the same algorithm applies to a larger class of problems, such as variational
inequalities, (b) there are two notions of splits, in terms of functions, or in terms of
partial derivatives, (c) the split does need to be done with convex-concave terms,
(d) non-uniform sampling is key to an efficient algorithm, both in theory and practice, and (e) these incremental algorithms can be easily accelerated using a simple
extension of the “catalyst” framework, leading to an algorithm which is always
superior to accelerated batch algorithms.

1

Introduction

When using optimization in machine learning, leveraging the natural separability of the objective
functions has led to many algorithmic advances; the most common example is the separability as a sum
of individual loss terms corresponding to individual observations, which leads to stochastic gradient
descent techniques. Several lines of work have shown that the plain Robbins-Monro algorithm could
be accelerated for strongly-convex finite sums, e.g., SAG [1], SVRG [2], SAGA [3]. However, these
only apply to separable objective functions.
In order to tackle non-separable losses or regularizers, we consider the saddle-point problem:
min max K(x, y) + M (x, y),

x∈Rd y∈Rn

(1)

where the functions K and M are “convex-concave”, that is, convex with respect to the first variable,
and concave with respect to the second variable, with M potentially non-smooth but “simple” (e.g.,
for which the proximal operator is easy to compute), and K smooth. These problems occur naturally
within convex optimization through Lagrange or Fenchel duality [4]; for example the bilinear saddlepoint problem minx∈Rd maxy∈Rn f (x)+y > Kx−g(y) corresponds to a supervised learning problem
with design matrix K, a loss function g ∗ (the Fenchel conjugate of g) and a regularizer f .
We assume that the function K may be split into a potentially large number of components. Many
problems in machine learning exhibit that structure in the saddle-point formulation, but not in the
associated convex minimization and concave maximization problems (see examples in Section 2.1).
Like for convex minimization, gradient-based techniques that are blind to this separable structure
need to access all the components at every iteration. We show that algorithms such as SVRG [2] and
SAGA [3] may be readily extended to the saddle-point problem. While the algorithmic extension is
straightforward, it comes with challenges and opportunities. We make the following contributions:
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

