On Graph Reconstruction via Empirical Risk
Minimization: Fast Learning Rates and Scalability

Guillaume Papa, Stéphan Clémençon
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay
75013, Paris, France
first.last@telecom-paristech.fr

Aurélien Bellet
INRIA
59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
aurelien.bellet@inria.fr

Abstract
The problem of predicting connections between a set of data points finds many
applications, in systems biology and social network analysis among others. This
paper focuses on the graph reconstruction problem, where the prediction rule is
obtained by minimizing the average error over all n(n − 1)/2 possible pairs of
the n nodes of a training graph. Our first contribution is to derive learning rates of
order OP (log n/n)
√ for this problem, significantly improving upon the slow rates
of order OP (1/ n) established in the seminal work of Biau and Bleakley (2006).
Strikingly, these fast rates are universal, in contrast to similar results known for
other statistical learning problems (e.g., classification, density level set estimation,
ranking, clustering) which require strong assumptions on the distribution of the
data. Motivated by applications to large graphs, our second contribution deals with
the computational complexity of graph reconstruction. Specifically, we investigate
to which extent the learning rates can be preserved when replacing the empirical
reconstruction risk by a computationally cheaper Monte-Carlo version, obtained
by sampling with replacement B  n2 pairs of nodes. Finally, we illustrate our
theoretical results by numerical experiments on synthetic and real graphs.

1

Introduction

Although statistical learning theory mainly focuses on establishing universal rate bounds (i.e.,
which hold for any distribution of the data) for the accuracy of a decision rule based on training
observations, refined concentration inequalities have recently helped understanding conditions on
the data distribution under which learning paradigms such as Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
lead to faster rates. In binary classification, i.e., the problem of learning to predict a random
binary label Y ∈ {−1, +1} from on an input random variable
√ X based on independent copies
(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) of the pair (X, Y ), rates faster than 1/ n are achieved when little mass in
the vicinity of 1/2 is assigned by the distribution of the random variable η(X) = P{Y = +1 | X}.
This condition and its generalizations are referred to as the Mammen-Tsybakov noise conditions (see
Mammen and Tsybakov, 1999; Tsybakov, 2004; Massart and Nédélec, 2006). It has been shown
that a similar phenomenon occurs for various other statistical learning problems. Indeed, specific
conditions under which fast rate results hold have been exhibited for density level set estimation
(Rigollet and Vert, 2009), (bipartite) ranking (Clémençon et al., 2008; Clémençon and Robbiano,
2011; Agarwal, 2014), clustering (Antos et al., 2005; Clémençon, 2014) and composite hypothesis
testing (Clémençon and Vayatis, 2010).
In this paper, we consider the supervised learning problem on graphs referred to as graph reconstruction, rigorously formulated by Biau and Bleakley (2006). The objective of graph reconstruction is to
predict the possible occurrence of connections between a set of objects/individuals known to form the
nodes of an undirected graph. Precisely, each node is described by a random vector X which defines
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

