Dimensionality Reduction of Massive Sparse Datasets
Using Coresets
Dan Feldman
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
dannyf.post@gmail.com

Mikhail Volkov
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
mikhail@csail.mit.edu

Daniela Rus
CSAIL, MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
rus@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper we present a practical solution with performance guarantees to the
problem of dimensionality reduction for very large scale sparse matrices. We
show applications of our approach to computing the Principle Component Analysis (PCA) of any n × d matrix, using one pass over the stream of its rows. Our
solution uses coresets: a scaled subset of the n rows that approximates their sum
of squared distances to every k-dimensional affine subspace. An open theoretical
problem has been to compute such a coreset that is independent of both n and
d. An open practical problem has been to compute a non-trivial approximation to
the PCA of very large but sparse databases such as the Wikipedia document-term
matrix in a reasonable time. We answer both of these questions affirmatively. Our
main technical result is a new framework for deterministic coreset constructions
based on a reduction to the problem of counting items in a stream.

1

Introduction

Algorithms for dimensionality reduction usually aim to project an input set of d-dimensional vectors
(database records) onto a k ≤ d − 1 dimensional affine subspace that minimizes the sum of squared
distances to these vectors, under some constraints. Special cases include the Principle Component
Analysis (PCA), Linear regression (k = d − 1), Low-rank approximation (k-SVD), Latent Drichlet
Analysis (LDA) and Non-negative matrix factorization (NNMF). Learning algorithms such as kmeans clustering can then be applied on the low-dimensional data to obtain fast approximations with
provable guarantees. To our knowledge, unlike SVD, there are no algorithms or coreset constructions with performance guarantees for computing the PCA of sparse n × n matrices in the streaming
model, i.e. using memory that is poly-logarithmic in n. Much of the large scale high-dimensional
data sets available today (e.g. image streams, text streams, etc.) are sparse. For example, consider
the text case of Wikipedia. We can associate a matrix with Wikipedia, where the English words
define the columns (approximately 1.4 million) and the individual documents define the rows (approximately 4.4 million documents). This large scale matrix is sparse because most English words
do not appear in most documents. The size of this matrix is huge and no existing dimensionality
reduction algorithm can compute its eigenvectors. To this point, running the state of the art SVD
implementation from GenSim on the Wikipedia document-term matrix crashes the computer very
quickly after applying its step of random projection on the first few thousand documents. This is
because such dense vectors, each of length 1.4 million, use all of the computer’s RAM capacity.
1
Support for this research has been provided by Hon Hai/Foxconn Technology Group and NSFSaTC-BSF
CNC 1526815, and in part by the Singapore MIT Alliance on Research and Technology through the Future of
Urban Mobility project and by Toyota Research Institute (TRI). TRI provided funds to assist the authors with
their research but this article solely reflects the opinions and conclusions of its authors and not TRI or any other
Toyota entity. We are grateful for this support.

Submitted to 30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016). Do not distribute.

