Stochastic Gradient Methods for Distributionally
Robust Optimization with f -divergences
Hongseok Namkoong
Stanford University
hnamk@stanford.edu

John C. Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We develop efficient solution methods for a robust empirical risk minimization
problem designed to give calibrated confidence intervals on performance and
provide optimal tradeoffs between bias and variance. Our methods apply to distributionally robust optimization problems proposed by Ben-Tal et al., which put
more weight on observations inducing high loss via a worst-case approach over a
non-parametric uncertainty set on the underlying data distribution. Our algorithm
solves the resulting minimax problems with nearly the same computational cost
of stochastic gradient descent through the use of several carefully designed data
structures. For a sample of size n, the per-iteration cost of our method scales as
O(log n), which allows us to give optimality certificates that distributionally robust
optimization provides at little extra cost compared to empirical risk minimization
and stochastic gradient methods.

1

Introduction

In statistical learning or other data-based decision-making problems, it is desirable to give solutions
that come with guarantees on performance, at least to some specified confidence level. For tasks
such as driving or medical diagnosis where safety and reliability are crucial, confidence levels
have additional importance. Classical techniques in machine learning and statistics, including
regularization, stability, concentration inequalities, and generalization guarantees [6, 25] provide
such guarantees, though often a more fine-tuned certificate—one with calibrated confidence—is
desirable. In this paper, we leverage techniques from the robust optimization literature [e.g. 2],
building an uncertainty set around the empirical distribution of the data and studying worst case
performance in this uncertainty set. Recent work [15, 13] shows how this approach can give (i)
calibrated statistical optimality certificates for stochastic optimization problems, (ii) performs a
natural type of regularization based on the variance of the objective and (iii) achieves fast rates of
convergence under more general conditions than empirical risk minimization by trading off bias
(approximation error) and variance (estimation error) optimally. In this paper, we propose efficient
algorithms for such distributionally robust optimization problems.
We now provide our formal setting. Let X ⇢ Rd be a compact convex set, and for a convex
function f : RR+ ! R with f (1) = 0, define the f -divergence between distributions P and Q by
dP
Df (P ||Q) = f ( dQ
)dQ. Letting P⇢,n := {p 2 Rn : p> = 1, p 0, Df (p|| /n)  n⇢ } be an
uncertainty set around the uniform distribution /n, we develop methods for solving the robust
empirical risk minimization problem
minimize
x2X

sup

n
X

p2P⇢,n i=1

pi `i (x).

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

(1)

