Learning Transferrable Representations for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Ozan Sener1 ,

Hyun Oh Song1 , Ashutosh Saxena2 , Silvio Savarese1
Stanford University1 Brain of Things2
{ozan,hsong,asaxena,ssilvio}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Supervised learning with large scale labelled datasets and deep layered models has
caused a paradigm shift in diverse areas in learning and recognition. However, this
approach still suffers from generalization issues under the presence of a domain
shift between the training and the test data distribution. Since unsupervised domain
adaptation algorithms directly address this domain shift problem between a labelled
source dataset and an unlabelled target dataset, recent papers [11, 33] have shown
promising results by fine-tuning the networks with domain adaptation loss functions
which try to align the mismatch between the training and testing data distributions.
Nevertheless, these recent deep learning based domain adaptation approaches still
suffer from issues such as high sensitivity to the gradient reversal hyperparameters
[11] and overfitting during the fine-tuning stage. In this paper, we propose a unified
deep learning framework where the representation, cross domain transformation,
and target label inference are all jointly optimized in an end-to-end fashion for
unsupervised domain adaptation. Our experiments show that the proposed method
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in both object recognition and
digit classification experiments by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep convolutional neural networks [17, 26, 30] have propelled unprecedented advances
in artificial intelligence including object recognition, speech recognition, and image captioning.
Although these networks are very good at learning state of the art feature representations and
recognizing discriminative patterns, one major drawback is that the network requires huge amounts
of labelled training data to fit millions of parameters in the complex network. However, creating such
datasets with complete annotations is not only tedious and error prone, but also extremely costly. In
this regard, the research community has proposed different mechanisms such as semi-supervised
learning [27, 37], transfer learning [23, 31], weakly labelled learning, and domain adaptation. Among
these approaches, domain adaptation is one of the most appealing techniques when a fully annotated
dataset (e.g. ImageNet [7], Sports1M [14]) is already available as a reference.
The goal of unsupervised domain adaptation, in particular, is as follows. Given a fully labeled
source dataset and an unlabeled target dataset, to learn a model which can generalize to the target
domain while taking the domain shift across the datasets into account. The majority of the literature
[13, 29, 9, 28, 32] in unsupervised domain adaptation formulates a learning problem where the task
is to find a transformation matrix to align the labelled source data distribution to the unlabelled target
data distribution. Although these approaches have shown promising results, they show accuracy
degradation because of the discrepancy between the learning procedure and the actual target inference
procedure. In this paper, we aim to address this issue by incorporating the unknown target labels into
the training procedure.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

