A state-space model of cross-region dynamic
connectivity in MEG/EEG

Ying Yang∗

Elissa M. Aminoff† Michael J. Tarr∗ Robert E. Kass∗
Carnegie Mellon University, † Fordham University
ying.yang.cnbc.cmu@gmail.com, {eaminoff@fordham, michaeltarr@cmu, kass@stat.cmu}.edu
∗

Abstract
Cross-region dynamic connectivity, which describes the spatio-temporal dependence of neural activity among multiple brain regions of interest (ROIs), can
provide important information for understanding cognition. For estimating such
connectivity, magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG)
are well-suited tools because of their millisecond temporal resolution. However,
localizing source activity in the brain requires solving an under-determined linear
problem. In typical two-step approaches, researchers first solve the linear problem
with generic priors assuming independence across ROIs, and secondly quantify
cross-region connectivity. In this work, we propose a one-step state-space model to
improve estimation of dynamic connectivity. The model treats the mean activity in
individual ROIs as the state variable and describes non-stationary dynamic dependence across ROIs using time-varying auto-regression. Compared with a two-step
method, which first obtains the commonly used minimum-norm estimates of source
activity, and then fits the auto-regressive model, our state-space model yielded
smaller estimation errors on simulated data where the model assumptions held.
When applied on empirical MEG data from one participant in a scene-processing
experiment, our state-space model also demonstrated intriguing preliminary results,
indicating leading and lagged linear dependence between the early visual cortex
and a higher-level scene-sensitive region, which could reflect feedforward and
feedback information flow within the visual cortex during scene processing.

1

Introduction

Cortical regions in the brain are anatomically connected, and the joint neural activity in connected
regions are believed to underlie various perceptual and cognitive functions. Besides anatomical
connectivity, researchers are particularly interested in the spatio-temporal statistical dependence
across brain regions, which may vary quickly in different time stages of perceptual and cognitive
processes. Descriptions of such spatio-temporal dependence, which we call dynamic connectivity, not
only help to model the joint neural activity, but also provide insights to understand how information
flows in the brain. To estimate dynamic connectivity in human brains, we need non-invasive
techniques to record neural activity with high temporal resolution. Magnetoencephalography (MEG)
and electroencephalography (EEG) are well-suited tools for such purposes, in that they measure
changes of magnetic fields or scalp voltages, which are almost instantaneously induced by electric
activity of neurons.
However, spatially localizing the source activity in MEG/EEG is challenging. Assuming the brain
source space is covered by m discrete points, each representing an electric current dipole generated
by the activity of the local population of neurons, then the readings of n MEG/EEG sensors can
be approximated with a linear transformation of the m-dimensional source activity. The linear
transformation, known as the forward model, is computed using Maxwell equations given the relative
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

