Ancestral Causal Inference
Sara Magliacane
VU Amsterdam & University of Amsterdam
sara.magliacane@gmail.com

Tom Claassen
Radboud University Nijmegen
tomc@cs.ru.nl

Joris M. Mooij
University of Amsterdam
j.m.mooij@uva.nl

Abstract
Constraint-based causal discovery from limited data is a notoriously difficult challenge due to the many borderline independence test decisions. Several approaches
to improve the reliability of the predictions by exploiting redundancy in the independence information have been proposed recently. Though promising, existing
approaches can still be greatly improved in terms of accuracy and scalability. We
present a novel method that reduces the combinatorial explosion of the search space
by using a more coarse-grained representation of causal information, drastically
reducing computation time. Additionally, we propose a method to score causal predictions based on their confidence. Crucially, our implementation also allows one
to easily combine observational and interventional data and to incorporate various
types of available background knowledge. We prove soundness and asymptotic
consistency of our method and demonstrate that it can outperform the state-ofthe-art on synthetic data, achieving a speedup of several orders of magnitude. We
illustrate its practical feasibility by applying it to a challenging protein data set.

1

Introduction

Discovering causal relations from data is at the foundation of the scientific method. Traditionally,
cause-effect relations have been recovered from experimental data in which the variable of interest is
perturbed, but seminal work like the do-calculus [16] and the PC/FCI algorithms [23, 26] demonstrate
that, under certain assumptions (e.g., the well-known Causal Markov and Faithfulness assumptions
[23]), it is already possible to obtain substantial causal information by using only observational data.
Recently, there have been several proposals for combining observational and experimental data to
discover causal relations. These causal discovery methods are usually divided into two categories:
constraint-based and score-based methods. Score-based methods typically evaluate models using a
penalized likelihood score, while constraint-based methods use statistical independences to express
constraints over possible causal models. The advantages of constraint-based over score-based methods
are the ability to handle latent confounders and selection bias naturally, and that there is no need
for parametric modeling assumptions. Additionally, constraint-based methods expressed in logic
[2, 3, 25, 8] allow for an easy integration of background knowledge, which is not trivial even for
simple cases in approaches that are not based on logic [1].
Two major disadvantages of traditional constraint-based methods are: (i) vulnerability to errors
in statistical independence test results, which are quite common in real-world applications, (ii) no
ranking or estimation of the confidence in the causal predictions. Several approaches address the
first issue and improve the reliability of constraint-based methods by exploiting redundancy in the
independence information [3, 8, 25]. The idea is to assign weights to the input statements that reflect
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

