Optimal Tagging with Markov Chain Optimization

Nir Rosenfeld
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
nir.rosenfeld@mail.huji.ac.il

Amir Globerson
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
gamir@post.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Many information systems use tags and keywords to describe and annotate content.
These allow for efficient organization and categorization of items, as well as
facilitate relevant search queries. As such, the selected set of tags for an item can
have a considerable effect on the volume of traffic that eventually reaches an item.
In tagging systems where tags are exclusively chosen by an item’s owner, who in
turn is interested in maximizing traffic, a principled approach for assigning tags
can prove valuable. In this paper we introduce the problem of optimal tagging,
where the task is to choose a subset of tags for a new item such that the probability
of browsing users reaching that item is maximized.
We formulate the problem by modeling traffic using a Markov chain, and asking
how transitions in this chain should be modified to maximize traffic into a certain
state of interest. The resulting optimization problem involves maximizing a certain
function over subsets, under a cardinality constraint.
We show that the optimization problem is NP-hard, but has a (1− 1e )-approximation
via a simple greedy algorithm due to monotonicity and submodularity. Furthermore,
the structure of the problem allows for an efficient computation of the greedy step.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we perform experiments on three
tagging datasets, and show that the greedy algorithm outperforms other baselines.

1

Introduction

To allow for efficient navigation and search, modern information systems rely on the usage of nonhierarchical tags, keywords, or labels to describe items and content. These tags are then used either
explicitly by users when searching for content, or implicitly by the system to recommend related
items or to augment search results.
Many online systems where users can create or upload content support tagging. Examples of such
systems are media-sharing platforms, social bookmarking websites, and consumer to consumer
auctioning services. While in some systems any user can tag any item, in many ad-hoc systems tags
are exclusively set by the item’s owner alone. She, in turn, is free to select any set of tags or keywords
which she believes best describe the item. Typically, the only concrete limitation is on the number
of tags, words, or characters used. Tags are often chosen on a basis of their ability to best describe,
classify, or categorize items and content. By choosing relevant tags, users aid in creating a more
organized information system. However, content owners may have their own individual objective,
such as maximizing the exposure of their items to other browsing users. This is true for many artists,
artisans, content creators, and merchants whose services and items are provided online.
This suggests that choosing tags should in fact be done strategically. For instance, for a user uploading
a new song, tagging it as ‘Rock’ may be informative, but will probably only contribute marginally to
the song’s traffic, as the competition for popularity under this tag can be fierce. On the other hand,
choosing a unique or obscure tag may be appealing, but will not help much either. Strategic tagging
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

