Selective inference for group-sparse linear models

Rina Foygel Barber
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
rina@uchicago.edu

Fan Yang
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
fyang1@uchicago.edu
Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research India
prajain@microsoft.com

John Lafferty
Depts. of Statistics and Computer Science
University of Chicago
lafferty@galton.uchicago.edu

Abstract
We develop tools for selective inference in the setting of group sparsity, including
the construction of confidence intervals and p-values for testing selected groups of
variables. Our main technical result gives the precise distribution of the magnitude
of the projection of the data onto a given subspace, and enables us to develop
inference procedures for a broad class of group-sparse selection methods, including
the group lasso, iterative hard thresholding, and forward stepwise regression. We
give numerical results to illustrate these tools on simulated data and on health
record data.

1

Introduction

Significant progress has been recently made on developing inference tools to complement the feature
selection methods that have been intensively studied in the past decade [6, 5, 9]. The goal of selective
inference is to make accurate uncertainty assessments for the parameters estimated using a feature
selection algorithm, such as the lasso [12]. The fundamental challenge is that after the data have
been used to select a set of coefficients to be studied, this selection event must then be accounted
for when performing inference, using the same data. A specific goal of selective inference is to
provide p-values and confidence intervals for the fitted coefficients. As the sparsity pattern is chosen
using nonlinear estimators, the distribution of the estimated coefficients is typically non-Gaussian
and multimodal, even under a standard Gaussian noise model, making classical techniques unusable
for accurate inference. It is of particular interest to develop finite-sample, non-asymptotic results.
In this paper, we present new results for selective inference in the setting of group sparsity [15, 3, 10].
We consider the linear model Y = Xβ + N (0, σ 2 In ) where X ∈ Rn×p is a fixed design matrix. In
many applications, the p columns or features of X are naturally grouped into blocks C1 , . . . , CG ⊆
{1, . . . , p}. In the high dimensional setting, the working assumption is that only a few of the
corresponding blocks of the coefficients β contain nonzero elements; that is, βCg = 0 for most groups
g. This group-sparse model can be viewed as an extension of the standard sparse regression model.
Algorithms for fitting this model, such as the group lasso [15], extend well-studied methods for sparse
linear regression to this grouped setting.
In the group-sparse setting, recent results of Loftus and Taylor [9] give a selective inference method
for computing p-values for each group chosen by a model selection method such as forward stepwise
regression; selection via cross-validation was studied in [9]. More generally, the inference technique
of [7] applies to any model selection method whose outcome can be described in terms of quadratic
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

