Poisson–Gamma Dynamical Systems

Aaron Schein
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
aschein@cs.umass.edu
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Hanna Wallach
Microsoft Research New York
641 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10011
hanna@dirichlet.net

Abstract
We introduce a new dynamical system for sequentially observed multivariate count
data. This model is based on the gamma–Poisson construction—a natural choice for
count data—and relies on a novel Bayesian nonparametric prior that ties and shrinks
the model parameters, thus avoiding overfitting. We present an efficient MCMC inference algorithm that advances recent work on augmentation schemes for inference
in negative binomial models. Finally, we demonstrate the model’s inductive bias
using a variety of real-world data sets, showing that it exhibits superior predictive
performance over other models and infers highly interpretable latent structure.

1

Introduction

Sequentially observed count vectors y (1) , . . . , y (T ) are the main object of study in many real-world
applications, including text analysis, social network analysis, and recommender systems. Count data
pose unique statistical and computational challenges when they are high-dimensional, sparse, and
overdispersed, as is often the case in real-world applications. For example, when tracking counts of
user interactions in a social network, only a tiny fraction of possible edges are ever active, exhibiting
bursty periods of activity when they are. Models of such data should exploit this sparsity in order to
scale to high dimensions and be robust to overdispersed temporal patterns. In addition to these characteristics, sequentially observed multivariate count data often exhibit complex dependencies within and
across time steps. For example, scientific papers about one topic may encourage researchers to write
papers about another related topic in the following year. Models of such data should therefore capture
the topic structure of individual documents as well as the excitatory relationships between topics.
The linear dynamical system (LDS) is a widely used model for sequentially observed data, with
many well-developed inference techniques based on the Kalman filter [1, 2]. The LDS assumes
that each sequentially observed V -dimensional vector r (t) is real valued and Gaussian distributed:
r (t) ∼ N (Φ θ (t) , Σ), where θ (t) ∈ RK is a latent state, with K components, that is linked to the
observed space via Φ ∈ RV ×K . The LDS derives its expressive power from the way it assumes
that the latent states evolve: θ (t) ∼ N (Π θ (t−1) , ∆), where Π ∈ RK×K is a transition matrix that
captures between-component dependencies across time steps. Although the LDS can be linked to
non-real observations via the extended Kalman filter [3], it cannot efficiently model real-world count
data because inference is O((K + V )3 ) and thus scales poorly with the dimensionality of the data [2].
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

