On Mixtures of Markov Chains
Rishi Gupta∗
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
rishig@cs.stanford.edu

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of reconstructing a mixture of Markov chains from the
trajectories generated by random walks through the state space. Under mild nondegeneracy conditions, we show that we can uniquely reconstruct the underlying
chains by only considering trajectories of length three, which represent triples of
states. Our algorithm is spectral in nature, and is easy to implement.

1

Introduction

Markov chains are a simple and incredibly rich tool for modeling, and act as a backbone in numerous
applications—from Pagerank for web search to language modeling for machine translation. While
the true nature of the underlying behavior is rarely Markovian [6], it is nevertheless often a good
mathematical assumption.
In this paper, we consider the case where we are given observations from a mixture of L Markov
chains, each on the same n states, with n ≥ 2L. Each observation is a series of states, and is
generated as follows: a Markov chain and starting state are selected from a distribution S, and then
the selected Markov chain is followed for some number of steps. The goal is to recover S and the
transition matrices of the L Markov chains from the observations.
When all of the observations follow from a single Markov chain (namely, when L = 1), recovering
the mixture parameters is easy. A simple calculation shows that the empirical starting distribution
and the empirical transition probabilities form the maximum likelihood Markov chain. So we are
largely interested in the case when L > 1.
As a motivating example, consider the usage of a standard maps app on a phone. There are a number
of different reasons one might use the app: to search for a nearby business, to get directions from
one point to another, or just to orient oneself. However, the users of the app never specify an explicit
intent, rather they swipe, type, zoom, etc., until they are satisfied. Each one of the latent intents can be
modeled by a Markov chain on a small state space of actions. If the assignment of each session to an
intent were explicit, recovering these Markov chains would simply reduce to several instances of the
L = 1 case. Here we are interested in the unsupervised setting of finding the underlying chains when
this assignment is unknown. This allows for a better understanding of usage patterns. For example:
• Common uses for the app that the designers had not expected, or had not expected to be
common. For instance, maybe a good fraction of users (or user sessions) simply use the app
to check the traffic.
• Whether different types of users use the app differently. For instance, experienced users
might use the app differently than first time users, either due to having different goals, or
due to accomplishing the same tasks more efficiently.
• Undiscoverable flows, with users ignoring a simple, but hidden menu setting, and instead
using a convoluted path to accomplish the same goal.
∗

Part of this work was done while the author was visiting Google Research.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

