Joint quantile regression in vector-valued RKHSs

Maxime Sangnier Olivier Fercoq Florence d’Alché-Buc
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech
Université Paris-Saclay
75013, Paris, France
{maxime.sangnier, olivier.fercoq, florence.dalche}
@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
Addressing the will to give a more complete picture than an average relationship
provided by standard regression, a novel framework for estimating and predicting
simultaneously several conditional quantiles is introduced. The proposed methodology leverages kernel-based multi-task learning to curb the embarrassing phenomenon of quantile crossing, with a one-step estimation procedure and no postprocessing. Moreover, this framework comes along with theoretical guarantees
and an efficient coordinate descent learning algorithm. Numerical experiments on
benchmark and real datasets highlight the enhancements of our approach regarding the prediction error, the crossing occurrences and the training time.

1

Introduction

Given a couple (X, Y ) of random variables, where Y takes scalar values, a common aim in statistics
and machine learning is to estimate the conditional expectation E [Y | X = x] as a function of x. In
the previous setting, called regression, one assumes that the main information in Y is a scalar value
corrupted by a centered noise. However, in some applications such as medicine, economics, social
sciences and ecology, a more complete picture than an average relationship is required to deepen the
analysis. Expectiles and quantiles are different quantities able to achieve this goal.
This paper deals with this last setting, called (conditional) quantile regression. This topic has been
championed by Koenker and Bassett [16] as the minimization of the pinball loss (see [15] for an
extensive presentation) and brought to the attention of the machine learning community by Takeuchi
et al. [26]. Ever since then, several studies have built upon this framework and the most recent ones
include regressing a single quantile of a random vector [12]. On the contrary, we are interested in
estimating and predicting simultaneously several quantiles of a scalar-valued random variable Y |X
(see Figure 1), thus called joint quantile regression. For this purpose, we focus on non-parametric
hypotheses from a vector-valued Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS).
Since quantiles of a distribution are closely related, joint quantile regression is subsumed under the
field of multi-task learning [3]. As a consequence, vector-valued kernel methods are appropriate for
such a task. They have already been used for various applications, such as structured classification
[10] and prediction [7], manifold regularization [21, 6] and functional regression [14]. Quantile
regression is a new opportunity for vector-valued RKHSs to perform in a multi-task problem, along
with a loss that is different from the `2 cost predominantly used in the previous references.
In addition, such a framework offers a novel way to curb the phenomenon of quantile curve crossing,
while preserving the so called quantile property (which may not be true for current approaches). This
one guarantees that the ratio of observations lying below a predicted quantile is close to the quantile
level of interest.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

