Showing versus Doing: Teaching by Demonstration

Mark K Ho
Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
mark_ho@brown.edu
Michael L. Littman
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
mlittman@cs.brown.edu

James MacGlashan
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
james_macglashan@brown.edu

Fiery Cushman
Department of Psychology
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
cushman@fas.harvard.edu

Joseph L. Austerweil
Department of Psychology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
austerweil@wisc.edu

Abstract
People often learn from others’ demonstrations, and inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) techniques have realized this capacity in machines. In contrast, teaching
by demonstration has been less well studied computationally. Here, we develop
a Bayesian model for teaching by demonstration. Stark differences arise when
demonstrators are intentionally teaching (i.e. showing) a task versus simply performing (i.e. doing) a task. In two experiments, we show that human participants
modify their teaching behavior consistent with the predictions of our model. Further, we show that even standard IRL algorithms benefit when learning from
showing versus doing.

1

Introduction

Is there a difference between doing something and showing someone else how to do something?
Consider cooking a chicken. To cook one for dinner, you would do it in the most efficient way
possible while avoiding contaminating other foods. But, what if you wanted to teach a completely
naïve observer how to prepare poultry? In that case, you might take pains to emphasize certain
aspects of the process. For example, by ensuring the observer sees you wash your hands thoroughly
after handling the uncooked chicken, you signal that it is undesirable (and perhaps even dangerous)
for other ingredients to come in contact with raw meat. More broadly, how could an agent show
another agent how to do a task, and, in doing so, teach about its underlying reward structure?
To model showing, we draw on psychological research on learning and teaching concepts by example.
People are good at this. For instance, when a teacher signals their pedagogical intentions, children
more frequently imitate actions and learn abstract functional representations [6, 7]. Recent work
has formalized concept teaching as a form of recursive social inference, where a teacher chooses
an example that best conveys a concept to a learner, who assumes that the teacher is choosing in
this manner [14]. The key insight from these models is that helpful teachers do not merely select
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

