Low-Rank Regression with Tensor Responses

Guillaume Rabusseau and Hachem Kadri
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIF, Marseille, France
{firstname.lastname}@lif.univ-mrs.fr

Abstract
This paper proposes an efficient algorithm (HOLRR) to handle regression
tasks where the outputs have a tensor structure. We formulate the regression
problem as the minimization of a least square criterion under a multilinear
rank constraint, a difficult non convex problem. HOLRR computes efficiently
an approximate solution of this problem, with solid theoretical guarantees.
A kernel extension is also presented. Experiments on synthetic and real data
show that HOLRR computes accurate solutions while being computationally
very competitive.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been an increasing interest in adapting machine learning and statistical
methods to tensors. Data with a natural tensor structure are encountered in many scientific
areas including neuroimaging [30], signal processing [4], spatio-temporal analysis [2] and
computer vision [16]. Extending multivariate regression methods to tensors is one of the
challenging task in this area. Most existing works extend linear models to the multilinear
setting and focus on the tensor structure of the input data (e.g. [24]). Little has been done
however to investigate learning methods for tensor-structured output data.
We consider a multilinear regression task where outputs are tensors; such a setting can occur
in the context of e.g. spatio-temporal forecasting or image reconstruction. In order to leverage
the tensor structure of the output data, we formulate the problem as the minimization of
a least squares criterion subject to a multilinear rank constraint on the regression tensor.
The rank constraint enforces the model to capture low-rank structure in the outputs and to
explain dependencies between inputs and outputs in a low-dimensional multilinear subspace.
Unlike previous work (e.g. [22, 24, 27]) we do not rely on a convex relaxation of this difficult
non-convex optimization problem. Instead we show that it is equivalent to a multilinear subspace identification problem for which we design a fast and efficient approximation algorithm
(HOLRR), along with a kernelized version which extends our approach to the nonlinear
setting (Section 3). Our theoretical analysis shows that HOLRR provides good approximation
guarantees. Furthermore, we derive a generalization bound for the class of tensor-valued
regression functions with bounded multilinear rank (Section 3.3). Experiments on synthetic
and real data are presented to validate our theoretical findings and show that HOLRR
computes accurate solutions while being computationally very competitive (Section 4).
Proofs of all results stated in the paper can be found in supplementary material A.
Related work. The problem we consider is a generalization of the reduced-rank regression
problem (Section 2.2) to tensor structured responses. Reduced-rank regression has its roots
in statistics [10] but it has also been investigated by the neural network community [3];
non-parametric extensions of this method have been proposed in [18] and [6]. In the context
of multi-task learning, a linear model using a tensor-rank penalization of a least squares
criterion has been proposed in [22] to take into account the multi-modal interactions between
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

