Probabilistic Linear Multistep Methods
Onur Teymur
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
o@teymur.uk

Konstantinos Zygalakis
School of Mathematics
University of Edinburgh
k.zygalakis@ed.ac.uk

Ben Calderhead
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
b.calderhead@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a derivation and theoretical investigation of the Adams-Bashforth and
Adams-Moulton family of linear multistep methods for solving ordinary differential
equations, starting from a Gaussian process (GP) framework. In the limit, this
formulation coincides with the classical deterministic methods, which have been
used as higher-order initial value problem solvers for over a century. Furthermore,
the natural probabilistic framework provided by the GP formulation allows us to
derive probabilistic versions of these methods, in the spirit of a number of other
probabilistic ODE solvers presented in the recent literature [1, 2, 3, 4]. In contrast
to higher-order Runge-Kutta methods, which require multiple intermediate function
evaluations per step, Adams family methods make use of previous function evaluations, so that increased accuracy arising from a higher-order multistep approach
comes at very little additional computational cost. We show that through a careful
choice of covariance function for the GP, the posterior mean and standard deviation
over the numerical solution can be made to exactly coincide with the value given
by the deterministic method and its local truncation error respectively. We provide
a rigorous proof of the convergence of these new methods, as well as an empirical
investigation (up to fifth order) demonstrating their convergence rates in practice.

1

Introduction

Numerical solvers for differential equations are essential tools in almost all disciplines of applied
mathematics, due to the ubiquity of real-world phenomena described by such equations, and the lack
of exact solutions to all but the most trivial examples. The performance – speed, accuracy, stability,
robustness – of the numerical solver is of great relevance to the practitioner. This is particularly
the case if the computational cost of accurate solutions is significant, either because of high model
complexity or because a high number of repeated evaluations are required (which is typical if an
ODE model is used as part of a statistical inference procedure, for example). A field of work has
emerged which seeks to quantify this performance – or indeed lack of it – by modelling the numerical
errors probabilistically, and thence trace the effect of the chosen numerical solver through the entire
computational pipeline [5]. The aim is to be able to make meaningful quantitative statements about
the uncertainty present in the resulting scientific or statistical conclusions.
Recent work in this area has resulted in the development of probabilistic numerical methods, first
conceived in a very general way in [6]. An recent summary of the state of the field is given in [7].
The particular case of ODE solvers was first addressed in [8], formalised and extended in [1, 2, 3]
with a number of theoretical results recently given in [4]. The present paper modifies and extends the
constructions in [1, 4] to the multistep case, improving the order of convergence of the method but
avoiding the simplifying linearisation of the model required by the approaches of [2, 3]. Furthermore
we offer extensions to the convergence results in [4] to our proposed method and give empirical
results confirming convergence rates which point to the practical usefulness of our higher-order
approach without significantly increasing computational cost.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

