Equality of Opportunity in Supervised Learning

Moritz Hardt
Google
m@mrtz.org

Eric Price∗
UT Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We propose a criterion for discrimination against a specified sensitive attribute in
supervised learning, where the goal is to predict some target based on available features. Assuming data about the predictor, target, and membership in the protected
group are available, we show how to optimally adjust any learned predictor so as to
remove discrimination according to our definition. Our framework also improves
incentives by shifting the cost of poor classification from disadvantaged groups to
the decision maker, who can respond by improving the classification accuracy.
We enourage readers to consult the more complete manuscript on the arXiv.

1

Introduction

As machine learning increasingly affects decisions in domains protected by anti-discrimination law,
there is much interest in algorithmically measuring and ensuring fairness in machine learning. In
domains such as advertising, credit, employment, education, and criminal justice, machine learning
could help obtain more accurate predictions, but its effect on existing biases is not well understood.
Although reliance on data and quantitative measures can help quantify and eliminate existing biases,
some scholars caution that algorithms can also introduce new biases or perpetuate existing ones [1].
In May 2014, the Obama Administration’s Big Data Working Group released a report [2] arguing
that discrimination can sometimes “be the inadvertent outcome of the way big data technologies
are structured and used” and pointed toward “the potential of encoding discrimination in automated
decisions”. A subsequent White House report [3] calls for “equal opportunity by design” as a guiding
principle in domains such as credit scoring.
Despite the demand, a vetted methodology for avoiding discrimination against protected attributes
in machine learning is lacking. A naïve approach might require that the algorithm should ignore all
protected attributes such as race, color, religion, gender, disability, or family status. However, this
idea of “fairness through unawareness” is ineffective due to the existence of redundant encodings,
ways of predicting protected attributes from other features [4].
Another common conception of non-discrimination is demographic parity [e.g. 5, 6, 7]. Demographic
parity requires that a decision—such as accepting or denying a loan application—be independent of
the protected attribute. Through its various equivalent formalizations this idea appears in numerous
papers. Unfortunately, the notion is seriously flawed on two counts [8]. First, it doesn’t ensure
fairness. The notion permits that we accept the qualified applicants in one demographic, but random
individuals in another, so long as the percentages of acceptance match. This behavior can arise
naturally, when there is little or no training data available for one of the demographics. Second,
demographic parity often cripples the utility that we might hope to achieve, especially in the common
scenario in which an outcome to be predicated, e.g. whether the loan be will defaulted, is correlated
with the protected attribute. Demographic parity would not allow the ideal prediction, namely giving
loans exactly to those who won’t default. As a result, the loss in utility of introducing demographic
parity can be substantial.
∗

Work partially performed while at OpenAI.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

