Gaussian Process Bandit Optimisation with Multi-fidelity Evaluations

Kirthevasan Kandasamy \ , Gautam Dasarathy ♦ , Junier Oliva \ ,
Jeff Schneider \ , Barnabás Póczos \
\
Carnegie Mellon University, ♦ Rice University
{kandasamy, joliva, schneide, bapoczos}@cs.cmu.edu, gautamd@rice.edu

Abstract
In many scientific and engineering applications, we are tasked with the optimisation
of an expensive to evaluate black box function f . Traditional methods for this
problem assume just the availability of this single function. However, in many cases,
cheap approximations to f may be obtainable. For example, the expensive real
world behaviour of a robot can be approximated by a cheap computer simulation.
We can use these approximations to eliminate low function value regions cheaply
and use the expensive evaluations of f in a small but promising region and speedily
identify the optimum. We formalise this task as a multi-fidelity bandit problem
where the target function and its approximations are sampled from a Gaussian
process. We develop MF-GP-UCB, a novel method based on upper confidence
bound techniques. In our theoretical analysis we demonstrate that it exhibits
precisely the above behaviour, and achieves better regret than strategies which
ignore multi-fidelity information. MF-GP-UCB outperforms such naive strategies
and other multi-fidelity methods on several synthetic and real experiments.

1

Introduction

In stochastic bandit optimisation, we wish to optimise a payoff function f : X → R by sequentially
querying it and obtaining bandit feedback, i.e. when we query at any x ∈ X , we observe a possibly
noisy evaluation of f (x). f is typically expensive and the goal is to identify its maximum while
keeping the number of queries as low as possible. Some applications are hyper-parameter tuning in
expensive machine learning algorithms, optimal policy search in complex systems, and scientific
experiments [20, 23, 27]. Historically, bandit problems were studied in settings where the goal is
to maximise the cumulative reward of all queries to the payoff instead of just finding the maximum.
Applications in this setting include clinical trials and online advertising.
Conventional methods in these settings assume access to only this single expensive function of
interest f . We will collectively refer to them as single fidelity methods. In many practical problems
however, cheap approximations to f might be available. For instance, when tuning hyper-parameters
of learning algorithms, the goal is to maximise a cross validation (CV) score on a training set, which
can be expensive if the training set is large. However CV curves tend to vary smoothly with training
set size; therefore, we can train and cross validate on small subsets to approximate the CV accuracies
of the entire dataset. For a concrete example, consider kernel density estimation (KDE), where we
need to tune the bandwidth h of a kernel. Figure 1 shows the CV likelihood against h for a dataset of
size n = 3000 and a smaller subset of size n = 300. The two maximisers are different, which is to
be expected since optimal hyper-parameters are functions of the training set size. That said, the curve
for n = 300 approximates the n = 3000 curve quite well. Since training/CV on small n is cheap,
we can use it to eliminate bad values of the hyper-parameters and reserve the expensive experiments
with the entire dataset for the promising candidates (e.g. boxed region in Fig. 1).
In online advertising, the goal is to maximise the cumulative number of clicks over a given period. In
the conventional bandit treatment, each query to f is the display of an ad for a specific time, say one
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

