Tractable Operations for
Arithmetic Circuits of Probabilistic Models
Yujia Shen and Arthur Choi and Adnan Darwiche
Computer Science Department
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
{yujias,aychoi,darwiche}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We consider tractable representations of probability distributions and the polytime
operations they support. In particular, we consider a recently proposed arithmetic
circuit representation, the Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram (PSDD). We
show that PSDDs support a polytime multiplication operator, while they do not
support a polytime operator for summing-out variables. A polytime multiplication
operator makes PSDDs suitable for a broader class of applications compared to
classes of arithmetic circuits that do not support multiplication. As one example,
we show that PSDD multiplication leads to a very simple but effective compilation
algorithm for probabilistic graphical models: represent each model factor as a
PSDD, and then multiply them.

1

Introduction

Arithmetic circuits (ACs) have been a central representation for probabilistic graphical models,
such as Bayesian networks and Markov networks. On the reasoning side, some state-of-the-art
approaches for exact inference are based on compiling probabilistic graphical models into arithmetic
circuits [Darwiche, 2003]; see also Darwiche [2009, chapter 12]. Such approaches can exploit
parametric structure (such as determinism and context-specific independence), allowing inference to
scale sometimes to models with very high treewidth, which are beyond the scope of classical inference
algorithms such as variable elimination and jointree. For example, the ace system for compiling
ACs [Chavira and Darwiche, 2008] was the only system in the UAI’08 evaluation of probabilistic
reasoning systems to exactly solve all 250 networks in a challenging (very high-treewidth) suite of
relational models [Darwiche et al., 2008].
On the learning side, arithmetic circuits have become a popular representation for learning from
data, as they are tractable for certain probabilistic queries. For example, there are algorithms for
learning ACs of Bayesian networks [Lowd and Domingos, 2008], ACs of Markov networks [Lowd
and Rooshenas, 2013, Bekker et al., 2015] and Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) [Poon and Domingos,
2011], among other related representations.1
Depending on their properties, different classes of ACs are tractable for different queries and operations. Among these queries are maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference,2 which is an NP-complete
problem, and evaluating the partition function, which is a PP-complete problem (more intractable).
Among operations, the multiplication of two ACs stands out as particularly important, being a primitive operation in some approaches to incremental or adaptive inference [Delcher et al., 1995, Acar
et al., 2008], bottom-up compilation of probabilistic graphical models [Choi et al., 2013], and some
search-based approaches to structure learning [Bekker et al., 2015].
1
2

SPNs can be converted into ACs (and vice-versa) with linear size and time [Rooshenas and Lowd, 2014].
This is also known as most probable explanation (MPE) inference [Pearl, 1988].

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

