Combinatorial Multi-Armed Bandit with General
Reward Functions
Wei Chen∗

Wei Hu†

Fu Li‡

Jian Li§

Yu Liu¶

Pinyan Luk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the stochastic combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB)
framework that allows a general nonlinear reward function, whose expected value
may not depend only on the means of the input random variables but possibly
on the entire distributions of these variables. Our framework enables a much
larger class of reward functions such as the max() function and nonlinear utility
functions. Existing techniques relying on accurate estimations of the means of
random variables, such as the upper confidence bound (UCB) technique, do not
work directly on these functions. We propose a new algorithm called stochastically
dominant confidence bound (SDCB), which estimates the distributions of underlying random variables and their stochastically dominant confidence bounds.√We
prove that SDCB can achieve O(log T ) distribution-dependent regret and Õ( T )
distribution-independent regret, where T is the time horizon. We apply our results
to the K-MAX problem and expected utility maximization problems. In particular,
for K-MAX, we provide the first polynomial-time
approximation scheme (PTAS)
√
for its offline problem, and give the first Õ( T ) bound on the (1−)-approximation
regret of its online problem, for any  > 0.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a classical online learning problem typically specified as a
player against m machines or arms. Each arm, when pulled, generates a random reward following an
unknown distribution. The task of the player is to select one arm to pull in each round based on the
historical rewards she collected, and the goal is to collect cumulative reward over multiple rounds as
much as possible. In this paper, unless otherwise specified, we use MAB to refer to stochastic MAB.
MAB problem demonstrates the key tradeoff between exploration and exploitation: whether the
player should stick to the choice that performs the best so far, or should try some less explored
alternatives that may provide better rewards. The performance measure of an MAB strategy is its
cumulative regret, which is defined as the difference between the cumulative reward obtained by
always playing the arm with the largest expected reward and the cumulative reward achieved by the
learning strategy. MAB and its variants have been extensively
√ studied in the literature, with classical
results such as tight Θ(log T ) distribution-dependent and Θ( T ) distribution-independent upper and
lower bounds on the regret in T rounds [19, 2, 1].
An important extension to the classical MAB problem is combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB).
In CMAB, the player selects not just one arm in each round, but a subset of arms or a combinatorial
∗

Microsoft Research, email: weic@microsoft.com. The authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Princeton University, email: huwei@cs.princeton.edu.
‡
The University of Texas at Austin, email: fuli.theory.research@gmail.com.
§
Tsinghua University, email: lapordge@gmail.com.
¶
Tsinghua University, email: liuyujyyz@gmail.com.
k
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, email: lu.pinyan@mail.shufe.edu.cn.
†

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

