Generative Shape Models: Joint Text Recognition and
Segmentation with Very Little Training Data

Xinghua Lou, Ken Kansky, Wolfgang Lehrach, CC Laan
Vicarious FPC Inc., San Francisco, USA
xinghua,ken,wolfgang,cc@vicarious.com
Bhaskara Marthi, D. Scott Phoenix, Dileep George
Vicarious FPC Inc., San Francisco, USA
bhaskara,scott,dileep@vicarious.com

Abstract
Abstract: We demonstrate that a generative model for object shapes can achieve
state of the art results on challenging scene text recognition tasks, and with orders of magnitude fewer training images than required for competing discriminative methods. In addition to transcribing text from challenging images, our
method performs fine-grained instance segmentation of characters. We show that
our model is more robust to both affine transformations and non-affine deformations compared to previous approaches.

1

Introduction

Classic optical character recognition (OCR) tools focus on reading text from well-prepared scanned
documents. They perform poorly when used for reading text from images of real world scenes [1].
Scene text exhibits very strong variation in font, appearance, and deformation, and image quality
can be lowered by many factors, including noise, blur, illumination change and structured background. Fig. 1 shows some representative images from two major scene text datasets: International
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR) 2013 and Street View Text (SVT).

Figure 1: Examples of text in real world scenes: ICDAR 2013 (left two columns) and SVT (right
two columns). Unlike classic OCR that handles well-prepared scanned documents, scene text recognition is difficult because of the strong variation in font, background, appearance, and distortion.
Despite these challenges, the machine learning and computer vision community have recently witnessed a surging interest in developing novel approaches for scene text recognition. This is driven
by numerous potential applications such as scene understanding for robotic control and augmented
reality, street sign reading for autonomous driving, and image feature extraction for large-scale image search. In this paper we present a novel approach for robust scene text recognition. Specifically,
we study the problem of text recognition in a cropped image that contains a single word, which is
usually the output from some text localization method (see [2] for a thorough review on this topic).
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

