Discriminative Gaifman Models
Mathias Niepert
NEC Labs Europe
Heidelberg, Germany
mathias.niepert@neclabs.eu

Abstract
We present discriminative Gaifman models, a novel family of relational machine
learning models. Gaifman models learn feature representations bottom up from
representations of locally connected and bounded-size regions of knowledge bases
(KBs). Considering local and bounded-size neighborhoods of knowledge bases
renders logical inference and learning tractable, mitigates the problem of overfitting, and facilitates weight sharing. Gaifman models sample neighborhoods
of knowledge bases so as to make the learned relational models more robust to
missing objects and relations which is a common situation in open-world KBs. We
present the core ideas of Gaifman models and apply them to large-scale relational
learning problems. We also discuss the ways in which Gaifman models relate to
some existing relational machine learning approaches.

1

Introduction

Knowledge bases are attracting considerable interest both from industry and academia [2, 6, 15, 10].
Instances of knowledge bases are the web graph, social and citation networks, and multi-relational
knowledge graphs such as Freebase [2] and YAGO [11]. Large knowledge bases motivate the
development of scalable machine learning models that can reason about objects as well as their
properties and relationships. Research in statistical relational learning (SRL) has focused on particular
formalisms such as Markov logic [22] and P ROB L OG [8] and is often concerned with improving the
efficiency of inference and learning [14, 28]. The scalability problems of these statistical relational
languages, however, remain an obstacle and have prevented a wider adoption. Another line of work
focuses on efficient relational machine learning models that perform well on a particular task such
as knowledge base completion and relation extraction. Examples are knowledge base factorization
and embedding approaches [5, 21, 23, 26] and random-walk based ML models [15, 10]. We aim to
advance the state of the art in relational machine learning by developing efficient models that learn
knowledge base embeddings that are effective for probabilistic query answering on the one hand, and
interpretable and widely applicable on the other.
Gaifman’s locality theorem [9] is a result in the area of finite model theory [16]. The Gaifman graph
of a knowledge base is the undirected graph whose nodes correspond to objects and in which two
nodes are connected if the corresponding objects co-occur as arguments of some relation. Gaifman’s
locality theorem states that every first-order sentence is equivalent to a Boolean combination of
sentences whose quantifiers range over local neighborhoods of the Gaifman graph. With this paper,
we aim to explore Gaifman locality from a machine learning perspective. If every first-order sentence
is equivalent to a Boolean combination of sentences whose quantifiers range over local neighborhoods
only, we ought to be able to develop models that learn effective representations from these local
neighborhoods. There is increasing evidence that learning representations that are built up from
local structures can be highly successful. Convolutional neural networks, for instance, learn features
over locally connected regions of images. The aim of this work is to investigate the effectiveness
and efficiency of machine learning models that perform learning and inference within and across
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

