Learnable Visual Markers
Oleg Grinchuk1 , Vadim Lebedev1,2 , and Victor Lempitsky1
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
2
Yandex, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
We propose a new approach to designing visual markers (analogous to QR-codes,
markers for augmented reality, and robotic fiducial tags) based on the advances
in deep generative networks. In our approach, the markers are obtained as color
images synthesized by a deep network from input bit strings, whereas another
deep network is trained to recover the bit strings back from the photos of these
markers. The two networks are trained simultaneously in a joint backpropagation
process that takes characteristic photometric and geometric distortions associated
with marker fabrication and marker scanning into account. Additionally, a stylization loss based on statistics of activations in a pretrained classification network
can be inserted into the learning in order to shift the marker appearance towards
some texture prototype. In the experiments, we demonstrate that the markers obtained using our approach are capable of retaining bit strings that are long enough
to be practical. The ability to automatically adapt markers according to the usage
scenario and the desired capacity as well as the ability to combine information
encoding with artistic stylization are the unique properties of our approach. As
a byproduct, our approach provides an insight on the structure of patterns that
are most suitable for recognition by ConvNets and on their ability to distinguish
composite patterns.

1

Introduction

Visual markers (also known as visual fiducials or visual codes) are used to facilitate humanenvironment and robot-environment interaction, and to aid computer vision in resource-constrained
and/or accuracy-critical scenarios. Examples of such markers include simple 1D (linear) bar
codes [31] and their 2D (matrix) counterparts such as QR-codes [9] or Aztec codes [18], which
are used to embed chunks of information into objects and scenes. In robotics, AprilTags [23] and
similar methods [3, 4, 26] are a popular way to make locations, objects, and agents easily identifiable for robots. Within the realm of augmented reality (AR), ARCodes [6] and similar marker
systems [13, 21] are used to enable real-time camera pose estimation with high accuracy, low latency, and on low-end devices. Overall, such markers can embed information into the environment
in a more compact and language-independent way as compared to traditional human text signatures,
and they can also be recognized and used by autonomous and human-operated devices in a robust
way.
Existing visual markers are designed “manually” based on the considerations of the ease of processing by computer vision algorithms, the information capacity, and, less frequently, aesthetics.
Once marker family is designed, a computer vision-based approach (a marker recognizer) has to be
engineered and tuned in order to achieve reliable marker localization and interpretation [1, 17, 25].
The two processes of the visual marker design on one hand and the marker recognizer design on the
other hand are thus separated into two subsequent steps, and we argue that such separation makes
the corresponding design choices inherently suboptimal. In particular, the third aspect (aesthetics)
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

