Path-Normalized Optimization of Recurrent Neural
Networks with ReLU Activations
Behnam Neyshabur∗
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Yuhuai Wu∗
University of Toronto

bneyshabur@ttic.edu

ywu@cs.toronto.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We investigate the parameter-space geometry of recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
and develop an adaptation of path-SGD optimization method, attuned to this
geometry, that can learn plain RNNs with ReLU activations. On several datasets
that require capturing long-term dependency structure, we show that path-SGD can
significantly improve trainability of ReLU RNNs compared to RNNs trained with
SGD, even with various recently suggested initialization schemes.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been found to be successful in a variety of sequence learning
problems [4, 3, 9], including those involving long term dependencies (e.g., [1, 23]). However, most
of the empirical success has not been with “plain” RNNs but rather with alternate, more complex
structures, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [7] or Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs)
[3]. Much of the motivation for these more complex models is not so much because of their modeling
richness, but perhaps more because they seem to be easier to optimize. As we discuss in Section
3, training plain RNNs using gradient-descent variants seems problematic, and the choice of the
activation function could cause a problem of vanishing gradients or of exploding gradients.
In this paper our goal is to better understand the geometry of plain RNNs, and develop better
optimization methods, adapted to this geometry, that directly learn plain RNNs with ReLU activations.
One motivation for insisting on plain RNNs, as opposed to LSTMs or GRUs, is because they
are simpler and might be more appropriate for applications that require low-complexity design
such as in mobile computing platforms [22, 5]. In other applications, it might be better to solve
optimization issues by better optimization methods rather than reverting to more complex models.
Better understanding optimization of plain RNNs can also assist us in designing, optimizing and
intelligently using more complex RNN extensions.
Improving training RNNs with ReLU activations has been the subject of some recent attention,
with most research focusing on different initialization strategies [12, 22]. While initialization can
certainly have a strong effect on the success of the method, it generally can at most delay the problem
of gradient explosion during optimization. In this paper we take a different approach that can be
combined with any initialization choice, and focus on the dynamics of the optimization itself.
Any local search method is inherently tied to some notion of geometry over the search space (e.g.
the space of RNNs). For example, gradient descent (including stochastic gradient descent) is tied to
the Euclidean geometry and can be viewed as steepest descent with respect to the Euclidean norm.
Changing the norm (even to a different quadratic norm, e.g. by representing the weights with respect
to a different basis in parameter space) results in different optimization dynamics. We build on prior
work on the geometry and optimization in feed-forward networks, which uses the path-norm [16]
∗

Contributed equally.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

