An urn model for majority voting
in classification ensembles
Victor Soto
Computer Science Department
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
vsoto@cs.columbia.edu

Alberto Suárez and Gonzalo Martínez-Muñoz
Computer Science Department
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Madrid, Spain
{gonzalo.martinez,alberto.suarez}@uam.es

Abstract
In this work we analyze the class prediction of parallel randomized ensembles by
majority voting as an urn model. For a given test instance, the ensemble can be
viewed as an urn of marbles of different colors. A marble represents an individual
classifier. Its color represents the class label prediction of the corresponding
classifier. The sequential querying of classifiers in the ensemble can be seen
as draws without replacement from the urn. An analysis of this classical urn
model based on the hypergeometric distribution makes it possible to estimate
the confidence on the outcome of majority voting when only a fraction of the
individual predictions is known. These estimates can be used to speed up the
prediction by the ensemble. Specifically, the aggregation of votes can be halted
when the confidence in the final prediction is sufficiently high. If one assumes
a uniform prior for the distribution of possible votes the analysis is shown to be
equivalent to a previous one based on Dirichlet distributions. The advantage of
the current approach is that prior knowledge on the possible vote outcomes can be
readily incorporated in a Bayesian framework. We show how incorporating this
type of problem-specific knowledge into the statistical analysis of majority voting
leads to faster classification by the ensemble and allows us to estimate the expected
average speed-up beforehand.

1

Introduction

Combining the outputs of multiple predictors is in many cases of interest a successful strategy to
improve the capabilities of artificial intelligence systems, ranging from agent architectures [19], to
committee learning [13, 15, 8, 9]. A common approach is to build a collection of individual subsystems and then integrate their outputs into a final decision by means of a voting process. Specifically,
in the machine learning literature, there is extensive empirical evidence on the improvements in
generalization capacity that can be obtained using ensembles of learners [7, 11]. However, one of the
drawbacks of these types of systems is the linear memory and time costs incurred in the computation
of the final ensemble prediction by combination of the individual predictions. There are various
strategies that alleviate these shortcomings. These techniques are grouped into static (or off-line)
and dynamic (or online). In static pruning techniques, only a subset of complementary predictors
from the original ensemble is kept [16, 21, 6]. By contrast, in dynamic pruning, the whole ensemble
is retained. The prediction of the class label of a particular instance is accelerated by halting the
sequential querying process when it is unlikely that the remaining (unknown) votes would change
the output prediction [10, 20, 14, 12, 2, 3, 17]. These techniques are online in the sense that, as new
individual predictions become known, the algorithm dynamically updated the estimated probability
of having a stable prediction; i.d. a prediction that coincides with that by the complete ensemble.
This is the basis of the Statistical Instance-Based Algorithm (SIBA) proposed in [14]. In a similar
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

