Backprop KF: Learning Discriminative Deterministic
State Estimators
Tuomas Haarnoja, Anurag Ajay, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel
{haarnoja, anuragajay, svlevine, pabbeel}@berkeley.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Generative state estimators based on probabilistic filters and smoothers are one
of the most popular classes of state estimators for robots and autonomous vehicles. However, generative models have limited capacity to handle rich sensory
observations, such as camera images, since they must model the entire distribution
over sensor readings. Discriminative models do not suffer from this limitation,
but are typically more complex to train as latent variable models for state estimation. We present an alternative approach where the parameters of the latent state
distribution are directly optimized as a deterministic computation graph, resulting
in a simple and effective gradient descent algorithm for training discriminative
state estimators. We show that this procedure can be used to train state estimators
that use complex input, such as raw camera images, which must be processed
using expressive nonlinear function approximators such as convolutional neural
networks. Our model can be viewed as a type of recurrent neural network, and
the connection to probabilistic filtering allows us to design a network architecture
that is particularly well suited for state estimation. We evaluate our approach on
synthetic tracking task with raw image inputs and on the visual odometry task in
the KITTI dataset. The results show significant improvement over both standard
generative approaches and regular recurrent neural networks.

1

Introduction

State estimation is an important component of mobile robotic applications, including autonomous
driving and flight [22]. Generative state estimators based on probabilistic filters and smoothers are
one of the most popular classes of state estimators. However, generative models are limited in their
ability to handle rich observations, such as camera images, since they must model the full distribution
over sensor readings. This makes it difficult to directly incorporate images, depth maps, and other
high-dimensional observations. Instead, the most popular methods for vision-based state estimation
(such as SLAM [22]) are based on domain knowledge and geometric principles. Discriminative
models do not need to model the distribution over sensor readings, but are more complex to train
for state estimation. Discriminative models such as CRFs [16] typically do not use latent variables,
which means that training data must contain full state observations. Most real-world state estimation
problem settings only provide partial labels. For example, we might observe noisy position readings
from a GPS sensor and need to infer the corresponding velocities. While discriminative models can
be augmented with latent state [18], this typically makes them harder to train.
We propose an efficient and scalable method for discriminative training of state estimators. Instead of
performing inference in a probabilistic latent variable model, we instead construct a deterministic
computation graph with equivalent representational power. This computation graph can then be
optimized end-to-end with simple backpropagation and gradient descent methods. This corresponds
to a type of recurrent neural network model, where the architecture of the network is informed by the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

