Linear Feature Encoding for Reinforcement Learning

Zhao Song, Ronald Parr† , Xuejun Liao, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
†
Department of Computer Science
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Abstract
Feature construction is of vital importance in reinforcement learning, as the quality
of a value function or policy is largely determined by the corresponding features.
The recent successes of deep reinforcement learning (RL) only increase the importance of understanding feature construction. Typical deep RL approaches use
a linear output layer, which means that deep RL can be interpreted as a feature
construction/encoding network followed by linear value function approximation.
This paper develops and evaluates a theory of linear feature encoding. We extend
theoretical results on feature quality for linear value function approximation from
the uncontrolled case to the controlled case. We then develop a supervised linear
feature encoding method that is motivated by insights from linear value function
approximation theory, as well as empirical successes from deep RL. The resulting
encoder is a surprisingly effective method for linear value function approximation
using raw images as inputs.

1

Introduction

Feature construction has been and remains an important topic for reinforcement learning. One of
the earliest, high profile successes of reinforcement learning, TD-gammon [1], demonstrated a huge
performance improvement when expert features were used instead of the raw state, and recent years
have seen a great deal of practical and theoretical work on understanding feature selection and
generation for linear value function approximation [2–5].
More recent practical advances in deep reinforcement learning have initiated a new wave of interest in
the combination of neural networks and reinforcement learning. For example, Mnih et al. [6] described
a reinforcement learning (RL) system, referred to as Deep Q-Networks (DQN), which learned to
play a large number of Atari video games as well as a good human player. Despite these successes
and, arguably because of them, a great deal of work remains to be done in understanding the role of
features in RL. It is common in deep RL methods to have a linear output layer. This means that there
is potential to apply the insights gained from years of work in linear value function approximation to
these networks, potentially giving insight to practitioners and improving the interpretability of the
results. For example, the layers preceding the output layer could be interpreted as feature extractors
or encoders for linear value function approximation.
As an example of the connection between practical neural network techniques and linear value
function approximation theory, we note that Oh et al. [7] introduced spatio-temporal prediction
architectures that trained an action-conditional encoder to predict next states, leading to improved
performance on Atari games. Oh et al. cited examples of next state prediction as a technique used in
neural networks in prior work dating back several decades, though this approach is also suggested by
more recent linear value function approximation theory [4].
In an effort to extend previous theory in a direction that would be more useful for linear value function
approximation and, hopefully, lead to greater insights into deep RL, we generalize previous work
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

