Achieving Budget-optimality with Adaptive Schemes
in Crowdsourcing
Ashish Khetan and Sewoong Oh
Department of ISE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Email: {khetan2,swoh}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Adaptive schemes, where tasks are assigned based on the data collected thus far, are
widely used in practical crowdsourcing systems to efficiently allocate the budget.
However, existing theoretical analyses of crowdsourcing systems suggest that the
gain of adaptive task assignments is minimal. To bridge this gap, we investigate this
question under a strictly more general probabilistic model, which has been recently
introduced to model practical crowdsourcing datasets. Under this generalized
Dawid-Skene model, we characterize the fundamental trade-off between budget
and accuracy. We introduce a novel adaptive scheme that matches this fundamental
limit. A given budget is allocated over multiple rounds. In each round, a subset of
tasks with high enough confidence are classified, and increasing budget is allocated
on remaining ones that are potentially more difficult. On each round, decisions are
made based on the leading eigenvector of (weighted) non-backtracking operator
corresponding to the bipartite assignment graph. We further quantify the gain of
adaptivity, by comparing the tradeoff with the one for non-adaptive schemes, and
confirm that the gain is significant and can be made arbitrarily large depending on
the distribution of the difficulty level of the tasks at hand.

1

Introduction

Crowdsourcing platforms provide labor markets in which pieces of micro-tasks are electronically
distributed to a pool of workers. In typical crowdsourcing scenarios, such as those on Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk, a requester posts a collection of tasks, and a batch is picked up by any worker
who is willing to complete it. The worker is subsequently rewarded for each task he/she completes.
However, some workers are spammers trying to make easy money. Moreover, since the reward is
small and tasks are tedious, errors are common even among those who try. To correct for the errors,
a common approach is to introduce redundancy by assigning each task to multiple workers and
aggregating their responses using some schemes such as majority voting.
A fundamental problem of interest is how to maximize the accuracy of thus inferred solutions, while
using as small number of repetitions as possible. There are two challenges in achieving such an
optimal tradeoff between accuracy and the budget: (a) we need a scheme for deciding which tasks to
assign to which workers; and (b) at the same time infer the true solutions from their responses.
Since the workers are fleeting, the requester has no control over who gets to work on which tasks. It
is impossible to make a trust relationship with the workers. In particular, it does not make sense to
explore reliable workers, and exploit them in subsequent steps. Each arriving worker is completely
new and you may never get him back. Nevertheless, by comparing responses from multiple workers,
we can estimate the true answer to the task, and use it in subsequent steps to learn the reliability of the
workers. Our beliefs on the true answers as well as the difficulty of the tasks and the reliability of the
workers can be iteratively refined, and one can potentially choose to assign more workers to the more
difficult tasks. We would like to understand such intricate interplay of task assignment and inference.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

