Multimodal Residual Learning for Visual QA

Jin-Hwa Kim

Sang-Woo Lee Donghyun Kwak Min-Oh Heo
Seoul National University
{jhkim,slee,dhkwak,moheo}@bi.snu.ac.kr

Jeonghee Kim
Jung-Woo Ha
Naver Labs, Naver Corp.
{jeonghee.kim,jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com
Byoung-Tak Zhang
Seoul National University & Surromind Robotics
btzhang@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep neural networks continue to advance the state-of-the-art of image recognition tasks with various methods. However, applications of these methods to
multimodality remain limited. We present Multimodal Residual Networks (MRN)
for the multimodal residual learning of visual question-answering, which extends
the idea of the deep residual learning. Unlike the deep residual learning, MRN
effectively learns the joint representation from vision and language information.
The main idea is to use element-wise multiplication for the joint residual mappings
exploiting the residual learning of the attentional models in recent studies. Various alternative models introduced by multimodality are explored based on our
study. We achieve the state-of-the-art results on the Visual QA dataset for both
Open-Ended and Multiple-Choice tasks. Moreover, we introduce a novel method
to visualize the attention effect of the joint representations for each learning block
using back-propagation algorithm, even though the visual features are collapsed
without spatial information.

1

Introduction

Visual question-answering tasks provide a testbed to cultivate the synergistic proposals which handle
multidisciplinary problems of vision, language and integrated reasoning. So, the visual questionanswering tasks let the studies in artificial intelligence go beyond narrow tasks. Furthermore, it may
help to solve the real world problems which need the integrated reasoning of vision and language.
Deep residual learning [6] not only advances the studies in object recognition problems, but also gives
a general framework for deep neural networks. The existing non-linear layers of neural networks
serve to fit another mapping of F(x), which is the residual of identity mapping x. So, with the
shortcut connection of identity mapping x, the whole module of layers fit F(x) + x for the desired
underlying mapping H(x). In other words, the only residual mapping F(x), defined by H(x) − x, is
learned with non-linear layers. In this way, very deep neural networks effectively learn representations
in an efficient manner.
Many attentional models utilize the residual learning to deal with various tasks, including textual
reasoning [25, 21] and visual question-answering [29]. They use an attentional mechanism to handle
two different information sources, a query and the context of the query (e.g. contextual sentences
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

