MetaGrad: Multiple Learning Rates
in Online Learning
Tim van Erven
Leiden University
tim@timvanerven.nl

Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Abstract
In online convex optimization it is well known that certain subclasses of objective
functions are much easier than arbitrary convex functions. We are interested in
designing adaptive methods that can automatically get fast rates in as many such
subclasses as possible, without any manual tuning. Previous adaptive methods
are able to interpolate between strongly convex and general convex functions. We
present a new method, MetaGrad, that adapts to a much broader class of functions,
including exp-concave and strongly convex functions, but also various types of
stochastic and non-stochastic functions without any curvature. For instance, MetaGrad can achieve logarithmic regret on the unregularized hinge loss, even though
it has no curvature, if the data come from a favourable probability distribution.
MetaGrad’s main feature is that it simultaneously considers multiple learning rates.
Unlike previous methods with provable regret guarantees, however, its learning
rates are not monotonically decreasing over time and are not tuned based on a
theoretically derived bound on the regret. Instead, they are weighted directly
proportional to their empirical performance on the data using a tilted exponential
weights master algorithm.

1

Introduction

Methods for online convex optimization (OCO) [28, 12] make it possible to optimize parameters
sequentially, by processing convex functions in a streaming fashion. This is important in time series
prediction where the data are inherently online; but it may also be convenient to process offline data
sets sequentially, for instance if the data do not all fit into memory at the same time or if parameters
need to be updated quickly when extra data become available.
The difficulty of an OCO task depends on the convex functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fT that need to be
optimized. The argument of these functions is a d-dimensional parameter vector w from a convex
domain U . Although this is abstracted away in the general framework, each function ft usually
measures the loss of the parameters on an underlying example (xt , yt ) in a machine learning task.
For example, in classification ft might be the hinge loss ft (w) = max{0, 1 yt hw, xt i} or the
logistic loss ft (w) = ln 1 + e yt hw,xt i , with yt 2 { 1, +1}. Thus the difficulty depends both on
the choice of loss and on the observed data.
There are different methods for OCO, depending on assumptions that can be made about the functions.
The simplest and most commonly used strategy is online gradient descent (GD), which does not
require any assumptions beyond convexity. GD updates parameters wt+1 = wt ⌘t rft (wt ) by
taking a step in the direction of the negative gradient, where
p the step size is determined by a parameter
⌘t called the learning rate. For learning rates ⌘t / 1/ t, GD guarantees that the regret over T
rounds, which measures the difference inpcumulative loss between the online iterates wt and the best
offline parameters u, is bounded by O( T ) [33]. Alternatively, if it is known beforehand that the
functions are of an easier type, then better regret rates are sometimes possible. For instance, if the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

