Bayesian Intermittent Demand Forecasting for Large
Inventories
Matthias Seeger, David Salinas, Valentin Flunkert
Amazon Development Center Germany
Krausenstrasse 38
10115 Berlin
matthis@amazon.de, dsalina@amazon.de, flunkert@amazon.de

Abstract
We present a scalable and robust Bayesian method for demand forecasting in the
context of a large e-commerce platform, paying special attention to intermittent
and bursty target statistics. Inference is approximated by the Newton-Raphson
algorithm, reduced to linear-time Kalman smoothing, which allows us to operate on
several orders of magnitude larger problems than previous related work. In a study
on large real-world sales datasets, our method outperforms competing approaches
on fast and medium moving items.

1

Introduction

Demand forecasting plays a central role in supply chain management, driving automated ordering,
in-stock management, and facilities planning. Classical forecasting methods, such as exponential
smoothing [10] or ARIMA models [5], produce Gaussian predictive distributions. While sufficient
for inventories of several thousand fast-selling items, Gaussian assumptions are grossly violated
for the extremely large catalogues maintained by e-commerce platforms. There, demand is highly
intermittent and bursty: long runs of zeros, with islands of high counts. Decision making requires
quantiles of predictive distributions [14], whose accuracy suffer under erroneous assumptions.
In this work, we detail a novel methodology for intermittent demand forecasting which operates in
the industrial environment of a very large e-commerce platform. Implemented in Apache Spark
[16], our method is used to process many hundreds of thousands of items and several hundreds of
millions of item-days. Key requirements are automated parameter learning (no expert interventions),
scalability and a high degree of operational robustness. Our system produces forecasts both for short
(one to three weeks) and longer lead times (up to several months), the latter require feature maps
depending on holidays, sales days, promotions, and price changes. Previous work on intermittent
demand forecasting in Statistics is surveyed in [15]: none of these address longer lead times. On a
modelling level, our proposal is related to [6], yet several novelties are essential for operating at the
industrial scale we target here. This paper makes the following contributions:
• A combination of generalized linear models and time series smoothing. The former enables
medium and longer term forecasts, the latter provides temporal continuity and reasonable
distributions over time. Compared to [6], we provide empirical evidence for the usefulness
of this combination.
• A novel algorithm for maximum likelihood parameter learning in state space models with
non-Gaussian likelihood, using approximate Bayesian inference. While there is substantial
related prior work, our proposal stands out in robustness and scalability. We show how
approximate inference is solved by the Newton-Raphson algorithm, fully reduced to Kalman
smoothing once per iteration. This reduction scales linearly (a vanilla implementation
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

