Generalization of ERM in Stochastic Convex
Optimization:
The Dimension Strikes Back∗
Vitaly Feldman
IBM Research – Almaden

Abstract
In stochastic convex optimization the goal is to minimize a convex function
.
F (x) = Ef ∼D [f (x)] over a convex set K ⊂ Rd where D is some unknown
distribution and each f (·) in the support of D is convex over K. The optimization is commonly based on i.i.d. samples f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f n from D. A standard
approach to P
such problems is empirical risk minimization (ERM) that optimizes
.
FS (x) = n1 i≤n f i (x). Here we consider the question of how many samples
are necessary for ERM to succeed and the closely related question of uniform
convergence of FS to F over K. We demonstrate that in the standard `p /`q setting
of Lipschitz-bounded functions over a K of bounded radius, ERM requires sample
size that scales linearly with the dimension d. This nearly matches standard upper
bounds and improves on Ω(log d) dependence proved for `2 /`2 setting in [18]. In
stark contrast, these problems can be solved using dimension-independent number
of samples for `2 /`2 setting and log d dependence for `1 /`∞ setting using other
approaches.
We further show that our lower bound applies even if the functions in the support
of D are smooth and efficiently computable and even if an `1 regularization term is
added. Finally, we demonstrate that for a more general class of bounded-range (but
not Lipschitz-bounded) stochastic convex programs an infinite gap appears already
in dimension 2.

1

Introduction

Numerous central problems in machine learning, statistics and operations research are special cases of
stochastic optimization from i.i.d. data samples. In this problem the goal is to optimize the value of the
.
expected objective function F (x) = Ef ∼D [f (x)] over some set K given i.i.d. samples f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f n
of f . For example, in supervised learning the set K consists of hypothesis functions from Z to Y
and each sample is an example described by a pair (z, y) ∈ (Z, Y ). For some fixed loss function
L : Y × Y → R, an example (z, y) defines a function from K to R given by f(z,y) (h) = L(h(z), y).
The goal is to find a hypothesis h that (approximately) minimizes the expected loss relative to some
distribution P over examples: E(z,y)∼P [L(h(z), y)] = E(z,y)∼P [f(z,y) (h)].
Here we are interested in stochastic convex optimization (SCO) problems in which K is some convex
subset of Rd and each function in the support of D is convex over K. The importance of this
setting stems from the fact that such problems can be solved efficiently via a large variety of known
techniques. Therefore in many applications even if the original optimization problem is not convex, it
is replaced by a convex relaxation.
A classic and widely-used approach to solving stochastic optimization problems is empirical risk
minimization (ERM) also referred to as stochastic average approximation (SAA) in the optimization
∗

See [9] for the full version of this work.

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

