The Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel

Risi Kondor
Department of Computer Science
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
risi@cs.uchicago.edu

Horace Pan
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
hopan@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Many real world graphs, such as the graphs of molecules, exhibit structure at multiple different scales, but most existing kernels between graphs are either purely
local or purely global in character. In contrast, by building a hierarchy of nested
subgraphs, the Multiscale Laplacian Graph kernels (MLG kernels) that we define
in this paper can account for structure at a range of different scales. At the heart
of the MLG construction is another new graph kernel, called the Feature Space
Laplacian Graph kernel (FLG kernel), which has the property that it can lift a
base kernel defined on the vertices of two graphs to a kernel between the graphs.
The MLG kernel applies such FLG kernels to subgraphs recursively. To make the
MLG kernel computationally feasible, we also introduce a randomized projection
procedure, similar to the Nyström method, but for RKHS operators.

1

Introduction

There is a wide range of problems in applied machine learning from web data mining [1] to protein function prediction [2] where the input space is a space of graphs. A particularly important
application domain is chemoinformatics, where the graphs capture the structure of molecules. In
the pharmaceutical industry, for example, machine learning algorithms are regularly used to screen
candidate drug compounds for safety and efficacy against specific diseases [3].
Because kernel methods neatly separate the issue of data representation from the statistical learning
component, it is natural to formulate graph learning problems in the kernel paradigm. Starting with
[4], a number of different graph kernels have appeared in the literature (for an overview, see [5]). In
general, a graph kernel k(G1 , G2 ) must satisfy the following requirements:
1. The kernel should capture the right notion of similarity between G1 and G2 . For example, if G1
and G2 are social networks, then k might capture to what extent their clustering structure, degree
distribution, etc. match. If, on the other hand, G1 and G2 are molecules, then we are probably
more interested in what functional groups are present, and how they are arranged relative to each
other.
2. The kernel is usually computed from the adjacency matrices A1 and A2 of the two graphs, but it
must be invariant to the ordering of the vertices. In other words, writing the kernel explicitly in
terms of A1 and A2 , we must have k(A1 , A2 ) = k(A1 ,P A2 P >) for any permutation matrix P .
Permutation invariance has proved to be the central constraint around which much of the graph
kernels literature is organized, effectively stipulating that graph kernels must be built out of graph
invariants. Efficiently computable graph invariants offered by the mathematics literature tend to fall
in one of two categories:
1. Local invariants, which can often be reduced to simply counting some local properties, such as
the number of triangles, squares, etc. that appear in G as subgraphs.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

