Hierarchical Question-Image Co-Attention
for Visual Question Answering

Jiasen Lu∗ , Jianwei Yang∗ , Dhruv Batra∗† , Devi Parikh∗†
∗ Virginia Tech, † Georgia Institute of Technology
{jiasenlu, jw2yang, dbatra, parikh}@vt.edu

Abstract
A number of recent works have proposed attention models for Visual Question
Answering (VQA) that generate spatial maps highlighting image regions relevant to
answering the question. In this paper, we argue that in addition to modeling “where
to look” or visual attention, it is equally important to model “what words to listen
to” or question attention. We present a novel co-attention model for VQA that
jointly reasons about image and question attention. In addition, our model reasons
about the question (and consequently the image via the co-attention mechanism)
in a hierarchical fashion via a novel 1-dimensional convolution neural networks
(CNN). Our model improves the state-of-the-art on the VQA dataset from 60.3% to
60.5%, and from 61.6% to 63.3% on the COCO-QA dataset. By using ResNet, the
performance is further improved to 62.1% for VQA and 65.4% for COCO-QA.1 .

1

Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) [2, 6, 14, 15, 27] has emerged as a prominent multi-discipline
research problem in both academia and industry. To correctly answer visual questions about an
image, the machine needs to understand both the image and question. Recently, visual attention based
models [18, 21–23] have been explored for VQA, where the attention mechanism typically produces
a spatial map highlighting image regions relevant to answering the question.
So far, all attention models for VQA in literature have focused on the problem of identifying “where
to look” or visual attention. In this paper, we argue that the problem of identifying “which words to
listen to” or question attention is equally important. Consider the questions “how many horses are
in this image?” and “how many horses can you see in this image?". They have the same meaning,
essentially captured by the first three words. A machine that attends to the first three words would
arguably be more robust to linguistic variations irrelevant to the meaning and answer of the question.
Motivated by this observation, in addition to reasoning about visual attention, we also address the
problem of question attention. Specifically, we present a novel multi-modal attention model for VQA
with the following two unique features:
Co-Attention: We propose a novel mechanism that jointly reasons about visual attention and question
attention, which we refer to as co-attention. Unlike previous works, which only focus on visual
attention, our model has a natural symmetry between the image and question, in the sense that the
image representation is used to guide the question attention and the question representation(s) are
used to guide image attention.
Question Hierarchy: We build a hierarchical architecture that co-attends to the image and question
at three levels: (a) word level, (b) phrase level and (c) question level. At the word level, we embed the
words to a vector space through an embedding matrix. At the phrase level, 1-dimensional convolution
neural networks are used to capture the information contained in unigrams, bigrams and trigrams.
1

The source code can be downloaded from https://github.com/jiasenlu/HieCoAttenVQA

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

