One-vs-Each Approximation to Softmax for Scalable
Estimation of Probabilities
Michalis K. Titsias
Department of Informatics
Athens University of Economics and Business
mtitsias@aueb.gr

Abstract
The softmax representation of probabilities for categorical variables plays a prominent role in modern machine learning with numerous applications in areas such as
large scale classification, neural language modeling and recommendation systems.
However, softmax estimation is very expensive for large scale inference because
of the high cost associated with computing the normalizing constant. Here, we
introduce an efficient approximation to softmax probabilities which takes the form
of a rigorous lower bound on the exact probability. This bound is expressed as a
product over pairwise probabilities and it leads to scalable estimation based on
stochastic optimization. It allows us to perform doubly stochastic estimation by
subsampling both training instances and class labels. We show that the new bound
has interesting theoretical properties and we demonstrate its use in classification
problems.

1

Introduction

Based on the softmax representation, the probability of a variable y to take the value k ∈ {1, . . . , K},
where K is the number of categorical symbols or classes, is modeled by
efk (x;w)
p(y = k|x) = PK
,
fm (x;w)
m=1 e

(1)

where each fk (x; w) is often referred to as the score function and it is a real-valued function indexed
by an input vector x and parameterized by w. The score function measures the compatibility of input
x with symbol y = k so that the higher the score is the more compatible x becomes with y = k. The
most common application of softmax is multiclass classification where x is an observed input vector
and fk (x; w) is often chosen to be a linear function or more generally a non-linear function such as a
neural network [3, 8]. Several other applications of softmax arise, for instance, in neural language
modeling for learning word vector embeddings [15, 14, 18] and also in collaborating filtering for
representing probabilities of (user, item) pairs [17]. In such applications the number of symbols
K could often be very large, e.g. of the order of tens of thousands or millions, which makes the
computation of softmax probabilities very expensive due to the large sum in the normalizing constant
of Eq. (1). Thus, exact training procedures based on maximum likelihood or Bayesian approaches
are computationally prohibitive and approximations are needed. While some rigorous bound-based
approximations to the softmax exists [5], they are not so accurate or scalable and therefore it would
be highly desirable to develop accurate and computationally efficient approximations.
In this paper we introduce a new efficient approximation to softmax probabilities which takes the
form of a lower bound on the probability of Eq. (1). This bound draws an interesting connection
between the exact softmax probability and all its one-vs-each pairwise probabilities, and it has several
desirable properties. Firstly, for the non-parametric estimation case it leads to an approximation of the
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

