Jump-Start Reinforcement Learning

Ikechukwu Uchendu * 1 Ted Xiao 1 Yao Lu 1 Banghua Zhu 2 Mengyuan Yan 3 Joséphine Simon 3
Matthew Bennice 3 Chuyuan Fu 3 Cong Ma 4 Jiantao Jiao 2 Sergey Levine 1 2 Karol Hausman 1 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
A promising aspect of reinforcement learning (RL) is the
ability of a policy to iteratively improve via trial and error.
Often, however, the most difficult part of this process is the
very beginning, where a policy that is learning without any
prior data needs to randomly encounter rewards to further
improve. A common way to side-step this exploration issue is to aid the policy with prior knowledge. One source
of prior knowledge might come in the form of a prior policy, which can provide some initial guidance in collecting
data with non-zero rewards, but which is not by itself fully
optimal. Such policies could be obtained from demonstration data (e.g., via behavioral cloning), from sub-optimal
prior data (e.g., via offline RL), or even simply via manual
engineering. In the case where this prior policy is itself
parameterized as a function approximator, it could serve
to simply initialize a policy gradient method. However,
sample-efficient algorithms based on value functions are
notoriously difficult to bootstrap in this way. As observed
in prior work (Peng et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2020; Kostrikov
et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021), value functions require both
good and bad data to initialize successfully, and the mere
availability of a starting policy does not by itself readily provide an initial value function of comparable performance.
This leads to the question we pose in this work: how can
we bootstrap a value-based RL algorithm with a prior policy
that attains reasonable but sub-optimal performance?

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a theoretical framework for continuously improving an
agent’s behavior via trial and error. However, efficiently learning policies from scratch can be very
difficult, particularly for tasks that present exploration challenges. In such settings, it might be
desirable to initialize RL with an existing policy,
offline data, or demonstrations. However, naively
performing such initialization in RL often works
poorly, especially for value-based methods. In
this paper, we present a meta algorithm that can
use offline data, demonstrations, or a pre-existing
policy to initialize an RL policy, and is compatible with any RL approach. In particular, we propose Jump-Start Reinforcement Learning (JSRL),
an algorithm that employs two policies to solve
tasks: a guide-policy, and an exploration-policy.
By using the guide-policy to form a curriculum of
starting states for the exploration-policy, we are
able to efficiently improve performance on a set
of simulated robotic tasks. We show via experiments that it is able to significantly outperform
existing imitation and reinforcement learning algorithms, particularly in the small-data regime.
In addition, we provide an upper bound on the
sample complexity of JSRL and show that with
the help of a guide-policy, one can improve the
sample complexity for non-optimism exploration
methods from exponential in horizon to polynomial.

The main insight that we leverage to address this problem is
that we can bootstrap an RL algorithm by gradually “rolling
in” with the prior policy, which we refer to as the guidepolicy. In particular, the guide-policy provides a curriculum
of starting states for the RL exploration-policy, which significantly simplifies the exploration problem and allows for
fast learning. As the exploration-policy improves, the effect
of the guide-policy is diminished, leading to an RL-only
policy that is capable of further autonomous improvement.
Our approach is generic, as it can be applied to downstream
RL methods that require the RL policy to explore the environment, though we focus on value-based methods in this
work. The only requirements of our method are that the
guide-policy can select actions based on observations of the
environment, and its performance is reasonable (i.e., better
than a random policy). Since the guide-policy significantly

* Work done as part of the Google AI Residency 1 Google, Mountain View, California 2 University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
California 3 Everyday Robots, Mountain View, California, United
States 4 Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 5 Stanford
University, Stanford, California. Correspondence to: Ikechukwu
Uchendu <iuchendu1@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

