Do the Rewards Justify the Means? Measuring Trade-Offs Between
Rewards and Ethical Behavior in the M ACHIAVELLI Benchmark
Alexander Pan * 1 Jun Shern Chan * 2 Andy Zou * 3 Nathaniel Li 1 Steven Basart 2 Thomas Woodside 4
Hanlin Zhang 3 Scott Emmons 1 Dan Hendrycks 2

Abstract
Artificial agents have traditionally been trained to
maximize reward, which may incentivize powerseeking and deception, analogous to how nexttoken prediction in language models (LMs) may
incentivize toxicity. So do agents naturally learn
to be Machiavellian? And how do we measure
these behaviors in general-purpose models such
as GPT-4? Towards answering these questions,
we introduce M ACHIAVELLI, a benchmark of
134 Choose-Your-Own-Adventure games containing over half a million rich, diverse scenarios that
center on social decision-making. Scenario labeling is automated with LMs, which are more performant than human annotators. We mathematize
dozens of harmful behaviors and use our annotations to evaluate agents’ tendencies to be powerseeking, cause disutility, and commit ethical violations. We observe some tension between maximizing reward and behaving ethically. To improve
this trade-off, we investigate LM-based methods
to steer agents towards less harmful behaviors.
Our results show that agents can both act competently and morally, so concrete progress can
currently be made in machine ethics–designing
agents that are Pareto improvements in both safety
and capabilities.

Figure 1. Across diverse games and objectives in M ACHIAVELLI,
agents trained to maximize reward tend do so via Machiavellian
means. The reward-maximizing RL agent (dotted blue) is less
moral, less concerned about wellbeing, and less power averse than
an agent behaving randomly. We find that simple techniques can
increase ethical behavior (solid lines) opening up the possibility
for further improvements.

2021b). Previous benchmarks aimed at evaluating these
complex systems have measured language understanding
(Wang et al., 2019) or reasoning in isolated scenarios (Srivastava et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022). However, models
are now being trained for real-world, interactive tasks (Ahn
et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). Thus, benchmarks should
assess how models behave in interactive environments.

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley, USA
Center For AI Safety, San Francisco, USA 3 Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, USA 4 Yale University, New Haven, USA.
Correspondence to: Alexander Pan <aypan.17@berkeley.edu>.

Text-based games are a natural test-bed for evaluating interactive agents. Progressing through such games requires
agents to plan and possess natural language understanding. Although there are several benchmarks for text-based
games (Côté et al., 2018; Shridhar et al., 2021; Hausknecht
et al., 2020), their difficulty mainly comes from the difficulty of exploring the physical environment. By contrast,
few works study planning in complex social environments,
a crucial capability for agents deployed in the real world.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Moreover, even if artificial agents learn to competently navigate social situations, there is no guarantee that they will
learn to behave ethically. For example, CICERO (Bakhtin

AI systems are rapidly gaining capabilities (OpenAI, 2023),
especially in natural language (Bubeck et al., 2023). To mitigate risks of deployment, models must be thoroughly evaluated and steered towards safer behaviors (Hendrycks et al.,
2

1

