The Role of Entropy and Reconstruction in
Multi-View Self-Supervised Learning

Borja Rodrı́guez-Gálvez 1 2 Arno Blaas 2 Pau Rodrı́guez 2 Adam Goliński 2
Xavier Suau 2 Jason Ramapuram 2 Dan Busbridge 2 Luca Zappella 2
et al., 2019), while inducing biases in the model that steer the
learned information to be semantically meaningful (Alemi
et al., 2017; van den Oord et al., 2018; Velickovic et al.,
2019). As such, MI has played a crucial role in understanding the performance of many representation learning
methods (Tishby et al., 1999; Rodrı́guez Gálvez et al., 2020;
Goldfeld & Polyanskiy, 2020).

Abstract
The mechanisms behind the success of multi-view
self-supervised learning (MVSSL) are not yet
fully understood. Contrastive MVSSL methods
have been studied through the lens of InfoNCE,
a lower bound of the Mutual Information (MI).
However, the relation between other MVSSL
methods and MI remains unclear. We consider a
different lower bound on the MI consisting of an
entropy and a reconstruction term (ER), and analyze the main MVSSL families through its lens.
Through this ER bound, we show that clusteringbased methods such as DeepCluster and SwAV
maximize the MI. We also re-interpret the mechanisms of distillation-based approaches such as
BYOL and DINO, showing that they explicitly
maximize the reconstruction term and implicitly
encourage a stable entropy, and we confirm this
empirically. We show that replacing the objectives of common MVSSL methods with this ER
bound achieves competitive performance, while
making them stable when training with smaller
batch sizes or smaller exponential moving average
(EMA) coefficients.

Recently, multi-view self-supervised learning (MVSSL),
where the loss enforces the model to produce similar representations for different views of the same data, has proven to
be a successful approach for representation learning (Bachman et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020; Caron
et al., 2021). The success of MVSSL has motivated the
research of several families of MVSSL approaches, such as
contrastive (Chen et al., 2020a), clustering- (Caron et al.,
2018), and distillation-based methods (Grill et al., 2020).
However, the effort to understand all of them under a common umbrella lags behind the development of new methods.
In this work, we aim to further our understanding of MVSSL
methods by identifying any mechanisms contributing to
maximizing MI, and to what extent they do so.
The connection of the contrastive MVSSL methods to MI
maximization is well established through the InfoNCE
bound (van den Oord et al., 2018; Poole et al., 2019),
which, in the MVSSL context, lower bounds the MI between the learned representations of different views. Tian
et al. (2020b) and Tsai et al. (2020) argue that maximizing this MI is attractive as a representation learning target
since, when the views are selected carefully, it extracts taskrelevant and discards task-irrelevant information.

Github repo: apple/ml-entropy-reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Representation learning tackles the problem of learning
lower dimensional representations of data which capture
the data’s semantic information. To achieve this, many representation learning methods aim to maximize the mutual
information (MI) between the input data and the learned
representations (Linsker, 1988; Belghazi et al., 2018; Hjelm

The interest in the MI perspective on representation learning, and MVSSL in particular, has been undermined following the work of Tschannen et al. (2020), whose key result
is showing that maximizing MI alone is not sufficient for
learning good representations. Yet, it is empirically evident that methods based on MI lower bound maximization
are competitive with state-of-the-art, and Tschannen et al.
(2020) note that “the performance of these methods depends
strongly on the bias that is encoded not only in the encoders,
but also on the actual form of the used MI estimators”. In
our opinion, their results strongly motivates further study

1
Division of Information Science and Engineering (ISE), KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Apple. Correspondence to: Borja Rodrı́guez-Gálvez <borjarg@kth.se>, Luca
Zappella <lzappella@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

