Learning Representations without Compositional Assumptions
Tennison Liu 1 Jeroen Berrevoets 1 Zhaozhi Qian 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract

mance due to heterogeneity among feature sets and the loss
of valuable relational information. A common approach is
then multi-view learning (Xu et al., 2013), which examines
each feature set separately and integrates information from
multiple views to learn representations. This task can be
difficult, particularly when labels for supervision are not
available, which can help disambiguate the dependencies
between views and task-relevant information. In the unsupervised learning setting, models rely on data assumptions
and inductive biases to learn good representations automatically (Locatello et al., 2019).

This paper addresses unsupervised representation
learning on tabular data containing multiple views
generated by distinct sources of measurement.
Traditional methods, which tackle this problem using the multi-view framework, are constrained by
predefined assumptions that assume feature sets
share the same information and representations
should learn globally shared factors. However,
this assumption is not always valid for real-world
tabular datasets with complex dependencies between feature sets, resulting in localized information that is harder to learn. To overcome this
limitation, we propose a data-driven approach that
learns feature set dependencies by representing
feature sets as graph nodes and their relationships
as learnable edges. Furthermore, we introduce
LEGATO, a novel hierarchical graph autoencoder
that learns a smaller, latent graph to aggregate information from multiple views dynamically. This
approach results in latent graph components that
specialize in capturing localized information from
different regions of the input, leading to superior
downstream performance.

Existing multi-view learning methods often rely on compositional assumptions, which assume that information is
distributed and should be aggregated in predetermined patterns. The classic multi-view inductive bias assumes that
views provide similar task-relevant information (Yan et al.,
2021), guiding how information is aggregated, with the goal
of learning robust and generalized representations that are
invariant across views (Federici et al., 2019). These assumptions have been widely used in image, text, and speech
domains, such as audio-visual speech recognition (Huang &
Kingsbury, 2013) and image-caption models (Radford et al.,
2021), where the settings are more controlled and the number of views is limited. In these domains, systematic and
aligned data collection ensures maximal information overlap between feature sets, making inter-view relationships
and information aggregation strategies known in advance.

1. Introduction

However, these assumptions may not hold for tabular multiview data, especially those collected in-the-wild (ITW),
where relationships between feature sets are significantly
more opaque. Examples of this include electronic health
records (Johnson et al., 2023), biobanks (Nagai et al., 2017),
and stock market data (Xu & Cohen, 2018). In these
datasets, information is more likely to exist in localized
clusters of views in unknown patterns, rather than being
globally present in all views (Xu et al., 2013). This is particularly true when dealing with tabular problems that typically
have more than two feature sets. Our findings indicate that
compositional assumptions are inadequate when learning
on tabular data collected in-the-wild, failing to capture localized information in representations.

Tabular datasets encountered in the real world often contain
distinct feature sets, or views, that originate from different
sources of measurement. For instance, the UK Biobank
(Bycroft et al., 2018) contains measurements of sociodemographic factors, heart and lung function, genomic data,
and electronic health records, each providing information
on a different aspect of a patient’s medical state, but also
dependent on one another to form a holistic medical context.
While different feature sets can be consolidated into a single
table, doing so can result in suboptimal learning perfor1

DAMTP, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Alan
Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Tennison Liu
<tl522@cam.ac.uk>.

To overcome this challenge, we propose a method to model
relationships between feature sets and dynamically aggre-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

