Scaling Laws for Multilingual Neural Machine Translation

Patrick Fernandes 1 2 3 Behrooz Ghorbani 1 Xavier Garcia 1 Markus Freitag 1 Orhan Firat 1

Abstract

training large neural models, much work has gone into
understanding their scaling properties and predicting the
evolution of their performance with scale through scaling
laws. Such scaling laws have been instrumental in guiding
the model development efforts across a variety of domains
such as computer vision (Zhai et al., 2022), language
modeling (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), and
neural machine translation (Ghorbani et al., 2022).

In this work, we provide a large-scale empirical
study of the scaling properties of multilingual
neural machine translation models. We examine
how increases in the model size affect the model
performance and investigate the role of the training mixture composition on the scaling behavior.
We find that changing the weightings of the
individual language pairs in the training mixture
only affect the multiplicative factor of the scaling
law. In particular, we observe that multilingual
models trained using different mixing rates all
exhibit the same scaling exponent. Through a
novel joint scaling law formulation, we compute
the effective number of parameters allocated
to each language pair and examine the role of
language similarity in the scaling behavior of
our models. We find little evidence that language
similarity has any impact. In contrast, the
direction of the multilinguality plays a significant
role, with models translating from multiple
languages into English having a larger number of
effective parameters per task than their reversed
counterparts. Finally, we leverage our observations to predict the performance of multilingual
models trained with any language weighting at
any scale, significantly reducing efforts required
for language balancing in large multilingual
models. Our findings apply to both in-domain
and out-of-domain test sets and to multiple
evaluation metrics, such as ChrF and BLEURT.

Despite these impressive developments, most of the scaling laws studies available in the literature only focus on
single-task, single-language models. On the contrary, current massive neural models are often trained to solve more
than one task across one or more modalities & languages
(Chowdhery et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Reed et al.,
2022). This disconnect from the current research frontier
limits the applicability of scaling laws in guiding model
development decisions. In particular, currently available
scaling laws studies are unable to inform the decision process on balancing the different tasks effectively at training
time. Without such guidance, practitioners often have to
rely on cumbersome and costly approaches such as approximate grid search to inform their decision-making; such
approaches quickly become infeasible as the problem scale
grows.
In this paper, we take the initial step towards developing
a quantitative understanding of the scaling behavior for
multitask models. We choose multilingual neural machine
translation (MNMT) as the setup for this initial study. This
choice is motivated by several reasons: (1) MNMT has been
framed and studied as a multi-task optimization problem
extensively in the past (Dong et al., 2015; Luong et al.,
2015; Arivazhagan et al., 2019b; Wang et al., 2021); (2)
It provides a popular setup with mature benchmarks and
substantial literature on scaling (Lepikhin et al., 2020; Costajussà et al., 2022; Bapna et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2019);
(3) Moreover, recent results on scaling laws for single-task
MT models provide a natural starting point for our study
(Ghorbani et al., 2022; Bansal et al., 2022; Gordon et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022). (4) Finally, recent findings on the
optimization dynamics of MNMT models greatly simplify
our study by removing the need to examine the role of the
optimization algorithm in our results (Xin et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, scaling has emerged as a popular
and effective way to improve the performance of neural
networks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Lepikhin et al., 2020). Given the costs associated with
1

Google Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Instituto Superior Técnico. Correspondence to: Patrick Fernandes <pfernand@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

For our analysis, we train over 200 MNMT models (ranging

1

