Data-Efficient Contrastive Self-supervised Learning:
Most Beneficial Examples for Supervised Learning Contribute the Least

Siddharth Joshi 1 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Abstract

most essential subsets for supervised learning (Toneva et al.,
2019; Paul et al., 2021; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Mindermann et al., 2022; Sorscher et al., 2022; Swayamdipta
et al., 2020). However, as datasets grow larger, obtaining
high-quality labels for them becomes prohibitively expensive. As a result, there has been a surge in self-supervised
(SSL) pretraining on large un-labeled dataset (Chen et al.,
2020; Grill et al., 2020a; Chen & He, 2021; Zbontar et al.,
2021). Nevertheless, finding the most important data points
for SSL has remained an open question.

Self-supervised learning (SSL) learns highquality representations from large pools of unlabeled training data. As datasets grow larger, it
becomes crucial to identify the examples that contribute the most to learning such representations.
This enables efficient SSL by reducing the volume
of data required. Nevertheless, quantifying the
value of examples for SSL has remained an open
question. In this work, we address this problem
for the first time, by proving that examples that
contribute the most to contrastive SSL are those
that have the most similar augmentations to other
examples, in expectation. We provide rigorous
guarantees for the generalization performance of
contrastive learning on such subsets. Through extensive experiments, we show that we can safely
exclude 20% of examples from CIFAR100 and
40% from STL10 and TinyImageNet, without affecting downstream task performance. In general,
subsets selected by our method outperform random subsets by over 3% across these datasets. Interestingly, we also discover the subsets that contribute the most to contrastive learning are those
that contribute the least to supervised learning.1

Finding the examples that contribute the most to SSL is indeed very challenging. When labels are available, the value
of every example for learning can be quantified based on
its loss (or confidence of the prediction) or gradient norm.
Effectively, difficult-to-learn examples i.e. those with high
loss or large gradient norm during training are the ones that
contribute the most to minimizing the training loss. However, in the absence of labels, SSL methods cluster examples
based on their similarity to the other data points. Therefore,
the SSL loss and gradient of every example is tightly coupled with that of the other examples in the dataset. Hence,
dropping an example affects the loss and gradient of all the
other examples. This makes data selection inherently more
challenging for SSL as compared to supervised learning.
In this work, we address the above challenge for the first
time and find examples that provably contribute the most
to SSL. In particular, we focus on contrastive SSL which
learns representations by maximizing the alignment between
augmented views of the same examples and minimizing
the similarity between augmented views of different examples (Chen et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021; Oord et al.,
2018). We prove that examples that contribute the most
to contrastive learning are those that have the highest expected similarity between their augmented views and the
augmented views of other examples in their latent class.
Effectively, such examples pull different groups of examples in a class together and enable the contrastive loss to
maximally push away representations of examples in different classes. We show that such examples (1) ensure a high
alignment between augmented views of examples in every
class, and (2) preserve the centers of class representations
learned by contrastive learning on the full data. We leverage

1. Introduction
Large datasets power modern machine learning models.
However, a key question is: what data points are essential
for learning and whether more data will always yield better
performance? Answering this question is crucial as it can reduce the substantial costs of training on large datasets, boost
performance of the trained models and guide data collection.
This has motivated a body of recent research on finding the
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.. Correspondence to: Siddharth
Joshi <sjoshi804@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/bigml-cs-ucla/sas-dataefficient-contrastive-learning

1

