Bilevel Optimization with Coupled Decision-Dependent Distributions

Songtao Lu 1

Abstract

variable from the other level:
P:

Bilevel optimization has gained significant popularity in recent years due to its ability to
formulate various machine learning problems.
For instance, in meta-learning, the upper-level
(UL) problem offers a good initialization for the
lower-level (LL) model to facilitate adaptation.
However, the decision variables can impact
data features and outcomes, leading to the
phenomenon known as performativity. In this
work, we investigate the inclusion of decisiondependent distributions in bilevel optimization.
Specifically, we consider the scenarios where
the UL data distribution depends on the LL
optimization variable, and the LL data distribution also depends on the UL decision variable.
We first establish sufficient conditions for the
existence of performatively stable (PS) solutions
in this class of bilevel problems. Also, we
propose efficient stochastic algorithms to find
the PS point with theoretical convergence rate
analysis and discuss the theoretical optimality of
the obtained solution. Our theoretical analysis
is corroborated through a series of numerical experiments, wherein we evaluate the performance
of the bilevel performative prediction algorithms
alongside non-performative counterparts in the
context of meta strategic learning problems.

min

E

f (x, y ∗ (x); Z)

x

Z∼Dx (y ∗ (x))

s.t.

y ∗ (x) = arg min

E

ℓ(x, y; Z)

y Z∼Dy (x)

(1a)
(1b)

where x, y respectively denote the decision/optimization
variables at the upper-level (UL) and lower-level (LL) of
this problem, loss functions f (x, y ∗ (x); Z) and ℓ(x, y; Z)
are smooth, y ∗ (x) represents the optimal solution of the LL
problem given x, Dy (x) stands for the LL data distribution
depended on the UL variable x, and similarly Dx (y ∗ (x))
for the UL data distribution that is dependent on the LL loss
function through the optimal LL decision variable y ∗ (x).
Motivation of This Work. One of the most prominent machine learning models that can be formulated using bilevel
optimization is model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML)
(Finn et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2019).
MAML
has been successful in addressing the challenge of
data distribution shifts between seen and unseen tasks,
particularly in few-shot learning scenarios. In MAML, the
meta-learner at the UL explores invariant features such as
good initializations that can be utilized to handle unseen
tasks, while the individual learners at the LL focus on
fitting personalized data. However, in many real-world
problems that fall under the umbrella of PP, such as election
forecasts, financial markets, online advertising, and traffic
predictions, the decision variables can heavily influence the
data distribution (Perdomo et al., 2020). Hence, it becomes
crucial to incorporate decision-dependent distributions into
the framework of meta-learning, as both levels of the
optimization problem are tightly intertwined through their
mutual interaction. This motivates the inclusion of crosslevel dependence between decision variables and data
distributions in bilevel optimization.

1. Introduction

Major Challenges in Bilevel PP. In contrast to singlelevel PP problems, solving bilevel optimization problems
involves generating two sequences, each used for minimizing the loss function at its respective level. Due to
the interdependence between decision variables and data
distributions across levels, it is unclear whether changes in
the data-generating distribution occur in a competitive or
collaborative manner during the play of this performative
Stackelberg game.
Consequently, demonstrating the
convergence rate of the bilevel stochastic algorithm is

In this work, we consider the following class of bilevel
performative prediction (PP) problems, where the data
distribution at each level is dependent on the decision
1

IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown
Heights, New York 10598, USA. Correspondence to: Songtao Lu
<songtao@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

