Efficient Quantum Algorithms for Quantum Optimal Control

Xiantao Li 1 Chunhao Wang 2

Abstract

Gross, 2007), which uses first principle-based computer simulations to identify the desired control variable, has been an
important route toward this direction. QOC problems have
also emerged in recent quantum computing and quantum information technology. For example, QOC has recently been
shown to have remarkable connections and applications to
machine learning techniques using quantum circuits, including variational quantum algorithms (VQA) (Choquette et al.,
2021; Yang et al., 2017), quantum neural networks (Larocca
et al., 2021), and quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) (Farhi et al., 2014; Cerezo et al., 2021; Leng
et al., 2022). QOC is treated as a particular machine learning application in (Banchi & Crooks, 2021). One specific
application of QOC to quantum machine learning is the diagnostics of quantum barren plateau (Larocca et al., 2022).
In addition, solving the optimal control problems for quantum systems is a critical step for implementing quantum
computers.

In this paper, we present efficient quantum algorithms that are exponentially faster than classical algorithms for solving the quantum optimal
control problem. This problem involves finding
the control variable that maximizes a physical
quantity at time T , where the system is governed
by a time-dependent Schrödinger equation. This
type of control problem also has an intricate relation with machine learning. Our algorithms are
based on a time-dependent Hamiltonian simulation method and a fast gradient-estimation algorithm. We also provide a comprehensive error
analysis to quantify the total error from various
steps, such as the finite-dimensional representation of the control function, the discretization of
the Schrödinger equation, the numerical quadrature, and optimization. Our quantum algorithms
require fault-tolerant quantum computers.

The problem of controlling a quantum system can be formulated based on the time-dependent Schrödinger equation
(TDSE),

i∂t |ψ⟩ = H0 − u(t)µ |ψ⟩ , |ψ(0)⟩ = |ψ0 ⟩ ,
(1)

1. Introduction
Optimal control is an important application of machine
learning and optimization.Meanwhile, it has been demonstrated in recent works that important insights on deep learning can be obtained by interpreting the process of training a
deep neural network as a discretization of an optimal control
problem (E et al., 2019; He et al., 2016). In recent decades,
following the emergence of quantum computers, the optimal control of quantum systems has attracted considerable
attention. This is because quantum properties are largely
responsible for many of the recent developments in material
science and chemical engineering, and such properties are
best utilized with external controls. (Geppert et al., 2004;
Datta, 2005; McCreery et al., 2013). Quantum optimal
control (QOC) algorithms (Brif et al., 2010; Werschnik &

with an external control variable u(t) that enters the Hamiltonian through an operator µ. One example comes from
2
electron transport, where H0 = − ∇2 + V (x) and µ is the
dipole operator. To keep our discussions focused on the
quantum algorithms, we consider the case with a single
control. The treatment of multiple control variables and
non-unitary dynamics will be presented in separate works.
We assume the copies of the initial state |ψ0 ⟩ are given for
free, i.e., we have access to the unitary Uψ0 that prepares
|ψ0 ⟩ as Uψ0 |0⟩ = |ψ0 ⟩.
The goal of QOC with time duration T is to determine a control variable u(t) for t ∈ [0, T ], such that a physical quantity,
represented by a Hermitian operator O, is maximized in that

1

Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA.
Correspondence to: Xiantao Li <xiantao.li@psu.edu>, Chunhao
Wang <cwang@psu.edu>.

max J(u),

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Here α > 0 can be regarded as a regularization parameter imposing a soft constraint on the magnitude of the
control variable u(t). In the context of optimization, the

Z T
u(t)

J(u) := ⟨ψ(T )|O|ψ(T )⟩ − α

|u(t)|2 dt.

0

(2)

1

