Demonstration-free Autonomous Reinforcement Learning via
Implicit and Bidirectional Curriculum

Jigang Kim * 1 2 Daesol Cho * 1 2 H. Jin Kim 1 3

Abstract

uninterrupted interaction. The challenge of applying RL
in the real world often arises in robotics where the practitioner has to bridge the gap between the tools available
(episodic RL) and the non-episodic nature of real-world
learning. In most cases, a multitude of time-consuming and
costly external interventions such as human supervision,
task-specific scripted policies, and custom experimental setups are deployed to reset the environment after each trial
(Kumar et al., 2016; Ha et al., 2020; Nagabandi et al., 2020).
These challenges should be addressed from the algorithmic
level by developing RL agents that can learn autonomously
with minimal interventions.

While reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved
great success in acquiring complex skills solely
from environmental interactions, it assumes that
resets to the initial state are readily available
at the end of each episode. Such an assumption hinders the autonomous learning of embodied agents due to the time-consuming and cumbersome workarounds for resetting in the physical world. Hence, there has been a growing interest in autonomous RL (ARL) methods that
are capable of learning from non-episodic interactions. However, existing works on ARL
are limited by their reliance on prior data and
are unable to learn in environments where taskrelevant interactions are sparse. In contrast, we
propose a demonstration-free ARL algorithm via
Implicit and Bi-directional Curriculum (IBC).
With an auxiliary agent that is conditionally activated upon learning progress and a bidirectional
goal curriculum based on optimal transport, our
method outperforms previous methods, even the
ones that leverage demonstrations.

Previous works on RL agents in the real world primarily
involve a mechanism to handle resets and may leverage
prior data along with additional consideration for reward
assignment. Reset mechanisms that prevent interventions by
requesting a reset when necessary (Eysenbach et al., 2017;
Kim et al., 2022) are only viable if manual resets are readily
available. Under the non-episodic autonomous RL (ARL)
framework (Sharma et al., 2021b), however, manual resets
are not available on-demand and the agent must learn from
continual interactions with no interventions. To overcome
the challenge of the non-episodic setting, many previous
methods rely on some form of prior data with varying degrees of privilege, ranging from the expert or sub-optimal
trajectories (Sharma et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) to examples of states of interest (Zhu et al., 2020). However, a truly
autonomous agent should be able to learn from scratch without external interventions and prior data. To that end, we
propose an ARL algorithm that can train a goal-conditioned
RL policy without demonstrations under the non-episodic,
sparse reward setting.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has enabled interactive agents
to learn complex skills in various domains with little to no
prior knowledge (Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Baker et al.,
2019; Vinyals et al., 2019; Degrave et al., 2022). However, existing algorithms assume an episodic setting where
each trial begins from a state sampled from some fixed initial state distribution, and they are not designed to learn
autonomously in the real world which involves continual,

It has been well established that existing RL algorithms
do not perform well in the non-episodic setting (Co-Reyes
et al., 2020) since the agent is unable to repeatedly practice
for the evaluation task. A common framework for extending
conventional RL to the non-episodic setting is to alternate
between multiple objectives within one continual interaction, effectively dividing it into multiple episodes. Typically, the forward episode attempts the original objective
and the backward episode follows an auxiliary objective
that provides an anchor for the forward episode with a good

*
Equal contribution , order decided by a coin toss. 1 Seoul
National University 2 Artificial Intelligence Institute of Seoul
National University (AIIS) 3 Automation and Systems Research Institute (ASRI). Correspondence to: Jigang Kim
<jgkim2020@snu.ac.kr>, Daesol Cho <dscho1234@snu.ac.kr>,
H. Jin Kim <hjinkim@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

