Under-Counted Tensor Completion with Neural Incorporation of Attributes

Shahana Ibrahim 1 Xiao Fu 1 Rebecca Hutchinson 1 Eugene Seo 2

Abstract

significantly—aspects such as recoverability, sample complexity, optimal algorithm design were extensively studied
under various tensor models, e.g., Tucker decomposition
(Mu et al., 2014), canonical polyadic decomposition (CPD)
(Kanatsoulis et al., 2020; Sørensen & De Lathauwer, 2019),
and block-term decomposition (BTD) (Zhang et al., 2020a;
Ding et al., 2020). The vast majority of classic TC methods were proposed for handling real-valued data, but TC
algorithms designed for integer data, e.g., binary data (Ghadermarzy et al., 2018) and count data (Chi & Kolda, 2012),
also exist. This is because such data often arise in real-world
problems, e.g., movie recommendation (Karatzoglou et al.,
2010), knowledge graph completion (Balazevic et al., 2019),
and social network analysis (Kashima et al., 2009).

Systematic under-counting effects are observed
in data collected across many disciplines, e.g.,
epidemiology and ecology. Under-counted tensor completion (UC-TC) is well-motivated for
many data analytics tasks, e.g., inferring the case
numbers of infectious diseases at unobserved locations from under-counted case numbers in neighboring regions. However, existing methods for
similar problems often lack supports in theory,
making it hard to understand the underlying principles and conditions beyond empirical successes.
In this work, a low-rank Poisson tensor model
with an expressive unknown nonlinear side information extractor is proposed for under-counted
multi-aspect data. A joint low-rank tensor completion and neural network learning algorithm is
designed to recover the model. Moreover, the
UC-TC formulation is supported by theoretical
analysis showing that the fully counted entries of
the tensor and each entry’s under-counting probability can be provably recovered from partial
observations—under reasonable conditions. To
our best knowledge, the result is the first to offer theoretical supports for under-counted multiaspect data completion. Simulations and real-data
experiments corroborate the theoretical claims.

However, less attention has been paid to integer data TC
problems where the observed entries suffer from systematical under-counting—but (strong) under-counting effects
are encountered in many disciplines, e.g., epidemiology and
ecology. In epidemiology, the cases of an infectious disease
(e.g., COVID-19) may be under-counted due to the existence
of symptom-free patients and the lack of testing (Schneider, 2020). In ecology, when an observer sees a species
at a certain location, the observer likely just observes a
small portion of this species’ population (MacKenzie et al.,
2006; Tylianakis et al., 2010). Hence, taking under-counting
effects into consideration for TC is meaningful in these domains. For example, recovering the “true” (fully counted)
number of COVID-19 cases at a certain location and time
helps estimate/understand the infection situation. The task
of under-counted tensor completion (UC-TC) is naturally
more challenging than the conventional (integer data) TC,
as it implicitly involves an extra task of compensating the
unknown under-counting effect.

1. Introduction
Tensor completion (TC) has been a workhorse for a large
variety of data analytics tasks, e.g., image/video inpainting (Liu et al., 2013), hyperspectral denoising (Wang et al.,
2018), sampling and recovery in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Kanatsoulis et al., 2020), and multimodal data
mining (Papalexakis et al., 2017)—just to name a few. In
the past decade, theory and methods of TC progressed

1.1. Prior Work and Challenges
In the literature, there exist some limited efforts towards
dealing with under-counted data completion/prediction. For
example, the line of work for user exposure matrix completion considered link prediction under undetected links
and unobserved links simultaneously (Liang et al., 2016).
The work on “zero-inflated” matrix/tensor factorization and
related models (Billio et al., 2022; Simchowitz, 2013; Durif et al., 2019) considered a similar scenario, where the
datasets’ observed entries are zeros with a certain non-zero

1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA 2 Department of
Applied Mathematics, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912,
USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Fu <xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

