VectorMapNet: End-to-end Vectorized HD Map Learning

Yicheng Liu 1 2 Tianyuan Yuan 2 Yue Wang 3 Yilun Wang 4 Hang Zhao 2 1

Abstract

et al., 2020). However, these methods face scalability issues
due to their heavy reliance on human labor for annotating
HD maps. Additionally, they necessitate precise localization
of the ego-vehicle to derive local maps from the global one,
a process that could introduce meter-level errors.

Autonomous driving systems require HighDefinition (HD) semantic maps to navigate
around urban roads. Existing solutions approach
the semantic mapping problem by offline manual
annotation, which suffers from serious scalability
issues. Recent learning-based methods produce
dense rasterized segmentation predictions to construct maps. However, these predictions do not
include instance information of individual map
elements and require heuristic post-processing
to obtain vectorized maps. To tackle these challenges, we introduce an end-to-end vectorized
HD map learning pipeline, termed VectorMapNet. VectorMapNet takes onboard sensor observations and predicts a sparse set of polylines in
the bird’s-eye view. This pipeline can explicitly model the spatial relation between map elements and generate vectorized maps that are
friendly to downstream autonomous driving tasks.
Extensive experiments show that VectorMapNet
achieve strong map learning performance on both
nuScenes and Argoverse2 dataset, surpassing previous state-of-the-art methods by 14.2 mAP and
14.6mAP. Qualitatively, VectorMapNet is capable
of generating comprehensive maps and capturing fine-grained details of road geometry. To the
best of our knowledge, VectorMapNet is the first
work designed towards end-to-end vectorized map
learning from onboard observations.

In contrast, our focus lies in developing a learning-based
approach for online HD semantic map learning. The aim is
to use onboard sensors, including LiDARs and cameras, to
estimate map elements on-the-fly. This methodology avoids
the need for localization, allowing for prompt updates. Furthermore, learning-based methods can generate uncertainty
or confidence indicators that downstream modules, such as
motion forecasting and planning, can utilize to offset imperfect perception. These methods can leverage increasing
data and model size, promptly reflect current conditions,
and generalize from annotated maps to under-annotated or
even non-annotated areas (please refer to Figure 6).
Most of HD semantic map learning methods (Li et al., 2021;
Philion & Fidler, 2020; Roddick & Cipolla, 2020; Zhou &
Krähenbühl, 2022) consider the task as a semantic segmentation problem in bird’s-eye view (BEV), which rasterizes
map elements into pixels and assigns each pixel with a
class label. This formulation makes it straightforward to
leverage fully convolutional networks. However, rasterized
maps are not an ideal map representation for autonomous
driving, for three reasons. First, rasterized maps lack instance information necessary to distinguish map elements
with the same class label but different semantics, e.g. left
boundary and right boundary. Second, it is hard to enforce
spatial consistency within the predicted rasterized maps,
e.g. nearby pixels might have contradicted semantics or geometries. Third, 2D rasterized maps are incompatible with
most autonomous driving systems which consume instancelevel 2D/3D vectorized maps for motion forecasting and
planning.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving systems require an understanding of
map elements on the road, including lanes, pedestrian crossing, and traffic signs, to navigate around the world. Such
map elements are typically provided by pre-annotated HighDefinition (HD) semantic maps in existing pipelines (Rong

To alleviate these issues and produce vectorized outputs,
HDMapNet (Li et al., 2021) generates semantic, instance,
and directional maps and vectorizes these three maps
with a hand-designed post-processing algorithm. However,
HDMapNet still relies on the rasterized map predictions,
and its heuristic post-processing step restricts the model’s
scalability and performance.

1
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 2 Tsinghua University 3 MIT 4 Li Auto.
Correspondence to: Hang Zhao <ZhaoHang0124@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose an end-to-end vectorized HD
1

