FusionRetro: Molecule Representation Fusion via In-Context Learning for
Retrosynthetic Planning

Songtao Liu 1 Zhengkai Tu * 2 Minkai Xu * 3 Zuobai Zhang * 4 5
Lu Lin 1 Rex Ying 6 Jian Tang 4 7 8 Peilin Zhao 9 Dinghao Wu 1

Abstract

100

Top-5 Accuracy & Search Success Rate (%)

Retrosynthetic planning aims to devise a complete multi-step synthetic route from starting materials to a target molecule. Current strategies
use a decoupled approach of single-step retrosynthesis models and search algorithms, taking only
the product as the input to predict the reactants
for each planning step and ignoring valuable context information along the synthetic route. In this
work, we propose a novel framework that utilizes
context information for improved retrosynthetic
planning. We view synthetic routes as reaction
graphs and propose to incorporate context through
three principled steps: encode molecules into embeddings, aggregate information over routes, and
readout to predict reactants. Our approach is
the first attempt to utilize in-context learning for
retrosynthesis prediction in retrosynthetic planning. The entire framework can be efficiently
optimized in an end-to-end fashion and produce
more practical and accurate predictions. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that by fusing in the context information over routes, our
model significantly improves the performance of
retrosynthetic planning over baselines that are
not context-aware, especially for long synthetic
routes. Code is available at https://github.
com/SongtaoLiu0823/FusionRetro.

USPTO
Retrosynthesis Prediction
Retrosynthetic Planning Search

94.5

92.9

90

85.0
80

76.0
69.0

70

60

50

60.5

GraphRetro

Retrosim

Retrosynthesis Model

Neuralsym

Figure 1. Performance of retrosynthesis prediction and multi-step
planning on USPTO dataset. We report the search success rate of
retrosynthesis models combined with Retro* at the limit of 500
calls and 5 expansions. The search success rate is much higher
than the accuracy of the top-5 retrosynthesis prediction.

The goal of retrosynthetic planning is to find a viable set of
starting materials and a sequence of reactions, that lead to
a given target molecule. It is crucial for process chemistry,
which aims to design efficient routes to synthesize desired
target products at a low cost, as well as for materials and
molecule discoveries that are contingent on the targets being
synthesizable. In the past few years, with the advancement
in deep learning, there has been increasing interest in applying machine learning to retrosynthetic planning, a sub-topic
of Computer-Aided Synthesis Planning (CASP).

1. Introduction

Existing strategies (Segler et al., 2018; Kishimoto et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020; Schwaller et al.,
2020; Kim et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022) generally model retrosynthetic planning as a search problem. In
a typical formulation, the synthetic route is treated as a tree
or a graph, and the molecules as nodes. Starting from the
target as the root node, these approaches employ some (possibly learned) search algorithms to select the most promising
node to expand, and then expand it into reaction precursors
with a one-step retrosynthesis model, until a viable route is
found in which all the leaf nodes are commercially available.

Retrosynthetic planning is a fundamental problem in organic chemistry (Coley et al., 2018; Genheden et al., 2020).
*

1
Equal contribution
Pennsylvania State University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 Stanford University 4 Mila - Québec AI Institute 5 Université de Montréal 6 Yale
University 7 HEC Montréal 8 CIFAR AI Chair 9 Tencent AI Lab.
Correspondence to: Songtao Liu <skl5761@psu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

