Efficient Training of Language Models using Few-Shot Learning

Sashank J. Reddi 1 Sobhan Miryoosefi 1 Stefani Karp 1 2 Shankar Krishnan 1 Satyen Kale 1 Seungyeon Kim 1
Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract

ing with highly efficient optimizers like SGD (or its adaptive variants) becomes computationally intractable, making
these large models challenging and resource-intensive to
train. On the other hand, when trained with these objectives, a particularly intriguing property of these models
emerges — their ability to adapt to a new (related) task
using very few samples from the task (often referred to
as few-shot learning in the literature). For instance, the
BERT model achieves very competitive performance on
challenging question-answering datasets like SQuaD with
very few samples (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020).
Furthermore, such few-shot learning performance has been
demonstrated on a variety of NLP and mathematics reasoning tasks. Thus, improving the training efficiency of these
models is of paramount importance to reap these benefits.

Large deep learning models have achieved stateof-the-art performance across various natural
language processing (NLP) tasks and demonstrated remarkable few-shot learning performance.
However, training them is often challenging and
resource-intensive. In this paper, we study an efficient approach to train language models using
few-shot learners. We show that, by leveraging
the fast learning nature of few-shot learners, one
can train language models efficiently in a stagewise manner. Our main insight is that stacking a
good few-shot learner on a good small language
model provides a good initializer for a larger language model. Using this insight and building
upon progressive stacking approaches, we develop novel approaches for training such networks
in a stagewise manner. Furthermore, we also provide a theoretical framework and accompanying
empirical studies to support our insights, thereby
creating a theoretical foundation for progressive
stacking. Finally, we provide empirical results to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
reducing the training time of few-shot learners.

Many training speedups achieved thus far came about by
introducing new optimizers, including Adam, Adafactor,
Shampoo, and LAMB (Kingma & Ba, 2015; Shazeer &
Stern, 2018; Anil et al., 2020; You et al., 2020). Recently, an
orthogonal approach was proposed to improve the training
efficiency of BERT models (Gong et al., 2019). The key
idea of this approach is to train the BERT model in stages:
begin training with a shallow BERT model and, in each
stage, double the model’s depth by “stacking” it on top of
itself (i.e., copying over the existing model’s parameters into
newly-created Transformer layers). The final stage involves
training the whole BERT model (but for fewer steps than
one otherwise would). Surprisingly, this simple algorithm,
called progressive stacking, improves the training efficiency
of BERT.

1. Introduction
Large neural networks have completely revolutionized the
fields of computer vision and natural language processing.
(e.g. BERT, T5, GPT3) (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al.,
2020; Brown et al., 2020). These models have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide variety of
tasks. These models are typically trained with a language
modeling objective like masked language modeling (e.g.
BERT) or span-corruption (e.g. T5) using adaptive variants
of SGD. However, in such large-scale regimes, even train-

While training neural networks in parts has been extensively
studied in the deep learning literature (e.g. greedy layerwise
training of deep belief networks), such stacking approaches
have not been studied earlier. Gong et al. (2019) primarily motivates progressive stacking by the similarity of the
distributions of the attention scores across layers. One shortcoming of progressive stacking, however, is that the network
size grows exponentially. Due to this, often the majority
of the training time is concentrated toward the final stage
of training, when the network is largest and thus takes the
longest to train. Furthermore, we argue that the similarity
of the attention scores does not fully explain the efficiency
gains due to stacking. Inspired by progressive stacking,

1
Google Research, NY, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. Correspondence to: Sashank J.
Reddi <sashank@google.com>, Sobhan Miryoosefi <miryoosefi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

