Structure-informed Language Models Are Protein Designers

Zaixiang Zheng * 1 Yifan Deng * 2 1 Dongyu Xue 1 Yi Zhou 1 Fei Ye 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

tures, namely structure-based protein (sequence) design,
is one of the most important problems in bio-engineering.
Significant progress has been made by several latest deep
generative model-based approaches (Ingraham et al., 2019;
Jing et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2022; Dauparas et al., 2022; Gao
et al., 2022). These approaches formulate structure-based
protein design as an end-to-end graph-to-sequence learning
problem, where an encoder-decoder model Mθ : X → S is
tasked with predicting protein sequence S given a protein
backbone structure X . Typically, supervised learning is performed on such models given a certain amount of protein
structure-sequence pair data.

This paper demonstrates that language models
are strong structure-based protein designers. We
present LM-D ESIGN, a generic approach to reprogramming sequence-based protein language models (pLMs), that have learned massive sequential
evolutionary knowledge from the universe of natural protein sequences, to acquire an immediate
capability to design preferable protein sequences
for given folds. We conduct a structural surgery
on pLMs, where a lightweight structural adapter
is implanted into pLMs and endows it with structural awareness. During inference, iterative refinement is performed to effectively optimize the generated protein sequences. Experiments show that
LM-D ESIGN improves the state-of-the-art results
by a large margin, leading to 4% to 12% accuracy
gains in sequence recovery (e.g., 55.65%/56.63%
on CATH 4.2/4.3 single-chain benchmarks, and
>60% when designing protein complexes). We
provide extensive and in-depth analyses, which
verify that LM-D ESIGN can (1) indeed leverage
both structural and sequential knowledge to accurately handle structurally non-deterministic regions, (2) benefit from scaling data and model
size, and (3) generalize to other proteins (e.g.,
antibodies and de novo proteins).

Albeit deep generative models showing revolutionized capability in this field, we argue that the current neural structurebased protein design approaches are not necessarily at their
best in designing more plausible proteins as two major obstacles remain and hinder further progress:
(i) Limited experimentally determined protein structure data. For example, the known protein structures in the commonly-used CATH (Orengo et al.,
1997) dataset are multiple orders of magnitude smaller
(< 0.1%) than the sequence data in the UniRef (Suzek
et al., 2015) sequence database (Fig. 1D-E). As
structure-based protein design is essentially a conditional sequence learning problem, the protein sequence
distribution is crucial yet remains elusive for generally data-hungry generative models due to limited data.
Therefore, they fail to holistically explore the protein
sequence space and tend to yield sub-optimal sequence
predictions for folds. Despite being partly remedied by
data-augmented approach (Hsu et al., 2022), additional
predicted structure data and trainable model parameters
at scale demand compute and storage overheads.
(ii) Challenge of structurally non-deterministic regions.
From a biological perspective, protein structures are
sometimes not sufficiently informative, especially for
those flexible regions such as loops and exposed surfaces (Towse & Daggett, 2012). In these regions,
residue identities can, hypothetically, be less correlated
with the structural context while sequential knowledge
is way more useful yet largely neglected. We verified
this hypothesis and found that existing purely structurebased approaches were prone to produce functionally
invalid sequences for these regions (Fig. 1A-B).

1. Introduction
Proteins are 3D-folded linear chains of amino acids that
govern biological functions such as transcription, translation,
signaling, and cell cycle control. Recently, the promise of
learning to understand and design proteins from data via
generative deep learning has led to an ongoing paradigm
shift apart from the long-established physics-based methods.
Designing protein sequences that fold into desired struc*

Equal contribution 1 ByteDance Research 2 Dept. of Computer
Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison (work was done during Yifan’s internship at ByteDance Research). Correspondence
to: Zaixiang Zheng <zhengzaixiang@bytedance.com>, Fei Ye
<yefei.joyce@bytedance.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

