Supervised Metric Learning to Rank for Retrieval via
Contextual Similarity Optimization

Christopher Liao 1 Theodoros Tsiligkaridis 2 Brian Kulis 1

Abstract
There is extensive interest in metric learning
methods for image retrieval. Many metric
learning loss functions focus on learning a
correct ranking of training samples, but strongly
overfit semantically inconsistent labels and
require a large amount of data. To address these
shortcomings, we propose a new metric learning
method, called contextual loss, which optimizes
contextual similarity in addition to cosine
similarity. Our contextual loss implicitly enforces
semantic consistency among neighbors while
converging to the correct ranking. We empirically
show that the proposed loss is more robust to
label noise, and is less prone to overfitting even
when a large portion of train data is withheld.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method achieves a new state-of-the-art across
four image retrieval benchmarks and multiple
different evaluation settings. Code is available

Figure 1. Examples of metric learning labels which are inconsistent
with semantic information from two standard benchmarks: CUB
(top) and SOP (bottom). These labels are caused by a visual feature
which is not present or barely visible.

supervision, and train an embedding space where images
with the same label are closer together than images with
different labels. However, binary supervision is unreliable,
since it does not capture the complexity of relationships in
the data. Furthermore, methods which overly rely on the
binary supervision can be brittle in the presence of noise,
since the supervision is either correct or incorrect. Multilabel datasets (Ranjan et al., 2015) mitigate this problem, but
can be expensive to procure, so developing a metric learning
method that is robust to label noise and generalizable to test
data is a challenging yet important problem.

at:
https://github.com/Chris210634/
metric-learning-using-contextualsimilarity

1. Introduction

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston
University 2 MIT Lincoln Laboratory.
Correspondence to:
Christopher Liao <cliao25@bu.edu>, Theodoros Tsiligkaridis
<ttsili@ll.mit.edu>, Brian Kulis <bkulis@bu.edu>.

Existing image retrieval approaches fall into two main categories: classification and pairwise ranking losses. Classification losses optimize a classifier on top of the embedding layer and discard the classifier at the end of training. Pairwise ranking losses train the embedding layer
directly by pulling together pairs of samples with the same
label and pushing apart pairs of samples with different labels. Pairwise ranking methods include losses which explicitly optimize a ranking metric such as AP (average precision) surrogates: Fast-AP (Cakir et al., 2019), Smooth-AP
(Brown et al., 2020), Blackbox AP (Rolı́nek et al., 2020)
and Roadmap (Ramzi et al., 2021). They also include the
standard contrastive, triplet and multi-similarity (MS) losses
(Wang et al., 2019).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Empirically, classification methods, such as proxy anchor
(Kim et al., 2020), proxy NCA (Teh et al., 2020), and HIST
(Lim et al., 2022) perform well on small benchmark datasets,

Image retrieval refers to learning a ranking of instances from
a gallery set relative to a query image such that the highest
ranked instances are the most relevant to the query. Several
real-world applications are powered by this technology, such
as person re-identification (Ye et al., 2021), face recognition
(Guillaumin et al., 2009), vehicle re-identification (Chu
et al., 2019), landmark retrieval (Weyand et al., 2020), and
product retrieval (Cakir et al., 2019). Current metric learning
techniques often use a dataset with single discrete labels for

1

