Scalable Safe Policy Improvement via Monte Carlo Tree Search

Alberto Castellini 1 Federico Bianchi * 1 Edoardo Zorzi * 1 2
Thiago D. Simão 3 Alessandro Farinelli 1 Matthijs T. J. Spaan 4

Abstract

Russell & Norvig, 2020) where the agent is provided with
a baseline policy and data is collected running this policy
in the real environment. The goal of SPI is to use this data
and the baseline policy to compute a new policy with better
performance than the baseline. The method is considered
safe if it is guaranteed to return an improved policy with
high probability.

Algorithms for safely improving policies are
important to deploy reinforcement learning approaches in real-world scenarios. In this work, we
propose an algorithm, called MCTS-SPIBB, that
computes safe policy improvement online using
a Monte Carlo Tree Search based strategy. We
theoretically prove that the policy generated by
MCTS-SPIBB converges, as the number of simulations grows, to the optimal safely improved policy generated by Safe Policy Improvement with
Baseline Bootstrapping (SPIBB), a popular algorithm based on policy iteration. Moreover, our
empirical analysis performed on three standard
benchmark domains shows that MCTS-SPIBB
scales to significantly larger problems than SPIBB
because it computes the policy online and locally,
i.e., only in the states actually visited by the agent.

One of the most popular algorithms for SPI is Safe Policy
Improvement with Baseline Bootstrapping (SPIBB; Laroche
et al., 2019). It is an extension of policy iteration which computes a policy that safely improves a baseline given a dataset
of trajectories produced by executing such baseline in the
environment. SPIBB considers a percentile criterion that
optimizes the policy in the worst-case scenario (Petrik et al.,
2016). The safe improvement is achieved by bootstrapping
the policy trained from data with the baseline policy in the
state-action pairs not executed enough times in the available trajectories. In practice, SPIBB searches the improved
policy in the constrained space of policies that are equal to
the baseline in the state-action pairs not observed enough
times in the dataset of trajectories (SPIBB constraint). This
strategy is proven to produce a safe improvement. SPIBB’s
derivation from policy iteration, however, limits its applicability to small domains, since the running time of this
algorithm depends cubically (if the Bellman equation is
solved by matrix inversion) or quadratically (if it is solved
by dynamic programming) on the size of the state space
(Sutton & Barto, 2018). We investigate how to develop SPI
algorithms for large problems.

1. Introduction
Safety is a paramount requirement for the deployment of
reinforcement learning (RL; Sutton & Barto, 2018). In environments where humans interact with robots or other kinds
of autonomous agents (e.g., autonomous cars, drones, or industrial plants) safety, robustness, and reliability of control
policies are crucial issues. Safe RL investigates how these
issues can be addressed by learning policies that maximize
expected return while ensuring minimal performance level
or respecting safety constraints during learning (Garcı́a &
Fernández, 2015). In this work, we focus on Safe Policy
Improvement (SPI; Thomas et al., 2015; Petrik et al., 2016)
for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs; Puterman, 2014;

Several approaches have been proposed to scale reinforcement learning to large state spaces (Kearns et al., 2002).
Among the most promising techniques, there is Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS; Coulom, 2007; Browne et al., 2012),
an online sampling-based lookahead-search method that efficiently computes policies converging to optimality and having a small error probability if stopped before convergence.
In MCTS, Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees (UCT;
Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006) is used as an action selection
strategy to deal with the exploration-exploitation dilemma.
UCT extends the Upper Confidence Bound algorithm (UCB;
Auer et al., 2002), originally defined for multi-armed bandit
problems. The per-state running time of MCTS has no dependence on the number of states but only on the number of

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Verona, Italy 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland 3 Department of
Software Science, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
4
Department of Software Technology, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Alberto Castellini
<alberto.castellini@univr.it>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

