Grounding Language Models to Images for Multimodal Inputs and Outputs

Jing Yu Koh 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Daniel Fried 1

Abstract
We propose an efficient method to ground pretrained text-only language models to the visual
domain, enabling them to process arbitrarily interleaved image-and-text data, and generate text
interleaved with retrieved images. Our method
leverages the abilities of language models learnt
from large scale text-only pretraining, such as
in-context learning and free-form text generation.
We keep the language model frozen, and finetune input and output linear layers to enable crossmodality interactions. This allows our model to
process arbitrarily interleaved image-and-text inputs, and generate free-form text interleaved with
retrieved images. We achieve strong zero-shot
performance on grounded tasks such as contextual image retrieval and multimodal dialogue, and
showcase compelling interactive abilities. Our
approach works with any off-the-shelf language
model and paves the way towards an effective,
general solution for leveraging pretrained language models in visually grounded settings.

What is this bird?
This is a male song sparrow (Passer domesticus)
in a feeder. The bird is eating seeds.
What other birds can this feeder attract?
This feeder can attract many types of birds. The
birds that can eat the seeds include the song
sparrow, the bluebird, the titmouse, the
black-headed hummingbird and the goldﬁnch.
Show me pictures of some of these birds.
Here are pictures of some of the birds that
can eat the seeds that this feeder attracts.

1. Introduction
Trained at massive scale on large text corpora, large language models (LLMs) are able to demonstrate compelling
abilities such as generating human-like dialogue and answering complex questions. While undeniably impressive, most
state-of-the-art LLMs are trained on text-only data scraped
from the Internet. They are not exposed to rich visual cues,
and are often unable to learn concepts grounded in the real
world. Consequently, most existing language models exhibit limitations on tasks that involve visual reasoning and
grounding, and they are also incapable of producing images.

Figure 1. Our method grounds a language model to the visual
domain, enabling it to process arbitrarily interleaved image-text
inputs and generate coherent text outputs interleaved with relevant
retrieved images. Speech bubbles in green are model generated,
while grey bubbles are input prompts.

the capabilities of a frozen LLM for multimodal (image
and text) input and output. Our approach equips text-only
models with exciting new vision-and-language capabilities
such as multimodal dialogue, generation, and contextual
image retrieval from conversations (Fig. 1 and Fig. 3).

In this paper, we show that we are able to efficiently leverage

We propose a method to bootstrap a frozen language model
for processing and outputting arbitrarily interleaved multimodal data. We start from a frozen pretrained LLM, and
a frozen pretrained visual encoder, and train with a multitask objective for (1) image captioning (learning to process
interleaved multimodal inputs) and (2) image-text retrieval

1

Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Jing Yu Koh
<jingyuk@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

