Linear CNNs Discover the Statistical Structure of the Dataset
Using Only the Most Dominant Frequencies

Hannah Pinson 1 Joerie Lenaerts 1 Vincent Ginis 1 2

Abstract

to cats than to cars. A general theory on how the implicit
structure in the network arises and how it depends on the
structure of the dataset has yet to be developed. Here we
derive such a theory for the specific case of two-layer, linear
CNNs, and we provide experiments that show how our insights relate to the evolution of learning in deep, non-linear
CNNs. Our approach is inspired by previous work on the
learning dynamics in linear fully connected neural networks
(FCNN) (Saxe et al., 2014; 2019), but we uncover the role
of convolutions and show how they fundamentally alter the
internal dynamics of learning. We start by discussing the
two involved structures in terms of singular value decompositions (SVD): on the one hand the SVD of the input-output
correlation matrix, representing the statistical dataset structure (Sec. 2.1); and the SVD of the convolutional network
structure on the other hand (Sec. 2.2). We subsequently consider the equations of gradient descent in the slow learning
regime, yielding a set of differential equations (Sec. 2.3).
These equations describe the evolution of the implicit network structure, given the statistical dataset structure. Our
analysis reveals that the convolutional network structure
gives rise to additional factors in those gradient descent
equations: these factors represent the interplay between the
singular vectors associated to the dataset and those associated to the convolutional network (Sec. 2.4). This interplay
changes the speed of discovery of the different parts of
the dataset structure, i.e., the singular vectors representing
broader to finer distinctions between classes, with respect
to the speed of discovery in a FCNN (Sec. 3). Internally,
this interplay also leads to a dominant frequency bias: only
the dominant frequency components of each singular vector
associated to the dataset are used by the CNN (Sec. 4).
Experiments with more general datasets confirm the overall dynamics of learning and the existence of the dominant
frequency bias (Sec. 5). Finally, we show how our theory
relates to deep, non-linear CNNs used in practice (Sec. 6).
Our results can be put in the context of the implicit regularisation resulting from training with gradient descent (Du
et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Gidel et al., 2019; Advani
et al., 2020; Satpathi & Srikant, 2021). In (Saxe et al.,
2014; 2019) the authors show that the structure of the final weights of linear FCNNs reflect the dataset structure,
at least when starting from random initial conditions and

We here present a stepping stone towards a deeper
understanding of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) in the form of a theory of learning in
linear CNNs. Through analyzing the gradient descent equations, we discover that the evolution
of the network during training is determined by
the interplay between the dataset structure and the
convolutional network structure. We show that linear CNNs discover the statistical structure of the
dataset with non-linear, ordered, stage-like transitions, and that the speed of discovery changes
depending on the relationship between the dataset
and the convolutional network structure. Moreover, we find that this interplay lies at the heart
of what we call the “dominant frequency bias”,
where linear CNNs arrive at these discoveries using only the dominant frequencies of the different
structural parts present in the dataset. We furthermore provide experiments that show how our
theory relates to deep, non-linear CNNs used in
practice. Our findings shed new light on the inner working of CNNs, and can help explain their
shortcut learning and their tendency to rely on
texture instead of shape.

In addition to a neural network’s pre-defined architecture,
the parameters of the network obtain an implicit structure
during training. For example, it has been shown that weight
matrices can exhibit structural patterns, such as clusters and
branches (Voss et al., 2021; Casper et al., 2022). On the
other hand, the input dataset also has an implicit structure
arising from patterns and relationships between the samples.
E.g., in a classification task, dogs are more visually similar
1

Data Lab/Applied Physics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussel, Belgium 2 Harvard John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, 29 Oxford
Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. Correspondence
to: Hannah Pinson <hannah.pinson@vub.be>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

