Coordinated Dynamic Bidding in Repeated Second-Price Auctions with Budgets

Yurong Chen * 1 Qian Wang * 1 Zhijian Duan 1 Haoran Sun 2 Zhaohua Chen 1 Xiang Yan 3 Xiaotie Deng 1 4

Abstract

auctions are confronted with an online decision problem.
That is, they could not know the values of incoming queries,
but have to decide their bids based on historical information
to maximize their accumulated utilities.

In online ad markets, a rising number of advertisers are employing bidding agencies to participate
in ad auctions. These agencies are specialized
in designing online algorithms and bidding on
behalf of their clients. Typically, an agency usually has information on multiple advertisers, so
she can potentially coordinate bids to help her
clients achieve higher utilities than those under
independent bidding. In this paper, we study coordinated online bidding algorithms in repeated
second-price auctions with budgets. We propose
algorithms that guarantee every client a higher
utility than the best she can get under independent
bidding. We show that these algorithms achieve
maximal coalition welfare and discuss bidders’
incentives to misreport their budgets, in symmetric cases. Our proofs combine the techniques of
online learning and equilibrium analysis, overcoming the difficulty of competing with a multidimensional benchmark. The performance of our
algorithms is further evaluated by experiments
on both synthetic and real data. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to consider bidder coordination in online repeated auctions with
constraints.

Recently, more and more advertisers are delegating their bidding tasks to specialized market agencies (Decarolis et al.,
2020). Advertisers only need to report their objectives and
constraints within a given number of rounds. Typically, an
advertiser aims to maximize her total utility subject to a
budget constraint that limits her total payment. With the
requests received, these agencies will design corresponding online bidding algorithms and bid on behalf of these
advertisers. A bidding agency usually has information of all
her clients, which leaves her a chance to coordinate bids to
improve every client’s utility.
However, most existing online bidding algorithms focus on
bidding for one bidder in the campaign (Han et al., 2020;
Golrezaei et al., 2021; Balseiro et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2022; Feng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). The fundamental
question of bidder coordination in online settings remains
unanswered: can we design a coordinated online bidding
strategy, such that each client advertiser enjoys a higher
utility compared to the best they can get under independent
bidding?
In this paper, we study bidder coordination in repeated
second-price auctions with budgets. The above question
can be modeled as an online multi-objective optimization:
to show that an algorithm has the desired performance, one
needs to compare each bidder’s utility with her corresponding benchmark utility. The main difficulty, compared to the
problem of designing individual online bidding algorithms,
is how we deal with the interplay of bidders in dynamic
repeated settings. Since auctions are multi-player games, a
bidder’s utility is influenced by others’ bids.

1. Introduction
Online advertising has been the main source of revenue for
important Internet companies (IAB, 2022). A transaction
in the market usually goes as follows: upon the arrival of
an ad query, an auction is held by the advertising platform
among all advertisers, and the winner gets the opportunity to
display her ad. Thus, advertisers engaging in such repeated

Indeed, one way to overcome the problem is to assume that
members who gain more than their respective benchmark
utility are able to compensate other members with money.
In this way, optimizing the welfare of the whole coalition is
sufficient (Bachrach et al., 2011; Allouah & Besbes, 2017).
However, we argue that monetary transfer is unrealistic in
the ad auction scenario. In reality, advertisers’ first goal
is usually to enlarge the influence of their products. They
participate in auctions to win more impressions for their ads,

*

Equal contribution 1 Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Huawei TCS Lab, Shanghai,
China 4 Center for Multi-Agent Research, Institute for AI, Peking
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiaotie Deng
<xiaotie@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

