TIDE: Time Derivative Diffusion for Deep Learning on Graphs

Maysam Behmanesh * 1 Maximilian Krahn * 1 2 Maks Ovsjanikov 1

Abstract

(see, e.g., (Zhou et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020) for recent
surveys), ranging from spectral methods, spatial or convolutional designs, recurrent graph neural networks, or
graph auto-encoders as well as many other hybrid techniques. A particularly prominent and widely-used category
of approaches is given by the convolutional graph neural
networks, and especially those based on message-passing,
following the design introduced in (Kipf & Welling, 2017)
and extended significantly in many follow-up works, e.g.,
(Li et al., 2018b; Zhuang & Ma, 2018; Chamberlain et al.,
2021b; Thorpe et al., 2021).

A prominent paradigm for graph neural networks
is based on the message-passing framework. In
this framework, information communication is
realized only between neighboring nodes. The
challenge of approaches that use this paradigm is
to ensure efficient and accurate long-distance communication between nodes, as deep convolutional
networks are prone to oversmoothing. In this paper, we present a novel method based on time
derivative graph diffusion (TIDE) to overcome
these structural limitations of the message-passing
framework. Our approach allows for optimizing
the spatial extent of diffusion across various tasks
and network channels, thus enabling medium and
long-distance communication efficiently. Furthermore, we show that our architecture design also
enables local message-passing and thus inherits
from the capabilities of local message-passing
approaches. We show that on both widely used
graph benchmarks and synthetic mesh and graph
datasets, the proposed framework outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin.+

The key strengths of convolutional graph neural networks,
as introduced in (Kipf & Welling, 2017), include their simplicity and computational efficiency, their ability to be composed with other neural networks as well as their ability to
generalize across different graphs (i.e., learning weights that
could be applied on unseen graphs). As a result, the original GCN approach (Kipf & Welling, 2017) is still highly
effective and is widely used in many applications.
Nevertheless, a prominent limitation of message-passing approaches, such as GCN and related methods is oversmoothing, which implies that such networks tend to be difficult
to train beyond a small number of layers (Oono & Suzuki,
2019). Furthermore, since typical message-passing operators only ensure communication between nodes within a
1-hop neighborhood, this means that message-passing approaches can hinder long-distance information propagation,
which can limit their utility in scenarios, where such longrange communication is important.

1. Introduction
Designing efficient and scalable architectures for learning
on graphs is a central problem in machine learning with
applications in a broad range of disciplines, including data
mining (Li et al., 2019b; Zhang et al., 2019), recommendation systems (Zhang et al., 2019), text classification (Yao
et al., 2019), image analysis and matching (Sarlin et al.,
2020) and even molecular property prediction (Wieder et al.,
2020) among myriad others.

In this work, we demonstrate that a simple modification to
the standard GCN design can be used to enable information
propagation across possibly distant nodes within a shallow,
one layer graph neural network, which does not have the
oversmoothing issues of traditional deep GNNs. Our design
inherits most of the advantages of standard message-passing
methods, including computational efficiency, their domain
independence, and their ability to generalize across different
graphs.

A very wide variety of graph neural network (GNN) approaches have been proposed over the past several years
*
Equal contribution 1 LIX, École polytechnique, IP Paris,
France 2 Aalto University, Finland. Correspondence to: Maysam
Behmanesh <maysam.behmanesh@lix.polytechnique.fr>, Maximilian Krahn <maximilian.krahn@icloud.com>.

Key to our approach is our use of learnable time diffusion which allows information propagation on the graph
+

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/maysambehmanesh/TIDE

1

