Federated Conformal Predictors for Distributed Uncertainty Quantification

Charles Lu 1 * Yaodong Yu 2 * Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 2 Michael I. Jordan 2 Ramesh Raskar 1

Abstract

Consider how a doctor performs differential diagnosis on a
patient by leveraging their clinical training and intuition to
rule out highly unlikely conditions to produce a narrow list
of conditions for a particular patient with some observed
symptoms. Thus, instead of a point estimate, we end up
with a prediction set of possible conditions. The number
of conditions in this prediction set naturally expresses uncertainty — a large set implies high uncertainty, while a
small set implies low uncertainty. Using such a prediction
set instead of a single prediction is more interpretable. It
can increase trust in black-box models for safety-critical
decision-making (Lu et al., 2022a;c) and has been promoted
for several medical applications (Shashikumar et al., 2021;
Vazquez & Facelli, 2022; Angelopoulos et al., 2022; Lu
et al., 2022b).

Conformal prediction is emerging as a popular
paradigm for providing rigorous uncertainty quantification in machine learning since it can be easily applied as a post-processing step to already
trained models. In this paper, we extend conformal prediction to the federated learning setting.
The main challenge we face is data heterogeneity
across the clients — this violates the fundamental
tenet of exchangeability required for conformal
prediction. We propose a weaker notion of partial
exchangeability, better suited to the FL setting,
and use it to develop the Federated Conformal
Prediction (FCP) framework. We show FCP enjoys rigorous theoretical guarantees and excellent
empirical performance on several computer vision
and medical imaging datasets. Our results demonstrate a practical approach to incorporating meaningful uncertainty quantification in distributed and
heterogeneous environments. We provide code
used in our experiments https://github.
com/clu5/federated-conformal.

Furthermore, conformal prediction insists that these prediction sets should contain the correct output with high
probability. Concretely, if C(X) is some set-valued function that generates prediction sets on X and α ∈ (0, 1) is
the desired confidence level, we would like the constructed
prediction set to contain the true output with probability
P (Y ∈ C(X)) ≥ 1 − α.
In this paper, we consider conformal prediction in the federated learning (FL) setting, where several clients (each
with some local data distribution Pk ) jointly optimize a
shared global model on a global distribution. Our goal is
to provide marginal coverage guarantees for the prediction
sets on P
unseen data sampled from the global distribution,
K
Qtest = k=1 λk Pk , where λ is a probability vector.

1. Introduction
For many real-world machine learning applications, predictive performance should not be the sole criterion determining a model’s usefulness (Bansal et al., 2019; Babbar et al.,
2022). For example, with AI medical devices, predictive performance should be considered in the context of principled
uncertainty quantification (Kompa et al., 2021). Techniques
that provide meaningful estimates of uncertainty quantification, such as conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005), are
critical to deploying machine learning in safety-conscious
domains such as healthcare (Bhatt et al., 2021).

However, we show that the natural heterogeneity in FL
among the client distributions {Pk } raises numerous issues.
First, heterogeneity immediately voids all standard conformal prediction guarantees since it contradicts exchangeability, a fundamental assumption in conformal prediction. Second, it also increases the size of the prediction sets, leading
to less reliable or useful uncertainty estimates. Additional
challenges in FL include potential uncertainty around the
global distribution Qtest (Mohri et al., 2019) and requiring
a fully distributed implementation with minimal communication (Bonawitz et al., 2022). We show how to carefully
design novel methods to overcome these challenges and
propose the following:

This work is an extended version of Lu & Kalpathy-Cramer
(2021). * Equal contribution 1 MIT Media Lab, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Charles Lu
<luchar@mit.edu>, Yaodong Yu <yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

