Stochastic Gradient Succeeds for Bandits
Jincheng Mei * 1 Zixin Zhong * 2 Bo Dai 1 3 Alekh Agarwal 4 Csaba Szepesvari 2 Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract

explicitly by designing auxiliary bonuses that induce optimism under uncertainty; Thompson sampling (Thompson,
1933; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012) maintains a posterior over
rewards that has to be updated and sampled from tractably.
The theoretical analysis of such algorithms typically focuses on bounding their regret, i.e., showing that the average reward obtained by the algorithm approaches that
of the optimal action in hindsight, at a rate that is statistically optimal. However, managing exploration bonuses
via uncertainty quantification is difficult in all but simple
environments (Gawlikowski et al., 2021), while posterior
updating and sampling can also be computationally difficult
in practice, which make the UCB and Thompson sampling
challenging to apply in real world scenarios.

We show that the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm converges to a globally optimal policy
at an O(1/t) rate, even with a constant step size.
Remarkably, global convergence of the stochastic
gradient bandit algorithm has not been previously
established, even though it is an old algorithm
known to be applicable to bandits. The new result is achieved by establishing two novel technical findings: first, the noise of the stochastic
updates in the gradient bandit algorithm satisfies
a strong “growth condition” property, where the
variance diminishes whenever progress becomes
small, implying that additional noise control via
diminishing step sizes is unnecessary; second,
a form of “weak exploration” is automatically
achieved through the stochastic gradient updates,
since they prevent the action probabilities from
decaying faster than O(1/t), thus ensuring that
every action is sampled infinitely often with probability 1. These two findings can be used to show
that the stochastic gradient update is already “sufficient” for bandits in the sense that exploration
versus exploitation is automatically balanced in a
manner that ensures almost sure convergence to a
global optimum. These novel theoretical findings
are further verified by experimental results.

Meanwhile, stochastic gradient-based techniques have witnessed widespread use across the breadth of machine learning. For bandit and reinforcement learning problems,
stochastic gradient yields a particularly simple algorithm—
the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm (Sutton & Barto,
2018, Section 2.8)—that omits any explicit control mechanism over exploration. This algorithm is naturally compatible with deep neural networks, in stark contrast to UCB
and Thompson sampling, and has seen significant practical
success (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Surprisingly, the theoretical understanding of this algorithm
remains under-developed: the global convergence and regret
properties of the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm is still
open, which naturally raises the question:
Is the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm able to balance
exploration vs. exploitation to identify an optimal action?

1. Introduction
Algorithms for multi-armed bandits (MABs) need to balance exploration and exploitation to achieve desirable
performance properties (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020).
Well known bandit algorithms generally introduce auxiliary
mechanisms to control the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
For example, the upper confidence bound strategies (UCB,
Lai et al. (1985); Auer et al. (2002a)), manage exploration

Such an understanding is paramount to further improving
the underlying approach. In this paper, we take a step in
this direction by studying the convergence properties of the
canonical stochastic gradient bandit algorithm in the simplest setting of multi-armed bandits, and answer the question
affirmatively: the distribution over the arms maintained by
this algorithm almost surely concentrates asymptotically on
a globally optimal action.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team 2 University
of Alberta 3 Georgia Tech 4 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Jincheng Mei <jcmei@google.com>, Zixin Zhong
<zzhong10@ualberta.ca>.

Of course, the broader literature on the use of stochastic
gradient techniques in reinforcement learning has a long
tradition, dating back to stochastic approximation (Robbins & Monro, 1951) with likelihood ratios (“log trick”)
(Glynn, 1990) and REINFORCE policy gradient estima-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

