Chameleon: Adapting to Peer Images
for Planting Durable Backdoors in Federated Learning

Yanbo Dai 1 Songze Li 1 2

Abstract

data-owning clients collaborating through a central server,
is an emerging collaborative training paradigm, in which
clients do not share their raw data with either the server
or other clients, but participate in training a global model
through uploading local models or gradients to the server.
While protecting clients’ data privacy, FL systems are vulnerable to a number of malicious attacks (Bagdasaryan et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2020; Geiping et al.,
2020; Fung et al., 2020; Shejwalkar et al., 2022; Nasr et al.,
2019; Bhagoji et al., 2019), which hampers FL from being
used in real-world settings.

In a federated learning (FL) system, distributed
clients upload their local models to a central
server to aggregate into a global model. Malicious
clients may plant backdoors into the global model
through uploading poisoned local models, causing
images with specific patterns to be misclassified
into some target labels. Backdoors planted by current attacks are not durable, and vanish quickly
once the attackers stop model poisoning. In this
paper, we investigate the connection between the
durability of FL backdoors and the relationships
between benign images and poisoned images (i.e.,
the images whose labels are flipped to the target
label during local training). Specifically, benign
images with the original and the target labels of
the poisoned images are found to have key effects
on backdoor durability. Consequently, we propose a novel attack, Chameleon, which utilizes
contrastive learning to further amplify such effects towards a more durable backdoor. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that Chameleon significantly extends the backdoor lifespan over baselines by 1.2× ∼ 4×, for a wide range of image
datasets, backdoor types, and model architectures.

Malicious clients can launch model poisoning attacks to
damage the performance of the global model, via uploading deliberately manipulated local models. According to
attacker’s goals, model poisoning attacks can be categorized
into untargeted attacks (Fang et al., 2020; Shejwalkar &
Houmansadr, 2021; Chen et al., 2017b; Guerraoui et al.,
2018) and backdoor attacks (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Bagdasaryan et al., 2020). Compared with untargeted attacks
whose goal is to compromise the overall performance of the
global model, backdoor attacks are especially destructive
because of its strong stealth. Specifically, backdoor attackers try to have the global model misclassify to a particular
target label when it encounters certain image patterns (or
triggers), and perform normally on other inference tasks
without triggers.

1. Introduction

Previous works (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2019; Wen et al., 2022)
have successfully planted backdoors in FL models. However, these works usually need attackers to keep uploading
poisoned models to avoid planted backdoors from vanishing. This requires attackers to consistently participate in the
training process, which will make the embedded backdoor
easier to be detected. It has been observed in current attacks
(Bagdasaryan et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022) that once all
attackers leave the training procedure or the global model
is retrained after malicious attacks stop, backdoors will
quickly be erased by model updates from benign clients(Xie
et al., 2021). In such cases, attackers wish to plant more
durable backdoors to ensure that the inserted backdoors
survive until the FL system is deployed.

Rocketing development in computational resources brings
exponential growth in both personal and corporate data. To
sufficiently exploit these data and break the data isolation
between decentralized data owners, collaborative training
frameworks that respect data privacy and resist malicious
participants are needed (Lyu et al., 2022). Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017), consisting of a group of
1

IoT Thrust, Information Hub, Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China.
Correspondence to: Songze Li <songzeli@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

As for the reason for rapidly vanishing backdoors, it is still
1

