NeRFool: Uncovering the Vulnerability of Generalizable Neural
Radiance Fields against Adversarial Perturbations

Yonggan Fu 1 Ye Yuan 1 Souvik Kundu 2 Shang Wu 1 Shunyao Zhang 3 Yingyan (Celine) Lin 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Novel view synthesis (NVS), which aims to generate photorealistic novel views of a scene given only a set of sparsely
sampled views, has become an essential functionality in
real-world 3D vision applications. Among various NVS
techniques, neural radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al.,
2021) have recently gained substantial attention thanks to
their record-breaking rendering quality, igniting a tremendous demand for NeRF-based NVS solutions. As many
real-world NVS applications require instant and real-time
rendering on new scenes, generalizable NeRF (GNeRF)
variants (Yu et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022) have emerged as the most appealing
real-world NeRF solutions. In particular, GNeRF conditions NeRF on the source views from a new target scene to
achieve cross-scene generalization and enable new scene
reconstruction via only a single forward pass execution.

Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields (GNeRF)
are one of the most promising real-world solutions for novel view synthesis, thanks to their
cross-scene generalization capability and thus the
possibility of instant rendering on new scenes.
While adversarial robustness is essential for realworld applications, little study has been devoted to
understanding its implication on GNeRF. We hypothesize that because GNeRF is implemented by
conditioning on the source views from new scenes,
which are often acquired from the Internet or
third-party providers, there are potential new security concerns regarding its real-world applications.
Meanwhile, existing understanding and solutions
for neural networks’ adversarial robustness may
not be applicable to GNeRF, due to its 3D nature
and uniquely diverse operations. To this end, we
present NeRFool, which to the best of our knowledge is the first work that sets out to understand
the adversarial robustness of GNeRF. Specifically,
NeRFool unveils the vulnerability patterns and
important insights regarding GNeRF’s adversarial
robustness. Built upon the above insights gained
from NeRFool, we further develop NeRFool+ ,
which integrates two techniques capable of effectively attacking GNeRF across a wide range of
target views, and provide guidelines for defending
against our proposed attacks. We believe that our
NeRFool/NeRFool+ lays the initial foundation
for future innovations in developing robust realworld GNeRF solutions. Our codes are available
at: https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/NeRFool.

Despite GNeRF’s big promise towards real-world NVS solutions, it is currently unclear whether it can fulfill the essential robustness requirements. In fact, we hypothesize
that GNeRF’s introduced conditionality on source views
can cause new security concerns. This is because the source
views that describe a new scene, e.g., a tourist attraction,
are often acquired from the Internet/third-party providers,
leaving opportunities for adversaries to take advantage in
terms of malicious attacks. For example, adversarial perturbations (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017)
can be injected into source views by adversaries to severely
degrade the reconstruction accuracy of GNeRF. With the increasing deployment of NeRF-powered security-critical applications, such as robot navigation systems (Adamkiewicz
et al., 2022; Maggio et al., 2022; Moreau et al., 2022) and
autonomous driving systems (Kundu et al., 2022; Fu et al.,
2022; Siddiqui et al., 2023), it is imperative to understand
the adversarial robustness of GNeRF for the unleashing of
its cross-scene generalization capability toward real-world
NeRF-based NVS solutions.

1

School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology,
USA 2 Intel Labs, San Diego, USA 3 Rice University, USA. Correspondence to: Yingyan (Celine) Lin <celine.lin@gatech.edu>.

To address the imperative need above, one may naturally
consider borrowing the existing insights about the adversarial robustness of deep neural networks (DNNs). However,
those insights may not be applicable to NeRF due to its
unique properties and processing pipeline. First, unlike 2D

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

