Analyzing Diffusion as Serial Reproduction

Raja Marjieh 1 Ilia Sucholutsky 2 Thomas A. Langlois 2 3 Nori Jacoby 3 Thomas L. Griffiths 1 2

Abstract

procedure whereby an input signal (e.g., a noisy image) is iteratively denoised at different noise levels which, in turn, are
successively made finer until a sharp sample is generated.
Initially, the noise family was restricted to the Gaussian
class (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019;
Ho et al., 2020) and the process was understood as a form
of Langevin dynamics (Song & Ermon, 2019). However,
recent work showed that this assumption can be relaxed
substantially (Bansal et al., 2022; Daras et al., 2022) by
training diffusion models with a wide array of degradation
families. One feature of this work is that it highlights the
idea that sampling (i.e. synthesis) can be thought of more
generally as an alternating process between degradation and
restoration operators (Bansal et al., 2022). This in turn calls
into question the theoretical understanding of these models
and necessitates new approaches.

Diffusion models are a class of generative models
that learn to synthesize samples by inverting a
diffusion process that gradually maps data into
noise. While these models have enjoyed great
success recently, a full theoretical understanding
of their observed properties is still lacking, in
particular, their weak sensitivity to the choice of
noise family and the role of adequate scheduling
of noise levels for good synthesis. By identifying a correspondence between diffusion models
and a well-known paradigm in cognitive science
known as serial reproduction, whereby human
agents iteratively observe and reproduce stimuli
from memory, we show how the aforementioned
properties of diffusion models can be explained
as a natural consequence of this correspondence.
We then complement our theoretical analysis with
simulations that exhibit these key features. Our
work highlights how classic paradigms in cognitive science can shed light on state-of-the-art
machine learning problems.

A hint at a strategy for understanding diffusion models
comes from noting that the structure of the sampling procedure in these generalized models (i.e., as a cascade of
noising-denoising units), as well as its robustness to the
choice of noise model, bears striking resemblance to a classic paradigm in cognitive science known as serial reproduction (Bartlett & Bartlett, 1995; Xu & Griffiths, 2010;
Jacoby & McDermott, 2017; Langlois et al., 2021). In a
serial reproduction task, participants observe a certain stimulus, e.g., a drawing or a piece of text, and then are asked to
reproduce it from memory (Figure 1A). The reproduction
then gets passed on to a new participant who in turn repeats
the process and so on. The idea is that as people repeatedly
observe (i.e., encode) a stimulus and then reproduce (i.e., decode) it from memory, their internal biases build up so that
the asymptotic dynamics of this process end up revealing
their inductive biases (or prior beliefs) with regard to that
stimulus domain. By modeling this process using Bayesian
agents, Xu & Griffiths (2010) showed that the process can
be interpreted as a Gibbs sampler, and more so, that the
stationary behavior of this process is in fact independent
of the nature of cognitive noise involved, making serial reproduction a particularly attractive tool for studying human
priors (Figure 1B).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models are a class of deep generative models that
have enjoyed great success recently in the context of image generation (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020;
Song & Ermon, 2019; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al.,
2022), with some particularly impressive text-to-image applications such as DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). The idea behind
diffusion models is to learn a data distribution by training a
model to invert a diffusion process that gradually destroys
data by adding noise (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). Given
the trained model, sampling is then done using a sequential
1

Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, USA 3 Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Correspondence to: Raja Marjieh
<raja.marjieh@princeton.edu>.

The main contribution of the present paper is to make the
correspondence between diffusion and serial reproduction
precise and show how the observed properties of diffusion
models, namely, their robustness to the choice of noise fam-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

