Additive Causal Bandits with Unknown Graph

Alan Malek 1 Virginia Aglietti 1 Silvia Chiappa 1

Abstract

can be phrased as asking which set X ⊆ X[K] and values
x ∈ supp(X) would produce an optimal outcome under
the intervention do(X = x), whose effect is to alter the
observational distribution p(X[K] , Y ) describing the existing relationships between X[K] ∪ Y by setting X to the
fixed value x. Indicating with p(Y | do(X = x)) the distribution of Y under such an intervention, answering these
questions is equivalent to solving the optimization problem
maxX⊆X[K] ,x∈supp(X)) E[Y | do(X = x)].

We explore algorithms to select actions in the
causal bandit setting where the learner can choose
to intervene on a set of random variables related
by a causal graph, and the learner sequentially
chooses interventions and observes a sample from
the interventional distribution. The learner’s goal
is to quickly find the intervention, among all interventions on observable variables, that maximizes the expectation of an outcome variable. We
depart from previous literature by assuming no
knowledge of the causal graph except that latent
confounders between the outcome and its ancestors are not present. We first show that the unknown graph problem can be exponentially hard
in the parents of the outcome. To remedy this, we
adopt an additional additive assumption on the
outcome which allows us to solve the problem
by casting it as an additive combinatorial linear
bandit problem with full-bandit feedback. We propose a novel action-elimination algorithm for this
setting, show how to apply this algorithm to the
causal bandit problem, provide sample complexity bounds, and empirically validate our findings
on a suite of randomly generated causal models,
effectively showing that one does not need to explicitly learn the parents of the outcome to identify
the best intervention.

The causal bandit problem, proposed in Lattimore et al.
(2016), is an extension of the multi-armed bandit problem
to the setting where many variables can be intervened on
and a causal graph G is used to describe the causal relationships among X[K] ∪ Y . The learner solves this optimization problem by repeatedly choosing an intervention
(X, x), also called an action, and observing a sample from
p(Y | do(X = x)). A naı̈ve approach to the problem would
be to treat each of the combinatorially many actions as independent and run a typical bandit algorithm. Instead, the
causal graph enables us to reason about acting on sub-parts
of the system and exploit the causal structure to reduce
the action set A. For example, consider a system of variables X1 , X2 , and Y with causal graph X1 → X2 → Y .
Fact 1.1 below tells us that intervening on pa(Y ), the parents of Y (or direct causes, i.e. the variables with an edge
into Y ), can always produce an expectation as high as the
best intervention on any other set. As pa(Y ) = {X2 },
this means that the optimization problem can simplified to
maxx2 ∈supp(X2 ) E[Y | do(X2 = x2 )].
Causal bandits have been explored under various assumptions on G, A, and the interventional distribution. Lattimore
et al. (2016) assumed full knowledge of G and of the distribution of pa(Y ) under any intervention in A and proposed
an algorithm that selects all actions at the start to minimize
a lower bound on sample complexity. Lu et al. (2020) proposed a UCB algorithm for the cumulative regret setting
which exploits the observation that one does not need a confidence bound on individual actions but on how the actions
affect pa(Y ). Lu et al. (2021) was the first to considered an
unspecified graph and instead considered the special case
of a tree G with a singleton pa(Y ), which allowed pa(Y ) to
be identified via binary search. De Kroon et al. (2022) did
not place constraints on the structure of G and instead used
causal discovery algorithms to learn a separating set (i.e. a

1. Introduction
What setting of our factory production system should we
choose to maximize efficiency? Which nutrients would induce maximal crop yield increase? What combination of
drugs and dosages would optimize patients outcomes? All
these questions ask which variables and values would optimize the causal effect on an outcome Y . In a system of
variables X[K] = {X1 , . . . , XK } and Y , these questions
1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Alan Malek
<alanmalek@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

