Fully-Adaptive Composition in Differential Privacy

Justin Whitehouse 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1 Ryan Rogers 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b) is an algorithmic
criterion that provides meaningful guarantees of individual
privacy for conducting analysis on sensitive data. Intuitively,
an algorithm is differentially private if similar inputs induce
similar distributions on outputs. More formally, an algorithm A : X → Y is differentially private if, for any set of
outcomes G ⊂ Y and any neighboring inputs x, x′ ∈ X ,

Composition is a key feature of differential privacy. Well-known advanced composition theorems allow one to query a private database
quadratically more times than basic privacy composition would permit. However, these results require that the privacy parameters of all algorithms
be fixed before interacting with the data. To address this, Rogers et al. (2016) introduced fully
adaptive composition, wherein both algorithms
and their privacy parameters can be selected adaptively. They defined two probabilistic objects to
measure privacy in adaptive composition: privacy filters, which provide differential privacy
guarantees for composed interactions, and privacy odometers, time-uniform bounds on privacy
loss. There are substantial gaps between advanced
composition and existing filters and odometers.
First, existing filters place stronger assumptions
on the algorithms being composed. Second, these
odometers and filters suffer from large constants,
making them impractical. We construct filters that
match the rates of advanced composition, including constants, despite allowing for adaptively chosen privacy parameters. En route we also derive
a privacy filter for approximate zCDP. We also
construct several general families of odometers.
These odometers match the tightness of advanced
composition at an arbitrary, preselected point in
time, or at all points in time simultaneously, up to
a doubly-logarithmic factor. We obtain our results
by leveraging advances in martingale concentration. In sum, we show that fully adaptive privacy
is obtainable at almost no loss.

P(A(x) ∈ G) ≤ eϵ P(A(x′ ) ∈ G) + δ,

(1)

where ϵ and δ are the privacy parameters of the algorithm.
A key property of differential privacy is graceful composition. Suppose A1 , . . . , An are algorithms such that each
Am is (ϵm , δm )-differentially private. Advanced composition (Dwork et al., 2010; Kairouz et al., 2015) states that,
for any δ ′ > 0, the composed sequence of
Palgorithms is
(ϵ, δ)-differentially private, where δ = δ ′ + m≤n δm , and
v
 X

 ϵm
u
X
u
1
e −1
2 +
ϵ = t2 log
ϵ
ϵ
. (2)
m
m
δ′
eϵm + 1
m≤n

m≤n

When all privacy parameters
are the same and small, we
√
roughly have ϵ = O( nϵm ). Hence, analysts can make use
of sensitive datasets with a slow degradation of privacy.
However, there is a major disconnect between most existing
results on privacy composition and modern data analysis.
As analysts view the outputs of algorithms, the future manner in which they interact with the data changes. Advanced
composition allows analysts to adaptively select algorithms,
but not privacy parameters. In many cases, analysts may
wish to choose the subsequent privacy parameters based
on the outcomes of the previous private algorithms. For
example, if an analyst learns, from past computations, that
they only need to run one more computation, they should
be able to use the remainder of their privacy budget in the
final round. Likewise, if an analyst is having a hard time deriving conclusions, they should be allowed to adjust privacy
parameters to extend the allowable number of computations.

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 LinkedIn. Correspondence to:
Justin Whitehouse <jwhiteho@andrew.cmu.edu>.

This desideratum has motivated the study of fully adaptive
composition, wherein one is allowed to adaptively select the
privacy parameters of the algorithms. Rogers et al. (2016)
define two probabilistic objects which can be used to ensure

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

