Gradient-based Wang–Landau Algorithm: A Novel Sampler for
Output Distribution of Neural Networks over the Input Space

Weitang Liu 1 Yi-Zhuang You 2 Ying Wai Li 3 Jingbo Shang 1

Abstract
The output distribution of a neural network (NN)
over the entire input space captures the complete
input-output mapping relationship, offering insights toward a more comprehensive NN understanding. Exhaustive enumeration or traditional
Monte Carlo methods for the entire input space
can exhibit impractical sampling time, especially
for high-dimensional inputs. To make such difficult sampling computationally feasible, in this
paper, we propose a novel Gradient-based WangLandau (GWL) sampler. We first draw the connection between the output distribution of a NN
and the density of states (DOS) of a physical system. Then, we renovate the classic sampler for the
DOS problem, Wang–Landau algorithm, by replacing its random proposals with gradient-based
Monte Carlo proposals. This way, our GWL sampler investigates the under-explored subsets of the
input space much more efficiently. Extensive experiments have verified the accuracy of the output
distribution generated by GWL and also showcased several interesting findings — for example,
in a binary image classification task, both CNN
and ResNet mapped the majority of human unrecognizable images to very negative logit values.

Figure 1. The energy density of states (DOS) of a physical system
vs. the output distribution of a deep neural network.

space, such as in-distribution subsets (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021; Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Steiner et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021; Zhuang et al., 2022; He et al., 2015), out-ofdistribution (OOD) subsets (Liu et al., 2020; Hendrycks &
Gimpel, 2016; Hendrycks et al., 2019; Hsu et al., 2020; Lee
et al., 2017; 2018), and adversarial subsets (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Rozsa et al., 2016; Miyato et al., 2018; Kurakin et al.,
2016).
Given the recent trend of applying NNs to open-world, nonIID applications (Cao et al., 2022; Sun & Li, 2022), we
argue that it is crucial to obtain the complete output distribution of a trained NN over the entire input space. This
output distribution can offer a complete picture about the
number of inputs mapped to certain output values. Note
that the entire input space here includes all kinds of inputs
mentioned above and even human unrecognizable inputs
(see Figure 2(a)). As a pilot study, we focus on binary classification — given a trained binary NN classifier, we aim
to sample the entire input space to obtain the output distribution, i.e., a histogram that counts the number of input
samples mapped to certain logit values, as shown in Fig 2(b).
The sampling procedure would also offer more fine-grained
information as side products, such as representative input
samples corresponding to a certain range of output values.

1. Introduction
The input-output mapping relationship of a trained neural
network (NN) is the key to understand a trained NN. Existing works measure the accuracy of a NN based on such
mapping relations over (pre-defined) subsets of the input
1
Department of Computer Science Engineering, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA 2 Department of Physics,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA 3 Computer,
Computational, and Statistical Sciences Division, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, USA. Correspondence to: Weitang Liu
<wel022@ucsd.edu>, Jingbo Shang <jshang@ucsd.edu>.

A straightforward solution is exhaustive enumeration or
traditional Monte Carlo methods (Chen et al., 2014; Welling
& Teh, 2011; Li et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018). However, the
sampling time would become impractical, or the sampler
could get stuck in a subset of input space, especially for
high-dimensional inputs. To overcome these issues, in this
paper, we propose a novel sampler called Gradient-based

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

