Transformers as Algorithms:
Generalization and Stability in In-context Learning

Yingcong Li 1 M. Emrullah Ildiz 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 2 Samet Oymak 1 3

Abstract

In-context learning

Input prompt

Desired
Output

In-context learning (ICL) is a type of prompting
where a transformer model operates on a sequence
of (input, output) examples and performs inference on-the-fly. In this work, we formalize incontext learning as an algorithm learning problem
where a transformer model implicitly constructs
a hypothesis function at inference-time. We first
explore the statistical aspects of this abstraction
through the lens of multitask learning: We obtain generalization bounds for ICL when the input
prompt is (1) a sequence of i.i.d. (input, label)
pairs or (2) a trajectory arising from a dynamical
system. The crux of our analysis is relating the
excess risk to the stability of the algorithm implemented by the transformer. We characterize
when transformer/attention architecture provably
obeys the stability condition and also provide empirical verification. For generalization on unseen
tasks, we identify an inductive bias phenomenon
in which the transfer learning risk is governed by
the task complexity and the number of MTL tasks
in a highly predictable manner. Finally, we provide numerical evaluations that (1) demonstrate
transformers can indeed implement near-optimal
algorithms on classical regression problems with
i.i.d. and dynamic data, (2) provide insights on
stability, and (3) verify our theoretical predictions.

Natural language
processing

berry, baya, apple, manzana, banana

plátano

Japan, mochi, France, croissant, Greece

baklava

Supervised learning

𝑥+ , 𝑦+ , 𝑥, , … , 𝑥-.+ , 𝑦-.+ , 𝑥/

𝑓(𝑥! )

Dynamical systems

𝑥+ , 𝑥, , 𝑥0 , … , 𝑥/., , 𝑥/.+ , 𝑥/

𝑓(𝑥! )

𝑦#!

𝑦##

𝑦! = 𝑓 𝑥! + noise

𝑥!"# = 𝑓 𝑥! + noise

𝑦#"

…

…

Supervised learning with TF
𝑥! 𝑦! 𝑥" 𝑦"

…

𝑦#$! 𝑥#

𝑥#" 𝑥#% 𝑥#&

…

𝑥## 𝑥##'!
…

Learning dynamics with TF
…

𝑥! 𝑥" 𝑥%

…

𝑥#$! 𝑥#

…

Figure 1: Examples of in-context learning. We focus on the lower
two settings in the table where a transformer admits a supervised
dataset or dynamical system trajectory as a prompt. Then, it autoregressively predicts the output following an input example x𝑖
based on the prompt (x1 , . . . , x𝑖 ).

of parameters (e.g., GPT-3 has 175B, and PaLM has 540B
parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022)).
It is perhaps not surprising that these large language models
(LLMs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a
wide range of natural language processing tasks. What is
surprising is the ability of some of these LLMs to perform incontext learning (ICL), i.e., to adapt and perform a specific
task given a short prompt, in the form of instructions, and
a small number of examples (Brown et al., 2020). These
models’ ability to learn in-context without explicit training
allows them to efficiently perform new tasks without a need
for updating model weights.
Figure 1 illustrates examples of ICL where a transformer
makes a prediction on an example based on a few (input,
output) examples provided within its prompt. For NLP, the
examples may correspond to pairs of (question, answer)’s
or translations. Recent works (Garg et al., 2022; Laskin
et al., 2022) demonstrate that ICL can also be used to infer
general functional relationships. For instance, (Hollmann
et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2022) aims to solve certain supervised learning problems where they feed an entire training
𝑛−1 as the input prompt, expecting that
dataset (x𝑖 , 𝑓 (x𝑖 ))𝑖=1
conditioning the TF model on this prompt would allow it
to make an accurate prediction on a new input point x𝑛 .
As discussed in (Akyürek et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2022),
this provides an implicit optimization flavor to ICL, where

1. Introduction
Transformer (TF) models were originally developed for
NLP problems to address long-range dependencies through
the attention mechanism. In recent years, language models
have become increasingly large, with some boasting billions
1 {yli692,mildi001}ucr.edu, University of California,

Riverside. 2 dimitris@papail.io, University of Wisconsin,
Madison. 3 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Correspondence
to: Samet Oymak <oymak@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

