L EVER: Learning to Verify Language-to-Code Generation with Execution

Ansong Ni 1 † Srini Iyer 2 Dragomir Radev 1 Ves Stoyanov 2 Wen-tau Yih 2 Sida I. Wang 2 * Xi Victoria Lin 2 *

Abstract

Lai et al., 2022). Recent advances on large language models
(LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021; Chowdhery
et al., 2022), especially those pre-trained on code (code
LLMs) (Chen et al., 2021a; Fried et al., 2022; Nijkamp
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a), have shown great promise
in such tasks with in-context few-shot learning (Shi et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2022). Yet their
performance is still far from perfect (Chen et al., 2021a).
Considering the computation cost to finetune such models,
it is appealing to explore ways to improve them without
changing their parameters.

The advent of large language models trained on
code (code LLMs) has led to significant progress
in language-to-code generation. State-of-the-art
approaches in this area combine LLM decoding
with sample pruning and reranking using test
cases or heuristics based on the execution results. However, it is challenging to obtain test
cases for many real-world language-to-code applications, and heuristics cannot well capture the
semantic features of the execution results, such as
data type and value range, which often indicates
the correctness of the program. In this work, we
propose L EVER, a simple approach to improve
language-to-code generation by learning to verify the generated programs with their execution
results. Specifically, we train verifiers to determine whether a program sampled from the LLMs
is correct or not based on the natural language
input, the program itself and its execution results.
The sampled programs are reranked by combining the verification score with the LLM generation probability, and marginalizing over programs
with the same execution results. On four datasets
across the domains of table QA, math QA and
basic Python programming, L EVER consistently
improves over the base code LLMs(4.6% to 10.9%
with code-davinci-002) and achieves new
state-of-the-art results on all of them.

A key observation is that while LLMs struggles with precision in the few-shot setting, it often produces the correct
output when enough samples are drawn. Previous work
have shown that majority voting and filtering by test cases
can significantly boost their performance when samples are
drawn at scale (Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022a). Shen et al. (2021) and Cobbe et al. (2021)
further demonstrated the effectiveness of training a verifier
and using the verification scores to rerank the candidate solutions for math world problems. Comparing to approaches
that solely rely on execution consistency and error pruning,
trained verifiers can make use of the rich semantic features
in the model solutions, such as data types, value range, and
variable attributes, which can be strong indicators of correctness of the programs. While Cobbe et al. (2021) and
subsequent work (Li et al., 2022b; Kadavath et al., 2022)
focus on verifying natural language solutions by LMs, a natural question is whether the same approach can be applied
to program solutions.
🤖

In this work, we propose learning to verify (L EVER🌏 )
language-to-code generation by code LLMs, with the help
of execution. More specifically, we train a verifier that learns
to distinguish and reject incorrect programs based on the
joint representation of the natural language description, the
program surface form and its execution result. We further
combine the verification probability with the LLM generation probability and marginalize over programs with the
same execution results. We use this aggregated probability
as the reranking score and output the programs that execute
to the most probable result.

1. Introduction
The ability of mapping natural language to executable code
is the cornerstone of a variety AI applications such as
database interfaces (Pasupat & Liang, 2015; Yu et al., 2018;
Shi et al., 2020), robotics control (Zhou et al., 2021; Shridhar et al., 2020) and virtual assistants (Agashe et al., 2019;
†
Majority of the work done during an internship at Meta AI.
Equal contribution 1 Yale University 2 Meta AI. Correspondence
to: Ansong Ni <ansong.ni@yale.edu>, Xi Victoria Lin <victorialin@meta.com>, Sida I. Wang <sida@meta.com>.

*

We conduct extensive experiments on four different
language-to-code benchmarks across domains of text-to-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

