Cooperation in the Latent Space: The Benefits of
Adding Mixture Components in Variational Autoencoders

Oskar Kviman 1 2 Ricky Molén 1 2 Alexandra Hotti 1 2 3 Semih Kurt 1 2 Vı́ctor Elvira 4 Jens Lagergren 1 2

Abstract

the target. The adaptive importance sampling methodology
(Bugallo et al., 2017) is currently enjoying a great amount of
research interest, e.g. regarding its convergence guarantees
(Akyildiz & Mı́guez, 2021; Akyildiz, 2022), and is considered a promising contender for the MCMC methodology
(Owen, 2013; Luengo et al., 2020).

In this paper, we show how the mixture components cooperate when they jointly adapt to
maximize the ELBO. We build upon recent advances in the multiple and adaptive importance
sampling literature. We then model the mixture
components using separate encoder networks and
show empirically that the ELBO is monotonically non-decreasing as a function of the number of mixture components. These results hold
for a range of different VAE architectures on the
MNIST, FashionMNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets.
In this work, we also demonstrate that increasing
the number of mixture components improves the
latent-representation capabilities of the VAE on
both image and single-cell datasets. This cooperative behavior motivates that using Mixture VAEs
should be considered a standard approach for obtaining more flexible variational approximations.
Finally, Mixture VAEs are here, for the first time,
compared and combined with normalizing flows,
hierarchical models and/or the VampPrior in an
extensive ablation study. Multiple of our Mixture
VAEs achieve state-of-the-art log-likelihood results for VAE architectures on the MNIST and
FashionMNIST datasets. The experiments are
reproducible using our code, provided here.

Meanwhile, in variational inference (VI), the mismatch between a variational approximation and the target distribution
is minimized via optimization of, typically, the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence. If one uses this optimization
scheme to adapt the proposal densities in AIS, VI appears to
be a special case in the AIS methodology. However, whereas
VI is well-known in the machine learning (ML) community,
AIS has received little attention until very recently.
The signal processing literature has recently started to see an
increase of studies at the intersection between AIS and VI
(Wang et al., 2019; 2021). For example, in El-Laham et al.
(2019a), they obtain a mixture of proposal distributions via
auto-differentiation VI (ADVI; Kucukelbir et al. (2017) as
a starting point for an AIS algorithm. After the adaptation,
the mixture of proposals is again updated via ADVI.
Similar to AIS, mixture distributions in VI and variational
autoencoders (VAEs; Kingma & Welling (2013)) is a research area which is also receiving a lot of attention (Nalisnick et al., 2016; Kucukelbir et al., 2017; Morningstar et al.,
2021; Kviman et al., 2022) since they result in increased
performance due to more flexible posterior approximations.
Despite this, mixture models in VAEs are not considered
standard tools. Instead, one would typically use normalizing flows (NFs; (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2021)), hierarchical models (Burda et al., 2015;
Sønderby et al., 2016; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020), autoregressive models (Van Oord et al., 2016) or more complex prior
distributions (Tomczak & Welling, 2018; Bauer & Mnih,
2019; Aneja et al., 2021). In this work, we argue that mixture models are indeed off-the-shelf solutions in VAEs. To
that effect, we demonstrate that mixture models result in
increased flexibility when combined with all of the four standard methods mentioned above. We also share our in-detail
implementation instructions on how to combine mixtures
with other popular tools in what we refer to as the mixture
cookbook, found in Sec. 3. By doing so, we attempt to

1. Introduction
Adaptive importance sampling (AIS) methods aim at approximating a target distribution by a set of proposal densities,
often interpreted as a mixture density (Elvira et al., 2019).
However, choosing appropriate proposals is known to be a
difficult problem, so they are sequentially updated according to an adaptation scheme to reduce the mismatch with
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology 2 Science for Life Laboratory 3 Klarna 4 University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Oskar
Kviman <okviman@kth.se>, Ricky Molén <rickym@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

