Active causal structure learning with advice

Davin Choo 1 Themis Gouleakis 1 Arnab Bhattacharyya 1

Abstract

medicine, biology, genetics, and econometrics (Reichenbach, 1956; Hoover, 1990; King et al., 2004; Woodward,
2005; Rubin & Waterman, 2006; Eberhardt & Scheines,
2007; Sverchkov & Craven, 2017; Rotmensch et al., 2017;
Pingault et al., 2018). Unfortunately, in general, it is known
that observational data can only recover the causal DAG up
to an equivalence class (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000).
Hence, if one wants to avoid making parametric assumptions about the causal mechanisms, the only recourse is
to obtain experimental data from interventions (Eberhardt
et al., 2005; 2006; Eberhardt, 2010).

We introduce the problem of active causal structure learning with advice. In the typical wellstudied setting, the learning algorithm is given the
essential graph for the observational distribution
and is asked to recover the underlying causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) G∗ while minimizing
the number of interventions made. In our setting,
we are additionally given side information about
G∗ as advice, e.g. a DAG G purported to be G∗ .
We ask whether the learning algorithm can benefit from the advice when it is close to being correct, while still having worst-case guarantees even
when the advice is arbitrarily bad. Our work is in
the same space as the growing body of research
on algorithms with predictions. When the advice
is a DAG G, we design an adaptive search algorithm to recover G∗ whose intervention cost is at
most O(max{1, log ψ}) times the cost for verifying G∗ ; here, ψ is a distance measure between G
and G∗ that is upper bounded by the number of
variables n, and is exactly 0 when G = G∗ . Our
approximation factor matches the state-of-the-art
for the advice-less setting.

Such considerations motivate the problem of interventional
design where the task is to find a set of interventions of
optimal cost which is sufficient to recover the causal DAG.
There has been a series of recent works studying this problem (He & Geng, 2008; Hu et al., 2014; Shanmugam et al.,
2015; Kocaoglu et al., 2017; Lindgren et al., 2018; Greenewald et al., 2019; Squires et al., 2020; Choo et al., 2022;
Choo & Shiragur, 2023) under various assumptions. In particular, assuming causal sufficiency, (Choo et al., 2022) gave
an adaptive algorithm that actively generates a sequence of
interventions of bounded size, so that the total number of
interventions is at most O(log n) times the optimal.
Typically though, in most applications of causal structure
learning, there are domain experts and practitioners who
can provide additional “advice” about the causal relations.
Indeed, there has been a long line of work studying how
to incorporate expert advice into the causal graph discovery process; e.g. see (Meek, 1995a; Scheines et al., 1998;
De Campos & Ji, 2011; Flores et al., 2011; Li & Beek, 2018;
Andrews et al., 2020; Fang & He, 2020). In this work, we
study in a principled way how using purported expert advice
can lead to improved algorithms for interventional design.

1. Introduction
A causal directed acyclic graph on a set V of n variables is
a Bayesian network in which the edges model direct causal
effects. A causal DAG can be used to infer not only the
observational distribution of V but also the result of any
intervention on any subset of variables V ′ ⊆ V . In this
work, we restrict ourselves to the causally sufficient setting
where there are no latent confounders, no selection bias, and
no missingness in data.

Before discussing our specific contributions, let us ground
the above discussion with a concrete problem of practical
importance. In modern virtualized infrastructure, it is increasingly common for applications to be modularized into
a large number of interdependent microservices. These
microservices communicate with each other in ways that depend on the application code and on the triggering userflow.
Crucially, the communication graph between microservices
is often unknown to the platform provider as the application code may be private and belong to different entities.

The goal of causal structure learning is to recover the underlying DAG from data. This is an important problem
with applications in multiple fields including philosophy,
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Davin Choo <davin@u.nus.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

