Equivariant Architectures for Learning in Deep Weight Spaces

Aviv Navon * 1 Aviv Shamsian * 1 Idan Achituve 1 Ethan Fetaya 1 Gal Chechik 1 2 Haggai Maron 2

Abstract

two cases, representing functions or data, it is often desirable to operate directly over the weights of a pre-trained
deep model. For instance, given a trained deep network
that performs visual object recognition, one may want to
change its weights so it matches a new data distribution. In
another example, given a dataset of INRs or NeRFs representing 3D objects, we may wish to analyze its shape space
by directly applying machine learning to the raw network
representation, namely the weights and biases.

Designing machine learning architectures for processing neural networks in their raw weight matrix form is a newly introduced research direction.
Unfortunately, the unique symmetry structure of
deep weight spaces makes this design very challenging. If successful, such architectures would
be capable of performing a wide range of intriguing tasks, from adapting a pre-trained network to a
new domain to editing objects represented as functions (INRs or NeRFs). As a first step towards
this goal, we present here a novel network architecture for learning in deep weight spaces. It takes
as input a concatenation of weights and biases of
a pre-trained MLP and processes it using a composition of layers that are equivariant to the natural permutation symmetry of the MLP’s weights:
Changing the order of neurons in intermediate
layers of the MLP does not affect the function it
represents. We provide a full characterization of
all affine equivariant and invariant layers for these
symmetries and show how these layers can be implemented using three basic operations: pooling,
broadcasting, and fully connected layers applied
to the input in an appropriate manner. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our architecture and its
advantages over natural baselines in a variety of
learning tasks.

In this paper, we seek a principled approach for learning over
neural weight spaces. We ask: ”What neural architectures
can effectively learn and process neural models that are
represented as sequences of weights and biases?”
The study of learning in neural weight spaces is still in
its infancy. Few pioneering studies (Eilertsen et al., 2020;
Unterthiner et al., 2020; Schürholt et al., 2021) used generic
architectures such as fully connected networks and attention
mechanisms to predict model accuracy or hyperparameters.
Even more recently, three papers have partially addressed
the question in the context of INRs (Dupont et al., 2022; Xu
et al., 2022; Luigi et al., 2023). Unfortunately, it is unclear if
and how these approaches could be applied to other types of
neural networks since they make strong assumptions about
the dimension of the input domain or the training procedure.
It remains an open problem to characterize the principles for
designing deep architectures that can process the weights of
other deep models. Traditional deep models were designed
to process data with well-understood structures like fixedsized tensors or sequences. In contrast, the weights of deep
models live in spaces with a very different structure, which
is still not fully understood (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990; Chen
et al., 1993; Brea et al., 2019; Entezari et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are the primary model for learning
functions from data, from classification to generation. Recently, they also became a primary model for representing
data samples, for example, INRs for representing images,
3D objects, or scenes (Park et al., 2019; Sitzmann et al.,
2020; Tancik et al., 2020; Mildenhall et al., 2021). In these

Our approach. This paper takes a step forward toward
learning in deep-weight spaces by developing architectures
that account for the unique structure of these spaces in a
principled manner. More concretely, we address learning in
spaces that represent a concatenation of weight (and bias)
matrices of Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs). Motivated by
the recent surge of studies that incorporate symmetry into
neural architectures (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Zaheer et al.,
2017; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018;
Maron et al., 2019b; Esteves et al., 2018; Bronstein et al.,
2021), we analyze the symmetry structure of neural weight

*
Equal contribution 1 Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel 2 Nvidia, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Aviv
Shamsian <aviv.shamsian@live.biu.ac.il>, Aviv Navon
<aviv.navon@biu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

