Proximal Causal Learning of Conditional Average Treatment Effects

Erik Sverdrup 1 Yifan Cui 2

Abstract

Künzel et al. (2019); Nie & Wager (2021) for combinations
thereof.

Efficiently and flexibly estimating treatment effect heterogeneity is an important task in a wide
variety of settings ranging from medicine to marketing, and there are a considerable number of
promising conditional average treatment effect
estimators currently available. These, however,
typically rely on the assumption that the measured covariates are enough to justify conditional
exchangeability. We propose the P-learner, motivated by the R- and DR-learner, a tailored twostage loss function for learning heterogeneous
treatment effects in settings where exchangeability given observed covariates is an implausible assumption, and we wish to rely on proxy variables
for causal inference. Our proposed estimator can
be implemented by off-the-shelf loss-minimizing
machine learning methods, which in the case of
kernel regression satisfies an oracle bound on the
estimated error as long as the nuisance components are estimated reasonably well.

To identify causal effects, the aforementioned approaches
operate under the exchangeability assumption, i.e., the assertion that conditional on observed covariates, the treatment
assignment is as good as random. We propose a CATE
estimator, which using the framework of Tchetgen Tchetgen et al. (2020), allows one to estimate causal effects in
settings where conditional exchangeability fails, but one has
measured a set of sufficient proxy variables. Our practical
approach is motivated by the generic Neyman-orthogonal
(Chernozhukov et al., 2018a) loss function from Nie & Wager (2021) and Kennedy (2020) that decouples nuisance
estimation and CATE estimation into two stages that can be
estimated (and tuned with cross-validation) by flexible lossminimizing machine learning tools, where the latter stage is
to first order less sensitive to estimation error arising from
the first stage. Our contribution is to extend this flexible
CATE estimation strategy to the proximal causal inference
framework (Tchetgen Tchetgen et al., 2020). The proposed
loss relies on doubly robust scores (Robins et al., 1994; Rotnitzky et al., 1998; Scharfstein et al., 1999; Chernozhukov
et al., 2018a; Cui et al., 2023) which can also be re-purposed
to enable semi-parametric efficient estimation and inference
on lower-dimensional summaries of the CATEs, such as best
linear projections (Semenova & Chernozhukov, 2021), or
rank-weighted average treatment effects (Yadlowsky et al.,
2021).

1. Introduction
The conditional average treatment effect (CATE) measures
the net benefit, such as the decrease in blood pressure, a
certain subset of a population experiences by being assigned
a certain intervention, such as a drug. Obtaining accurate estimates of CATEs is important in order to understand for example which parts of a population should be assigned a treatment, if any. A large body of work has made tremendous
advances in designing flexible estimators for the CATE. Examples include Hill (2011); Alaa & van der Schaar (2017);
Hahn et al. (2020) for Bayesian approaches, Athey & Imbens (2016); Wager & Athey (2018) for tree-based methods,
Johansson et al. (2016); Shalit et al. (2017); Yoon et al.
(2018); Shi et al. (2019) for adopting neural networks, and

1.1. Proxy Variables and Unmeasured Confounding
Conditional exchangeability (often also referred to as unconfoundedness (Imbens & Rubin, 2015)), is a crucial identifying assumption that underlies many popular methodologies
for estimating causal effects from observational data, including most CATE estimators. Loosely stated, it requires the
investigator to have collected a sufficient set of covariates,
such that controlling for these, the treatment assignment
is as good as random. Given some additional regularity
assumptions, this allows the investigator to estimate a difference in potential outcomes, without having access to a
randomized control trial (Imbens & Rubin, 2015). Naturally,
the quality of the causal estimates hinges on whether the
collected covariates sufficiently account for confounding,
and a large body of work, going back to for example Rosen-

1
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. 2 Center for Data Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Erik Sverdrup
<erikcs@stanford.edu>, Yifan Cui <cuiyf@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

