Stochastic Marginal Likelihood Gradients using Neural Tangent Kernels

Alexander Immer 1 2 Tycho F.A. van der Ouderaa 3 Mark van der Wilk 3
Gunnar Rätsch 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 2

Selecting hyperparameters in deep learning
greatly impacts its effectiveness but requires manual effort and expertise. Recent works show that
Bayesian model selection with Laplace approximations can allow to optimize such hyperparameters just like standard neural network parameters
using gradients and on the training data. However, estimating a single hyperparameter gradient requires a pass through the entire dataset,
limiting the scalability of such algorithms. In
this work, we overcome this issue by introducing
lower bounds to the linearized Laplace approximation of the marginal likelihood. In contrast to
previous estimators, these bounds are amenable to
stochastic-gradient-based optimization and allow
to trade off estimation accuracy against computational complexity. We derive them using the
function-space form of the linearized Laplace,
which can be estimated using the neural tangent
kernel. Experimentally, we show that the estimators can significantly accelerate gradient-based
hyperparameter optimization.

10000
Full GGN

2.4

NTK

5000
2500

2.2

KFAC

2.0

Diag GGN

1000

1.8

500

1.6

250

1.4

100

1.2

batch size

Negative Log Marginal Likelihood

Abstract

50

1.0

Pareto

0.8

20
10

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Runtime (s)

Figure 1. Pareto frontier between marginal likelihood estimator
tightness and runtime for invariance learning on rotated MNIST.
Our proposed estimators enable stochastic approximation with
varying batch size in contrast to the four previously used full-batch
estimators (batch size of 10 000 in black). NTK-based estimators
on subsets of data perform well at more than 10× speed-up.

Automated machine learing (AutoML) methods have the
potential to greatly reduce the cost of deploying deep learning for new problems (Hutter et al., 2019). Commonly,
black-box algorithms are applied in this setting to optimize
hyperparameters towards the best possible validation performance. For example, neural architectures can be optimized
by training each option to convergence and assessing the validation performance repeatedly. However, such iterative procedures require training many models to convergence and
suffer from high-dimensional hyperparameters due to their
black-box nature. We posit that (stochastic-)gradient-based
optimization of hyperparameters would be more desirable.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have many hyperparameters that need
to be chosen properly to achieve good performance. For
example, making the right architecture, regularization, or
data augmentation choices remains a problem that requires
significant human effort and computation. This is even
apparent within the field of deep learning itself, where the
state-of-the-art settings change frequently. Such manual
trial-and-error procedure is inefficient and can hinder the
application of deep learning to new problems. A more
automatic procedure could be much more sustainable.

Bayesian model selection, where we consider hyperparameters and neural network weights jointly as part of a probabilistic model, is amenable to gradient-based optimization
and also does not require any validation data (MacKay,
2003). Gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters
tends to suffer less from high dimensionality than iterative
black-box methods (Lorraine et al., 2020). Further, in such
integrated procedure, the hyperparameters can be jointly
optimized with the neural network weights (Foresee & Hagan, 1997; Immer et al., 2021a). While this is theoretically
appealing, estimating the hyperparameter gradient is costly
as it requires differentiating the marginal likelihood, i.e., the
normalization constant of the posterior.

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Imperial College London, UK. Correspondence to: Alexander
Immer <alexander.immer@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

