Mimetic Initialization of Self-Attention Layers

Asher Trockman 1 J. Zico Kolter 1 2

Abstract

primarily on Vision Transformers (ViTs), though we also investigate our technique in the context of language modeling.
We note that in pretrained ViTs, the weights of self-attention
T
layers are often quite correlated, in that WQ WK
∝ I +ϵ
and WV Wproj ∝ ϵ − I. Our proposal is merely to initialize
the self-attention weights to mimick this observation, with
the added caveat of requiring standard sinusoidal position
embeddings. While we propose only one technique here,
we believe that this concept is worthy of future research, as
it may enhance the understanding of the inner-workings of
deep models and lead to cheaper training and better optima.
We propose to call this type of technique mimetic initialization, as we initialize by mimicking the structures and
patterns observed in the weights of pretrained models. Importantly, the sort of mimetic initialization we propose seeks
to mimic solely through hand-crafted, interpretable formulas: it involves absolutely no pretraining and is practically
compute-free; i.e., there is no learning procedure involved.

It is notoriously difficult to train Transformers on
small datasets; typically, large pre-trained models
are instead used as the starting point. We explore
the weights of such pre-trained Transformers (particularly for vision) to attempt to find reasons for
this discrepancy. Surprisingly, we find that simply
initializing the weights of self-attention layers so
that they “look” more like their pre-trained counterparts allows us to train vanilla Transformers
faster and to higher final accuracies, particularly
on vision tasks such as CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
classification, where we see gains in accuracy of
over 5% and 4%, respectively. Our initialization
scheme is closed form, learning-free, and very
simple: we set the product of the query and key
weights to be approximately the identity, and the
product of the value and projection weights to approximately the negative identity. As this mimics
the patterns we saw in pre-trained Transformers,
we call the technique mimetic initialization.

Fundamentally, we seek to investigate the question proposed by Zhang et al. (2022): might some of the benefits
of pretraining actually just be a result of it serving as a
good initialization? Our approach is to attempt to find good
initializations that do not involve pretraining to begin to
explore this question.

1. Introduction

Our initialization shows strong advantages for ViTs, allowing gains of up to 5% when training on small datasets like
CIFAR-10, and up to 4% for larger datasets, i.e., ImageNet1k within a standard ResNet-style training pipeline. We also
see smaller performance gains on language modeling tasks
such as WikiText-103.

Despite their excellent performance in the regime of largescale pretraining, Transformers are notoriously hard to train
on small-scale datasets (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). In this
setting, convolutional networks such as the ResNet tend to
massively outperform Vision Transformers, with the gap
only being closed by the addition of techniques such as
self-supervised pretraining, auxiliary losses, convolutioninspired tokenizers, or the addition of other architectural
components that promote convolution-like inductive biases.
Similar effects are seen in language modeling, where classic
models such as LSTMs outperform vanilla Transformers
without extreme regularization and long-duration training.

2. Related Work
It is conventional wisdom that CNNs have a stronger inductive bias than ViTs. In practice, this means that CNNs
perform particularly well on small datasets, while ViTs
only surpass their performance when pretrained on very
large (e.g., ImageNet-21k- or JFT-300B-scale) datasets. To
remedy this situation, numerous works have proposed to
integrate convolutions explicitly into ViTs: Dai et al. (2021)
introduces CoAtNet, which directly integrates depthwise
convolution and self-attention. Wu et al. (2021) introduces
CvT, a Transformer modification involving convolutional tokenization and projections. Yuan et al. (2021) proposes the

In this work, we take a step towards bridging this gap via
a novel initialization technique for Transformers. We focus
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI. Correspondence to: Asher Trockman <ashert@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

