ACAT: Adversarial Counterfactual Attention for Classification and Detection in
Medical Imaging

Alessandro Fontanella 1 Antreas Antoniou 1 Wenwen Li 2 Joanna Wardlaw 2 Grant Mair 2 Emanuele Trucco 3
Amos Storkey 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In computer vision classification problems, it is often assumed that an object that represents a class occupies a large
part of an image. However, in other image domains, such
as medical imaging or histopathology, only a small fraction of the image contains information that is relevant for
the classification task (Kimeswenger et al., 2019). With
object-centric images, using wider contextual information
(e.g. planes fly in the sky) and global features can aid the
classification decision. In medical images, variations in
parts of the image away from the local pathology are often
normal, and using any apparent signal from such regions
is usually spurious and unhelpful in building robust classifiers. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2017; Huang
et al., 2017a) can struggle to generalise well in such settings,
especially when training cannot be performed on a very
large amount of data (Pawlowski et al., 2019). This is at
least partly because the convolutional structure necessitates
some additional ‘noisy’ statistical response to filters away
from the informative ‘signal’ regions. Because the ‘signal’
response region is small, and the noise region is potentially
large, this can result in low signal to noise in convolutional
networks, impacting performance.

In some medical imaging tasks and other settings
where only small parts of the image are informative for the classification task, traditional CNNs
can sometimes struggle to generalise. Manually
annotated Regions of Interest (ROI) are often used
to isolate the most informative parts of the image.
However, these are expensive to collect and may
vary significantly across annotators. To overcome
these issues, we propose a framework that employs saliency maps to obtain soft spatial attention masks that modulate the image features at
different scales. We refer to our method as Adversarial Counterfactual Attention (ACAT). ACAT
increases the baseline classification accuracy of
lesions in brain CT scans from 71.39% to 72.55%
and of COVID-19 related findings in lung CT
scans from 67.71% to 70.84% and exceeds the
performance of competing methods. We investigate the best way to generate the saliency maps
employed in our architecture and propose a way
to obtain them from adversarially generated counterfactual images. They are able to isolate the
area of interest in brain and lung CT scans without using any manual annotations. In the task of
localising the lesion location out of 6 possible regions, they obtain a score of 65.05% on brain CT
scans, improving the score of 61.29% obtained
with the best competing method.

To help localisation of the most informative parts of the
image in medical imaging applications, Region Of Interest
(ROI) annotations are often collected (Cheng et al., 2011;
Papanastasopoulos et al., 2020). However, these annotations
require expert knowledge, are expensive to collect, and
opinions on ROI of a particular case may vary significantly
across annotators (Grünberg et al., 2017; Fontanella et al.,
2020).
Alternatively, attention systems could be applied to locate
the critical regions and aid classification. Previous work has
explored the application of attention mechanisms over image features, either aiming to capture the spatial relationship
between features (Bell et al., 2016; Newell et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2017), the channel relationship (Hu et al., 2018)
or both (Woo et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017). Other authors
employed self-attention to model non-local properties of
images (Wang et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). However,

1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK 2 Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK 3 VAMPIRE project / CVIP, Computing, School of
Science and Engineering, University of Dundee, UK. Correspondence to: Alessandro Fontanella <A.Fontanella@sms.ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

