Shapley Based Residual Decomposition for Instance Analysis

Tommy Liu 1 Amanda Barnard 1

Abstract

explanations such as LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) and
SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) have seen explosive growth
from both academic and commercial interests. There
now exist many such methods for post-hoc explanations
which suit a variety of different needs, particularly over
the feature space. However, it is the case that explanations
and analysis tools over the instance space remain relatively
unexplored. Traditionally the task of instance explanations
has been neglected in favour of the computationally simpler task of understanding how the features combine instead.

In this paper, we introduce the idea of decomposing the residuals of regression with respect to the
data instances instead of features. This allows
us to determine the effects of each individual instance on the model and each other, and in doing
so makes for a model-agnostic method of identifying instances of interest. In doing so, we can also
determine the appropriateness of the model and
data in the wider context of a given study. The
paper focuses on the possible applications that
such a framework brings to the relatively unexplored field of instance analysis in the context of
Explainable AI tasks.

There still remain no clear methods to understand
how instances contribute to a model, particularly in the
presence of possibly degenerate data. The needs techniques
to analyse data-sets and the instance space remain to spread
out over many sub-fields such as Outlier and Anomaly
detection, Instance Selection, and Statistical Influence
Measures among many others (Escalante, 2005; Cook &
Weisberg, 1982; Pope, 1976; Li et al., 2017). Many of
the algorithms in these fields are designed for specific
tasks meaning that it remains difficult for a data analyst
to determine where to start probing the data. The task of
analysing such instances has many challenges that must
be overcome, in particular this lack of unifying definition
across the various sub-fields mentioned in the context of
Machine Learning tasks. A particularly relevant method
that provides insights into instances using Shapley Values
is that of Data Shapley values (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019;
Jia et al., 2019) and Distributional Data Shapley values
(Ghorbani et al., 2020), which decompose the contribution
of each instance to the loss term of a model to determine a
final ‘value’ for each instance. This ‘value’ of an instance
can then be used to determine how valuable or useful an
instance or similar instances may be (for the purposes of
data valuation tasks such as data warehousing). However,
the ‘value’ of an instance is derived from three sources: the
algorithm; data; and the choice of valuation method. Little
insight is provided into how the interaction of these three
plays into the final ‘value’ of this data.

1. Introduction and Related work
Often, the task of identifying instances of interest from
particular data lies with individual researchers’ intuitions,
experience, or knowledge. It is typically the case that we
place importance on some kinds of data more than others.
It is therefore desirable to quantify the impact that each
instance has on the model, and each other for a given
task. The tasks of determining outliers and influential
instances have been extensively studied in Statistics
(Cook, 1979; Hawkins, 1980; Hadi et al., 2009; Sullivan
et al., 2021), Databases Analysis (Angiulli et al., 2009),
Machine Learning (Escalante, 2005; Breunig et al., 2000;
Liu et al., 2008), and more. This issue however remains
context dependent and difficult to approach for general
cases, especially in many contemporary machine learning
problems where explainability is highly desired (Shin,
2021; Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017).
Explainable design of algorithms and techniques in
the field of Machine Learning has seen significant research
interest in recent years (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017;
Miller, 2019; Das & Rad, 2020). In particular, post-hoc
1

School of Computing, Australian National University,
Canberra, Australia.
Correspondence to: Tommy Liu
<tommy.liu@anu.edu.au>.

In this paper, we aim to demonstrate how choices
regarding the analysis of instances can be aided with
contemporary explainability frameworks such as the
Shapley Value (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Shapley, 1953).
We introduce a method to generally analyse data instances

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

