Internet Explorer: Targeted Representation Learning on the Open Web

Alexander C. Li * 1 Ellis Brown * 1 Alexei A. Efros 2 Deepak Pathak 1
Standard Pre-Training Setting

Abstract
Modern vision models typically rely on finetuning general-purpose models pre-trained on
large, static datasets. These general-purpose models only capture the knowledge within their pretraining datasets, which are tiny, out-of-date snapshots of the Internet—where billions of images
are uploaded each day. We suggest an alternate
approach: rather than hoping our static datasets
transfer to our desired tasks after large-scale pretraining, we propose dynamically utilizing the
Internet to quickly train a small-scale model that
does extremely well on the task at hand. Our approach, called Internet Explorer, explores the web
in a self-supervised manner to progressively find
relevant examples that improve performance on
a desired target dataset. It cycles between searching for images on the Internet with text queries,
self-supervised training on downloaded images,
determining which images were useful, and prioritizing what to search for next. We evaluate Internet Explorer across several datasets and show
that it outperforms or matches CLIP oracle performance by using just a single GPU desktop to actively query the Internet for 30–40 hours. Results,
visualizations, videos, and code on our website:
internet-explorer-ssl.github.io/

pre-train
once

fine-tune

model
static dataset

target dataset

Our Setting: Continually Explore the Internet
focus on
knowledge gaps

model
target dataset

learn from
new data
Internet

Figure 1. Given unlabeled data for a target task, our approach,
Internet Explorer, searches the Internet to progressively find more
and more relevant training data via self-supervised exploration.

transfer well to any kind of downstream task not known in
advance. This has led to a race to build ultra-large-scale
models in terms of computation, model size, and dataset
size. But is this goal of building an “omniscient” pre-trained
model that can work on any future downstream task even
feasible? Perhaps not, as our world is continually changing. Although the size of the pretraining datasets has grown
from 1.2M (Deng et al., 2009) to 5B (Schuhmann et al.,
2022) images, what has not changed at all is their nature:
these datasets are curated and, more importantly, static. For
instance, the portion of ImageNet curated before 2007 has
no idea what an iPhone is. Furthermore, although a few
hundred million images represent a staggering quantity of
visual data, they are minuscule compared to the entire Internet, where billions of new photos are uploaded every day.
Thus, current static datasets, however big they become, fail
to capture the richness and dynamic nature of the data available on the Internet. Moreover, as our static datasets grow,
they require increasingly inaccessible amounts of compute.

1. Introduction
Suppose you have a small dataset and need to train a model
for some task, say classification. A pipeline that has become standard today is to download the latest pre-trained
deep network and fine-tune it on your own small dataset.
This pre-trained model used to be ImageNet-based (Deng
et al., 2009; He et al., 2016) and now would probably be
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). The implicit goal set by the
community for such pre-trained models is that they should
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of
California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Alexander Li <alexanderli@cmu.edu>, Ellis Brown <ellisbrown@cmu.edu>.

In this paper, we rethink the idea of generic large-scale
pretraining and propose an alternate paradigm: train a smallscale but up-to-date model geared towards the specific downstream task of interest. To do so, we look beyond static
datasets and treat the Internet itself as a dynamic, openended dataset. Unlike conventional datasets, which are

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

