Neural Wasserstein Gradient Flows for Discrepancies with Riesz Kernels

Fabian Altekrüger 1 2 Johannes Hertrich 2 Gabriele Steidl 2

Abstract

dient descent (Dong et al., 2023; Grathwohl et al., 2020;
di Langosco et al., 2022). In combination with deep-learning
techniques, these representations can be used for generative
modeling, see, e.g., (Ansari et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2019;
Glaser et al., 2021; Hagemann et al., 2022; 2023; Song
et al., 2021; Song & Ermon, 2019; Welling & Teh, 2011).
For approximating Wasserstein gradient flows for more general functionals, a backward discretization scheme in time,
known as Jordan-Kinderlehrer-Otto (JKO) scheme (Giorgi,
1993; Jordan et al., 1998) can be used. Its basic idea is to
discretize the whole flow in time by applying iteratively
the Wasserstein proximal operator with respect to F. In
case of absolutely continuous measures, Brenier’s theorem
(Brenier, 1987) can be applied to rewrite this operator via
transport maps having convex potentials and to learn these
transport maps (Fan et al., 2022) or their potentials (AlvarezMelis et al., 2022; Bunne et al., 2022; Mokrov et al., 2021)
by neural networks (NNs). In most papers, the objective
functional arises from Kullback-Leibler divergence or its
relatives, which restricts the considerations to absolutely
continuous measures.

Wasserstein gradient flows of maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) functionals with non-smooth
Riesz kernels show a rich structure as singular
measures can become absolutely continuous ones
and conversely. In this paper we contribute to
the understanding of such flows. We propose
to approximate the backward scheme of Jordan,
Kinderlehrer and Otto for computing such Wasserstein gradient flows as well as a forward scheme
for so-called Wasserstein steepest descent flows
by neural networks (NNs). Since we cannot restrict ourselves to absolutely continuous measures,
we have to deal with transport plans and velocity
plans instead of usual transport maps and velocity
fields. Indeed, we approximate the disintegration of both plans by generative NNs which are
learned with respect to appropriate loss functions.
In order to evaluate the quality of both neural
schemes, we benchmark them on the interaction
energy. Here we provide analytic formulas for
Wasserstein schemes starting at a Dirac measure
and show their convergence as the time step size
tends to zero. Finally, we illustrate our neural
MMD flows by numerical examples.

In this paper, we are interested in gradient flows with respect
to discrepancy functionals which are also defined for singular measures. Moreover, in contrast to Langevin Monte
Carlo algorithms, no analytical form of the target measure
is required. The maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) is
2
defined as DK
(µ, ν) := EK (µ − ν), where EK is the interaction energy for signed measures
Z Z
1
K(x, y) dη(x)dη(y)
EK (η) :=
2 Rd Rd

1. Introduction
Wasserstein gradient flows of certain functionals F gained
increasing attention in generative modeling over the last
years. If F is given by the Kullback-Leibler divergence,
the corresponding gradient flow can be represented by the
Fokker-Planck equation and the Langevin equation (Jordan et al., 1998; Otto, 2001; Otto & Westdickenberg, 2005;
Pavliotis, 2014) and is related to the Stein variational gra-

and K : Rd × Rd → R is a conditionally positive definite
kernel. Then, we consider gradient flows with respect to the
MMD functional Fν : P2 (Rd ) → R given by
2
Fν := EK + VK,ν = DK
(·, ν) + const,

1

Department of Mathematics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Unter den Linden 6, D-10099 Berlin, Germany 2 Institute of
Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin, Straße des 17. Juni
136, D-10623 Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Fabian Altekrüger <fabian.altekrueger@hu-berlin.de>, Johannes Hertrich
<j.hertrich@math.tu-berlin.de>.

where VK,ν (µ) is the so-called potential energy
Z Z
:=
VK,ν (µ)
−
K(x, y) dν(y) dµ(x)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

acting as an attraction term between the masses of µ and ν,
while the interaction energy EK is a repulsion term enforcing
a proper spread of µ. In general, it will be essential for our

Rd

1

Rd

