simple diffusion: End-to-end diffusion for high resolution images

Emiel Hoogeboom * 1 Jonathan Heek * 1 Tim Salimans 1

Abstract
Currently, applying diffusion models in pixel
space of high resolution images is difficult. Instead, existing approaches focus on diffusion in
lower dimensional spaces (latent diffusion), or
have multiple super-resolution levels of generation referred to as cascades. The downside is that
these approaches add additional complexity to the
diffusion framework.
This paper aims to improve denoising diffusion
for high resolution images while keeping the
model as simple as possible. The paper is centered around the research question: How can one
train standard diffusion models on high resolution
images, and still obtain performance comparable
to these alternate approaches?
The four main findings are: 1) the noise schedule
should be adjusted for high resolution images,
2) It is sufficient to scale only a particular part
of the architecture, 3) dropout should be added
at specific locations in the architecture, and 4)
downsampling is an effective strategy to avoid
high resolution feature maps. Combining these
simple yet effective techniques, we achieve stateof-the-art on image generation among diffusion
models without sampling modifiers on ImageNet.

Figure 1: A dslr photo of a frog wearing a sweater, An owl
playing the piano, vivid, fantasy art, and two robots playing
chess with New York in the background. Except for the
frozen text encoder, simple diffusion is trained end-to-end
and images are generated in full pixel space.

1. Introduction
Score-based diffusion models have become increasingly
popular for data generation. In essence the idea is simple: one pre-defines a diffusion process, which gradually
destroys information by adding random noise. Then, the
opposite direction defines the denoising process, which is
approximated with a neural network.

Diffusion models have shown to be extremely effective for
image, audio, and video generation. However, for higher
resolutions the literature typically operates on lower dimensional latent spaces (latent diffusion) (Rombach et al., 2022)
or divides the generative process into multiple sub-problems,
for instance via super-resolution (cascaded diffusion) (Ho
et al., 2022) or mixtures-of-denoising-experts (Balaji et al.,
2022). The disadvantage is that these approaches introduce
additional complexity and usually do not support a single
end-to-end training setup.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Emiel Hoogeboom
<emielh@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we aim to improve standard denoising diffusion for higher resolutions while keeping the model as
1

