Stable Estimation of Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Anpeng Wu 1 Kun Kuang 1 2 Ruoxuan Xiong 3 Bo Li 4 Fei Wu 1 5 6

Abstract

Shalit et al., 2017), including economics, marketing, biology, and medicine. Non-random treatment assignments
in heterogeneous individuals or subgroups can lead to imbalanced confounders between treatment arms, which is
known as one of the primary sources of non-causal indirect
effects (Shalit et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2020). The bias caused
by imbalanced confounders is referred to as confounding
bias (Pearl, 2009b). Most of the existing causal methods
have been designed to reduce the confounding bias from
imbalanced treatment assignments. Although many causal
methods have been developed to address confounding bias
from imbalanced treatment assignments, they may still be
prone to estimation errors stemming from underrepresented
populations (Erba et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021), which
include subgroups with notably fewer samples, also known
as few-shot samples, compared to other subgroups.

Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTE)
is crucial for identifying the variation of treatment
effects across individuals or subgroups. Most existing methods estimate HTE by removing the
confounding bias from imbalanced treatment assignments. However, these methods may produce unreliable estimates of treatment effects and
potentially allocate suboptimal treatment arms
for underrepresented populations. To improve
the estimation accuracy of HTE for underrepresented populations, we propose a novel Stable CounterFactual Regression (StableCFR) to
smooth the population distribution and upsample the underrepresented subpopulations, while
balancing confounders between treatment and
control groups. Specifically, StableCFR upsamples the underrepresented data using uniform
sampling, where each disjoint subpopulation is
weighted proportional to the Lebesgue measure
of its support. Moreover, StableCFR balances
covariates by using an epsilon-greedy matching
approach. Empirical results on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our StableCFR on estimating HTE
for underrepresented populations.

For instance, in the study of the effect of a particular treatment on specific influenza across different age groups, physicians will assign different treatment recommendations (e.g.,
taking the drug or not) according to the patient’s individual circumstances (e.g., age). As shown on the left side in
Fig. 1(a), doctors will advise younger people to take the
medication more often and advise older people not to take it,
and the imbalanced treatment assignments would introduce
confounding bias. Besides, the non-random health-seeking
behavior of individuals and different age distribution in various regions can lead to issues of sample representativeness
in certain sample spaces. As shown on the right side in
Fig. 1(a), many-shot samples (representing the majority of
the population) aged between 20 and 80 make up 90% of
the data, while few-shot samples (representing underrepresented subpopulations such as both younger and older
patient groups) are relatively rare, comprising only 10%
of the data. Due to limited availability of these few-shot
samples, they may be underrepresented in the dataset. This
can cause traditional causal models to underestimate the
importance of these rare subgroups (see Fig. 1(b)), leading
to higher estimation errors (see Fig. 1(c)). Consequently,
the estimation of HTE may become unreliable, potentially
resulting in suboptimal treatments for worst-case samples.

1. Introduction
The estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects (HTE)
is a crucial problem in causal inference that has been gaining increasing attention across various fields (Imbens et al.,
2015; LaLonde, 1986; Pearl, 2009b; Mooij et al., 2016;
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, China 2 Key Laboratory for Corneal Diseases Research
of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, China 3 Department of
Quantitative Theory and Methods, Emory University, Atlanta, USA
4
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China 6 Shanghai
Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we systematically investigate the primary
sources of errors in heterogeneous treatment effect estimation for underrepresented populations. As illustrated
in Fig. 1(a), we separate the estimation error of HTE into

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

