Constrained Optimization via Exact Augmented Lagrangian
and Randomized Iterative Sketching

Ilgee Hong 1 * Sen Na 2 3 * Michael W. Mahoney 2 3 4 Mladen Kolar 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

We study constrained optimization problems of the form

We consider solving equality-constrained nonlinear, nonconvex optimization problems. This class
of problems appears widely in a variety of applications in machine learning and engineering, ranging from constrained deep neural networks, to
optimal control, to PDE-constrained optimization. We develop an adaptive inexact Newton
method for this problem class. In each iteration,
we solve the Lagrangian Newton system inexactly via a randomized iterative sketching solver,
and select a suitable stepsize by performing line
search on an exact augmented Lagrangian merit
function. The randomized solvers have advantages over deterministic linear system solvers by
significantly reducing per-iteration flops complexity and storage cost, when equipped with suitable
sketching matrices. Our method adaptively controls the accuracy of the randomized solver and
the penalty parameters of the exact augmented
Lagrangian, to ensure that the inexact Newton
direction is a descent direction of the exact augmented Lagrangian. This allows us to establish
a global almost sure convergence. We also show
that a unit stepsize is admissible locally, so that
our method exhibits a local linear convergence.
Furthermore, we prove that the linear convergence
can be strengthened to superlinear convergence if
we gradually sharpen the adaptive accuracy condition on the randomized solver. We demonstrate
the superior performance of our method on benchmark nonlinear problems in CUTEst test set, constrained logistic regression with data from LIBSVM, and a PDE-constrained problem.

min f (x)

x∈Rn

s.t. c(x) = 0,

(1)

where f : Rn → R is the objective function, c : Rn → Rm
is the equality constraint function, and both of them are nonlinear, possibly nonconvex, and twice continuously differentiable. Problem (1) appears widely (as a subproblem) in a
variety of applications, including constrained deep neural
networks (Chen et al., 2018), physical informed neural networks (Cuomo et al., 2022), PDE-constrained optimization
(Kouri et al., 2014), optimal control (Lewis et al., 2012), and
constrained model estimations (Scott & Tůma, 2022). There
exist numerous methods for solving Problem (1), such as
projected first- and second-order methods, penalty methods,
augmented Lagrangian methods, and sequential quadratic
programming (SQP) methods (Nocedal & Wright, 2006).
Among these methods, SQP is one of the most effective
methods for both small and large problems. Compared to
projected methods, SQP does not involve a projection step
that is generally expensive for nonlinear equality constraints.
Compared to penalty methods, SQP does not regularize the
objective that destroys the structure of the problem and suffer from ill-conditioning issue (Krishnapriyan et al., 2021).
Compared to augmented Lagrangian methods, SQP is more
robust to the (dual) initialization (Curtis et al., 2014a).
With only equality constraints, SQP is equivalent to an application of Newton method to the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker
(KKT) conditions (i.e., first-order optimality conditions). As
the second-order method, SQP is (not surprisingly) very efficient, taking only a few iterations to find a local solution to
the problem; while, at the same time, it can struggle to solve
the Newton system (of the Lagrangian) efficiently at each
step. Solving Newton systems dominates the computational
cost of Newton methods, and deriving exact Newton directions is often prohibitive for large-scale problems.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Chicago 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley 3 International Computer Science Institute 4 Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory 5 Booth School of Business, University of
Chicago. Correspondence to: Sen Na <senna@berkeley.edu>.

1.1. Main Results
Motivated by the above bottleneck, we propose an adaptive
inexact Newton (SQP) method for Problem (1) that applies
randomized iterative sketching solvers to solve Newton systems inexactly. Our method is called AdaSketch-Newton.
At each step, AdaSketch-Newton solves the Lagrangian New-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

