Nearly-tight Bounds for Deep Kernel Learning

Yi-Fan Zhang 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 2 3

Abstract

fectly fit the training data even with random labels, this
sparked a rush to explain this phenomenon through generalization analysis based on complexity measures. The problem of understanding deep learning theoretically remains
relatively under-explored. Meanwhile, kernel machines
have a perfect fit of training data while guaranteeing that
they generalize well (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Belkin
et al., 2018). Therefore, the progress on understanding deep
learning is also greatly affected by the new theoretical research of kernel methods.

The generalization analysis of deep kernel learning (DKL) is a crucial and open problem of kernel
methods for deep learning. The implicit nonlinear mapping in DKL makes existing methods of
capacity-based generalization analysis for deep
learning invalid. In an attempt to overcome this
challenge and make up for the gap in the generalization theory of DKL, we develop an analysis
method based on the composite relationship of
function classes and derive capacity-based bounds
with mild dependence on the depth, which generalizes learning theory bounds to deep kernels and
serves as theoretical guarantees for the generalization of DKL. In this paper, we prove novel and
nearly-tight generalization bounds based on the
uniform covering number and the Rademacher
chaos complexity for deep (multiple) kernel machines. In addition, for some common classes,
we estimate their uniform covering numbers
and Rademacher chaos complexities by bounding their pseudo-dimensions and kernel pseudodimensions, respectively. The mild bounds without strong assumptions partially explain the good
generalization ability of deep learning combined
with kernel methods.

In recent years, efforts to explain why deep models generalize well have become a hot and important open problem in
learning theory. Uniform convergence is a powerful tool in
learning theory for understanding the generalization ability
of learners, and it is also widely used in the generalization
analysis of deep learning. Although ongoing endeavors have
developed a considerable amount of non-vacuous generalization error bounds that reflect weak dependence or even independence on the network width and depth, these theoretical
results are elaborate and algorithm-based (i.e. theoretical
analysis incorporates the implicit regularization of stochastic gradient descent (SGD)) (Neyshabur et al., 2017; Soudry
et al., 2018; He et al., 2019; Foret et al., 2021; Lei & Ying,
2021), which makes such theoretical results not applicable
to all deep models. The capacity/complexity-based generalization analysis can provide a general theoretical guarantee
for the surprising generalization performance of deep learning. However, capacity-based generalization bounds tend
to have a strong dependence on the network depth, which
makes theoretical results often of limited significance.

1. Introduction
Recent work in machine learning has given a revival of
attention to deep learning due to its impressive empirical advances across a wide range of tasks. Deep models are typically heavily over-parametrized, while they
still achieve good generalization performance, Zhang et al.
(2017) showed that deep neural networks can almost per-

Deep kernel learning (DKL), which combines the representation power and structural prior knowledge of deep learning
with the non-parametric flexibility of kernel methods, is an
important problem of kernel methods for deep learning. A
satisfactory and complete study of deep kernel learning
should cover three aspects: 1) the design of deep kernels,
2) the efficiency of training algorithms, and 3) the analysis of generalization property. The design of deep kernels
has been developed to a certain extent (Cho & Saul, 2009;
Wilson et al., 2016b;a; Al-Shedivat et al., 2017; Lee et al.,
2018), which mainly benefits from Gaussian processes. In
terms of training algorithms, the studies are often related to
specific deep kernel machines (Cho & Saul, 2009; Mairal
et al., 2014; Al-Shedivat et al., 2017) or involve many heuris-

1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry
of Education, China 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

