WL meet VC
Christopher Morris * 1 Floris Geerts * 2 Jan Tönshoff 1 Martin Grohe 1

Abstract

learning for graph-structured, most notably those based on
graph kernels (Borgwardt et al., 2020; Kriege et al., 2020) or
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Chami et al., 2020; Gilmer
et al., 2017; Morris et al., 2021). Here, graph kernels (Shervashidze et al., 2011) based on the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–
Leman algorithm (1-WL) (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968), a
well-studied heuristic for the graph isomorphism problem,
and corresponding GNNs (Morris et al., 2019; Xu et al.,
2019), have recently advanced the state-of-the-art in supervised vertex- and graph-level learning (Morris et al., 2021).
Further, based on the k-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (k-WL), 1-WL’s more powerful generalization, several works generalized GNNs to higher-order GNNs (kGNNs), resulting in provably more expressive architectures,
e.g., Azizian & Lelarge (2021); Geerts & Reutter (2022);
Maron et al. (2019); Morris et al. (2019; 2020b; 2021; 2022).

Recently, many works studied the expressive
power of graph neural networks (GNNs) by linking it to the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (1-WL). Here, the 1-WL is a well-studied
heuristic for the graph isomorphism problem,
which iteratively colors or partitions a graph’s
vertex set. While this connection has led to significant advances in understanding and enhancing
GNNs’ expressive power, it does not provide insights into their generalization performance, i.e.,
their ability to make meaningful predictions beyond the training set. In this paper, we study
GNNs’ generalization ability through the lens of
Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension theory in
two settings, focusing on graph-level predictions.
First, when no upper bound on the graphs’ order
is known, we show that the bitlength of GNNs’
weights tightly bounds their VC dimension. Further, we derive an upper bound for GNNs’ VC
dimension using the number of colors produced
by the 1-WL. Secondly, when an upper bound
on the graphs’ order is known, we show a tight
connection between the number of graphs distinguishable by the 1-WL and GNNs’ VC dimension.
Our empirical study confirms the validity of our
theoretical findings.

While devising provably expressive GNN-like architectures
is a meaningful endeavor, it only partially addresses the
challenges of machine learning with graphs. That is, expressiveness results reveal little about an architecture’s ability
to generalize to graphs outside the training set. Surprisingly,
only a few notable contributions study GNNs’ generalization behaviors, e.g., Garg et al. (2020); Kriege et al. (2018);
Liao et al. (2021); Maskey et al. (2022); Scarselli et al.
(2018). However, these approaches express GNN’s generalization ability using only classical graph parameters, e.g.,
maximum degree, number of vertices, or edges, which cannot fully capture the complex structure of real-world graphs.
Further, most approaches study generalization in the nonuniform regime, i.e., assuming that the GNNs operate on
graphs of a pre-specified order. Further, they only investigate the case k = 1, i.e., standard GNNs, ignoring more
expressive generalizations; see the previous paragraph.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data are prevalent across application domains ranging from chemo- and bioinformatics (Barabasi
& Oltvai, 2004; Jumper et al., 2021; Stokes et al., 2020)
to image (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2017) and socialnetwork analysis (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010), indicating
the importance of machine learning methods for such data.
Nowadays, there are numerous approaches for machine

1.1. Present work
This paper investigates the influence of graph structure and
the parameters’ encoding lengths on GNNs’ generalization by tightly connecting 1-WL’s expressivity and GNNs’
Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension. Specifically, our
contributions are:

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. Correspondence to: Christopher Morris <morris@cs.rwth-aachen.de>.

1. In the non-uniform regime, we prove tight bounds on
GNNs’ VC dimension. We show that GNNs’ VC dimension depends tightly on the number of equivalence

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

