Efficient RL via Disentangled Environment and Agent Representations

Kevin Gmelin * 1 Shikhar Bahl * 1 Russell Mendonca 1 Deepak Pathak 1

Abstract
Robot

Agents that are aware of the separation between
themselves and their environments can leverage
this understanding to form effective representations of visual input. We propose an approach for
learning such structured representations for RL
algorithms, using visual knowledge of the agent,
such as its shape or mask, which is often inexpensive to obtain. This is incorporated into the RL
objective using a simple auxiliary loss. We show
that our method, Structured Environment-Agent
Representations (SEAR), outperforms state-ofthe-art model-free approaches over 18 different
challenging visual simulation environments spanning 5 different robots.

World

Control

Environment

Figure 1: SEAR learns structured representations for visual
control, by leveraging knowledge of the robot.

as objects in the environment. Thus, by explicitly forcing
the learning algorithm to disentangle agent-centric representations, we also implicitly create environment-centric
ones. This allows for visual RL approaches to not only learn
faster but makes the representations interpretable. Consider
a policy trained on a door-opening task with one type of
robot. If it is aware of the agent-environment distinction,
then it will be able to adapt a lot faster when deployed on
a new robot, or a new task like opening a drawer, since it
will not need to relearn visual appearance and it can focus
just on dynamics. How can we incorporate this into an RL
training setup?

1. Introduction
Proprioception, i.e. the knowledge of one’s own self, is
heavily used by biological entities enabling them to perform
various real-world tasks such as walking, manipulation, and
navigation. Awareness of the position and movement of
their body, and perceiving the environment as external to
themselves, enables forming efficient representations of
the observed input (Shapiro, 2010). In contrast, most contemporary methods in visual reinforcement learning (RL)
often learn combined representations in an end-to-end manner (Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Arulkumaran et al., 2017;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Levine et al., 2016; Peters et al.,
2010) and require large amounts of data as a result. Inspired
by the concept of the interface between the “inner” and
“outer” environments, we study the following question: is
there a natural way to build a representation that can disentangle a robotic agent from its environment, and does that
improve learning efficiency for RL?

Our solution is simple: we augment the RL loss with an
agent-centric auxiliary loss. Naively doing so using proprioceptive data like joint angles or end-effector positions does
not result in the desired representations, as these are not
grounded in the visual observation space, and do not contain information about the robot’s appearance. We find that
the most grounded forms of supervision are agent masks.
If some information is known about the agent, it is often
quite practical to obtain (even rough) masks for agents, for
example, by training a segmentation model.

We argue that knowledge of the agent allows RL algorithms
to focus on more interesting aspects of the visual input, such
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Kevin Gmelin <kgmelin11@gmail.com>, Shikhar Bahl
<sbahl2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Our
approach,
Structured
Environment-Agent
Representations (SEAR), formulates the agent-environment
representation learning problem as an auxiliary loss to the
RL objective. This loss is the sum of the reconstruction loss
of the agent mask and the full image as shown in Figure 2.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

