Tight Data Access Bounds for Private Top-k Selection

Hao Wu 1 Olga Ohrimenko 1 Anthony Wirth 1

Abstract

pothesis testing (Qiao et al., 2021), etc.
In recent years, a significant progress has been made towards
understanding how accurate the algorithms for this problem
can be. For example, (Bafna & Ullman, 2017; Steinke &
Ullman, 2017) provide lower bounds for the problem in
terms of sample complexity, which can be achieved by a
number of existing algorithms (Durfee & Rogers, 2019;
Qiao et al., 2021).

We study the top-k selection problem under the differential privacy model: m items are rated according to votes
of a set of clients. We consider a setting in which algorithms can retrieve data via a sequence of accesses, each
either a random access or a sorted access; the goal is to
minimize the total number
√ of data accesses. Our algorithm requires only O( mk) expected accesses: to our
knowledge, this is the first sublinear data-access upper
bound for this problem. Our analysis also shows that
the√
well-known exponential mechanism requires only
O( m) expected accesses. Accompanying this, we
develop the first lower bounds for the problem, in three
settings: only random accesses; only sorted accesses;
a sequence of accesses of either kind. We show that,
to avoid Ω(m) access cost, supporting both kinds of
access is necessary, and that in this case our algorithm’s
access cost is optimal.

Another line of research is devoted to improving the efficiency of the algorithms. Early works such as the peeling
solution (Bhaskar et al., 2010) need to iterate k times over
all items. The improved mechanisms (Durfee & Rogers,
2019; Qiao et al., 2021) iterate over each item only once.
Since k can be much smaller than m, the research community remains interested in the following question:
Is there a private top-k selection algorithm that accesses
only a sublinear number of items?
Although it seems to be an unachievable target, it is possible to address this question by considering how items are
accessed. For example, Durfee & Rogers (2019) consider
the setting where the data has been pre-processed and resides in an existing data analytics system, that can return
the items in sorted order (which we refer to as sorted access
in our paper). Their top-k algorithm can make a sublinear
number of accesses at a cost of potentially returning fewer
than k items, while to guarantee that k items are returned,
the number of retrieved items can be m. Since retrieving
information from an existing system incurs corresponding
query processing and communication cost, it is crucial to
minimize the number of data accesses.

1. Introduction
We consider the differentially private top-k selection problem; there are m items to be rated according to n clients’
votes. Each client can either vote or not vote for each item,
and can vote for an unlimited number of items. Since this
data can be sensitive (e.g., visited websites, purchased items,
or watched movies), the goal is to identify a set of k items
with approximately the highest number of votes, while concealing the votes of individual clients.
Private top-k selection is a fundamental primitive and underlies a wide range of differentially private machine learning
and data analytics tasks such as discovering frequent patterns from data (Bhaskar et al., 2010), training wide neural
networks (Zhang et al., 2021), tracking data streams (Cardoso & Rogers, 2022), false discovery rate control in hy-

In this paper, we systematically investigate the minimum
number of items an algorithm needs to evaluate (a.k.a. access cost) , in order to answer the private top-k selection
problem. In addition to sorted access, we also consider
another common way of accessing items’ data, i.e., the random access, in which an algorithm can actively request the
data of an arbitrary item.1 Both types of accesses have been
considered by previous literature for the non-private version of top-k selection problem (see Ilyas et al. (2008) for a
comprehensive survey).

1

School of Computing and Information Systems,
The University of Melbourne.
Correspondence to:
Hao Wu <whw4@student.unimelb.edu.au>, Olga Ohrimenko <oohrimenko@unimelb.edu.au>, Anthony Wirth
<awirth@unimelb.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Here random carries the sense of Random Access Memory
(RAM), rather than the outcome of a random process.

1

