Flipping Coins to Estimate Pseudocounts
for Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

Sam Lobel * 1 Akhil Bagaria * 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract

it (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017).
While providing the first way to estimate pseudocounts,
Bellemare et al. (2016)’s relationship between counts and
probability densities exists only when the density model
meets the following restrictions (Ostrovski et al., 2017):

We propose a new method for count-based exploration in high-dimensional state spaces. Unlike
previous work which relies on density models,
we show that counts can be derived by averaging samples from the Rademacher distribution (or
coin flips). This insight is used to set up a simple
supervised learning objective which, when optimized, yields a state’s visitation count. We show
that our method is significantly more effective at
deducing ground-truth visitation counts than previous work; when used as an exploration bonus
for a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm,
it outperforms existing approaches on most of 9
challenging exploration tasks, including the Atari
game M ONTEZUMA’ S R EVENGE.

• It must output normalized probability densities, which
precludes many powerful density models.
• It must be learning-positive, which means that the
probability density of a state must increase when it is
encountered by the density model again.
• It must be updated exactly once per state visitation,
precluding common techniques such as batching.
These requirements make density-based pseudocounts challenging to implement and sensitive to network architecture and hyperparameters such as learning rate. In light
of these restrictions, it is tempting to forego count-based
exploration in favor of other novelty estimates based on
dynamics (Pathak et al., 2017) or observation (Burda et al.,
2019) prediction errors. But prediction-error based methods
do not tell us how an exploration bonus should decay with
repeated visits. Furthermore, they do not enjoy the same
theoretical foundations afforded by count-based methods
(Strehl & Littman, 2008; Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018).
For instance, count-based bonuses lead to near-optimal policies even when environments are highly stochastic; no such
guarantees exist for prediction-error based methods.

1. Introduction
Deep exploration is crucial to solving long-horizon problems using reinforcement learning (RL) (Osband et al.,
2016). When the number of states is small, an agent can
simply keep track of how many times it has visited each
state. This count can then be used as an exploration bonus
to train a near-optimal policy (Strehl & Littman, 2008).
When the world is much bigger than the agent, it may never
revisit the same state (Sutton et al., 2022). To facilitate
count-based exploration in such domains, the notion of visitation counts has been generalized to that of “pseudocounts”
(Bellemare et al., 2016) which behave similarly to counts but
can be meaningfully applied in large or infinite state-spaces.
Previous methods have equated the problem of estimating
pseudocounts to the canonical machine learning problem of
density estimation: the more informative a given state is to
the model while learning, the higher the reward for reaching

We hypothesize that count-based exploration can be more
effective than prediction-error based methods if we can compute pseudocounts under a less restrictive setting. Our core
insight is that a state’s visitation count can be derived from
the sampling distribution of Rademacher trials made every
time a state is encountered. We train a neural network, the
Coin Flip Network (CFN), to predict the average of this
sampling distribution; by solving this supervised learning
problem, we output the inverse of the state’s visitation count.
Unlike other pseudocount methods (Ostrovski et al., 2017),
we do not place any restrictions on the type of function
approximator or the procedure used to train it, thereby allowing a practitioner to select the model architecture best
suited to their input modality.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. Correspondence
to: Sam Lobel <samuel lobel@brown.edu>, Akhil Bagaria
<akhil bagaria@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

