Q-Flow: Generative Modeling for Differential Equations of Open Quantum
Dynamics with Normalizing Flows

Owen Dugan 1 2 Peter Y. Lu 3 2 Rumen Dangovski 4 2 Di Luo 2 5 6 Marin Soljačić 1 2

Abstract
Studying the dynamics of open quantum systems
can enable breakthroughs both in fundamental
physics and applications to quantum engineering and quantum computation. Since the density matrix ρ, which is the fundamental description for the dynamics of such systems, is highdimensional, customized deep generative neural
networks have been instrumental in modeling ρ.
However, the complex-valued nature and normalization constraints of ρ, as well as its complicated dynamics, prohibit a seamless connection
between open quantum systems and the recent
advances in deep generative modeling. Here we
lift that limitation by utilizing a reformulation
of open quantum system dynamics to a partial
differential equation (PDE) for a corresponding
probability distribution Q, the Husimi Q function. Thus, we model the Q function seamlessly
with off-the-shelf deep generative models such
as normalizing flows. Additionally, we develop
novel methods for learning normalizing flow evolution governed by high-dimensional PDEs based
on the Euler method and the application of the
time-dependent variational principle. We name
the resulting approach Q-Flow and demonstrate
the scalability and efficiency of Q-Flow on open
quantum system simulations, including the dissipative harmonic oscillator and the dissipative
bosonic model. Q-Flow is superior to conventional PDE solvers and state-of-the-art physicsinformed neural network solvers, especially in
high-dimensional systems.

reformulation
used in
our work
Euler method (ours)

modeled with normalizing flows
(ours)

Figure 1. Q-Flow. We reformulate differential equations for density matrix dynamics as PDEs for probability distribution dynamics.
We use off-the-shelf normalizing flows and our Euler-KL method
for solving such PDEs.

1. Introduction
Understanding open quantum system dynamics is crucial
for fundamental physics and high-impact scientific applications such as quantum engineering and quantum computation (Verstraete et al., 2009; Barreiro et al., 2011).
The state of an open quantum system is given by the density matrix ρ, which is an exponentially scaling object with
a size that grows as N 2k for k subsystems each with a
Hilbert space of dimension N . Thus, computing or evolving ρ becomes infeasible as k increases due to the curse
of dimensionality. Pioneering work on representing ρ in a
compact form as a customized deep generative neural network has shown great promise in advancing the frontier of
understanding high-dimensional quantum systems (Vicentini et al., 2019; Yoshioka & Hamazaki, 2019; Hartmann
& Carleo, 2019; Nagy & Savona, 2019). However, a number of computational challenges remain when solving for ρ,
which motivates the development of novel machine learning
methods. Notable challenges are:

1
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental
Interactions 3 Data Science Institute, University of Chicago 4 MIT
EECS 5 Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 6 Department of Physics, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Di Luo <diluo@mit.edu>.

1. The density matrix ρ is complex-valued and has the
constraint tr[ρ] = 1. That makes it non-trivial to model
with standard generative models that are real-valued.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

2. The differential equation that governs the dynamics of
ρ models complicated interactions in high-dimensional
1

