A Statistical Perspective on Retrieval-Based Models

Soumya Basu * 1 Ankit Singh Rawat * 2 Manzil Zaheer * 3

Abstract

homogeneously scale the size of a parametric model, such
as neural networks, which has been behind many recent
high-performance models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020) and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Their performance
(accuracy) exhibits a monotonic behavior with increasing
model size, as demonstrated by “scaling laws” (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). Such large models, however,
have their own limitations, including high computation cost,
catastrophic forgeting (hard to adapt to changing data), lack
of provenance, and poor explainability. Classical instancebased models (Fix & Hodges, 1989), on the other hand, offer
many desirable properties by design — efficient data structures, incremental learning (easy addition and deletion of
knowledge), and some provenance for its prediction based
on the nearest neighbors w.r.t. the input. However, these
models often suffer from weaker empirical performance as
compared to deep parametric models.

Many modern high-performing machine learning
models increasingly rely on scaling up models,
e.g., transformer networks. Simultaneously, a parallel line of work aims to improve the model performance by augmenting an input instance with
other (labeled) instances during inference. Examples of such augmentations include task-specific
prompts and similar examples retrieved from the
training data by a nonparametric component. Despite a growing literature showcasing the promise
of these retrieval-based models, their theoretical
underpinnings remain under-explored. In this paper, we present a formal treatment of retrievalbased models to characterize their performance
via a novel statistical perspective. In particular,
we study two broad classes of retrieval-based classification approaches: First, we analyze a local
learning framework that employs an explicit local
empirical risk minimization based on retrieved
examples for each input instance. Interestingly,
we show that breaking down the underlying learning task into local sub-tasks enables the model to
employ a low complexity parametric component
to ensure good overall performance. The second
class of retrieval-based approaches we explore
learns a global model using kernel methods to
directly map an input instance and retrieved examples to a prediction, without explicitly solving
a local learning task.

Increasingly, a middle ground combining the two paradigms
and retaining the best of both worlds is becoming popular
across various domains, ranging from natural language (Das
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Izacard et al.,
2022), to vision (Liu et al., 2015; 2019; Iscen et al., 2022;
Long et al., 2022), to reinforcement learning (Blundell et al.,
2016; Pritzel et al., 2017; Ritter et al., 2020), to even protein
structure prediction (Cramer, 2021). In such approaches,
given a test input, one first retrieves relevant entries from
a data index and then processes the retrieved entries along
with the test input to make the final predictions using an ML
model. This process is visualized in Fig. 1c.
While classical learning setups (cf. Fig. 1a and 1b) have
been studied extensively over decades, even basic properties and trade-offs pertaining to retrieval-based models
(cf. Fig. 1c), despite their aforementioned remarkable successes, remain highly under-explored. Most of the existing
efforts on retrieval-based models solely focus on developing end-to-end domain-specific models, without identifying
the key dataset properties or structures that are critical in
realizing performance gains by such models. Furthermore,
at first glance, due to the highly dependent nature of an
input and the associated retrieved set, direct application of
existing statistical learning techniques does not appear as
straightforward. This prompts a natural question:
What is the right theoretical framework to rigorously
showcase the value of the retrieved set in ensuring superior
performance of modern retrieval-based models?

1. Introduction
As our world is complex, we need expressive machine learning (ML) models to make high-accuracy predictions on
real-world problems. There are multiple ways to increase
the expressiveness of an ML model. A popular way is to
*

Equal contribution; in alphabetical order 1 Google, Mountain
View, USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA 3 Google DeepMind, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Soumya Basu <basusoumya@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

