A Complete Expressiveness Hierarchy for Subgraph GNNs
via Subgraph Weisfeiler-Lehman Tests
Bohang Zhang 1 Guhao Feng * 2 3 Yiheng Du * 4 Di He 1 Liwei Wang 1 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), especially equivariant
message-passing neural networks (MPNNs), have become
the dominant approach for learning on graph-structured data
(Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling,
2017; Veličković et al., 2018). Despite their great simplicity and scalability, one major drawback of MPNNs lies in
the limited expressiveness (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al.,
2019). This motivated a variety of subsequent works to develop provably more expressive architectures, among which
subgraph GNNs have emerged as a new trend (Cotta et al.,
2021; You et al., 2021; Zhang & Li, 2021; Bevilacqua et al.,
2022; Zhao et al., 2022a; Papp & Wattenhofer, 2022; Frasca
et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022).

Recently, subgraph GNNs have emerged as an important direction for developing expressive graph
neural networks (GNNs). While numerous architectures have been proposed, so far there is still
a limited understanding of how various design
paradigms differ in terms of expressive power,
nor is it clear what design principle achieves maximal expressiveness with minimal architectural
complexity. To address these fundamental questions, this paper conducts a systematic study of
general node-based subgraph GNNs through the
lens of Subgraph Weisfeiler-Lehman Tests (SWL).
Our central result is to build a complete hierarchy of SWL with strictly growing expressivity.
Concretely, we prove that any node-based subgraph GNN falls into one of the six SWL equivalence classes, among which SSWL achieves the
maximal expressive power. We also study how
these equivalence classes differ in terms of their
practical expressiveness such as encoding graph
distance and biconnectivity. In addition, we give
a tight expressivity upper bound of all SWL algorithms by establishing a close relation with localized versions of WL and Folklore WL (FWL)
tests. Overall, our results provide insights into
the power of existing subgraph GNNs, guide the
design of new architectures, and point out their
limitations by revealing an inherent gap with the
2-FWL test. Finally, experiments demonstrate
that SSWL-inspired subgraph GNNs can significantly outperform prior architectures on multiple
benchmarks despite great simplicity.

Broadly speaking, a general (node-based) subgraph GNN
first transforms an input graph G into a collection of subgraphs, each of which is associated with a unique node in
G. It then computes a feature representation for each node
of each subgraph through a series of equivariant messagepassing layers. Finally, it outputs a representation of graph
G by pooling all these subgraph node features. Subgraph
GNNs have received great attention partly due to their elegant structure, enhanced expressiveness, message-passingbased inductive bias, and superior empirical performance
(Frasca et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022a).
One central question in subgraph GNNs lies in how to design simple yet expressive equivariant layers. Starting from
the most basic design where each node only interacts with
its local neighbors in the own subgraph (Cotta et al., 2021;
Qian et al., 2022), recent works have developed a rich family
of (cross-graph) aggregation operations (Bevilacqua et al.,
2022; Zhao et al., 2022a; Frasca et al., 2022). In particular,
Frasca et al. (2022) gave a unified characterization of the design space of subgraph GNNs based on 2-IGN (Maron et al.,
2019b;a), which contains dozens of atomic aggregations.
However, it is generally unclear whether the added aggregations can theoretically improve a model’s expressiveness
as it becomes increasingly complex. So far, a systematic investigation and comparison of various possible aggregation
schemes in terms of expressiveness is still lacking. More
fundamentally, for both theory and practice, is there a canonical design principle of subgraph GNNs that achieves the
maximal expressiveness with the least model complexity?

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Peking University 2 School of EECS, Peking University 3 Pazhou
Lab 4 Yuanpei College, Peking University 5 Center for Data Science,
Peking University. Correspondence to: Bohang Zhang <zhangbohang@pku.edu.cn>, Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang
<wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

