Toward Efficient Gradient-Based Value Estimation
Arsalan Sharifnassab 1 Richard Sutton 1

Abstract

ity problem of TD learning has inspired other classes of
value estimation algorithms that involve optimizing a loss
function through gradient updates. This includes Residual Gradient (RG) algorithm for minimizing Mean Squared
Bellman Error (MSBE) (Baird, 1995), Gradient-TD algorithms for minimizing projected Bellman error (Sutton et al.,
2009; Maei et al., 2010; Maei, 2011; Hackman, 2012), and
their extensions for optimizing a dual formulation of BE2
(Liu et al., 2015; Macua et al., 2014; Dai et al., 2017). These
algorithms enjoy the general robustness and convergence
properties of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), but are
known to be slower than TD in tabular and linear function
approximation settings (Baird, 1995; Schoknecht & Merke,
2003; Gordon, 1999; Ghiassian & Sutton, 2021) .

Gradient-based methods for value estimation in
reinforcement learning have favorable stability
properties, but they are typically much slower
than Temporal Difference (TD) learning methods.
We study the root causes of this slowness and
show that Mean Square Bellman Error (MSBE)
is an ill-conditioned loss function in the sense
that its Hessian has large condition-number. To
resolve the adverse effect of poor conditioning of
MSBE on gradient based methods, we propose a
low complexity batch-free proximal method that
approximately follows the Gauss-Newton direction and is asymptotically robust to parameterization. Our main algorithm, called RANS, is
efficient in the sense that it is significantly faster
than the residual gradient methods while having
almost the same computational complexity, and is
competitive with TD on the classic problems that
we tested.

In this paper, we investigate the root causes of the slowness problem of gradient-based value estimation by taking a
deeper look into the landscape of MSBE, and propose linear
complexity methods to alleviate these problems. We provide
theoretical results showing that MSBE is an ill-conditioned
loss function in the senses that the condition-number of
its Hessian matrix is typically very large. This explains
slowness of gradient-based value estimation methods, because gradient descent in general is slow in minimizing
ill-conditioned loss functions. In contrast, algorithms like
Newton and Gauss-Newton methods are invariant to conditioning of the loss. Unfortunately a direct implementation of
these methods requires matrix inversion, which is computationally costly even if computed incrementally. We propose
a linear complexity incremental algorithm, called Residual Approximate Gauss-Newton (RAN), that incorporates a
trace to approximate the Gauss-Newton direction and then
updates the weights along that trace. We show that RAN
can be equivalently formulated as a batch-free proximal
algorithm. A weakness of RAN is that it requires double
sampling (Baird, 1995), which limits its use in stochastic environments. We propose a double-sampling-free extension
of RAN by following similar ideas that underlie GTD-type
methods. The resulting algorithms significantly outperform
RG and GTD2, being orders of magnitudes faster on the
simple classic environments that we tested, while having
almost similar computational complexity to RG and GTD2.

1. Introduction
Value estimation is a core problem in reinforcement learning
(Sutton & Barto, 2018), and is a key ingredient in several
policy optimization methods, e.g., (Bhatnagar et al., 2009;
Minh et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015) . The popular class
of value estimation algorithms based on temporal difference
learning via forward bootstrapping; including TD(λ) (Sutton, 1988), Expected Sarsa (van Seijen et al., 2009), and
Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) have found substantial empirical success when combined with proper policy
optimization (Minh et al., 2015; Minh et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2015). Nevertheless, these algorithms are not
gradient-based optimization methods (Barnard, 1993) and
their convergence cannot be guaranteed for general function approximation setting (Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis & Van
Roy, 1997; Brandfonbrener & Bruna, 2019). The stabil1

Authors are with the Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada. Correspondence to: Arsalan Sharifnassab <sharifna@ualberta.ca>.

We then turn our focus to a second cause of slowness of
gradient-based value estimation: under function approximation, sample gradients of MSBE involve large outliers

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

