Set-membership Belief State-based Reinforcement Learning for POMDPs

Wei Wei 1 Lijun Zhang 1 Lin Li 1 Huizhong Song 1 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract

remarkable improvements in areas such as autonomous driving or robotics control with such powerful technology are
limited to simulation platforms, which have yet not been
used in widespread real-world applications (Haarnoja et al.,
2018; Richter et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021a). One of the
critical issues in real-world applications is that the agent
may have to decide under uncertain or partially observable
(i.e., the agent’s observations could be noisy or incomplete,
which cannot accurately represent the complete state). Thus
the decisions based on the observations are likely wrong. In
practical tasks, it is ubiquitous that the agents often have
to take action continuously, even when their observations
of the environment are noisy or incomplete (Somani et al.,
2013; Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Ni et al., 2022). Take
autonomous driving as an example. A running autonomous
driving car must keep moving despite its radar perception
sensors being noisy or partially occluded rather than stop
abruptly itself and then move again. In such cases, ignoring
the imperfect state information or setting specific action
selection rules is inappropriate and could even bring disaster
to the system. Consequently, it is necessary to research
the decision-making problem with noisy and incomplete
observations.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant
progress in areas such as Atari games and robotic
control, where the agents have perfect sensing
capabilities. However, in many real-world sequential decision-making tasks, the observation
data could be noisy or incomplete due to the intrinsic low quality of the sensors or unexpected
malfunctions; that is, the agent’s perceptions are
rarely perfect. The current POMDP RL methods, such as particle-based and Gaussian-based,
can only provide a probability estimate of hidden
states rather than certain belief regions, which
may lead to inefficient and even wrong decisionmaking. This paper proposes a novel algorithm
called Set-membership Belief state-based Reinforcement Learning (SBRL), which consists of
two parts: a Set-membership Belief state learning
Model (SBM) for learning bounded belief state
sets and an RL controller for making decisions
based on SBM. We prove that our belief estimation method can provide a series of belief state
sets that always contain the true states under the
unknown-but-bounded (UBB) noise. The effectiveness of the proposed method is verified on
a collection of benchmark tasks, and the results
show that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods.

Generally, this type of decision-making problem is usually
modeled as partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) (Åström, 1965; Kurniawati et al., 2008; Somani
et al., 2013), which is suitable for scenarios where an agent
cannot accurately observe the complete state of the environment. There are two main approaches for POMDPs in
the existing literature. The first type uses a recurrent neural
network (RNN) as a function approximator to learn the representation of the hidden states from the state-transition data
(Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Zhu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2022). Despite these RNN-based methods being simple and,
to some extent, practical, they are often likely suboptimal in
complex tasks due to performing inference implicitly requiring a known or learned model. The second type is the belief
inference approach, which can characterize the uncertainty
of the current hidden state by introducing particle filters,
diagonal Gaussians, or other technologies. Compared to
the first type, this method can explicitly characterize the
uncertainty of the knowledge about the current hidden state.
To mention a few, DVRL (Igl et al., 2018) and DPFRL (Ma
et al., 2020) introduce particle filter-based methods that use

1. Introduction
Boosted by advanced and rapid developments of reinforcement learning (RL), sequence decisions in stochastic environments have made considerable progress and have been
found in many applications, such as Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2015), autonomous navigation (Wang et al., 2019),
and robotics control (Kurniawati, 2021). However, most
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006. PR. China. Correspondence to: Jiye Liang <liy@sxu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

