Defects of Convolutional Decoder Networks in Frequency Representation

Ling Tang * 1 Wen Shen * 1 Zhanpeng Zhou 1 Yuefeng Chen 2 Quanshi Zhang 1 3

Abstract

We extend the 2D circular convolution theorem to reformulate the forward propagation through multiple convolutional layers in the frequency domain. We find that both
the forward propagation and the backward propagation in
a convolutional network can be represented as the matrix
multiplication on spectrums of the feature. Specifically, we
mainly analyze a convolutional decoder, which only contains convolution operations without changing the size of
feature maps. Then, based on the propagation in the frequency domain, we prove the following conclusions.

In this paper, we prove the representation defects
of a cascaded convolutional decoder1 network,
considering the capacity of representing different
frequency components of an input sample. We
conduct the discrete Fourier transform on each
channel of the feature map in an intermediate
layer of the decoder network. Then, we extend the
2D circular convolution theorem to represent the
forward and backward propagations through convolutional layers in the frequency domain. Based
on this, we prove three defects in representing
feature spectrums. First, we prove that the convolution operation, the zero-padding operation,
and a set of other settings all make a convolutional decoder network more likely to weaken
high-frequency components. Second, we prove
that the upsampling operation generates a feature
spectrum, in which strong signals repetitively appear at certain frequencies. Third, we prove that
if the frequency components in the input sample
and frequency components in the target output
for regression have a small shift, then the decoder
usually cannot be effectively learned.

• Problem in representing high-frequency components. We
prove that both the convolution operation and the zeropadding operation make a cascaded convolutional decoder
network more likely to weaken the high-frequency components of the input sample, if the convolution operation with
a padding operation does not change the size of the feature
map in a channel, as shown in Figure 1(a). Besides, we also
prove that the following three conditions further strengthen
the above representation problem, including (1) a deep network architecture; (2) a small convolutional kernel size; and
(3) a large absolute value of the mean value of convolutional
weights.
• Problem in mistakenly repeating certain frequencies. We
find that the upsampling operation makes a cascaded convolutional decoder network generate a feature spectrum, in
which strong signals repetitively appear at certain frequencies, as shown in Figure 1(b).

1. Introduction
In this study, we investigate the representation defect of
a cascaded convolutional decoder1 in generating features
at different frequencies. That is, when we apply the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) to each channel of the feature
map or the input sample, we try to prove which frequency
components of each input channel are usually strengthened/weakened by the network.

• Problem in fitting specific frequency components. More
crucially, we discover and prove that it is usually difficult
to train an auto-encoder to fit the target image, if salient
frequency components of the target output and those of
the input have a small shift in the spectrum. Considering
the continuous success of the auto-encoder in recent years,
such a phenomenon is quite contrary to intuition. As Figure 1(c) shows, a smaller shift between the input spectrum
and the output spectrum usually leads to a higher difficulty
in training the auto-encoder.

*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2 Alibaba
Group. 3 Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the John
Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Correspondence to: Quanshi Zhang <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.

The above three problems just explain general trends towards generic problems of neural networks with convolution, zero-padding, and upsampling operations, instead of
deriving a deterministic property of a specific network.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Here, the decoder represents a typical network, whose feature
map size is non-decreasing during the forward propagation.

Although most conclusions are derived by ignoring ReLU

1

