User-defined Event Sampling and Uncertainty Quantification in Diffusion
Models for Physical Dynamical Systems

Marc Finzi 1 2 3 Anudhyan Boral 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 2 Fei Sha 1 Leonardo Zepeda-Núñez 1

Abstract

merical weather prediction (Richardson, 1922; Bauer et al.,
2015), current methodologies still struggle to forecast extreme events. Heat waves (Perkins & Alexander, 2013),
flooding (Mosavi et al., 2018), and oceanic rogue waves
(Dysthe et al., 2008), are examples of catastrophic events
of enormous socio-economic impact. Part of the difficulty
of forecasting such extreme events can be attributed to the
chaotic behavior of the dynamical systems associated with
weather prediction (Lorenz, 1963; Hochman et al., 2019).
Furthermore, extreme events are often located at the tail
of the distribution and are non-trivial to characterize, rendering them hard to sample efficiently, which in return has
spun several methods seeking to attenuate this issue (Kahn
& Harris, 1951; Rosenbluth & Rosenbluth, 1955; Farazmand & Sapsis, 2019; Qi & Majda, 2020). Most of the
methods above are based on rejection-sampling (Hastings,
1970; Rossky et al., 1978), whose cost, measured as the
number of on-demand large-scale simulations of the dynamical system, increases as events become rarer, rapidly
becoming prohibitive.

Diffusion models are a class of probabilistic generative models that have been widely used as a
prior for image processing tasks like text conditional generation and inpainting. We demonstrate that these models can be adapted to
make predictions and provide uncertainty quantification for chaotic dynamical systems. In
these applications, diffusion models can implicitly represent knowledge about outliers and extreme events; however, querying that knowledge
through conditional sampling or measuring probabilities is surprisingly difficult. Existing methods for conditional sampling at inference time
seek mainly to enforce the constraints, which is
insufficient to match the statistics of the distribution or compute the probability of the chosen events. To achieve these ends, optimally
one would use the conditional score function, but
its computation is typically intractable. In this
work, we develop a probabilistic approximation
scheme for the conditional score function which
provably converges to the true distribution as the
noise level decreases. With this scheme we are
able to sample conditionally on nonlinear userdefined events at inference time, and matches
data statistics even when sampling from the tails
of the distribution.

Recent advances in deep generative models, particularly
diffusion-based models, have shown remarkable results
in capturing statistics of high-dimensional variables (such
as images) and generating new samples from the learned
probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020). In constrast
with GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2020) which often struggle
with dropping modes that are difficult to model, diffusion
models have proven better at capturing the full diversity of
the data.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we investigate the application of diffusion
models to modeling trajectories. In particular, we are interested in whether such models can be used as surrogate
models for the physical systems. We consider three classical dynamical systems: Lorenz strange attractors (“butterfly”) (Figure 1 left), the double pendulum, and FitzHughNagumo neuron model (Figure 1 right). Even though these
models are fairly simple they retain the core difficulty of
more complex ones, e.g., the first two exhibit chaotic trajectories while the last one exhibits extreme events.

Accurately predicting trajectories for chaotic dynamical
systems is a great scientific challenge of societal importance. For instance, despite the impressive progress of nu1

Google Research, 1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy Mountain View
CA 94043, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, New
York University, NYC, USA 3 Work done during an internship at Google Research. Correspondence to: Marc Finzi
<maf820@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Concretely, we study two questions. First, can we learn
diffusion-based generative models directly from trajecto1

