D ECOMP D IFF: Diffusion Models with Decomposed Priors
for Structure-Based Drug Design

Jiaqi Guan * 1 2 Xiangxin Zhou * 3 4 2 Yuwei Yang 2 Yu Bao 2
Jian Peng 1 Jianzhu Ma 5 Qiang Liu 3 4 Liang Wang 3 4 Quanquan Gu 2

1

Abstract

Introduction

Modern deep learning is revolutionizing many subfields in
drug discovery, among which structure-based drug design
(SBDD) (Anderson, 2003) is an important yet challenging
one. Aiming at generating 3D ligand molecules conditioned
on a target binding site, SBDD requires models to generate drug-like molecules with stable 3D structures and
high binding affinities to the target. Recently, deep generative models have been successfully employed to achieve
this goal. For example, autoregressive models (Luo & Ji,
2021; Liu et al., 2022b; Peng et al., 2022) have achieved
promising performance in SBDD tasks, which generate 3D
molecules in the target binding site by adding atoms and
bonds iteratively. However, autoregressive models suffer
from error accumulation and require a generation order,
which is nontrivial for molecular graphs. In order to overcome the limitation of autoregressive models, recent works
(Guan et al., 2023; Schneuing et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022)
use diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) to approximate the
distribution of atom types and positions from a standard
Gaussian prior, and use a post-processing algorithm to assign bonds between atoms. These diffusion model-based
methods can model local and global interactions between
atoms simultaneously and achieve better performance than
autoregressive models. Despite the state-of-the-art performance, existing diffusion model-based approaches neglect
bonds in the modeling process, which may lead to unreasonable molecular structures. Moreover, diffusion model-based
approaches treat the ligand molecule as a whole and learn
the overall correspondence between the target binding site
and the ligand. However, atoms within the same ligand can
be designed for different functions. Therefore, treating all
ligand atoms equally may not be the best way for SBDD,
especially considering the tremendous drug-like space (Virshup et al., 2013) to explore and the limited amount of high
quality target-ligand complexes (Berman et al., 2000) for
training. This motivates us to study how to properly incorporate function-related prior knowledge into diffusion
model-based SBDD methods.

Designing 3D ligands within a target binding site
is a fundamental task in drug discovery. Existing structured-based drug design methods treat
all ligand atoms equally, which ignores different roles of atoms in the ligand for drug design
and can be less efficient for exploring the large
drug-like molecule space. In this paper, inspired
by the convention in pharmaceutical practice, we
decompose the ligand molecule into two parts,
namely arms and scaffold, and propose a new diffusion model, D ECOMP D IFF, with decomposed
priors over arms and scaffold. In order to facilitate the decomposed generation and improve the
properties of the generated molecules, we incorporate both bond diffusion in the model and additional validity guidance in the sampling phase. Extensive experiments on CrossDocked2020 show
that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in generating high-affinity molecules
while maintaining proper molecular properties
and conformational stability, with up to −8.39
Avg. Vina Dock score and 24.5% Success Rate.
The code is provided at https://github.
com/bytedance/DecompDiff

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 ByteDance Research
(Work was done during Jiaqi’s and Xiangxin’s internship at
ByteDance) 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Center for Research on Intelligent
Perception and Computing (CRIPAC), State Key Laboratory of
Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA) 5 Institute for
AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiangxin Zhou <zhouxiangxin1998@gmail.com>,
Quanquan Gu <quanquan.gu@bytedance.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In fact, decomposing ligands into smaller functional regions
is a common practice in conventional drug design. As shown
1

