Raising the Cost of Malicious AI-Powered Image Editing

Hadi Salman * 1 Alaa Khaddaj * 1 Guillaume Leclerc * 1 Andrew Ilyas 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract

scratch. The key new problem that large generative models introduce is that these actors can now create realistic
edited images with ease, i.e., without the need for specialized skills or expensive equipment. This realization motivates us to ask:

We present an approach to mitigating the risks
of malicious image editing posed by large diffusion models. The key idea is to immunize images so as to make them resistant to manipulation by these models. This immunization relies
on injection of imperceptible adversarial perturbations designed to disrupt the operation of the
targeted diffusion models, forcing them to generate unrealistic images. We provide two methods
for crafting such perturbations, and then demonstrate their efficacy. Finally, we discuss a policy
component necessary to make our approach fully
effective and practical—one that involves the organizations developing diffusion models, rather
than individual users, to implement (and support)
the immunization process.1

How can we raise the cost of malicious (AI-powered)
image manipulation?
In this paper, we put forth an approach that aims to alter the
economics of AI-powered image editing. At the core of our
approach is the idea of image immunization—that is, making a specific image resistant to AI-powered manipulation
by adding a carefully crafted (imperceptible) perturbation
to it. This perturbation would disrupt the operation of a diffusion model, forcing the edits it performs to be unrealistic
(see Figure 1). In this paradigm, people can thus continue
to share their (immunized) images as usual, while getting a
layer of protection against undesirable manipulation.
We demonstrate how one can craft such imperceptible perturbations for large-scale diffusion models and show that
they can indeed prevent realistic image editing. We then
discuss in Section 5 complementary technical and policy
components needed to make our approach fully effective
and practical.

1. Introduction
Large diffusion models such as DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) are
known for their ability to produce high-quality photorealistic images, and can be used for a variety of image synthesis
and editing tasks. However, the ease of use of these models has raised concerns about their potential abuse, e.g., by
creating inappropriate or harmful digital content. For example, a malevolent actor might download photos of people posted online and edit them maliciously using an offthe-shelf diffusion model (as in Figure 1 top).

2. Preliminaries
We start by providing an overview of diffusion models as
well as of the key concept we will leverage: adversarial
attacks.

How can we address these concerns? First, it is important
to recognize that it is, in some sense, impossible to completely eliminate such malicious image editing. Indeed,
even without diffusion models in the picture, malevolent
actors can still use tools such as Photoshop to manipulate
existing images, or even synthesize fake ones entirely from

2.1. Diffusion Models
Diffusion models have emerged recently as powerful tools
for generating realistic images (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020). These models excel especially at generating and editing images using textual prompts, and
currently surpass other image generative models such as
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) in terms of the quality of
produced images.

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Hadi Salman
<hady@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
MadryLab/photoguard.

Diffusion process. At their core, diffusion models employ a stochastic differential process called the diffusion
process (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). This process allows
1

