One-shot Imitation in a Non-Stationary Environment via Multi-Modal Skill

Sangwoo Shin 1 Daehee Lee 1 Minjong Yoo 1 Woo Kyung Kim 1 Honguk Woo 1

Abstract

and environments (Pertsch et al., 2022; Jang et al., 2022;
Brohan et al., 2022).

One-shot imitation is to learn a new task from a
single demonstration, yet it is a challenging problem to adopt it for complex tasks with the high
domain diversity inherent in a non-stationary environment. To tackle the problem, we explore the
compositionality of complex tasks, and present
a novel skill-based imitation learning framework
enabling one-shot imitation and zero-shot adaptation; from a single demonstration for a complex unseen task, a semantic skill sequence is
inferred and then each skill in the sequence is
converted into an action sequence optimized for
environmental hidden dynamics that can vary over
time. Specifically, we leverage a vision-language
model to learn a semantic skill set from offline
video datasets, where each skill is represented on
the vision-language embedding space, and adapt
meta-learning with dynamics inference to enable
zero-shot skill adaptation. We evaluate our framework with various one-shot imitation scenarios
for extended multi-stage Meta-world tasks, showing its superiority in learning complex tasks, generalizing to dynamics changes, and extending to
different demonstration conditions and modalities,
compared to other baselines.

In this paper, we investigate skill-based imitation learning
techniques to conduct one-shot imitation for long-horizon
tasks in a non-stationary environment, where underlying dynamics can be changed over time. To do so, we leverage the
compositionality in control tasks and explore the semantic
representation capability of a large scale vision-language
pretrained model. Specifically, we develop a novel one-shot
imitation learning framework using semantic skills, OnIS to
enable one-shot imitation for new long-horizon tasks across
different dynamics in a non-stationary environment. The
framework employs a vision-language pretrained model and
contrastive learning on expert data to represent semantic
skills and environment dynamics separately, and explores
meta-learning to adapt semantic skills to unseen dynamics. This establishes the capability of dynamics-aware skill
transfer.
In deployment, given a single video demonstration for a
new task, the framework translates it to a sequence of semantic skills through a sequence encoder built on the visionlanguage model. It then combines the skills with inferred
current dynamics to generate actions optimized for not only
the demonstration but also the current dynamics.
As such, through the decomposition of skills and dynamics,
each skill can be well represented in the vision-language
aligned embedding space without much deformation by
time-varying environment dynamics. This decomposition
structure with multi-modality renders OnIS unique to explore the compositionality of control tasks with skills, different from prior skill-based reinforcement learning (RL)
approaches, e.g., (Pertsch et al., 2021; Nam et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
In the context of learning control tasks for autonomous
agents, one-shot imitation aims at learning such a task on
a single demonstration presented (Duan et al., 2017; Finn
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2022). One-shot imitation is particularly desirable, as it allows efficient use of expert demonstrations, which are often costly to collect for diverse tasks.
However, it is considered challenging to achieve reliable
one-shot imitation for complex tasks across various domains

The main contributions of our work are as follows.
• We present the OnIS framework to enable one-shot
imitation and zero-shot adaptation.
• We develop a dynamics-aware skill transfer scheme to
adapt skills in a non-stationary environment.
• We create an expert dataset for long-horizon, multistage Meta-world tasks with diverse robotic manipulation skills, and make it publicly available for other
research works.
• We test the OnIS framework with several imitation

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Honguk Woo <hwoo@skku.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

