TabDDPM: Modelling Tabular Data with Diffusion Models

Akim Kotelnikov 1 2 Dmitry Baranchuk 2 Ivan Rubachev 1 2 Artem Babenko 2

Abstract

applications, such as colorization (Song et al., 2021), inpainting (Song et al., 2021), segmentation (Baranchuk et al.,
2021), super-resolution (Saharia et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021),
semantic editing (Meng et al., 2021) and others. Beyond
computer vision, the DDPM framework is also investigated
in other fields, such as NLP (Austin et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022), waveform signal processing (Kong et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020b), molecular graphs (Jing et al., 2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022), time series (Tashiro et al., 2021), testifying the universality of diffusion models across a wide range
of problems.

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models are becoming the leading generative modeling paradigm
for many important data modalities. Being the
most prevalent in the computer vision community,
diffusion models have recently gained some attention in other domains, including speech, NLP, and
graph-like data. In this work, we investigate if the
framework of diffusion models can be advantageous for general tabular problems, where data
points are typically represented by vectors of heterogeneous features. The inherent heterogeneity
of tabular data makes it quite challenging for accurate modeling since the individual features can
be of a completely different nature, i.e., some of
them can be continuous and some can be discrete.
To address such data types, we introduce TabDDPM — a diffusion model that can be universally
applied to any tabular dataset and handles any feature types. We extensively evaluate TabDDPM
on a wide set of benchmarks and demonstrate its
superiority over existing GAN/VAE alternatives,
which is consistent with the advantage of diffusion models in other fields. The source code of
TabDDPM is available at GitHub.

Our work aims to investigate if the universality of DDPM
can be extended to the case of general tabular problems,
which are ubiquitous in various industrial applications that
include data described by a set of heterogeneous features.
For many such applications, the demand for high-quality
generative models is especially acute because of the modern
privacy regulations, like GDPR, which prevent publishing
real user data, while the synthetic data produced by generative models can be shared. However, training a highquality model of tabular data can be more challenging than
in computer vision or NLP due to the heterogeneity of individual features and relatively small sizes of typical tabular
datasets. This paper shows that despite these two intricacies,
the diffusion models can successfully approximate typical
distributions of tabular data, leading to state-of-the-art performance on most of the benchmarks. In more detail, the
main contributions of this work are the following:

1. Introduction

1. We introduce TabDDPM — a simple design of DDPM
for tabular problems that can be applied to any tabular
task and work with mixed data types including numerical and categorical features.

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) have recently become
an object of great research interest in the generative modeling community since they often outperform the alternative
approaches both in terms of the realism of individual samples and their diversity (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). The
most impressive successes of DDPM were demonstrated in
the domain of natural images (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022), where the advantages of diffusion models are successfully exploited in

2. We demonstrate that TabDDPM outperforms the alternative approaches designed for tabular data, including
GAN-based and VAE-based methods, and illustrate the
sources of this advantage on several datasets.
3. We observe that shallow interpolation-based methods,
e.g., SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002), produce surprisingly
effective synthetic data that provides competitively high
ML efficiency. Compared with SMOTE, we show that
TabDDPM’s data is preferable for privacy-concerned
scenarios when synthetic data are used to substitute the
real user data that cannot be shared.

1
HSE university, Moscow, Russia 2 Yandex, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Akim Kotelnikov <ya@akotelnikov.ru>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

