Exploring Chemical Space with
Score-based Out-of-distribution Generation
Seul Lee 1 Jaehyeong Jo 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1

Abstract

can automatically generate candidate molecules arose as
promising substitutes (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2016; Lim
et al., 2018; Schwalbe-Koda & Gómez-Bombarelli, 2019)
for conventional experimental drug discovery approaches
via trial-and-error processes with human efforts. However,
most existing molecule generation models have the following two limitations, which limit their practical impact.

A well-known limitation of existing molecular
generative models is that the generated molecules
highly resemble those in the training set. To generate truly novel molecules that may have even
better properties for de novo drug discovery, more
powerful exploration in the chemical space is
necessary. To this end, we propose Molecular
Out-Of-distribution Diffusion (MOOD), a scorebased diffusion scheme that incorporates outof-distribution (OOD) control in the generative
stochastic differential equation (SDE) with simple
control of a hyperparameter, thus requires no additional costs. Since some novel molecules may not
meet the basic requirements of real-world drugs,
MOOD performs conditional generation by utilizing the gradients from a property predictor that
guides the reverse-time diffusion process to highscoring regions according to target properties such
as protein-ligand interactions, drug-likeness, and
synthesizability. This allows MOOD to search for
novel and meaningful molecules rather than generating unseen yet trivial ones. We experimentally
validate that MOOD is able to explore the chemical space beyond the training distribution, generating molecules that outscore ones found with existing methods, and even the top 0.01% of the original training pool. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/SeulLee05/MOOD.

First of all, the common pitfall of the models based on distributional learning is that the exploration is confined to the
training distribution, and the generated molecules highly
resemble those in the training set. For example, Walters
& Murcko (2020) point out that the top-scoring molecule
found by the model of Zhavoronkov et al. (2019) exhibits
“striking similarity” to known active molecules included in
the training set (see Figure 1 (Left; a1, a2)). When designing
hit or scaffold molecules that can be used as templates for
further optimization, novel core structures are often required
to overcome major hurdles at later stages or to avoid already
patented scaffolds (Schreyer & Blundell, 2012). Therefore,
the limited explorability highly limits the models’ applicability to de novo drug discovery, emphasizing the need for
a generation strategy that can generate out-of-distribution
(OOD) molecules with desired properties.
Secondly, there exists a discrepancy between the target
chemical properties of the molecule generation models and
those in real-world scenarios. The most common properties
utilized by the molecule generation models are penalized
logP and quantitative estimate of drug-likeness (QED) (Jin
et al., 2018; You et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019; Zang & Wang,
2020; Luo et al., 2021c; Liu et al., 2021). However, as criticized by Coley (2020), Cieplinski et al. (2020), and Xie et al.
(2020), optimization of these scores may not lead to the discovery of useful drugs. For example, the top-penalized logP
molecule found in the state-of-the-art model is a trivial long
chain of carbons (Luo et al., 2021c).

1. Introduction
Finding novel molecules with desired chemical properties
is the primary goal of drug discovery. However, the chemical space is vast, and it is infeasible to examine all possible molecules to find those satisfying a target molecule
profile. Recently, deep molecule generation models that

To overcome such a limitation of conventional property objectives, a few recent works adopted the docking score, a
binding affinity score based on the three-dimensional simulation of a target protein and a drug candidate (Cieplinski
et al., 2020). However, using the docking score as a sole metric is still insufficient as a reasonable proxy for drug activity,
since heavy molecules with high docking scores are likely

1

KAIST, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Seul Lee
<seul.lee@kaist.ac.kr>, Jaehyeong Jo <harryjo97@kaist.ac.kr>,
Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

