Mitigating Propagation Failures in Physics-informed Neural Networks
using Retain-Resample-Release (R3) Sampling

Arka Daw 1 Jie Bu 1 Sifan Wang 2 Paris Perdikaris 2 Anuj Karpatne 1

Abstract

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al.,
2019) represent a seminal line of work in deep learning for
solving PDEs. The basic idea of PINNs is to train a neural
network to minimize errors w.r.t. the PDE solution provided
at initial/boundary points of a spatio-temporal domain, as
well as the PDE residuals observed over a sample of interior
points, referred to as collocation points. Recent success
with PINNs has shown significant promise across a broad
range of scientific applications, from fluid dynamics (Rao
et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), medical imaging (Sahli Costabal et al., 2020; van Herten et al., 2022), material science
(Shao et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022), geophysics (Yang & Ma,
2021; Voytan & Sen, 2020) and climate modeling (Lutjens
et al., 2021). Despite the success of PINNs, it is known that
PINNs sometimes fail to converge to the correct solution
in problems involving complicated PDEs, as reflected in
several recent studies on characterizing the “failure modes”
of PINNs (Wang et al., 2021; 2022c; Krishnapriyan et al.,
2021). Many of these failure modes are related to the susceptibility of PINNs in getting stuck at trivial solutions acting
as poor local minima, due to the unique optimization challenges of PINNs. In particular, training PINNs is different
from conventional deep learning problems as we only have
access to the correct solution on the initial and/or boundary
points, while for all interior points, we can only compute
PDE residuals. Also, minimizing PDE residuals does not
guarantee convergence to a correct solution since there are
many trivial solutions of commonly observed PDEs that
show 0 residuals. While previous studies have mainly focused on modifying network architectures or balancing loss
functions during PINN training, the effect of sampling collocation points on avoiding failure modes of PINNs has been
largely overlooked. Although some previous approaches
have explored the effect of sampling strategies on PINN
training (Wang et al., 2022a; Lu et al., 2021), they either
suffer from large computation costs or fail to converge to
correct solutions, empirically demonstrated in our results.

Despite the success of physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) in approximating partial differential equations (PDEs), PINNs can sometimes
fail to converge to the correct solution in problems
involving complicated PDEs. This is reflected in
several recent studies on characterizing the “failure modes” of PINNs, although a thorough understanding of the connection between PINN failure modes and sampling strategies is missing. In
this paper, we provide a novel perspective of failure modes of PINNs by hypothesizing that training PINNs relies on successful “propagation” of
solution from initial and/or boundary condition
points to interior points. We show that PINNs
with poor sampling strategies can get stuck at
trivial solutions if there are propagation failures,
characterized by highly imbalanced PDE residual
fields. To mitigate propagation failures, we propose a novel Retain-Resample-Release sampling
(R3) algorithm that can incrementally accumulate collocation points in regions of high PDE
residuals with little to no computational overhead.
We provide an extension of R3 sampling to respect the principle of causality while solving timedependent PDEs. We theoretically analyze the
behavior of R3 sampling and empirically demonstrate its efficacy and efficiency in comparison
with baselines on a variety of PDE problems.

1. Introduction
Our understanding of physical systems in a number of domains largely relies on our ability to solve partial differential
equations (PDEs), and hence, enhancing PDE solution accuracy and computational speed can yield substantial benefits.

In this work, we present a novel perspective of failure modes
of PINNs by postulating the propagation hypothesis: “in
order for PINNs to avoid converging to trivial solutions at interior points, the correct solution must be propagated from
the initial/boundary points to the interior points.” When
this propagation is hindered, PINNs can get stuck at trivial

1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
Virginia, USA 2 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Arka Daw <darka@vt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

