Nearly Minimax Optimal Reinforcement Learning
for Linear Markov Decision Processes
Jiafan He 1 Heyang Zhao 1 Dongruo Zhou 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

with function approximation to find the optimal policy?
Such optimal sample complexity results have been widelystudied and established for tabular RL methods (e.g., Azar
et al. 2017; Zhang and Ji 2019; Zhang et al. 2020), but are
still understudied for RL with function approximation.

We study reinforcement learning (RL) with linear function approximation. For episodic timeinhomogeneous linear Markov decision processes (linear MDPs) whose transition probability can be parameterized as a linear function of
a given feature mapping, we propose the first
computationally efficient algorithm that√achieves
the nearly minimax optimal regret e
O(d H 3 K),
where d is the dimension of the feature mapping,
H is the planning horizon, and K is the number of episodes. Our algorithm is based on a
weighted linear regression scheme with a carefully designed weight, which depends on a new
variance estimator that (1) directly estimates the
variance of the optimal value function, (2) monotonically decreases with respect to the number of
episodes to ensure a better estimation accuracy,
and (3) uses a rare-switching policy to update the
value function estimator to control the complexity of the estimated value function class. Our
work provides a complete answer to optimal RL
with linear MDPs, and the developed algorithm
and theoretical tools may be of independent interest.

1

Some recent works have studied the optimal regret results
for a special class of MDPs called linear mixture Markov
decision processes (linear mixture MDPs) (Jia et al., 2020;
Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021a; Zhou and Gu, 2022),
which assume that the transition probability of the MDP is
a linear combination of several base models. More specifically, Zhou et al. (2021a) proposed the near-optimal algorithm for time-inhomogeneous linear mixture MDPs. Zhou
and Gu (2022) further proposed near-optimal horizon-free
algorithm for time-homogeneous linear mixture MDPs under the assumption that the total reward is bounded by 1.
However, the computational efficiency of their algorithms
highly depends on the value-targeted regression procedure
(Jia et al., 2020; Ayoub et al., 2020), which relies on an integration or sampling oracle of the individual base model.
Such an integration or sampling oracle exists for some special linear mixture MDPs but can be computationally expensive or even intractable in the general case.
Another line of works studies the linear Markov decision
processes (linear MDPs) (Yang and Wang, 2019; Jin et al.,
2020), which assumes that the transition probability and the
reward of the environment enjoys a compact low-rank representation. The most appealing feature of linear MDPs is
that they can induce a linear structure of the value function
for any policy, which makes sample-efficient RL possible.
Meanwhile, the algorithms for linear MDPs directly approximate the value function itself, which is computationally more efficient than the algorithms for linear mixture
MDPs. In particular, Yang and Wang (2019) first proposed
a near-optimal RL algorithm with the access to a generative
model, which can generate any number of samples for any
given state-action pairs. Without accessing the generative
model, Jin et al. (2020) proposed an LSVI-UCB algorithm
based on the principle of
√ optimism in the face of uncertainty and achieved e
O( d3 H 4 K) regret, where d is the
dimension of a linear MDP, H is the planning horizon and
K is the number of episodes. Nevertheless,
√ their algorithm
is not optimal since there exists an O( dH) gap between

Introduction

How to make reinforcement learning (RL) efficient with
large state and action spaces has been a central research
problem in the RL community. A widely used approach
is function approximation, which approximates the value
function in RL with a predefined function class for efficient
exploration and exploitation. Although the intuition is simple, some basic questions about the function approximation approach still remain open. For instance, what is the
optimal sample complexity (or regret) for RL algorithms
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan
Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

