Learning Antidote Data to Individual Unfairness

Peizhao Li 1 Ethan Xia 2 Hongfu Liu 1

Abstract

vices (Bartlett et al., 2022). To avoid societal concerns,
fairness, as one of the fundamental ethical guidelines for AI,
has been proposed to encourage practitioners to adopt AI responsibly and fairly. The unifying idea of fairness articulates
that ML systems should not discriminate against individuals or any groups distinguished by legally-protected and
sensitive attributes, therefore preventing disparate impact in
automated decision-making (Barocas & Selbst, 2016).

Fairness is essential for machine learning systems deployed in high-stake applications. Among
all fairness notions, individual fairness, deriving
from a consensus that ‘similar individuals should
be treated similarly,’ is a vital notion to describe
fair treatment for individual cases. Previous studies typically characterize individual fairness as a
prediction-invariant problem when perturbing sensitive attributes on samples, and solve it by Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) paradigm.
However, such adversarial perturbations along a
direction covering sensitive information used in
DRO do not consider the inherent feature correlations or innate data constraints, therefore could
mislead the model to optimize at off-manifold and
unrealistic samples. In light of this drawback, in
this paper, we propose to learn and generate antidote data that approximately follows the data distribution to remedy individual unfairness. These
generated on-manifold antidote data can be used
through a generic optimization procedure along
with original training data, resulting in a pure
pre-processing approach to individual unfairness,
or can also fit well with the in-processing DRO
paradigm. Through extensive experiments on multiple tabular datasets, we demonstrate our method
resists individual unfairness at a minimal or zero
cost to predictive utility compared to baselines.
Code available at https://github.com/brandeismachine-learning/AntiIndivFairness.

Many notions have been proposed to specify AI Fairness (Dwork et al., 2012; Kusner et al., 2017; Hashimoto
et al., 2018). Group fairness is currently the most influential
notion in the fairness community, driving different groups
to receive equitable outcomes in terms of statistics like true
positive rates or positive rates, regardless of their sensitive
attributes (Hardt et al., 2016). However, these statistics describe the average of a group, hence lacking guarantees on
the treatments of individual cases. Alternatively, individual
fairness established upon a consensus that ‘similar individuals should be treated similarly,’ shifts force to reduce the
predictive gap between conceptually similar instances. Here,
‘similar’ usually means two instances have close profiles regardless of their different sensitive attributes, and could have
customized definitions upon domain knowledge.
Previous studies solve the individual fairness problem mainly by Distributionally Robust Optimization
(DRO) (Yurochkin et al., 2020; Yurochkin & Sun, 2021;
Ruoss et al., 2020; Yeom & Fredrikson, 2021). They convert the problem to optimize models for invariant predictions
towards original data and their perturbations, where the perturbations are adversarially constructed to mostly change the
sensitive information in samples. However, the primary use
case of DRO in model robustness is to adversarially perturb
data distribution by a small degree which usually bounded
by some divergence (Duchi & Namkoong, 2018; Levy et al.,
2020). In that case, the perturbations can be regarded as
local perturbations, and the adversarial samples are still on
the data manifold. In contrast, perturbing a sample to best
convert its sensitive information, e.g., directly flipping its
sensitive attributes like gender from male to female, cannot be regarded as a local perturbation. These perturbations
may violate inherent feature correlations, e.g., some features
are subject to gender but without notice, thus driving the
adversarial samples leave the data manifold. Additionally,
perturbations in a continuous space could break the innate

1. Introduction
Unregulated decisions could reflect racism, ageism, and
sexism in high-stakes applications, such as grant assignments (Mervis, 2022), recruitment (Dastin, 2018), policing strategies (Gelman et al., 2007), and lending ser1
Brandeis University 2 Cornell University. Correspondence to:
Peizhao Li <peizhaoli@brandeis.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

