Quantum Speedups for Zero-Sum Games
via Improved Dynamic Gibbs Sampling

Adam Bouland 1 Yosheb Getachew 1 Yujia Jin 1 Aaron Sidford 1 Kevin Tian 2

Abstract

What accuracy versus dimension-dependence
tradeoffs are inherent in quantum optimization?
What techniques improve this tradeoff?

We give a quantum algorithm for computing an
-approximate Nash equilibrium of a zero-sum
game in an m × n payoff matrix with bounded
entries. Given a standard quantum oracle for accessing √
the payoff matrix our algorithm runs in
e m + n · −2.5 + −3 ) and outputs a clastime O(
sical representation of the -approximate Nash
equilibrium. This improves
upon the best prior
√
e m + n·−3 ) obtained by
quantum runtime of O(
(van Apeldoorn & Gilyén, 2019) and the classical
e
O((m
+ n) · −2 ) runtime due to (Grigoriadis &
Khachiyan, 1995) whenever  = Ω((m + n)−1 ).
We obtain this result by designing new quantum
data structures for efficiently sampling from a
slowly-changing Gibbs distribution.

1

We consider this question for the fundamental optimization
problem of computing -approximate Nash equilibrium in
zero-sum games. Our main result is an improved dependence on  for quantum algorithms solving zero-sum games,
which is very close to that of its classical counterpart. Further, we show that for our algorithms, obtaining a classical
representation of the solution is obtainable at no additional
asymptotic cost. Our work builds upon (van Apeldoorn &
Gilyén, 2019; Li et al., 2019), which already took a large
and important step towards answering the above question
by designing quantum data structures for efficiently implementing algorithms for solving zero-sum games.
To obtain our result we provide improved quantum algorithms for solving a dynamic data structure problem of
sampling from a slowly-changing Gibbs distribution. Such
dynamic sampling problems arise as a natural component
of stochastic gradient methods for solving zero-sum games.
We obtain our speedups by improving a Gibbs sampling
subroutine developed in (van Apeldoorn & Gilyén, 2019).
We design a new dynamic quantum data structure perform1
ing the necessary sampling in time e
O(− 2 ), faster than the
O(−1 ) runtime achieved by (van Apeldoorn
corresponding e
& Gilyén, 2019). Beyond the intrinsic utility of solving
this problem, we hope our improved Gibbs sampler showcases algorithmic insights that can be gleaned by seeking
improved error dependencies for quantum optimization algorithms. Moreover, we hope this work encourages the
study of quantum data structures for efficient optimization.

Introduction

For a wide range of machine learning and numerical
linear algebra problems, quantum algorithms (in certain
parameter regimes) yield faster runtimes than classical
counterparts (Biamonte et al., 2017).1 Leveraging quantum
algorithmic primitives, e.g. (Brassard et al., 2002; Harrow
et al., 2009; Gilyén et al., 2019), these algorithms obtain
runtimes which improve upon the dimension dependence
of classical algorithms, but often at the cost of a worse
dependence on the error tolerance and/or implicit access
to the solution (e.g. query or sampling access for solution
entries). Consequently, this paper is motivated by the
following question.

1.1

1

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 2 Microsoft Research,
Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Yosheb Getachew
<yoshebg@stanford.edu>.

Zero-sum games

For matrix A ∈ Rm×n its associated zero-sum game is the
pair of equivalent optimization problems

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Note that quantifying the end-to-end speedups obtained by
these methods can be subtle due to I/O overheads, different access
models (Aaronson, 2015), and classical de-quantization algorithms
(Tang, 2019; Chia et al., 2020; Gharibian & Le Gall, 2022).

min max u> Av = maxn minm u> Av,
v∈∆ u∈∆
P
k
where ∆ := {x ∈ R≥0 : i∈[k] xi = 1}.
u∈∆m v∈∆n
k

In such a game, we refer to A as the payoff matrix and view
the m and n-dimensional simplices, i.e. ∆m and ∆n , as the
1

