General Covariance Data Augmentation for Neural PDE Solvers

Vladimir Fanaskov 1 Tianchi Yu 1 Alexander Rudikov 1 2 Ivan Oseledets 1 3

Abstract

An alternative we do not consider here is to resort to a
so-called physics-informed setting when the loss is a L2
norm of PDE residual evaluated at certain points (Wang
et al., 2021), (Li et al., 2021). This way, one avoids data
generation by a classical solver. Arguably, it is currently
recognized that the whole process is inefficient (Lu et al.,
2021b), (Karnakov et al., 2022).

The growing body of research shows how to replace classical partial differential equation (PDE)
integrators with neural networks. The popular
strategy is to generate the input-output pairs with
a PDE solver, train the neural network in the regression setting, and use the trained model as a
cheap surrogate for the solver. The bottleneck in
this scheme is the number of expensive queries of
a PDE solver needed to generate the dataset. To
alleviate the problem, we propose a computationally cheap augmentation strategy based on general
covariance and simple random coordinate transformations. Our approach relies on the fact that
physical laws are independent of the coordinate
choice, so the change in the coordinate system
preserves the type of a parametric PDE and only
changes PDE’s data (e.g., initial conditions, diffusion coefficient). For tried neural networks and
partial differential equations, proposed augmentation improves test error by 23% on average. The
worst observed result is a 17% increase in test
error for multilayer perceptron, and the best case
is a 80% decrease for dilated residual network.

In the regression setting the size of the generated dataset is
usually limited owing to the restrictions on the computation
budget. Deep learning is data-hungry, so ways to cheaply
increase the number of data points available for training
are highly desirable. Numerous augmentation techniques
serve this purpose in classical machine learning (Shorten &
Khoshgoftaar, 2019), (Wen et al., 2020). For scientific machine learning, literature on augmentation is scarce (Brandstetter et al., 2022), (Li et al., 2022a). In this note, we
contribute a new way to augment datasets for neural PDE
solvers.
The central idea behind our approach is the principle of
general covariance. General covariance states that physical phenomena do not depend on the choice of a coordinate system (Post, 1997), (Emam, 2021). Mathematically,
the covariance means the physical fields are geometric objects (tensors) with particular transformation laws under
the change of coordinates (Eglit et al., 1996), (Liseikin,
2017). In exceptional cases, these transformation laws leave
governing equations invariant (symmetry transformation),
but in most cases, it is only the form of the equations that
persists. More specifically, for parametric partial differential equations, suitably chosen coordinate transformation
induces the change of problem data (e.g., permeability field,
convection coefficients, source term, initial or boundary conditions, e.t.c.). We use this fact to build a computationally
cheap and broadly applicable augmentation strategy based
on simple random coordinate transformations. To evaluate the efficiency of our approach, we perform empirical
tests on the two-way wave, convection-diffusion, and stationary diffusion equations using several variants of Fourier
Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020), Deep Operator Network (DeepONet) (Lu et al., 2021a), Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) (Haykin, 1994), Dilated Residual Network (DilResNet) (Yu & Koltun, 2015), (Stachenfeld et al., 2021) and
U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015). Both for one-dimensional
and two-dimensional PDEs proposed augmentation tech-

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly used to solve partial differential equations (PDEs). The especially fruitful idea is
to learn a computationally cheap but sufficiently accurate
surrogate for the classical solver (Hennigh, 2017), (Li et al.,
2020), (Tripura & Chakraborty, 2022), (Lu et al., 2021a),
(Stachenfeld et al., 2021). The most reliable training strategy is to generate input-output pairs with a classical solver
and fit a neural network of choice with a standard L2 loss
(regression setting).
1

Skoltech, Center for Artificial Intelligence Technology 2 Marchuk Institute of Numerical Mathematics of the
Russian Academy of Sciences 3 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute.
Correspondence to: Vladimir Fanaskov
<V.Fanaskov@skoltech.ru>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

