Dataset Distillation with Convexified Implicit Gradients

Noel Loo 1 Ramin Hasani 1 Mathias Lechner 1 Daniela Rus 1

Abstract

optimization loop and then back-propagate errors through
it to obtain the meta gradients. This could be done via
backpropagation through time (Werbos, 1988), evolution
strategies (Salimans et al., 2017), and equilibrium propagation (Scellier & Bengio, 2016). Numerous research works
have improved dataset distillation by introducing surrogate
objectives for computing the meta gradients through gradient matching (Zhao & Bilen, 2021a), training trajectory
matching (Cazenavette et al., 2022a), feature alignment
(Wang et al., 2022), by regressing on neural features (Zhou
et al., 2022), and by leveraging the neural tangent kernel
(NTK) theory (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019a) in
exact (Nguyen et al., 2021a;b) and approximate forms (Loo
et al., 2022a).

We propose a new dataset distillation algorithm
using reparameterization and convexification of
implicit gradients (RCIG), that substantially improves the state-of-the-art. To this end, we first
formulate dataset distillation as a bi-level optimization problem. Then, we show how implicit
gradients can be effectively used to compute metagradient updates. We further equip the algorithm with a convexified approximation that corresponds to learning on top of a frozen finite-width
neural tangent kernel. Finally, we improve bias
in implicit gradients by parameterizing the neural network to enable analytical computation of
final-layer parameters given the body parameters.
RCIG establishes the new state-of-the-art on a diverse series of dataset distillation tasks. Notably,
with one image per class, on resized ImageNet,
RCIG sees on average a 108% improvement over
the previous state-of-the-art distillation algorithm.
Similarly, we observed a 66% gain over SOTA on
Tiny-ImageNet and 37% on CIFAR-100. 1

What does it take to significantly increase the accuracy and
performance of dataset distillation? In this paper, we construct a novel dataset distillation algorithm that substantially
outperforms state-of-the-art methods, by re-parameterizing
and convexifying implicit gradients. Implicit gradients (IGs)
leverage implicit function theorem (Bengio, 2000; Chen
& Hagan, 1999; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), that defines a
meta-gradient update for a bi-level optimization problem
(meta-learning with inner and outer loops). IG, off the bat,
can serve as a dataset distillation algorithm, but it could perform significantly better via linearized training. Linearized
training, which corresponds to learning on a frozen finite
width neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018), convexifies the inner model, and as a result refines the implicit
gradients. We show that such convexified implicit gradients
dataset distillation algorithm equipped with a reparameterization technique for reducing the bias in IG considerably
supersedes the state-of-the-art performance on 17 out of 22
reported benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Dataset distillation aims to condense a given dataset into
a synthetic version that ideally preserves the information
of the original set (Wang et al., 2018). Training on this
synthetic set should result in similar performance compared
to training on the original dataset.
Dataset distillation can be formulated as a bi-level optimization problem with an inner objective to update model
parameters on the support/synthetic/distilled set, and an
outer (meta) objective to refine the distilled sets via metagradient updates (Wang et al., 2018). Evaluating the metaoptimization loop is difficult, as we have to solve the inner

In summary, we make the following new contributions:
I. We step-by-step construct a new dataset distillation algorithm called reparameterized convexified implicit gradients
(RCIG), that establishes the new state-of-the-art. II. We
show how to effectively design and improve implicit gradients to obtain a bi-level dataset distillation algorithm. III.
We conduct a large experimental evaluation of our method
in a diverse set of dataset distillation tasks and benchmarks
and compare its performance to other advanced baselines.

*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
Correspondence to: Noel Loo <loo@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/yolky/RCIG

1

