Blackout Diffusion: Generative Diffusion Models in Discrete-State Spaces

Javier E. Santos 1 Zachary R. Fox 2 3 Nicholas Lubbers 2 Yen Ting Lin 2

Abstract

transformations (implemented as deep neural networks) that
sequentially process a prescribed distribution (the prior,
usually a high-dimensional isotropic Gaussian) to the data
distribution. To train the networks, samples drawn from the
data distribution are transformed by a stochastic process,
which goes forward in time, and which has the prior as a
stationary (final) distribution. Realizations from the forward
diffusion process are used to train transformations that approximate the reverse-time process. In generative inference,
samples are drawn from the prior, and the trained network
is used to transform them into samples of the learned data
distribution.

Typical generative diffusion models rely on a
Gaussian diffusion process for training the backward transformations, which can then be used to
generate samples from Gaussian noise. However,
real world data often takes place in discrete-state
spaces, including many scientific applications.
Here, we develop a theoretical formulation for
arbitrary discrete-state Markov processes in the
forward diffusion process using exact (as opposed
to variational) analysis. We relate the theory to the
existing continuous-state Gaussian diffusion as
well as other approaches to discrete diffusion, and
identify the corresponding reverse-time stochastic process and score function in the continuoustime setting, and the reverse-time mapping in the
discrete-time setting. As an example of this framework, we introduce “Blackout Diffusion”, which
learns to produce samples from an empty image
instead of from noise. Numerical experiments on
the CIFAR-10, Binarized MNIST, and CelebA
datasets confirm the feasibility of our approach.
Generalizing from specific (Gaussian) forward
processes to discrete-state processes without a
variational approximation sheds light on how to
interpret diffusion models, which we discuss.

Diffusion Models have been used for many applications, including image (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020;
Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Song & Ermon, 2019; 2020; Song
et al., 2021d;b), audio (Kong et al., 2021), video (Höppe
et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), and language (Gong et al.,
2022). Most works follow the original formulation (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020), utilizing Gaussian
diffusion on continuous domains. However, there are wideranging data domains which are not continuous in nature1 ,
and applying quantization and de-quantization for treating
these data may not be ideal. For example, single-molecule
and single-cell gene expressions (Munsky et al., 2015; Pichon et al., 2018) study systems with very small counts, in
which discrete effects are qualitatively relevant to system
behavior. As another example, phase-separated fluid problems occur in many applications pertaining to industrial and
earth sciences, where each region of space is occupied categorically, that is, by exactly one of several fluid types (Li
et al., 2016). Graph structures are pervasive and machine
learning on these structures is an area of tremendous recent
growth (Zhou et al., 2020), for example being the dominant
representation for molecular structure, which is of relevance
to chemistry (Gilmer et al., 2017), drug discovery (Wieder
et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2018), and biophysics (Jiang et al.,
2021). In bioinformatics, both DNA and protein sequences
are codes consisting of discrete values (Ingraham et al.,
2019).

1. Introduction
Diffusion processes have been recently utilized to construct
Diffusion Models, a class of generative models in deep learning (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021d). These frameworks consist of a set of trainable
1
Computational Earth Science Group (EES-16), Earth and
Environmental Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 2 Information Sciences
Group (CCS-3), Computer, Computational and Statistical Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos,
NM 87545, USA 3 Currently at Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, TN 37830, USA. Correspondence to: Yen Ting Lin
<yentingl@lanl.gov>.

Some prior works have investigated diffusion modeling beyond the Gaussian paradigm. For example, Bansal et al.
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Even digital images are usually encoded using quantized levelvalues for each pixel.

1

