Improving Fair Training under Correlation Shifts

Yuji Roh 1 Kangwook Lee 2 Steven Euijong Whang 1 Changho Suh 1

Abstract

et al., 2012a). In this work, we focus on group fairness, and
there are three prominent group fairness approaches: preprocessing, where training data is debiased; in-processing,
where model training is tailored for fairness; and postprocessing, where the trained model’s output is modified to
satisfy fairness – see more related works discussed in Sec. 2.

Model fairness is an essential element for Trustworthy AI. While many techniques for model
fairness have been proposed, most of them assume that the training and deployment data distributions are identical, which is often not true
in practice. In particular, when the bias between
labels and sensitive groups changes, the fairness
of the trained model is directly influenced and
can worsen. We make two contributions for solving this problem. First, we analytically show that
existing in-processing fair algorithms have fundamental limits in accuracy and group fairness.
We utilize the notion of correlation shifts between
labels and groups, which can explicitly capture
the change of the above bias. Second, we propose
a novel pre-processing step that samples the input
data to reduce correlation shifts and thus enables
the in-processing approaches to overcome their
limitations. We formulate an optimization problem for adjusting the data ratio among labels and
sensitive groups to reflect the shifted correlation.
A key benefit of our approach lies in decoupling
the roles of pre- and in-processing approaches:
correlation adjustment via pre-processing and unfairness mitigation on the processed data via inprocessing. Experiments show that our framework effectively improves existing in-processing
fair algorithms w.r.t. accuracy and fairness, both
on synthetic and real datasets.

While fairness in-processing approaches are commonly used
to mitigate unfairness, most of them make the limiting assumption that the training and deployment data distributions
are the same (Zafar et al., 2017a; Zhang et al., 2018; Roh
et al., 2021). However, the two distributions are usually different, especially in terms of data biases (Wick et al., 2019;
Maity et al., 2021). For example, a recent work shows that
the bias amounts likely differ between previously collected
data and recently collected data (Ding et al., 2021). Moreover, when the data bias changes, the fairness and accuracy
of the trained model are now unpredictable at deployment,
as the above assumption is broken.
In this work, we utilize the notion of correlation shifts between the label y and group attribute z in the data (i.e., (y, z)correlation shifts) to systematically address the data bias
changes. Although several works have been recently proposed to investigate fair training on different types of distribution shifts, including covariate and concept shifts (Singh
et al., 2021; Mishler & Dalmasso, 2022), they usually do
not explicitly consider bias changes between y and z. In
comparison, our (y, z)-correlation shift enables us to theoretically analyze how exactly bias changes affect fair training
– see how correlation shift compares with other types of
distribution shifts in Sec. 2.
For fair training under (y, z)-correlation shifts, we first 1)
analyze the fundamental accuracy and fairness limits of inprocessing approaches with the fixed distribution assumption using the notion of (y, z)-correlation in the data and
then 2) design a novel pre-processing step to boost the
performances of in-processing approaches under the (y, z)correlation shifts. We show that existing in-processing fair
algorithms are indeed limited by the training distribution
and may perform poorly on the deployment distribution. In
particular, a high (y, z)-correlation results in a poor accuracyfairness tradeoff for any fair training. Therefore, as most
in-processing fair algorithms assume identical training and
deployment distributions, there is no guarantee their perfor-

1. Introduction
Model fairness is becoming indispensable in many artificial intelligence (AI) applications to prevent discrimination
against specific groups such as gender, race, or age (Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt et al., 2016) or individuals (Dwork
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Steven E. Whang
<swhang@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

