Stochastic Gradient Descent-Induced Drift of Representation in a Two-Layer
Neural Network
Farhad Pashakhanloo 1 Alexei Koulakov 1

Abstract

brain structure processing information about smells, demonstrated drift of odorant representations despite stable odor
identification. Such drift was characterized by a gradual
and across-days decay in the self-similarity of the stimulus
representation. Additionally, in the same study, the drift was
shown to be stimulus dependent. It was shown that a more
familiar stimulus drifts at a smaller rate (Schoonover et al.,
2021).

Representational drift refers to over-time changes
in neural activation accompanied by a stable task
performance. Despite being observed in the brain
and in artificial networks, the mechanisms of
drift and its implications are not fully understood. Motivated by recent experimental findings of stimulus-dependent drift in the piriform
cortex, we use theory and simulations to study
this phenomenon in a two-layer linear feedforward network. Specifically, in a continual online
learning scenario, we study the drift induced by
the noise inherent in the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). By decomposing the learning dynamics into the normal and tangent spaces of the
minimum-loss manifold, we show the former corresponds to a finite variance fluctuation, while the
latter could be considered as an effective diffusion
process on the manifold. We analytically compute
the fluctuation and the diffusion coefficients for
the stimuli representations in the hidden layer as
functions of network parameters and input distribution. Further, consistent with experiments, we
show that the drift rate is slower for a more frequently presented stimulus. Overall, our analysis
yields a theoretical framework for better understanding of the drift phenomenon in biological
and artificial neural networks.

The mechanisms and implications of the drift in the brain
and artificial neural networks are still under investigation
(see recent reviews by Masset et al. (2022), Rule et al.
(2019), and Driscoll et al. (2022)). Recent modeling studies
have shown that drift could happen in the presence of synaptic or other types of noise (Qin et al., 2023; Aitken et al.,
2022). Using simulations of neural networks, Aitken et al.
(2022) showed different noise types injected during training
could lead to drift with qualitatively different patterns and
geometries. However, no theoretical consideration of the
drift was provided in that study. Qin et al. (2023) studied
the drift in a network with a similarity-matching objective
and a Hebbian/anti-Hebbian learning rule. They showed
that noisy synaptic updates could lead to a random-walk
exploration of the solution space. Other mechanisms have
been suggested on how a stable readout could be performed
despite an evolving population code (Rule & O’Leary, 2022;
Rule et al., 2020; Kalle Kossio et al., 2021).
One important source of noise during learning for both natural and artificial neural networks is the sampling noise that
arises from the stochasticity in observing the data. It is therefore natural to ask if and how this type of noise can lead to
drift, and whether it can explain the stimulus-dependency
of the rate of the drift observed in experiments. Here, we
aim to answer these questions in a two-layer linear neural
network model that undergoes online continual learning via
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In addition to being
common in machine learning, feed-forward networks are a
reasonable first approximation to sensory (olfactory) processing in the brain. Specifically, we found the two-layer
linear network to be one of the simplest models that enables
studying the representational drift in the hidden layer, and
yet allows for analytical tractability.

1. Introduction
Representational drift has been observed across different
parts of the nervous system, such as in the hippocampus (Ziv
et al., 2013), sensorimotor (Rule et al., 2019), and visual
systems (Deitch et al., 2021; Marks & Goard, 2021). A recent study in the piriform cortex (Schoonover et al., 2021), a
1

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New
York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Farhad Pashakhanloo
<pashakh@cshl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

