Controlled Differential Equations on Long Sequences via Non-standard Wavelets

Response
Path u(t) :

Sourav Pal 1 Zhanpeng Zeng 1 Sathya N. Ravi 2 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract

: Inverse transform
Recompose

Parameterized
Integral Operator

Neural Controlled Differential equations (NCDE)
are a powerful mechanism to model the dynamics
in temporal sequences, e.g., applications involving physiological measures, where apart from the
initial condition, the dynamics also depend on
subsequent measures or even a different “control”
sequence. But NCDEs do not scale well to longer
sequences. Existing strategies adapt rough path
theory, and instead model the dynamics over summaries known as log signatures. While rigorous
and elegant, invertibility of these summaries is
difficult, and limits the scope of problems where
these ideas can offer strong benefits (reconstruction, generative modeling). For tasks where it is
sensible to assume that the (long) sequences in
the training data are a fixed length of temporal
measurements – this assumption holds in most experiments tackled in the literature – we describe
an efficient simplification. First, we recast the
regression/classification task as an integral transform. We then show how restricting the class of
operators (permissible in the integral transform),
allows the use of a known algorithm that leverages
non-standard Wavelets to decompose the operator.
Thereby, our task (learning the operator) radically
simplifies. A neural variant of this idea yields consistent improvements across a wide gamut of use
cases tackled in existing works. We also describe
a novel application on modeling tasks involving
coupled differential equations.

Time

Approx.

Details
Details

Approx.

Control
Path v(t) :

Details

Approx.
Decompose
: Forward transform
Time

Figure 1. A control path driving a response. Multi-resolution analysis allows the proposed parameterization of an integral operator.

terface of DNNs with the rich extant literature on differential
equations, a widely used tool in much of science. Consequently, new capabilities have emerged (Li et al., 2020b;
Salvi et al., 2022). To see this, consider the task of modeling the relationship between variables and their derivatives,
using a first order Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE)
along with initial conditions of the form
z(0) = z0 ;

dz
= f (z(t)) = f (zt )
dt

(1)

where zt ∈ Rd . In their prevalent use in simulation and
physics, the analytical form of f is known and hence the defacto approach would use numerical initial value problem
(IVP) solvers. But one may also hope to learn f parameterized as neural networks using observed data, and Neural
Ordinary Differential Equation (NODE) (Chen et al., 2018)
is a prominent example of such a model. Given a sequence
of observations x0 , x1 , · · · , xT , with each xi ∈ RD , where
D is the dimensionality of the observed space, NODE can
be written
Z t
(2)
z0 = Sθ (x0 );
zt = z0 +
fθ (zs )ds

1. Introduction
In the last few years, the function approximation capabilities of modern deep neural networks models (DNNs) (Liang
& Srikant, 2016; Hanson & Raginsky, 2020) have been
successfully exploited towards new results exploring the in-

0

1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of Illinois
Chicago. Correspondence to: Sourav Pal <spal9@wisc.edu>.

where Sθ and fθ are neural networks pertaining to the initial
condition and latent dynamics in a latent space of dimensionality d respectively. Here, s is introduced as the variable
of integration. In (1) and (2), zt = z(t) is the value of the

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

