Linear Causal Disentanglement via Interventions

Chandler Squires * 1 2 Anna Seigal * 1 3 Salil Bhate 1 Caroline Uhler 1 2

Abstract

ple, the presence of a sink and the presence of a mirror in
an image. It is therefore natural to generalize conceptual
distinctness to variables that are causally autonomous; i.e.,
interventions can be performed on each variable separately.
This motivates causal disentanglement (Yang et al., 2021),
the recovery of causally autonomous variables from data.

Causal disentanglement seeks a representation of
data involving latent variables that are related via
a causal model. A representation is identifiable
if both the latent model and the transformation
from latent to observed variables are unique. In
this paper, we study observed variables that are
a linear transformation of a linear latent causal
model. Data from interventions are necessary for
identifiability: if one latent variable is missing
an intervention, we show that there exist distinct
models that cannot be distinguished. Conversely,
we show that a single intervention on each latent variable is sufficient for identifiability. Our
proof uses a generalization of the RQ decomposition of a matrix that replaces the usual orthogonal
and upper triangular conditions with analogues
depending on a partial order on the rows of the
matrix, with partial order determined by a latent
causal model. We corroborate our theoretical results with a method for causal disentanglement.
We show that the method accurately recovers a latent causal model on synthetic and semi-synthetic
data and we illustrate a use case on a dataset of
single-cell RNA sequencing measurements.

In this paper, we study the identifiability of causal disentanglement; i.e., its uniqueness. We adopt a generative
perspective, as in (Bengio et al., 2013; Moran et al., 2021).
We assume that the observed variables are generated in two
steps. First, latent variables Z are sampled from a distribution P(Z). Then, the observed variables X are the image of
the latent variables under a deterministic mixing function.
We assume that the latent variables are generated according
to a linear structural equation model and that the mixing
function is an injective linear map. Recent work has studied
identifiability of various settings in representation learning
(Khemakhem et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2021). A common
assumption for identifiability is that variables are observed
across multiple contexts, each affecting the latent distribution P(Z) but not the mixing function. In our setup, each
context is either an intervention on a latent variable, or is
observational, i.e., has no interventions. We use the same
terminology for interventions as Squires & Uhler (2022).
From most to least general, a soft intervention on Zi changes
the dependency of Zi on its direct causes, a perfect intervention removes this dependency but allows for stochasticity of
Zi , and a do-intervention sets Zi to a deterministic value.

1. Introduction

Our main result is that our linear causal disentanglement
setup is identifiable if, in addition to an observational context, for each latent variable Zi , there is a context where Zi
is the intervened variable under a perfect intervention; see
Section 3.2. This is a sufficient condition for identifiability.
Furthermore, we show that the condition of at least one intervention per latent node is necessary in the worst case: if
some latent node is not intervened in any context, then there
exist latent causal representations that are not identifiable;
see Section 3.3. Our focus in this paper is on identifiability guarantees. Nonetheless, we convert our proofs into
a method for causal disentanglement in the finite-sample
setting. In Section 4, we apply the method to synthetic and
semi-synthetic data and show that it recovers the generative
model, and we compute a linear causal disentanglement on
a single-cell RNA sequencing dataset.

The goal of representation learning is to find a description of data that is interpretable, useful for reasoning, and
generalizable. Such a representation disentangles the data
into conceptually distinct variables. Traditionally, conceptual distinctness of variables has meant statistical independence. This is the setting of independent component analysis
(Comon, 1994). However, human reasoning often involves
variables that are not statistically independent. For exam*
Equal contribution 1 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT 3 School
of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Chandler Squires <csquires@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

