F ED HPO-B ENCH: A Benchmark Suite for Federated Hyperparameter
Optimization

Zhen Wang * 1 Weirui Kuang * 1 Ce Zhang 2 Bolin Ding 1 Yaliang Li 1

Abstract

problems so that different HPO methods can be effortlessly
compared in a fair and reproducible way.

Research in the field of hyperparameter optimization (HPO) has been greatly accelerated by
existing HPO benchmarks. Nonetheless, existing
efforts in benchmarking all focus on HPO for
traditional learning paradigms while ignoring
federated learning (FL), a promising paradigm for
collaboratively learning models from dispersed
data. In this paper, we first identify some uniqueness of federated hyperparameter optimization
(FedHPO) from various aspects, showing that
existing HPO benchmarks no longer satisfy the
need to study FedHPO methods. To facilitate the
research of FedHPO, we propose and implement
a benchmark suite F ED HPO-B ENCH that
incorporates comprehensive FedHPO problems,
enables flexible customization of the function
evaluations, and eases continuing extensions.
We conduct extensive experiments based on
F ED HPO-B ENCH to provide the community with
more insights into FedHPO. We open-sourced
F ED HPO-B ENCH at https://github.
com/alibaba/FederatedScope/tree/
master/benchmark/FedHPOBench.

However, existing HPO benchmarks all focus on traditional learning paradigms. Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020a), as a privacy-preserving
paradigm for collaboratively learning a model from distributed data, has not been considered. Actually, along with
the increasing privacy concerns from the whole society, FL
has been gaining increasing attention from academia and
industry. Meanwhile, HPO for FL algorithms (denoted by
FedHPO from now on) is identified as a critical and promising open problem in FL (Kairouz et al., 2019).
In this paper, we first elaborate on several aspects of
FedHPO’s uniqueness against traditional HPO (see Sec. 3),
including (1) the concurrent exploration strategy FedHPO
methods often adopt to improve efficiency, (2) personalization strategy potentially benefiting FedHPO methods,
(3) multi-objective FedHPO problems raised from privacy
and fairness concerns of FL, (4) runtime estimation and
system-dependent trade-offs between fidelity dimensions
required for studying FedHPO methods, and (5) Byzantine
fault tolerance desired to be possessed by FedHPO methods.
We attribute them to FL’s distributed nature and the heterogeneity among federation partners. On the one hand, the
HPO problems existing benchmarks prepared correspond
to centralized learning tasks and thus fail to possess the
above unique properties, such as the necessity for making
personalization. On the other hand, the implementations of
FedHPO methods need to be fused with the FL algorithm
for studying the above unique strategies and desiderata. Existing HPO benchmarks are not built on an FL framework
and thus cannot satisfy this need. Thus, recently proposed
FedHPO methods (Zhou et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2020; Khodak et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2022) are
evaluated on different problems and have not been uniformly
implemented in one FL framework and well benchmarked.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning algorithms are sensitive to their hyperparameters. Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) (Feurer
& Hutter, 2019) aims at making the right choices automatically. To this end, HPO methods often solve an optimization problem, where evaluating the objective function at a
specific hyperparameter configuration f (λ) corresponds to
executing the considered algorithm configured by λ. Research in this line has been greatly facilitated by HPO benchmarks (Gijsbers et al., 2019; Eggensperger et al., 2021;
Pineda-Arango et al., 2021), which prepare many HPO
*

1

To promote the research and application of FedHPO, we
present F ED HPO-B ENCH, which is (1) Comprehensive:
F ED HPO-B ENCH provides a comprehensive collection of
FedHPO problems for drawing an unbiased conclusion from
comparisons of related methods; (2) Flexible: F ED HPOB ENCH allows users to flexibly tailor a FedHPO problem

2

Equal contribution Alibaba Group ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Yaliang Li <yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

