PPG Reloaded: An Empirical Study on What Matters in Phasic Policy Gradient

Kaixin Wang 1 Daquan Zhou 2 Jiashi Feng 2 Shie Mannor 1 3

Abstract

share a torso network to encode the observations into latent
features. While this benefits sharing features between policy
and value, jointly training the policy and value function
might incur optimization interference and impose artificial
restrictions on sample reuse (Cobbe et al., 2021).

In model-free reinforcement learning, recent
methods based on a phasic policy gradient (PPG)
framework have shown impressive improvements
in sample efficiency and zero-shot generalization
on the challenging Procgen benchmark. In PPG,
two design choices are believed to be the key contributing factors to its superior performance over
PPO: the high level of value sample reuse and
the low frequency of feature distillation. However, through an extensive empirical study, we
unveil that policy regularization and data diversity are what actually matters. In particular, we
can achieve the same level of performance with
low value sample reuse and frequent feature distillation, as long as the policy regularization strength
and data diversity are preserved. In addition, we
can maintain the high performance of PPG while
reducing the computational cost to a similar level
as PPO. Our comprehensive study covers all 16
Procgen games in both sample efficiency and generalization setups. We hope it can advance the
understanding of PPG and provide insights for
future works.

Recently, Cobbe et al. (2021) proposes a phasic policy gradient (PPG) framework, which circumvents the disadvantages of using a shared encoder while preserving its benefits.
The PPG framework is the core behind recent improvements (Cobbe et al., 2021; Raileanu & Fergus, 2021; Moon
et al., 2022) in sample efficiency and zero-shot generalization on the large-scale Procgen benchmark (Cobbe et al.,
2020). Therefore, it is worthwhile to take a closer look at
what makes PPG so effective.
The stark difference between PPG and PPO is that PPG
decouples the joint training of policy and value function
into two separate phases (a policy phase and a distillation
phase, see Section 2.2 for details). With this decoupling,
one can make different algorithmic choices for policy and
value learning (Table 1). In existing works (Cobbe et al.,
2021; Moon et al., 2022), two design choices are believed
to be the key factors to the superior performance of PPG:
• High level of value sample reuse,
• Low frequency of feature distillation.

1. Introduction

However, these conclusions are drawn from ablation experiments that do not properly disentangle different factors. For
example, in (Cobbe et al., 2021), increasing the frequency
of feature distillation also shrinks the size of the off-policy
buffer, consequently reducing the diversity of the buffered
data.

In recent years, model-free deep reinforcement learning
(RL) has achieved great success in multiple domains ranging
from video games (Badia et al., 2020; Cobbe et al., 2021) to
robotics control (Haarnoja et al., 2018; OpenAI et al., 2019).
One family of high-performing model-free algorithms is
the actor-critic methods, such as PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017), A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) and IMPALA (Espeholt
et al., 2018). These methods learn a policy (actor) and a
value function (critic). In deep RL with image observation
(e.g., video games), the policy and the value function often

To get a clear understanding of what matters in PPG, we
conduct a large-scale empirical study on Procgen. Specifically, we focus on the three aspects in Table 1 and run
ablation experiments with proper control of other (possibly
confounding) hyperparameters. We aim to elucidate the core
contributing factors in PPG and provide insights for future
works built upon it. Our study consists of comprehensive
experiments covering all 16 Procgen games in both sample
efficiency and generalization setups.

1
Faculty of Electrical And Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 ByteDance, Singapore 3 NVIDIA Research, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Kaixin Wang
<kaixin96.wang@gmail.com>.

Below is a summary of our main findings:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• The low frequency of feature distillation is actually
1

