On the Impact of Knowledge Distillation for Model Interpretability

Hyeongrok Han 1 Siwon Kim 1 Hyun-Soo Choi 2 3 Sungroh Yoon 1 4

Abstract

a student model is a small neural network with a lower learning capacity compared to that of the teacher model. Many
attempts have been made to reduce the size of large models
using KD (Liu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; West et al.,
2021). This is because the huge size of large pre-trained
models such as CLIP and GPT results in increased resource
consumption and inference costs, limiting their usage in
downstream applications (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
2021).

Several recent studies have elucidated why knowledge distillation (KD) improves model performance. However, few have researched the other
advantages of KD in addition to its improving
model performance. In this study, we have attempted to show that KD enhances the interpretability as well as the accuracy of models.
We measured the number of concept detectors
identified in network dissection for a quantitative comparison of model interpretability. We
attributed the improvement in interpretability to
the class-similarity information transferred from
the teacher to student models. First, we confirmed
the transfer of class-similarity information from
the teacher to student model via logit distillation.
Then, we analyzed how class-similarity information affects model interpretability in terms of its
presence or absence and degree of similarity information. We conducted various quantitative
and qualitative experiments and examined the
results on different datasets, different KD methods, and according to different measures of interpretability. Our research showed that KD models
by large models could be used more reliably in
various fields. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Rok07/KD_XAI.git.

Several recent studies have elucidated why KD improves
model performance (Yuan et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2021). However, few studies have researched
the other advantages of KD besides its improving model
performance. Through this study, we demonstrated that
KD could improve not only the generalization performance
of models but also the interpretability, which indicates the
reliability of models.
Researchers have attempted to understand the internal
decision-making processes of neural networks, which essentially seem to be black boxes (Singla et al., 2019; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016). For large models
such as CLIP and GPT to be applied to various studies, it
is necessary to secure explainability (Gerlings et al., 2021;
van der Velden et al., 2022). Many studies consider the
interpretability of a model high if the activation is objectcentric (Fong & Vedaldi, 2017; Dabkowski & Gal, 2017;
Zintgraf et al., 2017). In this study, we found that KD promoted the object-centricity of the activation map of student
models and thereby enhanced their interpretability.

1. Introduction

Figure 1 summarizes the main arguments of this study. First,
to compare the interpretability of the models, we adopted
the number of concept detectors introduced in network dissection (Bau et al., 2017) as a measure of interpretability.
The number of concept detectors represents the degree of the
object-centricity of activation maps and is directly proportional to the model interpretability. According to the defined
terms of interpretability, we compared the interpretability of
models trained from scratch (fscratch ) and trained using KD
(fKD ), as shown in Figures 1 (a) and (b). Comparing the activation maps shown in Figures 1 (a) and (b), the activation
map of fKD is more object-centric than that of fscratch .

In knowledge distillation (KD), information is transferred
from the teacher to student model, improving the performance of the student model (Hinton et al., 2015). In general,
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University of
Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea 3 ZIOVISION
Inc., Chuncheon, Republic of Korea 4 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Hyun-Soo
Choi <choi.hyunsoo@seoultech.ac.kr>, Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We attributed this improvement in interpretability to the
class-similarity information transferred from the teacher to
1

