Predictable MDP Abstraction for Unsupervised Model-Based RL

Seohong Park 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract

Original
MDP

A key component of model-based reinforcement
learning (RL) is a dynamics model that predicts
the outcomes of actions. Errors in this predictive
model can degrade the performance of modelbased controllers, and complex Markov decision
processes (MDPs) can present exceptionally difficult prediction problems. To mitigate this issue, we propose predictable MDP abstraction
(PMA): instead of training a predictive model on
the original MDP, we train a model on a transformed MDP with a learned action space that
only permits predictable, easy-to-model actions,
while covering the original state-action space as
much as possible. As a result, model learning
becomes easier and more accurate, which allows
robust, stable model-based planning or modelbased RL. This transformation is learned in an
unsupervised manner, before any task is specified by the user. Downstream tasks can then be
solved with model-based control in a zero-shot
fashion, without additional environment interactions. We theoretically analyze PMA and empirically demonstrate that PMA leads to significant
improvements over prior unsupervised modelbased RL approaches in a range of benchmark environments. Our code and videos are available at
https://seohong.me/projects/pma/

Predictable
MDP

Figure 1. In the original Ant environment, some actions lead to unpredictable behaviors that are difficult to accurately model2 , which
makes the learned dynamics model susceptible to catastrophic
model exploitation. In our transformed predictable MDP, every
transition is easy to model and predictable, which enables robust,
stable model-based learning.

However, even small errors in a predictive model can cause
a model-based RL algorithm to underperform, sometimes
catastrophically (Hasselt et al., 2019; Jafferjee et al., 2020).
This phenomenon, referred to as model exploitation, happens when a controller or policy exploits these errors, picking actions that the model erroneously predicts should lead
to good outcomes. This issue is further exacerbated with
long-horizon model rollouts, which accumulate prediction
errors over time, or in complex MDPs, where accurately
modeling all transitions is challenging. Previous approaches
often try to address model exploitation by estimating model
uncertainty (Chua et al., 2018) or only using the model for
short rollouts (Buckman et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019).

The basic building block of model-based reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms is a predictive model p̂(s′ |s, a),
typically one that predicts the next state conditioned on the
previous state and action in the given Markov decision process (MDP). By employing predictive models with planning
or RL, previous model-based approaches have been shown
to be effective in solving a variety of complex problems,
ranging from robotics (Wu et al., 2022) to games (Schrittwieser et al., 2020), in a sample-efficient manner.

We take a different perspective on model-based RL to tackle
this challenge: instead of training a predictive model on
the original MDP, we apply model-based RL on top of an
abstracted, simplified MDP. Namely, we first abstract the
MDP into a simpler learned MDP with a transformed latent
action space by restricting unpredictable actions, and then
build the predictive model on this simplified MDP. Here, the
transformed MDP is designed to be predictable in the sense
that every transition in the new MDP is easy to model, while
covering the original state-action space as much as possible.
As a result, there is little room for catastrophic model exploitation compared to the original, possibly complex MDP,
allowing robust model-based planning and RL. We illustrate
an example of predictable MDP transformation in Figure 1.

1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Seohong Park <seohong@berkeley.edu>.

We design a practical algorithm for learning predictable
MDP abstractions in the setting of unsupervised model-

1. Introduction

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

2

Even though the Ant environment is completely deterministic,
it is very difficult to accurately model all the possible transitions
due to its complex, contact-rich dynamics (see Section 7.3).

1

