Bag of Tricks for Training Data Extraction from Language Models

Weichen Yu * 1 Tianyu Pang 2 Qian Liu 2 Chao Du 2 Bingyi Kang 2 Yan Huang 1 Min Lin 2 Shuicheng Yan 2

Abstract

19.7
20.8

Sampling
Strategy

With the advance of language models, privacy
protection is receiving more attention. Training
data extraction is therefore of great importance,
as it can serve as a potential tool to assess privacy leakage. However, due to the difficulty of
this task, most of the existing methods are proofof-concept and still not effective enough. In this
paper, we investigate and benchmark tricks for improving training data extraction using a publicly
available dataset. Because most existing extraction methods use a pipeline of generating-thenranking, i.e., generating text candidates as potential training data and then ranking them based
on specific criteria, our research focuses on the
tricks for both text generation (e.g., sampling strategy) and text ranking (e.g., token-level criteria).
The experimental results show that several previously overlooked tricks can be crucial to the
success of training data extraction. Based on the
GPT-Neo 1.3B evaluation results, our proposed
tricks outperform the baseline by a large margin
in most cases, providing a much stronger baseline for future research. The code is available at
https://github.com/weichen-yu/LM-Extraction.

34.4

(Sec 5.1)

33.5

Prob. Dist.
Adjustment

19.5
32.6

(Sec 5.2)

Exp. Bias
Reduction

46.7
24.6

(Sec 5.3)

Look-ahead

36.7

(Sec 5.4)

37.1

Sen. Level
Criteria

36.6

(Sec 6.1)

37.1

Tok. Level
Criteria
(Sec 6.2)

40.6
(%)

10

20

30

40

Figure 1. Overview for the bag of tricks explored in this work, with
an evaluation of precision (MP ). Bars in pink denote the methods
in the improved suffix generation, and bars in orange denote the
methods in the improved suffix ranking. The dashed bars indicate
the best method in each category.

age that hinders the widespread adoption of LMs (Carlini
et al., 2021; 2022; Lehman et al., 2021).
As privacy security has been an important issue of public
concern, a crucial topic is to develop efficient methods for
evaluating privacy leakage. Thus, the focus of our research
is on the adversarial task of training data extraction from
LMs, a relatively new area of study (Carlini et al., 2021;
Lehman et al., 2021). Existing extraction methods have
yielded successful records, but there are instances in which
these methods are even less effective than simply selecting
the most popular entity based on prior score. In addition,
successful data extraction requires a high generation ratio,
i.e., the need to generate and rank a large number of candidates in order to identify a single successful instance. These
suboptimal results suggest that, despite the viability of training data extraction and developed pioneering methods as
demonstrated in previous research, this task is still relatively
new with an abundance of problems to solve.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in language models (LMs) have led to impressive performance in a variety of downstream language
tasks (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Brown et al., 2020). It
has been demonstrated, however, that training data can be
extracted from LMs due to the memorization effects (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Carlini et al., 2019; Feldman, 2020;
Brown et al., 2020). These training data may contain sensitive information such as names, email addresses, phone
numbers, and physical addresses, resulting in privacy leak∗
Work done during an internship at Sea AI Lab. 1 Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. 2 Sea AI Lab. Correspondence to: Tianyu Pang <tianyupang@sea.com>, Qian Liu
<liuqian@sea.com>, Yan Huang <yhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

In this study, we aim to develop techniques for efficient
training data extraction. We adhere to the criteria of the
recent Training Data Extraction Challenge,1 which employs

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Website link of Training Data Extraction Challenge

