Specializing Smaller Language Models towards Multi-Step Reasoning

Yao Fu 1 Hao Peng 2 Litu Ou 1 Ashish Sabharwal 2 Tushar Khot 2

Abstract

Chowdhery et al., 2022). Wei et al. (2022a) discuss the emergent abilities of large language models – abilities that only
exist in large models (more than 100B parameters), but not
in smaller ones. A typical example (also the first-discovered
one) is the ability to perform multi-step reasoning on math
word problems with chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting (Wei
et al., 2022b) where the authors let the model generate a
step-by-step reasoning chain to help get the final answer.
The existence of such abilities has a profound impact: on
the positive side, such abilities open countless opportunities for new research directions; on the negative side, very
few organizations have the compute to even fine-tune 100Bscale models, making such abilities less accessible. It would
be ideal if smaller models can also obtain emergent abilities like math CoT reasoning, so they can be accessed by
a larger range of researchers and practitioners. However,
preliminary results of Wei et al. (2022a) show that if the
model scale is small (empirically less than 100B parameters), CoT exhibits flat, sometimes even near zero scaling
curve (Wei et al., 2022b): the model CoT performance benefits little from scaling up, until a certain threshold is reached.
Later smaller models’ scaling curve is partially improved
in Chung et al. (2022), but they still underperform large
models. These results so far are rather pessimistic since they
suggest improving CoT performance for smaller models
can be challenging. At the current stage, the community is
eager to know to what extent such abilities can be further
improved in smaller models.

The surprising ability of Large Language Models
(LLMs) to perform well on complex reasoning
with only few-shot chain-of-thought prompts is
believed to emerge only in very large-scale models. We show that such abilities can, in fact, be
distilled down from GPT-3.5 (≥ 175B) to T5 variants (≤ 11B). We propose model specialization, to
specialize the model’s ability towards a target task.
The hypothesis is that large models (commonly
viewed as larger than 100B) have strong modeling
power such that they can perform a large spectrum of tasks. Small models (commonly viewed
as smaller than 10B) have limited model capacity,
but if we specialize their capacity towards a target
task, the model can achieve decent performance
improvements. We use multi-step math reasoning
as our testbed because it is a very typical emergent
ability. We show two important aspects of model
abilities: (1) balancing language model’s performance on multiple tasks is a delicate matter, as
improvements on one task may compromise other
tasks; (2) yet by intentionally paying the price of
decreased generic ability, we can clearly improve
across different model scales smaller than 10B
towards a specialized multi-step math reasoning
ability. We further give comprehensive discussions about important design choices for better
generalization, including the data format mixture
and the start model checkpoint. We hope our practice and discoveries can serve as an important
attempt towards specialized smaller models in the
new research paradigm set by LLMs.

This paper addresses the problem of CoT reasoning for
smaller models by model specialization. Our hypothesis is
that large models (≥ 100B) have strong modeling power
but are spread over a large spectrum of tasks. Small models
(≤ 10B) have limited model capacity, but if we “concentrate” their capacity on a target task (improving one target task at the cost of decreased capability on other tasks),
the model can achieve decent performance improvements.
There exists promising preliminary work on smaller models’
chain-of-thought abilities such as UL2 (Tay et al., 2022)
and FlanT5 (Chung et al., 2022), but their approaches risk
spreading the models’ limited capacity across many different datasets, hurting their performance in tasks involving
complex reasoning. In our experiments, we show that we
can improve the scaling trend of CoT reasoning on small
FlanT5 models (250M, 760M, and 3B) by a large margin

1. Introduction
Recently, the field of NLP is significantly impressed by
large language models’ strong abilities (Brown et al., 2020;
1

University of Edinburgh 2 Allen Institute for AI. Correspondence to: Yao Fu <yao.fu@ed.ac.uk>, Tushar Khot
<tushark@allenai.org>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

