Image Shortcut Squeezing:
Countering Perturbative Availability Poisons with Compression

Zhuoran Liu 1 Zhengyu Zhao 2 3 Martha Larson 1

Abstract
Perturbative availability poisons (PAPs) add small
changes to images to prevent their use for model
training. Current research adopts the belief that
practical and effective approaches to countering
PAPs do not exist. In this paper, we argue that it is
time to abandon this belief. We present extensive
experiments showing that 12 state-of-the-art PAP
methods are vulnerable to Image Shortcut Squeezing (ISS), which is based on simple compression.
For example, on average, ISS restores the CIFAR10 model accuracy to 81.73%, surpassing the previous best preprocessing-based countermeasures
by 37.97% absolute. ISS also (slightly) outperforms adversarial training and has higher generalizability to unseen perturbation norms and
also higher efficiency. Our investigation reveals
that the property of PAP perturbations depends
on the type of surrogate model used for poison
generation, and it explains why a specific ISS
compression yields the best performance for a
specific type of PAP perturbation. We further test
stronger, adaptive poisoning, and show it falls
short of being an ideal defense against ISS. Overall, our results demonstrate the importance of considering various (simple) countermeasures to ensure the meaningfulness of analysis carried out
during the development of PAP methods. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
liuzrcc/ImageShortcutSqueezing.

Figure 1. An illustration of our Image Shortcut Squeezing (ISS) for
countering perturbative availability poisons (PAPs). The model accuracy is reduced by PAPs but is then restored by our ISS. Results
are reported for EM (Huang et al., 2021) poisons on CIFAR-10.

1. Introduction
The ever-growing amount of data that is easily available
online has driven the tremendous advances of deep neural
networks (DNNs) (Schmidhuber, 2015; LeCun et al., 2015;
He et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020). However, online data
may be proprietary or contain private information, raising
concerns about unauthorized use. Perturbative availability
poisons (PAPs) are recognized as a promising approach to
data protection and recently a large number of PAP methods
have been proposed that add perturbations to images which
block training by acting as shortcuts (Shen et al., 2019;
Huang et al., 2021; Fowl et al., 2021b;a). As illustrated by
Figure 1 (a)→(b), the high test accuracy of a DNN model is
substantially reduced by PAPs.
Existing research has shown that PAPs can be compromised
to a limited extent by preprocessing-based-countermeasures,
such as data augmentations (Huang et al., 2021; Fowl et al.,
2021b) and pre-filtering (Fowl et al., 2021b; Chen et al.,
2023). However, a widely adopted belief is that no approaches exist that are capable of effectively countering
PAPs. Adversarial training (AT) has been proven to be a
strong countermeasure (Tao et al., 2021; Wen et al., 2023).
However, it is not considered to be a practical one, since it
requires a large amount of computation and also gives rise to
a non-negligible trade-off in test accuracy of the clean (non-

1
Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands 2 Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 3 CISPA Helmholtz
Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Zhuoran Liu <z.liu@cs.ru.nl>,
Zhengyu Zhao <zhengyu.zhao@cispa.de>, Martha Larson
<m.larson@cs.ru.nl>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

