Generative Decoding of Visual Stimuli

Eleni Miliotou * 1 Panagiotis Kyriakis * 2 Jason D Hinman 1 Andrei Irimia 3 Paul Bogdan 2

Abstract

activity relates to external stimuli (Glaser et al., 2020), for
engineering application such as brain-computer interfaces
(Brandman et al., 2017), for decoding imagery during sleep
(Horikawa et al., 2013), and even for reconstructing video
frames from brain activity (Le et al., 2022). Given its importance, neuroscience and machine learning researchers have
jointly led the development of sophisticated deep learning
architectures that allows us to design pipelines that map
voxel-based recordings to the corresponding visual stimuli.
Based on the target learning task, visual decoding can be
categorized into stimuli classification, stimuli identification,
and stimuli reconstruction. The former two tasks aim to
predict the object category of the presented stimulus or identify the stimulus from an ensemble of possible stimuli. The
reconstruction task, which is the most challenging one and
the main focus of this paper, aims to construct a replica of
the presented stimulus image from the fMRI recordings.

Reconstructing real-world images from fMRI
recordings is a challenging task of great importance in neuroscience. The current architectures
are bottlenecked because they fail to effectively
capture the hierarchical processing of visual stimuli that takes place in the human brain. Motivated by that fact, we introduce a novel neural
network architecture for the problem of neural decoding. Our architecture uses Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders (HVAEs) to learn meaningful
representations of real-world images and leverages their latent space hierarchy to learn voxel-toimage mappings. By mapping the early stages
of the visual pathway to the first set of latent
variables and the higher visual cortex areas to
the deeper layers in the latent hierarchy, we are
able to construct a latent variable neural decoding
model that replicates the hierarchical visual information processing. Our model achieves better
reconstructions compared to the state of the art
and our ablation study indicates that the hierarchical structure of the latent space is responsible for
that performance.

Related Work. The proposed methods for the problem of
neural decoding can be broadly classified in three categories:
non-deep learning methods, non-generative deep learning
methods and generative deep learning methods. The nondeep learning class consists of methods that are based on
primitive linear models and aim in reconstructing low-level
image features (Kay et al., 2008). Such approaches first
extract handcrafted features from real-world images, such
as multi-scale image bases (Miyawaki et al., 2008) or Gabor filters (Yoshida & Ohki, 2020), and then learn a linear
mapping from the fMRI voxel space to the extracted features. Due to their simplicity, linear models are not able
to reconstruct complex real-world images and thus their
applicability is restricted to simple images containing only
low-level features.

1. Introduction
Decoding visual imagery from brain recordings is a key
problem in neuroscience. This problem aims to reconstruct
the visual stimuli from fMRI recordings taken while the
subject is viewing the stimuli. Even though some of the
excitement is fuelled by science fiction and the difficulty
of the problem (Shen et al., 2019b), the scientific consensus is that neural decoding has real-world, important implications. It is important for understanding how neural

Methods that use convolutional neural networks as well as
encoder-decoder architectures belong to the non-generative
deep learning class. Horikawa et al. (Horikawa & Kamitani, 2017) demonstrated a homology between human and
machine vision by designing an architecture with which
the features extracted from convolutional neural networks
can be predicted from fMRI signals. Based upon those
findings, Shen et al. (Shen et al., 2019b) used a pretrained
VGG-19 model to extract hierarchical features from stimuli images and learned a mapping from the fMRI voxels
in the low/high area to the corresponding low/high VGG19 features. Beliy et al. (Beliy et al., 2019) designed a

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Neurology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, US 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, US 3 Department of Gerontology, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Panagiotis
Kyriakis <pkyriaki@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

