Learning Preconditioners for Conjugate Gradient PDE Solvers

Yichen Li 1 Peter Yichen Chen 1 Tao Du 2 3 Wojciech Matusik 1

Abstract

is commonly applied to solve the underlying large sparse
linear systems originating from discretized partial differential equations (PDEs), as PDEs generally lack analytical, closed-form solutions. Therefore, developing a highquality linear solver is instrumental in solving numerical
PDEs efficiently and effectively.

Efficient numerical solvers for partial differential equations empower science and engineering.
One commonly employed numerical solver is the
preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) algorithm, whose performance is largely affected by
the preconditioner quality. However, designing
high-performing preconditioner with traditional
numerical methods is highly non-trivial, often requiring problem-specific knowledge and meticulous matrix operations. We present a new method
that leverages learning-based approach to obtain
an approximate matrix factorization to the system matrix to be used as a preconditioner in the
context of PCG solvers. Our high-level intuition
comes from the shared property between preconditioners and network-based PDE solvers that excels at obtaining approximate solutions at a low
computational cost. Such observation motivates
us to represent preconditioners as graph neural
networks (GNNs). In addition, we propose a
new loss function that rewrites traditional preconditioner metrics to incorporate inductive bias
from PDE data distributions, enabling effective
training of high-performing preconditioners. We
conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate
the efficacy and generalizability of our proposed
approach on solving various 2D and 3D linear
second-order PDEs.1

A naive CG implementation suffers from a slow convergence rate for ill-conditioned matrices. Therefore, it
is typically equipped with a preconditioner that modulates the system matrix’s condition number. Preconditioners are mathematically-grounded and problem-dependent
transformation matrices that can be applied to the original linear system Ax = b, where A is a sparse matrix,
A ∈ Rn×n , and x, b ∈ Rn are the unknown solution
vector and right-hand-side vector respectively. Preconditioner P ∈ Rn×n transforms the original into an easier
one when applied to both sides of the original linear system, P−1 Ax = P−1 b. Traditional numerical preconditioners use the approximation of A as preconditioners, and
the quality of preconditioning significantly affects the CG
solvers’ convergence rate.
Designing a high-performance preconditioner is challenging because an ideal preconditioner is inexpensive to solve
and greatly reduces the condition number of the system
matrix. These two desired properties that often conflict.
Decades of research effort in applied math have been devoted to addressing this longstanding issue through proposing new sparsity patterns (Schäfer et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2021c; Davis & Hager, 1999b), matrix reordering techniques (Liu, 1990; Chen et al., 2021a; Brandhorst & HeadGordon, 2011), and multi-level approaches (Saad & Zhang,
2001; Buranay & Iyikal, 2019; Liew et al., 2007). Recent
efforts have been made towards leveraging machine learning and optimization to discover preconditioners (Götz &
Anzt, 2018; Sappl et al., 2019; Ackmann et al., 2020; Azulay & Treister, 2022), but their methods are typically tailored to specific PDE problems. To our best knowledge,
a learning-based solution applicable to general PDE problems is unavailable, and our work aims to fill this gap.

1. Introduction
The conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm is an efficient numerical method for solving large sparse linear systems. CG
iteratively reduces the residual error to solve the linear systems to a specified accuracy level and does not require
the expensive computation of a full matrix inverse. CG
1

MIT CSAIL 2 Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.
Correspondence to: Yichen Li <yichenl@csail.mit.edu>.

In this work, we propose a learning-based method for preconditioning sparse symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices. Recent machine learning works on simulating PDEgoverned physical systems (Pfaff et al., 2020; Sanchez-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://sites.google.com/view/neuralPCG

1

