The Price of Differential Privacy under Continual Observation

Palak Jain * 1 Sofya Raskhodnikova * 1 Satchit Sivakumar * 1 Adam Smith * 1

Abstract

crosoft (Apple, 2017; Yang et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2022).

We study the accuracy of differentially private
mechanisms in the continual release model. A
continual release mechanism receives a sensitive
dataset as a stream of T inputs and produces, after receiving each input, an output that is accurate for all the inputs received so far. We provide the first strong lower bounds on the error
of continual release mechanisms. In particular,
for two fundamental problems that are closely related to empirical risk minimization and widely
studied and used in the standard (batch) model,
we prove that the worst case error of every continual release algorithm is Ω̃(T 1/3 ) times larger
than that of the best batch algorithm. Previous
work shows only a Ω(log T ) gap between the
worst case error achievable in these two models.
We also formulate a model that allows for adaptively selected inputs, thus capturing dependencies that arise in many applications of continual
release. Even though, in general, both privacy
and accuracy are harder to attain in this model,
we show that our lower bounds are matched by
the error of simple algorithms that work even for
adaptively selected inputs.

Many deployments of differential privacy operate in the
batch model: that is, they collect their input all at once and
produce a single output. However, in numerous situations,
sensitive data are collected over time, and published models and statistics need to be updated regularly. Examples
include COVID-19 dashboards that display statistics about
the number of COVID cases and deaths, ad campaign analytics, recommendation systems, and predictive language
models. To investigate privacy in these situations, Dwork,
Naor, Pitassi, and Rothblum (2010a) and Chan, Shi, and
Song (2011) introduced the continual release model (sometimes referred to as the continual observation model). In
the continual release model, a mechanism receives a sensitive dataset as a stream of T input records and produces,
after receiving each record, an accurate output on the obtained inputs. Intuitively, the mechanism is DP if releasing
the entire vector of T outputs satisfies differential privacy.
Some deployments of differential privacy already fit this
model (Apple, 2017). Furthermore, the continual release
model arises as an intermediate step inside the analysis of
some batch algorithms, such as the DP-FTRL learning algorithm (Kairouz et al., 2021). Despite the model’s prevalence, the theoretical understanding of continual release is
still limited, and only a handful of techniques have been developed to tackle it. The main challenge for privacy in this
model is that each individual record contributes to outputs
at multiple time steps.

1. Introduction

Dwork et al. (2010a) and Chan et al. (2011) considered
the problem of computing summation in the continual release model when each record consists of one bit. Dwork
et al. (2010a) showed that an error of Ω(log T ) is necessary to privately release all running sums. Additionally, both works designed the binary tree mechanism, a
continual release mechanism that achieves (additive) error
O(log2 T ) for this problem. Since then, this mechanism
has been shown to accurately solve (with polylog T error)
many problems in the continual release model. (Further
related work is discussed in Appendix B.) Given this success, one might conjecture that these results could be extended to a wide range of problems or at least to problems
closely related to summation. Indeed, the largest previously known gap between the worst case error achievable
in the batch and continual release models is Ω(log T ), ex-

Differentially private (DP) data analysis (Dwork, McSherry, Nissim, and Smith, 2006b) studies the design of algorithms that publish aggregate statistics about input datasets
while preserving the privacy of individuals whose data they
contain. The published aggregates often include learning models trained on the private data, as in Apple’s
auto-complete feature, in Google’s search query suggestions, and large-capacity language models deployed by Mi*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence
to: Palak Jain <palakj@bu.edu>, Sofya Raskhodnikova <sofya@bu.edu>, Adam Smith <ads22@bu.edu>, Satchit Sivakumar <satchit@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

