Reinforcement Learning Can Be More Efficient with Multiple Rewards

Christoph Dann 1 Yishay Mansour 1 2 Mehryar Mohri 1 3

Abstract

Here, we aim to lessen the requirement from the reward
designers to supply a single adequate reward definition and
instead allow for multiple rewards, which together can help
better represent the task and induce fast learning.

Reward design is one of the most critical and
challenging aspects when formulating a task as a
reinforcement learning (RL) problem. In practice,
it often takes several attempts of reward specification and learning with it in order to find one that
leads to sample-efficient learning of the desired
behavior. Instead, in this work, we study whether
directly incorporating multiple alternate reward
formulations of the same task in a single agent can
lead to faster learning. We analyze multi-reward
extensions of action-elimination algorithms and
prove more favorable instance-dependent regret
bounds compared to their single-reward counterparts, both in multi-armed bandits and in tabular
Markov decision processes. Our bounds scale
for each state-action pair with the inverse of the
largest gap among all reward functions. This suggests that learning with multiple rewards can indeed be more sample-efficient, as long as the rewards agree on an optimal policy. We further
prove that when rewards do not agree, multireward action elimination in multi-armed bandits
still learns a policy that is good across all reward
functions.

To illustrate our motivation, consider the street navigation
task, where the objective is to drive from one city center
to another in the shortest possible time. A natural way to
define the reward in this scenario is to assign a negative
value to each road section proportionate to the travel time
required to traverse it. While this reward definition specifies
the desired behavior, it may pose challenges in terms of
learning, as there could be numerous alternative routes with
similar travel times. The agent would need to repeatedly
test these routes to determine which one is consistently the
fastest. Local experts, such as experienced taxi drivers, often
possess an in-depth understanding of their neighborhoods.
They confidently know which road sections are not the most
efficient options. Incorporating their recommendations can
be valuable by introducing an additional reward function.
This function assigns a significant negative reward to the
discouraged road sections and zero everywhere else. Although this reward function does not provide information
about other road segments, it can complement the original
reward function and expedite the agent’s learning process
in avoiding those specific segments with higher penalties.
Consequently, the agent can optimize its navigation strategy
more efficiently.

1. Introduction

Another example where multiple reward functions naturally occur is in the context of goal reaching in robotics.
In this scenario, the objective is to train an agent to efficiently move the end-effector of a robot to a desired position. There are many natural ways to formulate the reward
function for this task. We could give a reward of -1 unless
the end-effector is within a certain bounding box around the
goal, or alternatively, a negative reward proportional to the
Euclidean distance of end-effector to goal. Other choices
are negative rewards proportional to the squared Euclidean
distance or the Manhattan distance. All of these reward
function formulations are reasonable and can lead to optimal or approximately-optimal policies. However, it is not
immediately evident which reward function is the easiest to
learn, and certain policies may be more or less suboptimal
under different reward functions. In fact, existing research
(Luo et al., 2020, Table II) has observed significant differ-

Crafting an appropriate reward function often poses one
of the most challenging obstacles when implementing reinforcement learning in real-world scenarios. The process
typically entails numerous iterations of reward engineering
to come up with a definition that both captures the task accurately and enables fast learning. This frequently involves
exploring different formulations by training an agent with
alternative definitions and testing which yields the fastest
learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018, Chapter 17.6).
1

Google Research 2 Tel Aviv University 3 Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences. Correspondence to: Christoph Dann
<cdann@cdann.net>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

