Revisiting Structured Variational Autoencoders

Yixiu Zhao 1 Scott W. Linderman 2

Abstract

models to capture dependencies in the prior distribution over
latent variables. For example, when working with sequential data, graphical models can capture latent dynamics (Krishnan et al., 2015; Archer et al., 2015). When domain
knowledge is available, graphical models offer an expressive
means of incorporating it (Pandarinath et al., 2018; Lopez
et al., 2018). When inferring the posterior distribution over
latent variables, graphical models offer an ancillary benefit:
SVAEs can leverage the rich toolkit of message passing
algorithms for graphical models (Wainwright et al., 2008)
to aid in approximate inference.

Structured variational autoencoders (SVAEs)
(Johnson et al., 2016) combine probabilistic
graphical model priors on latent variables, deep
neural networks to link latent variables to observed data, and structure-exploiting algorithms
for approximate posterior inference. These models are particularly appealing for sequential data,
where the prior can capture temporal dependencies. However, despite their conceptual elegance,
SVAEs have proven difficult to implement, and
more general approaches have been favored in
practice. Here, we revisit SVAEs using modern
machine learning tools and demonstrate their advantages over more general alternatives in terms
of both accuracy and efficiency. First, we develop
a modern implementation for hardware acceleration, parallelization, and automatic differentiation
of the message passing algorithms at the core of
the SVAE. Second, we show that by exploiting
structure in the prior, the SVAE learns more accurate models and posterior distributions, which
translate into improved performance on prediction
tasks. Third, we show how the SVAE can naturally handle missing data, and we leverage this
ability to develop a novel, self-supervised training approach. Altogether, these results show that
the time is ripe to revisit structured variational
autoencoders.

Specifically, the SVAE leverages a structure-exploiting
amortized variational inference algorithm. Rather than producing a full posterior distribution over latent variables, the
recognition network (also referred to as an encoder) outputs
conjugate potentials. When the prior is composed of exponential family distributions, the conjugate potentials can be
combined with the prior using message passing algorithms
to obtain an approximate posterior. Essentially, the SVAE
learns to approximate complex deep generative models with
simpler exponential family models where fast and efficient
algorithms can be applied.
Despite their conceptual elegance, two issues have limited the adoption of SVAEs. The first is that the structureexploiting inference algorithm is difficult to implement in
practice, requiring gradients through message passing algorithms and fixed-point iterations. The second is a more basic
question: what is the value of structure-exploiting amortized
inference when we can construct arbitrarily flexible recognition networks? In practice, some methods retain a structured
prior but use more general recognition networks (Krishnan
et al., 2015; Dilokthanakul et al., 2016; Casale et al., 2018).
Other methods use more flexible priors as well; e.g., sequential latent variable models often leverage recurrent neural
network priors (e.g. Chung et al., 2015; Karl et al., 2016;
Buesing et al., 2018; Pandarinath et al., 2018; Kosiorek
et al., 2018; Hafner et al., 2019; Saxena et al., 2021)

1. Introduction
Variational autoencoders (VAEs, Kingma and Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014) are deep generative models that use
neural networks to link latent variables to high dimensional observations. Structured variational autoencoders
(SVAEs) (Johnson et al., 2016) use probabilistic graphical

In this work we address both of these concerns. First, we develop a modern implementation of the SVAE that is fast and
scalable with CPU, GPU, or TPU hardware. We show how
the SVAE can leverage parallel message passing algorithms
to obtain orders of magnitude speedup over less structured
alternatives. Second, we study SVAEs for sequential data

1
Applied Physics Department, Stanford University
Department of Statistics and the Wu Tsai Neurosciences
Institute, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Yixiu Zhao
<yixiuz@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

