Context Consistency Regularization for Label Sparsity in Time Series

Yooju Shin 1 Susik Yoon 2 Hwanjun Song 3 Dongmin Park 1 Byunghyun Kim 4 Jae-Gil Lee 4 Byung Suk Lee 5

Abstract

tamp in the time series requires prohibitively high cost, and
therefore, in reality, a lot of time series are only sparsely
labeled (Moltisanti et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2020; Yoon et al.,
2021; Shin et al., 2022). In this regard, consistency regularization is used as a promising way to train a model from
sparse labels, by leveraging the model’s output to infer new
labels for unlabeled data points (Laine & Aila, 2017; Rizve
et al., 2021). Consistency regularization enforces the consistency among the outputs of a model for a pair of augmented
data instances, and thus data augmentation plays a key role
in consistency regularization. Recent state-of-the-art consistency regularization methods, mostly developed for image
data, necessitate domain-specific data augmentation such as
color transformation and image rotation (Cubuk et al., 2020;
Sohn et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Kim & Lee, 2022).

Labels are typically sparse in real-world time series due to the high annotation cost. Recently,
consistency regularization techniques have been
used to generate artificial labels from unlabeled
augmented instances. To fully exploit the sequential characteristic of time series in consistency
regularization, we propose a novel method of
data augmentation called context-attached augmentation, which adds preceding and succeeding instances to a target instance to form its augmented instance. Unlike the existing augmentation techniques that modify a target instance
by directly perturbing its attributes, the contextattached augmentation generates instances augmented with varying contexts while maintaining
the target instance. Based on our augmentation
method, we propose a context consistency regularization framework, which first adds different
contexts to a target instance sampled from a given
time series and then shares unitary reliabilitybased cross-window labels across the augmented
instances to maintain consistency. We demonstrate that the proposed framework outperforms
the existing state-of-the-art consistency regularization frameworks through comprehensive experiments on real-world time-series datasets.

1

Such conventional data augmentation generates multiple
different instances from a target instance (i.e., an instance
for pseudo-labeling) by way of data perturbation. If data
instances are independent of one another as in image data,
there is no other way than to perturb the target instance itself.
In contrast, using the sequential nature of time series, where
data instances (segments or data points) are temporally correlated, it is feasible to generate multiple different instances
from a target instance without perturbing it but by attaching
its surrounding sequence (i.e., context). As shown in Figure
1(a), given a target instance in a time series, contexts of varying lengths are attached to the target instance to generate
different pairs of “augmented” instances. We call this type
of data augmentation the context-attached augmentation.

Introduction

The key property of context-attached augmentation is to
achieve the effect of data augmentation without perturbing
a target instance. Being free of data perturbation brings
several benefits. First, consistency between augmented
instances can be enforced more reliably because a target
instance itself is exactly the same among its augmented
instances. Second, a sufficient number of augmented instances can be easily obtained by varying contexts. Third,
it is computationally inexpensive, only requiring the retrieval of a sub-sequence from a time series. Moreover,
context-attached augmentation can be used together with
conventional data augmentation such as jittering and scaling.
Thus, the novel concept of context-attached augmentation
opens a new direction of context consistency regularization.

A time series is a collection of consecutive data points, often
annotated with temporally coherent timestamp labels. As
the boundaries of coherent labels are unknown in practice,
a classifier is trained to predict the label of each timestamp (Farha & Gall, 2019). However, due to the length
of and complexity in a time series, labeling every times1

Graduate School of Data Science, KAIST, Korea 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
USA 3 AWS AI Labs, USA 4 School of Computing, KAIST, Korea
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Vermont, USA.
Correspondence to: Jae-Gil Lee <jaegil@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

