Modeling Temporal Data as Continuous Functions
with Stochastic Process Diffusion
Marin Biloš 1 2 Kashif Rasul 2 Anderson Schneider 2 Yuriy Nevmyvaka 2 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract

flows (Deng et al., 2020), etc. As it turns out, capturing the
true generative process proves difficult, especially with the
inherent stochasticity of the data.

Temporal data such as time series can be viewed
as discretized measurements of the underlying
function. To build a generative model for such
data we have to model the stochastic process
that governs it. We propose a solution by defining the denoising diffusion model in the function
space which also allows us to naturally handle
irregularly-sampled observations. The forward
process gradually adds noise to functions, preserving their continuity, while the learned reverse
process removes the noise and returns functions
as new samples. To this end, we define suitable noise sources and introduce novel denoising
and score-matching models. We show how our
method can be used for multivariate probabilistic
forecasting and imputation, and how our model
can be interpreted as a neural process.

Recently, denoising diffusion models have shown great
promise in modeling very complicated data distributions
such as those in the image domain (Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021). The approach consists of first gradually
adding the noise to data, until it becomes pure noise, corresponding to some base distribution. At the same time, the
model is trained to reverse this process. To generate a new
data point, we start with an initial noisy value sampled from
the base distribution; then the model gradually denoises it
to reach a sample from the learned data distribution. We
define this more rigorously in Section 2.
In this work, we expand on this general framework to define the diffusion for data measured in continuous time by
treating it as a discretization of some continuous function.
That is, instead of adding noise to each data point independently, we add the noise to the whole function while preserving its continuity. In Section 3, we show that this can
be done by using stochastic processes as noise generators.
We additionally show that the final noisy function will also
correspond to a sample from a known stochastic process.
Next, we specify the transition probabilities in the forward
noising process, the evidence bound on the likelihood used
in the training, and the new sampling procedure, for both
the fixed-step and SDE-based diffusion approaches.

1. Introduction
Time series data is collected from measurements of some
real-world system that evolves via some complex unknown
dynamics. The sampling rate is often arbitrary and nonuniform, producing irregularly-sampled time series. Therefore, we can make an assumption that time series follows
some underlying continuous function; consider, e.g., the
temperature or load of a system over time. Although values
are observed as separate events, we know that temperature
always exists and its evolution over time is smooth, not jittery. This kind of data can be found in many domains, from
medical, industrial to financial applications.

Figure 1 shows an illustration of our approach. Data is observed as a set of (irregularly-sampled) points that correspond to some underlying function. By adding noise to
this function we reach the prior stochastic process. At the
same time, the model can reverse this process, allowing us
to generate new function samples.

Previously, different approaches for modeling irregular
data have been proposed, including neural ordinary and
stochastic differential equations (Chen et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2020), neural processes (Garnelo et al., 2018), normalizing

In Section 4 we describe different use cases that we tackle
with our model while highlighting the benefits over previous approaches. For instance, we use conditioning, to output the distribution over future values, i.e., for multivariate
probabilistic forecasting. Since we define the distribution
over functions we can also view our model as a neural process (Garnelo et al., 2018), allowing us to estimate missing
points from the observed. In Section 5 we empirically show
that our model outperforms the baselines on all tasks.

1

Technical University of Munich, Germany 2 Machine Learning Research, Morgan Stanley, United States. Correspondence to:
Marin Biloš <marin.bilos@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

