A Watermark for Large Language Models

John Kirchenbauer * 1 Jonas Geiping * 1 Yuxin Wen 1 Jonathan Katz 1 Ian Miers 1 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Potential harms of large language models can be
mitigated by watermarking model output, i.e., embedding signals into generated text that are invisible to humans but algorithmically detectable from
a short span of tokens. We propose a watermarking framework for proprietary language models.
The watermark can be embedded with negligible
impact on text quality, and can be detected using
an efficient open-source algorithm without access
to the language model API or parameters. The
watermark works by selecting a randomized set
of “green” tokens before a word is generated, and
then softly promoting use of green tokens during
sampling. We propose a statistical test for detecting the watermark with interpretable p-values,
and derive an information-theoretic framework
for analyzing the sensitivity of the watermark. We
test the watermark using a multi-billion parameter
model from the Open Pretrained Transformer
(OPT) family, and discuss robustness and security.

Prompt
Z-score

p-value

Num tokens

…The watermark detection algorithm
can be made public, enabling third
parties (e.g., social media
platforms) to run it themselves, or
it can be kept private and run behind
an API. We seek a watermark with the
following properties:

Extremely efficient on average term
lengths and word frequencies on
synthetic, microamount text (as little
as 25 words)
56 .31
Very small and low-resource key/hash
(e.g., 140 bits per key is sufficient
for 99.999999999% of the Synthetic
Internet

.38

No watermark

With watermark

- minimal marginal probability for a
detection attempt.
- Good speech frequency and energy
rate reduction.
- messages indiscernible to humans.
- easy for humans to verify.

36 7.4 6e-14

Figure 1. Outputs of a language model, both with and without
the application of a watermark. The watermarked text, if written
by a human, is expected to contain 9 “green” tokens, yet it contains 28. The probability of this happening by random chance is
≈ 6×10−14 , leaving us extremely certain that this text is machine
generated. Words are marked with their respective colors. The
model is OPT-6.7B using multinomial sampling. Watermark
parameters are γ, δ = (0.25, 2). The prompt is the whole blue
paragraph marked below.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as the recently developed ChatGPT, can write documents, create executable
code, and answer questions, often with human-like capabilities (Schulman et al., 2022). As these systems become
more pervasive, there is increasing risk that they may be
used for malicious purposes (Bergman et al., 2022; Mirsky
et al., 2023). These include social engineering and election
manipulation campaigns that exploit automated bots on social media platforms, creation of fake news and web content,
and use of AI systems for cheating on academic writing and
coding assignments. Furthermore, the proliferation of synthetic data on the web complicates future dataset creation
efforts, as synthetic data is often inferior to human content
and must be detected and excluded before model training

(Radford et al., 2022). For many reasons, the ability to detect and audit the usage of machine-generated text becomes
a key principle of harm reduction for large language models (Bender et al., 2021; Crothers et al., 2022; Grinbaum &
Adomaitis, 2022).
In this work, we study watermarking of language
model output. A watermark is a hidden pattern in
text that is imperceptible to humans, while making
the text algorithmically identifiable as synthetic. We
propose an efficient watermark that makes synthetic
text detectable from short spans of tokens (as few as
25 tokens), while false-positives (where human text
is marked as machine-generated) are statistically improbable. The watermark detection algorithm can be

Code is available at https://www.github.com/
jwkirchenbauer/lm-watermarking. * Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland. Correspondence to: John Kirchenbauer <jkirchen@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

