Marginalization is not Marginal:
No Bad VAE Local Minima when Learning Optimal Sparse Representations
David Wipf 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Although the variational autoencoder (VAE) represents a widely-used deep generative model, the underlying energy function when applied to continuous data remains poorly understood. In fact, most
prior theoretical analysis has assumed a simplified
affine decoder such that the model collapses to
probabilistic PCA, a restricted regime whereby
existing classical algorithms can also be trivially
applied to guarantee globally optimal solutions.
To push our understanding into more complex,
practically-relevant settings, this paper instead
adopts a deceptively sophisticated single-layer decoder that nonetheless allows the VAE to address
the fundamental challenge of learning optimally
sparse representations of continuous data originating from popular multiple-response regression
models. In doing so, we can then examine VAE
properties within the non-trivial context of solving difficult, NP-hard inverse problems. More
specifically, we prove rigorous conditions which
guarantee that any minimum of the VAE energy
(local or global) will produce the optimally sparse
latent representation, meaning zero reconstruction error using a minimal number of active latent
dimensions. This is ultimately possible because
VAE marginalization over the latent posterior selectively smooths away bad local minima as has
been conjectured but not actually proven in prior
work. We then discuss how equivalent-capacity
deterministic autoencoders, even with appropriate sparsity-promoting regularization of the latent
space, maintain bad local minima that do not correspond with such parsimonious representations.
Overall, these results serve to elucidate key properties of the VAE loss surface relative to finding
low-dimensional structure in data.

The variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014) is a commonly-used latent variable model targeting, among other things, data x ∈ Rd assumed to possess some unknown low-dimensional structure.
This is reflected
in the trainable marginalized distribution
R
pθ (x) = pθ (x|z)p(z)dz that underpins canonical VAE
models, where θ ∈ Θ are flexible parameters and z ∈ Rκ
represents unobservable latent factors. Low-dimensional
structure is either explicitly enforced when κ < d, or implicitly whenever the dimensions of z that significantly influence x are limited in number. For example, the maximum
likelihood value of θ could be such that only a handful of
entries in z actually impact the distribution pθ (x|z).
In this vein, given a set of n training points X =
[x:1 , . . . , x:n ] ∈ Rd×n , we may equivalently choose
to Pminimize the negative log-likelihood expression
1
i − log [pθ (x:i )]. However, because the marginalizan
tion over z required to produce pθ (x:i ) is often intractable,
we may instead minimize the variational upper bound on
the negative log-likelihood given by L(θ, ϕ) ≜
n
X

−Eqϕ (z |x:i ) [log pθ (x:i |z)] + KL [qϕ (z|x:i )||p(z)]
i=1

(1)
with equality iff qϕ (z|x:i ) = pθ (z|x:i ) for each datapoint i.
The trainable parameters ϕ define the variational distribution
qϕ (z|x:i ) that is designed to approximate the true (but generally intractable) pθ (z|x). Excluding the KL-divergencebased regularization factor, the first term in (1) amounts to a
form of stochastic reconstruction loss that mirrors the basic
structure of an autoencoder (AE) but modified to include
marginalization over the latent space. In fact, if qϕ (z|x)
collapses to a Dirac delta function this term directly defaults
to a deterministic AE (more on this later).
Given our present focus on continuous data, we adopt the
convention that the so-called decoder and encoder distributions satisfy

1

Amazon Web Services (a portion of this work was initially
conducted while the author was with Microsoft Research). Correspondence to: David Wipf <davidwipf@gmail.com>.

pθ (x|z) = N (x|µx , γI) and qϕ (z|x) = N (z|µz , Σz )
(2)
along with prior p(z) = N (z|0, I), where γ > 0 is a scalar
variance that may be trained or held fixed. The Gaussian
moment functions µx ≡ µx (z; θ), µz ≡ µz (x; ϕ), and

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

