Proper Losses for Discrete Generative Models

Dhamma Kimpara 1 Rafael Frongillo 1 * Bo Waggoner 1 *

Abstract

Wikipedia; or to produce an image of a human face drawn
from the same distribution as all U.S. passport photos. In
areas such as climate modeling or weather forecasting, the
goal may be to produce possible future trajectories from the
same distribution as the actual climate. We abstract away
from how the model is trained and learned; our focus is only
on methods of evaluating the model. We leave the issue of
training for future investigation.

We initiate the study of proper losses for evaluating generative models in the discrete setting.
Unlike traditional proper losses, we treat both the
generative model and the target distribution as
black-boxes, only assuming ability to draw i.i.d.
samples. We define a loss to be black-box proper
if the generative distribution that minimizes expected loss is equal to the target distribution. Using techniques from statistical estimation theory,
we give a general construction and characterization of black-box proper losses: they must take a
polynomial form, and the number of draws from
the model and target distribution must exceed the
degree of the polynomial. The characterization
rules out a loss whose expectation is the crossentropy between the target distribution and the
model. By extending the construction to arbitrary sampling schemes such as Poisson sampling,
however, we show that one can construct such a
loss.

We take the approach of the proper losses and proper scoring rule literature (McCarthy, 1956; Savage, 1971; Gneiting
& Raftery, 2007), using one or more observations drawn
from the target distribution to evaluate the model. However,
many generative models are essentially “black boxes”. One
typically cannot obtain a closed form expression for the
probabilities a model assigns to different outputs. This rules
out using traditional proper losses for evaluating distributions, such as ℓ2 loss or log loss. As a theoretical foundation,
we instead assume only that we can draw independent and
identically-distributed (i.i.d.) observations from the model p
and compare these to observations from the target distribution q. The question is whether, and/or how, one can design
losses under these restrictions that are proper: the expected
loss is minimized by setting the model’s distribution equal
to the target, i.e. setting p = q.

1. Introduction
Generative models are widely used tools in machine learning and statistics. For example, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) have recently been successful particularly in natural language and image generation. However,
the evaluation of generative models is still an open area of
research, with many evaluation methods proposed (Borji,
2019; Theis et al., 2015). This paper investigates theoretical
foundations for evaluating generative models using a proper
losses approach.

Our results. As the initial work taking this approach, we
focus on distributions over discrete, usually finite, sample
spaces. We discuss extensions to the continuous setting in
Section 7. First, we consider an easier problem: If we had
full access to the target distribution q, i.e. in closed form or
as an oracle, can we design proper losses for evaluating the
model p from samples? We call this the report-black-box
(RBB) setting. We show that the naive approach of plugging
the empirical distributions directly into a distance function
such as ℓ2 does not yield a proper loss. However, by using
the samples to construct unbiased estimators of the error
introduced, we can correct for them and produce losses that
are in fact proper.

Specifically, we consider evaluating generative models that
aim to match some underlying “target” distribution. For
example, a GAN’s goal may be to produce sentences from
the same distribution as a random sentence drawn from
*

1
Equal
contribution
University
of
Colorado
Boulder.
Correspondence to:
Dhamma Kimpara
<dhamma.kimpara@colorado.edu>.

Extending the unbiased-estimator approach, we characterize
RBB-proper losses as those whose expectation is a polynomial in the model distribution, e.g. expected loss ∥p − q∥kk
for even integers k. For such polynomials, we explicitly
construct RBB-proper losses using the classical theory of
unbiased estimators. Furthermore, the minimum number of

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

