Alternately Optimized Graph Neural Networks

Haoyu Han 1 Xiaorui Liu 2 Haitao Mao 1 MohamadAli Torkamani 3 Feng Shi 4 Victor Lee 4 Jiliang Tang 1

Abstract

ator exploits graph structure to propagate information to
its neighbors, which usually follows the message passing
scheme (Gilmer et al., 2017).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have greatly advanced the semi-supervised node classification
task on graphs. The majority of existing GNNs
are trained in an end-to-end manner that can be
viewed as tackling a bi-level optimization problem. This process is often inefficient in computation and memory usage. In this work, we
propose a new optimization framework for semisupervised learning on graphs from a multi-view
learning perspective. The proposed framework
can be conveniently solved by the alternating optimization algorithms, resulting in significantly improved efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method can achieve comparable or better performance with state-of-the-art
baselines while it has significantly better computation and memory efficiency.

While the message passing scheme (Gilmer et al., 2017) empowers GNNs with the superior capability of capturing both
node features and graph structure information, they suffer
from the scalability limitation when training the GNNs in
an end-to-end way (Hamilton et al., 2017). The end-to-end
training of GNNs are in fact inefficient in computation cost
and memory usage. In the forward computation, features
will be propagated through all propagation layers in every
epoch. In the backward computation, the gradients need be
back-propagated through all propagation layers. In addition,
every propagation layer needs to maintain all the hidden
states for back-propagation, leading to a high memory cost.
There are extensive efforts trying to improve the scalability
and efficiency of GNNs, including pre-computing methods (Wu et al., 2019a; Rossi et al., 2020), post-computing
methods(Huang et al., 2020), sampling methods (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018), and distributed methods (Chiang et al., 2019; Shao et al., 2022). In particular,
pre-computing and post-computing methods are the most
efficient ones in dealing with large-scale graphs. SGC (Wu
et al., 2019a) and SIGN (Rossi et al., 2020) first propagate
features as a pre-processing and then an MLP is trained
based on the propagated features. C&S (Huang et al., 2020)
first trains an encoder on node features and then applies
correction and smoothing steps. These methods only need
to propagate information once during the whole training
process so they are highly scalable and efficient. However,
the performance of these GNNs is often worse than the endto-end GNNs that propagate features in every epoch, such
as APPNP, especially when the labeling rate is small (Duan
et al., 2022; Palowitch et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Graph is a fundamental data structure that denotes pairwise relationships between entities in a wide variety of
domains (Wu et al., 2019b; Ma & Tang, 2021). Semisupervised node classification is one of the most crucial
tasks on graphs. Given graph structure, node features, and a
part of labels, the task aims to predict labels of the unlabeled
nodes. In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have been proven to be powerful in semi-supervised node
classification (Gilmer et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling, 2016;
Veličković et al., 2017). A typical GNN model mainly contains two operators, i.e., feature transformation and feature
propagation. The feature transformation operator encodes
input features into a low dimensional space, which is typically a learnable function. The feature propagation oper-

In this paper, we first demonstrate that the majority of aforementioned GNNs for node classification can be considered
as solving a bi-level optimization problem. Instead of following the above perspective as previous GNNs, we propose a single-level optimization problem to couple the node
features and graph structure information through a multiview semi-supervised learning framework. This new optimization problem can be conveniently optimized in an
alternating way, leading to the proposed algorithm ALT-

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, US 2 Department of Computer
Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, US 3 Amazon,
US (this work does not relate to the author’s position at Amazon) 4 TigerGraph, US. Correspondence to: Haoyu Han <hanhaoy1@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

