Out-of-Distribution Generalization of Federated Learning
via Implicit Invariant Relationships

Yaming Guo * 1 Kai Guo * 1 Xiaofeng Cao 1 Tieru Wu 1 Yi Chang 1

Abstract

Loss landscape for client 1

Trajectory of during FEDIIR training
Gradient of the loss (client 1)

Out-of-distribution generalization is challenging
for non-participating clients of federated learning under distribution shifts. A proven strategy is
to explore those invariant relationships between
input and target variables, working equally well
for non-participating clients. However, learning
invariant relationships is often in an explicit manner from data, representation, and distribution,
which violates the federated principles of privacypreserving and limited communication. In this paper, we propose F ED IIR, which implicitly learns
invariant relationships from parameter for out-ofdistribution generalization, adhering to the above
principles. Specifically, we utilize the prediction
disagreement to quantify invariant relationships
and implicitly reduce it through inter-client gradient alignment. Theoretically, we demonstrate
the range of non-participating clients to which
F ED IIR is expected to generalize and present the
convergence results for F ED IIR in the massively
distributed with limited communication. Extensive experiments show that F ED IIR significantly
outperforms relevant baselines in terms of out-ofdistribution generalization of federated learning.

Gradient of the loss (client 2)
Solution of ERM (client 1)
Solution of ERM (client 2)
Solution of OOD
Loss landscape for client 2

Aligned

Unaligned

Figure 1. Illustration of inter-client gradient alignment with two
clients. If the inter-client gradient is aligned, the model’s local
learning on one client will also improve its performance on other
clients. This indicates that the model implicitly learns invariant
relationships that work equally for all clients. In this way, F ED IIR
will converge to the OOD solution instead of the ERM one.

usually comprised of a large number of clients that generate and collect data in a non-identical distribution manner,
most of which may never participate in training. Since the
distribution shift probably exists between participating and
non-participating (unseen) clients, models that follow empirical risk minimization (ERM) may perform poorly on the
non-participating clients, known as the out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization problem(Mohri et al., 2019; Yuan
et al., 2022). The OOD generalization is challenging under
the principles specific to federated learning.

1. Introduction

A proven strategy in the OOD generalization literature(Peters et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019) is to learn the
invariant relationships that are stable across distributions
and build a model that works equally well over OOD. Intuitively, an invariant relationship is a statistical relationship
between inputs and target variables that is maintained across
all data distributions. A typical example(Beery et al., 2018)
is training a model to classify camels from cows, which fails
when the background is switched. The reason is that the
model classifies relying on the spurious relationship (i.e.,
background color vs. label) rather than the invariant relationship (i.e., animal feature vs. label). Therefore, when
the client’s data are drawn from different distributions, the
model should make predictions using invariant relationships
instead of relying on varying spurious relationships.

With the growth of storage and computational capabilities on
devices within distributed networks, federated learning has
emerged as a popular distributed learning paradigm(Yang
et al., 2019; Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020a). In the
federated learning scenario, multiple clients collaborate to
solve machine learning problems under the coordination of
a server, where each client’s raw data is stored locally and
is not exchanged or transferred. The federated networks are
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin
University, Changchun, China. Correspondence to: Xiaofeng Cao
<xiaofengcao@jlu.edu.cn>, Tieru Wu <wutr@jlu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

