Nested Elimination:
A Simple Algorithm for Best-Item Identification From Choice-Based Feedback

Junwen Yang 1 Yifan Feng 2 1

Abstract

Our problem can be applied to a wide range of contemporary real-world scenarios. The following example will be
used throughout this paper for clarity and readability. Consider a company that seeks to identify the most preferred
item (e.g., commercial product) among a set of alternative
options. The company can interact with customers through
a feedback collection process to learn the unknown preference. In particular, the company sequentially displays
(possibly) different subsets of items to different customers
and asks them to choose their favorite within the display sets.
The subsequent display sets may depend on prior ones as
well as the previously obtained samples. For the company,
an important objective is to minimize the cost of feedback
collection while maintaining a high level of accuracy in
identifying the top-ranked item.

We study the problem of best-item identification
from choice-based feedback. In this problem, a
company sequentially and adaptively shows display sets to a population of customers and collects their choices. The objective is to identify
the most preferred item with the least number
of samples and at a high confidence level. We
propose an elimination-based algorithm, namely
N ESTED E LIMINATION (NE), which is inspired
by the nested structure implied by the informationtheoretic lower bound. NE is simple in structure,
easy to implement, and has a strong theoretical
guarantee for sample complexity. Specifically,
NE utilizes an innovative elimination criterion
and circumvents the need to solve any complex
combinatorial optimization problem. We provide
an instance-specific and non-asymptotic bound on
the expected sample complexity of NE. We also
show NE achieves high-order worst-case asymptotic optimality. Finally, numerical experiments
from both synthetic and real data corroborate our
theoretical findings.

To address the company’s problem, Feng et al. (2021) proposed a relatively general framework for encoding customers’ preferences using their choice probabilities. They
assumed that customers’ preferences (i.e., choice probability distributions) satisfy certain consistency and separability conditions, i.e., the more preferred item is always
chosen with (strictly) higher probabilities. On account of the
instance-specific information-theoretical lower bound, they
proposed a minimax formulation of the company’s problem
and designed a randomized policy, called M YOPIC T RACK ING P OLICY (or MTP), which is worst-case asymptotically
optimal. However, some limitations of MTP still need to
be addressed urgently. One major issue is its computational
inefficiency for large-scale problems, which requires solving combinatorial optimization problems. Additionally, the
theoretical guarantees of MTP are not only asymptotic in
nature but also instance-independent.

1. Introduction
Online machine learning (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012) has
been proven to be an effective method for efficiently collecting and utilizing large amounts of data, as evidenced by
theoretical and practical studies. In this paper, we investigate
the online learning problem of best-item identification from
choice-based feedback akin to Feng et al. (2021), which is
a practical extension of the stochastic multi-armed bandit
problem (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020).

Main Contributions. Our main results and contributions
are summarized as follows:

1

Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Analytics and Operations, NUS Business School, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yifan Feng
<yifan.feng@nus.edu.sg>.

(i) We design an elimination-based algorithm N ESTED
E LIMINATION (NE); see Section 3. This algorithm is
based on a new design of a sequence of hitting times
governing when (and how) to rule out sub-optimal
items. This design is inspired by the nested structure in the optimal solution to the max-min problem
for the information-theoretic lower bound. It differs

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

