Feature Programming for Multivariate Time Series Prediction

Alex Reneau * 1 Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 Ammar Gilani 1 Han Liu 1 2

Abstract

customizable lists of both raw and hand-crafted features
provided by users.

We introduce the concept of programmable feature engineering for time series modeling and propose a feature programming framework. This
framework generates large amounts of predictive
features for noisy multivariate time series while
allowing users to incorporate their inductive bias
with minimal effort. The key motivation of our
framework is to view any multivariate time series as a cumulative sum of fine-grained trajectory
increments, with each increment governed by a
novel spin-gas dynamical Ising model. This finegrained perspective motivates the development
of a parsimonious set of operators that summarize multivariate time series in an abstract fashion, serving as the foundation for large-scale automated feature engineering. Numerically, we
validate the efficacy of our method on several synthetic and real-world noisy time series datasets.

Our key motivation comes from a novel dynamical Ising-like
model, the spin-gas Glauber dynamics, originated from a
newly debuted gas-like interaction that includes momentum
and acceleration information. By using spin-gas Glauber
dynamics as the fundamental model for time series generating processes at the smallest time scale, we explore the
potential of treating time series as the path-sum of infinitesimal increments generated by a series of Markovian coin
tosses following the spin-gas Glauber dynamics. From such
a fine-grained perspective, a set of operators is motivated for
extracting informative features in an abstract fashion. We
introduce the idea of the feature programming framework
as a three-step pipeline for feature generation (Figure 1):
1. Design a customized three-level feature template, which,
at each level (list), includes both raw features from the
data and user-specified (discretionary) features.
2. Implement a programmable operation module consisting of pre-specified operations by the user based on the
proposed operator combinations.

1. Introduction

3. Generate a large number of predictive features automatically by feeding the feature template into the programmable module, following a user-specified hierarchical feature generation rule encoded in the operation
module.

We investigate the problem of automated time series feature
engineering for prediction tasks in the regression setting. A
programmable feature engineering framework is proposed,
named feature programming, for multivariate time series
modeling. Our framework facilitates the automatic generation of large amounts of meaningful features from raw
data. Simultaneously, it enables the incorporation of domain
knowledge through the use of feature templates, which are
*

For more comprehensive details, see Section 4, and for
concrete case studies, please see Appendix E.2.
Contributions. Our contribution is three-fold.

1

Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science,
University of Northwestern, Evanston, USA 2 Department
of Statistics and Data Science, University of Northwestern, Evanston, USA. Correspondence to: Alex Reneau
<alexreneau@u.northwestern.edu>,
Jerry YaoChieh Hu <jhu@u.northwestern.edu>, Ammar Gilani
<ammargilani2024@u.northwestern.edu>, Han Liu
<hanliu@northwestern.edu>.

• Methodologically, we present a novel dynamical Isingstyle model for time series data generation. This model
motivates a parsimonious set of operators for mining valuable features from time series data. Building on this,
we introduce a feature programming framework, which
enables the systematic generation of a large number of features by leveraging the motivated operators and a modelbased hierarchical feature generation rule. Additionally,
this framework provides the flexibility for users to incorporate discretionary inductive biases through feature
templates.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
Code is available at GitHub; the most updated version is
available on arXiv with a full list of authors, including Chenwei
Xu and Weijian Li. We kindly request that citations refer to the
arXiv version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06252.

• Theoretically, to the best of our knowledge, our framework is the first automated feature generation method for
1

