Extrapolative Controlled Sequence Generation via Iterative Refinement

Vishakh Padmakumar 1 Richard Yuanzhe Pang 1 He He 1 Ankur P. Parikh 2

Abstract

In cases where the amount of supervised pairs available
is small, it is typical to train a scorer f (x) on this data,
which maps from an input sequence to an output attribute
value. One can then use f (x) to annotate a large corpus for
training (Gehman et al., 2020) or directly use f (x) during
inference to guide the generation process of an unconditional model p(x) (Dathathri et al., 2020; Yang & Klein,
2021).

We study the problem of extrapolative controlled
generation, i.e., generating sequences with attribute values beyond the range seen in training.
This task is of significant importance in automated
design, especially drug discovery, where the goal
is to design novel proteins that are better (e.g.,
more stable) than existing sequences. Thus, by
definition, the target sequences and their attribute
values are out of the training distribution, posing challenges to existing methods that aim to
directly generate the target sequence. Instead, in
this work, we propose Iterative Controlled Extrapolation (ICE) which iteratively makes local edits
to a sequence to enable extrapolation. Specifically,
we train the model on synthetically generated sequence pairs that demonstrate small improvement
in the attribute value. Results on one natural language task (sentiment analysis) and two protein
engineering tasks (ACE2 stability and AAV fitness) show that ICE considerably outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches despite its simplicity.1

In this work, we focus on applications where it is necessary
to generate sequences with attribute values that extrapolate
beyond the training distribution. For example, in biological sequence design, the problem of generating de novo
(novel) sequences that are better than existing natural sequences with respect to some attribute (e.g., binding affinity
to a specific target) is of critical importance to drug discovery (Arnold, 1998; Romero & Arnold, 2009; Freschlin et al.,
2022). In creative text generation, we want to generate text
that accentuates a stylistic attribute (e.g., humor) beyond
simply imitating existing literature (He et al., 2019; Lyu
et al., 2021).
Existing controlled generation paradigms often extrapolate
poorly when the range of attribute values z in the training
data has limited coverage, as both p(x|z) and the attribute
scorer f (x) may not generalize outside of the training range
of the attribute. For example, consider the ACE2 stability
task (Chan et al., 2021c) shown in Figure 1, where the goal
is to generate mutants of the ACE2 protein that have higher
stability (lower ddG value). The training data contains sequences with ddG values varying between −4 and 10, but
during inference, we want to generate more stable proteins
than what we already have, e.g., extrapolate to ddG less than
−5. Since this range of z is not supported on the training
data, directly fitting p(x|z) to the training data will result in
unpredictable performance for z < −4.

1. Introduction
Controlled generation, i.e., generating sequences x with a
desired attribute z, is a pervasive problem across multiple
domains. In natural language processing (NLP), z could
represent the sentiment or the style (e.g., formality) of a
sentence. In computational biology, z could represent the
stability, fluorescence, binding affinity, or other properties
of a protein sequence.
Occasionally, abundant supervised data of the form (x, z)
exist, such as Wikipedia domains or Gene Ontology categories (Keskar et al., 2019; Madani et al., 2020), enabling
direct training of a conditional generation model p(x|z).

Our main assumption is that even though sequences with
different target values, such as stable and unstable proteins,
have distinct distributions, the process of transforming one
sequence into a slightly improved version is applicable to
different ranges of attribute values. For instance, in drug
design, better proteins are often achieved by evolving from
successive mutants, and in text generation, the sentiment
can be strengthened by adding adverbs of degree. Therefore,
we propose to the problem into a series of local improve-

1
New York University 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Vishakh Padmakumar <vishakh@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code and models are available at https://github.com/
vishakhpk/iter-extrapolation.

1

