Improving Adversarial Robustness
by Putting More Regularizations on Less Robust Samples

Dongyoon Yang 1 Insung Kong 1 Yongdai Kim 1

Abstract

2019) and autonomous driving (Kurakin et al., 2017; Deng
et al., 2020; Morgulis et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020).

Adversarial training, which is to enhance robustness against adversarial attacks, has received
much attention because it is easy to generate
human-imperceptible perturbations of data to deceive a given deep neural network. In this paper,
we propose a new adversarial training algorithm
that is theoretically well motivated and empirically superior to other existing algorithms. A
novel feature of the proposed algorithm is to apply more regularization to data vulnerable to adversarial attacks than other existing regularization
algorithms do. Theoretically, we show that our algorithm can be understood as an algorithm of minimizing the regularized empirical risk motivated
from a newly derived upper bound of the robust
risk. Numerical experiments illustrate that our
proposed algorithm improves the generalization
(accuracy on examples) and robustness (accuracy
on adversarial attacks) simultaneously to achieve
the state-of-the-art performance.

Adversarial training, which is to enhance robustness against
adversarial attacks, has received much attention. Various
adversarial training algorithms can be categorized into two
types. The first one is to learn prediction models by minimizing the robust risk - the risk for adversarial examples.
PGD-AT (Madry et al., 2018) is the first of its kinds and
various modifications including (Zhang et al., 2020; Ding
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021) have been proposed since
then.
The second type of adversarial training algorithms is to minimize the regularized risk which is the sum of the empirical
risk for clean examples and a regularized term related to
adversarial robustness. TRADES (Zhang et al., 2019) decomposes the robust risk into the sum of the natural and
boundary risks, where the first one is the risk for clean
examples and the second one is the remaining part, and
replaces them to their upper bounds to have the regularized
risk. HAT (Rade & Moosavi-Dezfolli, 2022) modifies the
regularization term of TRADES by adding an additional
regularization term based on helper samples.

1. Introduction

The aim of this paper is to develop a new adversarial training algorithm for DNNs, which is theoretically well motivated and empirically superior to other existing competitors.
Our algorithm modifies the regularization term of TRADES
(Zhang et al., 2019) to put more regularization on less robust
samples. This new regularization term is motivated by an
upper bound of the boundary risk.

It is easy to generate human-imperceptible perturbations
that put prediction of a deep neural network (DNN) out.
Such perturbed samples are called adversarial examples
(Szegedy et al., 2014) and algorithms for generating adversarial examples are called adversarial attacks. It is well
known that adversarial attacks can greatly reduce the accuracy of DNNs, for example from about 96% accuracy on
clean data to almost zero accuracy on adversarial examples
(Madry et al., 2018). This vulnerability of DNNs can cause
serious security problems when DNNs are applied to security critical applications (Kurakin et al., 2017; Jiang et al.,
2019) such as medicine (Ma et al., 2020; Finlayson et al.,

Our proposed regularized term is similar to that used in
MART (Wang et al., 2020). The two key differences are that
(1) the objective function of MART consists of the sum of
the robust risk and regularization term while ours consists
of the sum of the natural risk and regularization term and
(2) our algorithm regularizes less robust samples more but
MART regularizes less accurate samples more. Note that
our algorithm is theoretically well motivated from an upper
bound of the robust risk but no such theoretical explanation
of MART is available. In numerical studies, we demonstrate
that our algorithm outperforms MART as well as TRADES
with significant margins.

1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Yongdai Kim
<ydkim0903@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

