Text Generation with Diffusion Language Models: A Pre-training Approach
with Continuous Paragraph Denoise

Zhenghao Lin 1 2 3 Yeyun Gong 4 Yelong Shen 5 Tong Wu 6 2 Zhihao Fan 7 2
Chen Lin 1 3 Nan Duan 4 Weizhu Chen 5

Abstract

which generate texts sequentially from left to right. However, RNNs suffer from issues such as long-term dependency
and exposure bias. Recently, Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017b), a self-attention-based neural network, has emerged
as the dominant paradigm for text generation, thanks to its
ability to capture global dependencies and leverage largescale pre-trained language models (Qi et al., 2020; Lewis
et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020a). Transformer-based methods typically adopt an encoder-decoder architecture, where
the encoder maps the input text to a sequence of hidden vectors, and the decoder generates the output text either autoregressively (AR) or non-autoregressively (NAR). Generally,
AR decoding is more accurate but slower, as it predicts each
word conditioned on the previous ones. NAR decoding is
faster but less precise, as it predicts all words simultaneously
without modeling their dependencies.

In this paper, we introduce a novel dIffusion
language modEl pre-training framework for text
generation, which we call GENIE. GENIE is a
large-scale pre-trained diffusion language model
that consists of an encoder and a diffusion-based
decoder, which can generate text by gradually
transforming a random noise sequence into a
coherent text sequence. To pre-train GENIE
on a large-scale language corpus, we design a
new continuous paragraph denoise objective,
which encourages the diffusion-decoder to
reconstruct a clean text paragraph from a
corrupted version while preserving the semantic
and syntactic coherence. We evaluate GENIE
on four downstream text generation benchmarks,
namely XS UM, CNN/DAILY M AIL, G IGA WORD , and C OMMON G EN . Our experimental
results show that GENIE achieves comparable
performance with the state-of-the-art autoregressive models on these benchmarks, and
generates more diverse text samples. The
code and models of GENIE are available
at https://github.com/microsoft/
ProphetNet/tree/master/GENIE.

This paper presents a new text generation approach, called
GENIE, that integrates the diffusion model and Transformerbased method. The diffusion model is a generative model
that reverses a stochastic process of adding noise to the data
and has shown promising results in image (Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2020), molecule (Hoogeboom et al., 2022),
video (Ho et al., 2022), and text (Li et al., 2022b; Gong
et al., 2022; Strudel et al., 2022; Reid et al., 2022) generation.
GENIE follows the encoder-decoder architecture, where the
encoder transforms the input text to hidden vectors, and
the diffusion model restores the output text from a random
Gaussian noise, guided by the encoder’s hidden vectors.
The diffusion model iterates over multiple time steps and
gradually denoises the output text at each step.

1. Introduction
Text generation is a crucial task in natural language processing, which aims to produce fluent and coherent texts for various applications. Previous text generation methods mainly
relied on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Pawade et al.,
2018; Song et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2016a; Qi et al., 2021),

To leverage the large-scale unlabeled text data, we also propose an end-to-end pre-training method for GENIE. Unlike
the existing pre-training tasks that involve masking or splitting tokens or texts (Qi et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2019; Raffel
et al., 2020a), we design a novel pre-training task, called
continuous paragraph denoise (CPD). CPD requires the
model to predict the noise added to continuous paragraphs
in the current time step, given the paragraph context and the
noisy paragraph information.

1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University 2 This work was
done during an internship in MSRA 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Microsoft Research Asia 5 Microsoft 6 Tsinghua
University 7 Fudan University. Correspondence to: Chen Lin
<chenlin@xmu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We evaluate GENIE on four popular text generation benchmarks: XSum (Narayan et al., 2018), CNN/DailyMail (Her1

