Private Federated Learning with Autotuned Compression

Enayat Ullah * 1 2 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo * 3 Peter Kairouz * 3 Sewoong Oh * 3 4

Best Compression Rate at =1%

10000

Abstract
We propose new techniques for reducing communication in private federated learning without the
need for setting or tuning compression rates. Our
on-the-fly methods automatically adjust the compression rate based on the error induced during
training, while maintaining provable privacy guarantees through the use of secure aggregation and
differential privacy. Our techniques are provably
instance-optimal for mean estimation, meaning
that they can adapt to the “hardness of the problem” with minimal interactivity. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach on real-world
datasets by achieving favorable compression rates
without the need for tuning.

Stack Overflow
Next Word Prediction
Shakespeare

Task
F-EMNIST

1000

100

10

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Noise Multiplier, z

0.6

0.7

Figure 1. The optimal compression rates differ highly between
different tasks. For each noise multiplier, we run compression
rates of 2i , for i ∈ [1, 13], and report the highest compression rate
with a maximum of ∆ = 1% relative drop in accuracy from the
same model without compression. We interpolate accuracies for
fine-grained results. See Sec. 5 for task descriptions.

1. Introduction

and DP give a strong trust model for privacy-preserving
FL (Kairouz et al., 2021a; Chen et al., 2022a; Agarwal et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022b; Xu et al., 2023). However, SecAgg
can introduce significant communication burdens, especially
in the large cohort setting which is preferred for DP. In the
extreme, this can significantly limit the scalability of DP-FL
with SecAgg. This motivated the study of privacy-utilitycommunication tradeoffs by Chen et al. (2022a), where they
found that significant communication reductions could be
attained essentially “for free” (see Figure 1) by using a
variant of the Count Sketch linear data structure.

Federated Learning (FL) is a form of distributed learning
whereby a shared global model is trained collaboratively
by many clients under the coordination of a central service
provider. Often, clients are entities like mobile devices
which may contain sensitive or personal user data. FL has a
favorable construction for privacy-preserving machine learning, since user data never leaves the device. Building on
top of this can provide strong trust models with rigorous
user-level differential privacy (DP) guarantees (Dwork et al.,
2010a), which has been studied extensively in the literature (Dwork et al., 2010b; McMahan et al., 2017b; 2022;
Kairouz et al., 2021b).

However, the approach of Chen et al. (2022a) suffers from a
major drawback: it is unclear how to set the sketch size (i.e.,
compression rate) a priori. Indeed, using a small sketch may
lead to a steep degradation in utility whereas a large sketch
may hurt bandwidth. Further, as demonstrated in Figure
1, the “optimal” compression rate can differ substantially
for different datasets, tasks, model architectures, and noise
multipliers (altogether, DP configurations). This motivates
the following question which we tackle in this paper:

More recently, it has become evident that secure aggregation
(SecAgg) techniques (Bonawitz et al., 2016; Bell et al.,
2020) are required to prevent honest-but-curious servers
from breaching user privacy (Fowl et al., 2022; Hatamizadeh
et al., 2022; Suliman and Leith, 2022). Indeed, SecAgg
*

1
Equal contribution
The Johns Hopkins Uni2
versity
Work completed while on internship at
3
Google.
Google Research 4 University of Washington.
Correspondence to:
<enayat@jhu.edu>,
<{cchoquette,sewoongo,kairouz}@google.com>.

Can we devise adaptive (autotuning) compression
techniques which can find favorable compression rates in
an instance-specific manner?

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Naive approaches to tuning the compression rate. Before introducing our proposed approaches, we discuss the
1

