Provably Efficient Offline Reinforcement Learning with Perturbed Data Sources

Chengshuai Shi 1 Wei Xiong 2 Cong Shen 1 Jing Yang 3

Abstract

empirical successes, recent studies have also advanced the
theoretical understandings of offline RL (Rashidinejad et al.,
2021; Jin et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021b).

Existing theoretical studies on offline reinforcement learning (RL) mostly consider a dataset sampled directly from the target task. In practice,
however, data often come from several heterogeneous but related sources. Motivated by this gap,
this work aims at rigorously understanding offline
RL with multiple datasets that are collected from
randomly perturbed versions of the target task
instead of from itself. An information-theoretic
lower bound is derived, which reveals a necessary
requirement on the number of involved sources
in addition to that on the number of data samples.
Then, a novel HetPEVI algorithm is proposed,
which simultaneously considers the sample uncertainties from a finite number of data samples per
data source and the source uncertainties due to a
finite number of available data sources. Theoretical analyses demonstrate that HetPEVI can solve
the target task as long as the data sources collectively provide a good data coverage. Moreover,
HetPEVI is demonstrated to be optimal up to a
polynomial factor of the horizon length. Finally,
the study is extended to offline Markov games
and offline robust RL, which demonstrates the
generality of the proposed designs and theoretical
analyses.

Despite these progresses, most theoretical studies on offline
RL focus on learning via data collected exactly from the
target task. In practice, however, it is difficult to ensure such
a perfect match. Instead, it is more reasonable to model that
data are collected from different sources that are perturbed
versions of the target task in some applications. For example, when training a chatbot (Jaques et al., 2020), the offline
dialogue datasets typically consist of conversations from
different people with naturally varying language habits. The
training objective is the common underlying language structure, e.g., the basic grammar, which cannot be completely
reflected in any individual dialogue but can be holistically
learned from the aggregation of them. Similar examples can
be found in healthcare with records from different hospitals
(Tang & Wiens, 2021), recommender systems with histories
from different customers (Afsar et al., 2022), and others;
more discussions are provided in Appendix A.1.
While a few empirical investigations have been reported
(in particular, under the offline meta-RL framework, e.g.,
Dorfman et al. (2021); Lin et al. (2022); Mitchell et al.
(2021)), theoretical understandings of effectively and efficiently learning with heterogeneous while related data
sources are lacking. Motivated by this limitation, this work
makes progress in answering the following open question:
Can we design provably efficient offline RL for a target task
with multiple randomly perturbed data sources?

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al., 2020),
a.k.a. batch RL (Lange et al., 2012), has received growing
interest in recent years. It aims at training RL agents using accessible datasets collected a priori and thus avoids
expensive online interactions. Along with its tremendous

Challenges. Existing offline RL studies typically deal with
one type of uncertainty, i.e., the sample uncertainty associated with the finite data sampled directly from the target
task, which results in distributional shift and partial coverage. In addition to these, randomly perturbed data sources
bring new challenges. First, since multiple data sources are
involved, it is important to jointly aggregate their sample
uncertainties, and to leverage their collective information.
Moreover, even if every data source is perfectly known, the
target task may not be fully revealed as the data sources are
perturbations of the target. Thus, importantly, an additional
type of uncertainty due to a finite number of available data
sources should be jointly considered, which is referred to as

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia 2 Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 3 Department of Electrical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University. Correspondence to: Chengshuai Shi <cs7ync@virginia.edu>, Cong Shen
<cong@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

