Causal Strategic Classification: A Tale of Two Shifts

Guy Horowitz 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract

et al., 2021; Lechner & Urner, 2021; Ahmadi et al., 2022;
Nair et al., 2022; Eilat et al., 2022; Barsotti et al., 2022).

When users can benefit from certain predictive
outcomes, they may be prone to act to achieve
those outcome, e.g., by strategically modifying
their features. The goal in strategic classification
is therefore to train predictive models that are robust to such behavior. However, the conventional
framework assumes that changing features does
not change actual outcomes, which depicts users
as ‘gaming’ the system. Here we remove this assumption, and study learning in a causal strategic
setting where true outcomes do change. Focusing
on accuracy as our primary objective, we show
how strategic behavior and causal effects underlie two complementing forms of distribution shift.
We characterize these shifts, and propose a learning algorithm that balances between these two
forces and over time, and permits end-to-end training. Experiments on synthetic and semi-synthetic
data demonstrate the utility of our approach.

As a learning problem, strategic classification is appealing
in that its simple and clean formulation permits and feasible
practical challenges. But simplicity comes at a price, and
the framework’s general applicability is hindered by its reliance on a set of strong assumptions. As part of a growing
community effort to extend strategic classification beyond
its original narrow form, our goal in this work is to take one
step towards making strategic classification more flexible.
In particular, here we target one of the key assumptions in
strategic classification, which is the assumption that true outcomes y do not change when features x are modified. Under
this assumption, strategic behavior amounts to gaming, and
users are depicted as acting to ‘fool’ the classifier. But in
reality, this assumption rarely holds, since actions taken by
users to change predictions can also change true outcomes.
The observation that changes in x can causally affect y has
been made by several authors (Miller et al., 2020; Shavit
et al., 2020; Bechavod et al., 2021; Harris et al., 2022). But
to date, works that have addressed this point focus primarily
on the question of improvement, i.e., whether (and how)
learning can incentivize users to change x in ways that
improve outcomes y. While this is an important goal, here
we argue that the current perspective conflates (i) the mere
fact that y can change, with (ii) the desire for y to change
favorably. But from a purely predictive point of view,
any changes to y—whether for better or for worse—may
deteriorate performance. Hence, and given that the
implications of causal strategic behavior on learning are not
yet well-understood, here we choose to focus entirely on the
conventional goal of optimizing predictive accuracy, and
study appropriate notions of robustness. We view this as an
essential first step, intended to set the ground for more elaborate learning tasks such as incentivizing for improvement.

1. Introduction
The field of strategic classification (Brückner et al., 2012;
Hardt et al., 2016) studies learning in a setting where users
can strategically respond to a learned classifier by modifying
their features, at some cost, to obtain favorable predictive
outcomes. Such behavior can be expected when predictions
are used to inform decisions about users, and from which
users stand to gain (or lose); common examples include
loans approval, university admissions, and job hiring. The
framework of strategic classification succinctly captures a
widespread form of tension that naturally arises between a
classifier and the users it targets, and which applies broadly.
This has made it the target of much recent interest (Dong
et al., 2018; Miller et al., 2020; Tsirtsis & Gomez Rodriguez,
2020; Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Ghalme et al., 2021; Zrnic
et al., 2021; Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021; 2022; Estornell

Towards this, and aiming to remain as true as possible to
the original formulation, we seek to take the minimal necessary step beyond strategic classification for introducing
meaningful causal relations. Our proposed setting, which
generalizes vanilla strategic classification, can be described
succinctly by a simple causal graph depicting the relations
between different variable types: causal, non-causal (or
‘correlative’), and unobserved. The graph’s structure defines

1
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Nir Rosenfeld <nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

