Online Restless Bandits with Unobserved States
Bowen Jiang 1 Bo Jiang 1 Jian Li 2 Tao Lin 3 Xinbing Wang 1 Chenghu Zhou 4

Abstract

Sheng et al., 2014; Xiong et al., 2022b), sensor/machine
maintenance (Ahmad et al., 2009; Akbarzadeh & Mahajan,
2021) and healthcare (Mate et al., 2020; 2021). This problem considers one agent and N arms. Each arm i is modulated by a Markov chain M i with state transition function
P i and reward function Ri . At each time, the agent decides
which arm to pull. After the pulling, all arms make a state
transition independently. The state transitions can be actiondependent or not, and we consider the action-independent
case. That is to say, the state of each arm makes one transition per time slot regardless of being pulled or not. More
importantly, the transition function remains the same when
pulling or not pulling. The goal is to decide which
PT arm
to pull to maximize the expected reward, i.e., E[ t=1 rt ],
where rt is the reward at time t and T is the time horizon.

We study the online restless bandit problem,
where each arm evolves according to a Markov
chain independently, and the reward of pulling an
arm depends on both the current state of the corresponding Markov chain and the pulled arm. The
agent (decision maker) does not know the transition functions and reward functions, and cannot observe the states of arms even after pulling.
The goal is to sequentially choose which arms
to pull so as to maximize the expected cumulative rewards collected. In this paper, we propose TSEETC, a learning algorithm based on
Thompson Sampling with Episodic Explore-ThenCommit. The algorithm proceeds in episodes of
increasing length and each episode is divided into
exploration and exploitation phases. During the
exploration phase, samples of action-reward pairs
are collected in a round-robin fashion and utilized
to update the posterior distribution as a mixture
of Dirichlet distributions. At the beginning of the
exploitation phase, TSEETC generates a sample
from the posterior distribution as true parameters.
It then follows the optimal policy for the sampled
model for the rest of the episode.
√ We establish
the Bayesian regret bound Õ( T ) for TSEETC,
where T is the time horizon. We show through
simulations that TSEETC outperforms existing
algorithms in regret.

In this paper, we consider the online restless bandit problem with unknown parameters (transition functions and
reward functions) and unobserved states. Many works assume the arms’ states are known and concentrate on learning
unknown parameters (Liu et al., 2010; 2011; Ortner et al.,
2012; Wang et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2022a;d;c). However,
the arms’ states are often unobserved in real-world applications, such as cache access (Paria & Sinha, 2021) and
recommendation system (Peng et al., 2020). In the cache access problem, the user can only get the perceived delay but
cannot know whether the requested content is stored in the
cache before or after the access. In the recommender system,
we do not know the user’s preference for the items. There
are some studies that consider the unobserved states. However, they often assume the parameters are known (Mate
et al., 2020; Meshram et al., 2018; Akbarzadeh & Mahajan,
2021) or there is no discussion about the regret bound (Peng
et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
The restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) is a general
setup to model many sequential decision making problems
ranging from wireless communication (Tekin & Liu, 2011;

One common way to handle the unknown parameters but
with observed states is to use the optimism in the face of
uncertainty (OFU) principle (Liu et al., 2010; Ortner et al.,
2012; Wang et al., 2020). However, existing policies may
not perform close to the optimal offline policy, e.g., Liu et al.
(2010) only considers the best policy that constantly pulls a
fixed arm, which is not optimal for RMAB √
problems. Ortner
et al. (2012) derives the lower bound Õ( T ) for RMAB
problems. Another way to estimate the unknown parameters
is Thompson Sampling (TS) (Jung & Tewari, 2019; Jung
et al., 2019; Jahromi et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022). TS

1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 2 SUNYBinghamton University, Binghamton, NY, USA. 3 Communication
University of China, Beijing, China. 4 Institute of Geographic
Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Bo Jiang
<bjiang@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

