Provably Efficient Representation Learning with Tractable Planning in
Low-Rank POMDP
Jiacheng Guo 1 2 Zihao Li 1 Huazheng Wang 3 Mengdi Wang 1 Zhuoran Yang 4 Xuezhou Zhang 1

Abstract

are sampled from a state-dependent distribution. POMDPs
are an important class of models for decision-making that is
increasingly being used to model complex real-world applications, ranging from robotics and navigation to healthcare,
finance, manufacturing (Roy et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2016;
Ghandali et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020).

In this paper, we study representation learning in
partially observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs), where the agent learns a decoder function that maps a series of high-dimensional raw
observations to a compact representation and uses
it for more efficient exploration and planning.
We focus our attention on the sub-classes of γobservable and decodable POMDPs, for which it
has been shown that statistically tractable learning
is possible, but there has not been any computationally efficient algorithm. We first present an
algorithm for decodable POMDPs that combines
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) to perform representation learning and achieve efficient
sample complexity, while only calling supervised
learning computational oracles. We then show
how to adapt this algorithm to also work in the
broader class of γ-observable POMDPs.

POMDPs differ from MDPs in the presence of nonMarkovian observations. In the MDP setting, we assume
that the system follows a Markovian law of transition induced by the agent’s policy, meaning that the current state
of the environment depends solely on the previous state and
the action taken. As a result, there exists a Markovian optimal policy, i.e. a policy whose action only depends on the
current state. However, with the assumption of unobserved
hidden states and therefore the lack of Markovian property,
generally, the optimal policy of POMDP depends on the full
history. This causes great difficulties in both computational
and statistical aspects, as the agent has to maintain a longterm memory while performing learning and planning. In
fact, the agent can only learn the posterior distribution of
the latent state given the whole history, known as the belief
state, and then maps the belief state to the action. Therefore,
learning POMDP is well-known to be intractable in general,
even with a small state and observation space (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987a; Mundhenk et al., 2000; Golowich
et al., 2022b).

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are commonly used in
reinforcement learning to model problems across a range of
applications that involve sequential decision-making. However, MDPs assume that the agent has perfect knowledge of
the current environmental state, which is often not realistic.
To address this, Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) have been introduced as an extension of
MDPs (Cassandra, 1998; Murphy, 2000; Braziunas, 2003).
In POMDPs, the agent does not have direct access to the
environmental state. Instead, it receives observations that

Nevertheless, this doesn’t rule out special problem structures
that enable statistically efficient algorithms. In particular,
Katt et al. (2018) and Liu et al. (2022a) study a setting
called γ-observable POMDP, i.e. POMDP whose omission
matrix is full-rank, and achieve polynomial sample complexities. Another more tractable class is called the decodable
POMDP, in which we can decode the latent state by L-step
back histories (Efroni et al., 2022b). Subsequent works
on provably efficient learning in POMDP have since found
broader classes of statistically tractable problem instances
that generalized the above setting (Zhan et al., 2022; Uehara
et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2022b). One common drawback
of the aforementioned works, however, is their computational intractability. Almost all of these algorithms follow
the algorithmic template of optimistic planning, where the
algorithm iteratively refines a version space of plausible
functions in the function class. To achieve this, these meth-

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 School of Mathematical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 3 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, OR, USA 4 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University, NH, USA. Correspondence to: Mengdi Wang
<mengdiw@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

