Robust Non-Linear Feedback Coding via Power-Constrained Deep Learning

Junghoon Kim 1 Taejoon Kim 2 David Love 1 Christopher Brinton 1

Abstract

nel. We now have near-optimal codes for the canonical
open-loop additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel setting first proposed by Shannon (Shannon, 1948),
thanks to the extraordinary advancements in code design
over a number of decades. However, the design of practical codes for a variety of other important channel models
has remained long-standing open problems. In particular,
when feedback is available in communication systems, i.e.,
when a transmitter can obtain information on the receive
signals through a reverse link from a receiver, it has been
shown that while capacity cannot be increased (Shannon,
1956), communication reliability can be improved by utilizing feedback codes (Schalkwijk & Kailath, 1966; Butman,
1969; Shayevitz & Feder, 2011; Ben-Yishai & Shayevitz,
2017). However, the design of feedback codes is non-trivial
since both the bit stream and feedback information (i.e.,
past receive signals) should be incorporated into the design.
Though feedback codes hold the potential to revolutionize future communication systems, major innovations are
needed in their design and implementation.

The design of codes for feedback-enabled communications has been a long-standing open problem. Recent research on non-linear, deep learningbased coding schemes have demonstrated significant improvements in communication reliability
over linear codes, but are still vulnerable to the
presence of forward and feedback noise over the
channel. In this paper, we develop a new family
of non-linear feedback codes that greatly enhance
robustness to channel noise. Our autoencoderbased architecture is designed to learn codes
based on consecutive blocks of bits, which obtains de-noising advantages over bit-by-bit processing to help overcome the physical separation
between the encoder and decoder over a noisy
channel. Moreover, we develop a power control layer at the encoder to explicitly incorporate hardware constraints into the learning optimization, and prove that the resulting average
power constraint is satisfied asymptotically. Numerical experiments demonstrate that our scheme
outperforms state-of-the-art feedback codes by
wide margins over practical forward and feedback
noise regimes, and provide information-theoretic
insights on the behavior of our non-linear codes.
Moreover, we observe that, in a long blocklength
regime, canonical error correction codes are still
preferable to feedback codes when the feedback
noise becomes high. Our code is available at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/RCode1.

1.1. Linear Feedback Coding
Over several decades, research on the design of feedback
codes for closed-loop AWGN channels mostly focused on
the linear family of codes, which simplifies code design.
The seminal work (Schalkwijk & Kailath, 1966) introduced
a linear coding technique for AWGN channels with noiseless
feedback, known as the SK scheme, which achieves doubly
exponential decay in the probability of error. However, for
noisy feedback, the SK scheme does not perform well. In
response, (Chance & Love, 2011) introduced a linear coding
scheme for AWGN channels with noisy feedback, known as
the CL scheme. The CL scheme was further examined and
found to be optimal within the linear family of codes under
the noisy feedback scenario (Agrawal et al., 2011). There
have been attempts to view the linear feedback code design
as feedback stabilization in control theory (Elia, 2004) and
dynamic programming (Mishra et al., 2021). However, the
linear assumption made in these works severely limits their
ability to produce optimal codes.

1. Introduction
The design of codes has been an important field of research
both in information theory and communications, targeting
efficient and reliable data transmission across a noisy chan1
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA 2 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA. Correspondence to:
Junghoon Kim <kim3220@purdue.edu>.

1.2. Deep Learning-Based Channel Coding

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A recent trend of research has been examining code design
from a deep learning perspective to take advantage of its
1

