Model-based Reinforcement Learning with Scalable
Composite Policy Gradient Estimators

Paavo Parmas 1 Takuma Seno 2 Yuma Aoki 3

Abstract

This gradient estimation is often performed with the likelihood ratio (LR) method that only requires the value of R to
create an unbiased estimator (Glynn, 1990; Williams, 1992;
Sutton et al., 2000).1 While LR does not require knowledge
of the system, if we do have access to such a differentiable
model, we can use the reparameterization gradient (RP)2
that uses dR
dτ to perform a more efficient estimate (Rezende
et al., 2014; Jordan & Rumelhart, 1992; Werbos, 1990).

In model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL),
policy gradients can be estimated either by
derivative-free RL methods, such as likelihood ratio gradients (LR), or by backpropagating through
a differentiable model via reparameterization gradients (RP). Instead of using one or the other, the
Total Propagation (TP) algorithm in prior work
showed that a combination of LR and RP estimators averaged using inverse variance weighting
(IVW) can achieve orders of magnitude improvement over either method. However, IVW-based
composite estimators have not yet been applied
in modern RL tasks, as it is unclear if they can
be implemented scalably. We propose a scalable
method, Total Propagation X (TPX) that improves
over TP by changing the node used for IVW, and
employing coordinate wise weighting. We demonstrate the scalability of TPX by applying it to the
state of the art visual MBRL algorithm Dreamer.
The experiments showed that Dreamer fails with
long simulation horizons, while our TPX works
reliably for only a fraction of additional computation. One key advantage of TPX is its ease of
implementation, which will enable experimenting
with IVW on many tasks beyond MBRL.

As dR
dτ contains D bits of information (one for each dimension of τ ), while R is a single scalar, one can construct
examples where the accuracy of RP scales D times better
than LR (Rezende et al., 2014). This improved scalability
is enjoyed by several impressive RL results, such as differentiable simulation (Xu et al., 2022), visual MBRL (Hafner
et al., 2023) or inventory management (Madeka et al., 2022).
Unfortunately, derivative-based methods such as RP are
not always effective. Parmas et al. (2018); Parmas (2020)
decisively showed in MBRL that RP has a major flaw in
chaotic systems causing the gradient estimation variance
to explode. This issue is related to the exploding gradient
problem (Pascanu et al., 2013), and it is common in machine
learning tasks with long chains of non-linear computations.
The LR method was robust to the problem with chaos; however, LR is in general inefficient, so there is a risk that the
solutions to many problems of interest are out of the reach
of standard algorithms. Fortunately, Parmas also proposed
an algorithm to alleviate the issue: Total Propagation (TP).

1. Introduction

Total Propagation combines the best of RP and LR: it
achieves efficiency while being robust to chaos. The basic idea is that it performs weighted averaging of LR and
RP, with the weights estimated by inverse variance weighting (IVW), without requiring additional hyperparameters.
Moreover, TP includes a step-wise algorithmic approach
that can even give 100 times improvement in gradient accuracy (Parmas & Seno, 2022), particularly at the edge of
chaos. TP also influenced follow-up works that employed
IVW in varied fields such as meta-learning (Metz et al.,
2019) and differentiable simulation (Suh et al., 2022).

Reinforcement learning (RL) deals with optimizing the behavioral parameters, θ, of an agent in an environment, so as
to maximize the expected rewards Ep(τ ;θ) [R(τ )] (Sutton &
Barto, 2018) of the trajectory, τ . One main approach to RL
is stochastic gradient ascent using the policy gradient (PG),
d
dθ Ep(τ ;θ) [R(τ )]. Computing this expectation analytically
is intractable—it can only be estimated by sampling—and,
thus, the gradient must be statistically approximated.
1
Kyoto University 2 Sony AI 3 University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Paavo Parmas <paavo@sys.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

2

1

LR is often also called the score function estimator.
RP is a type of pathwise gradient similar to back propagation.

