Differential Privacy has Bounded Impact on Fairness in Classification

Paul Mangold * 1 Michaël Perrot * 1 Aurélien Bellet 1 Marc Tommasi 1

Abstract

new theoretical bound on the relative impact of privacy on
fairness in classification.

We theoretically study the impact of differential
privacy on fairness in classification. We prove
that, given a class of models, popular group fairness measures are pointwise Lipschitz-continuous
with respect to the parameters of the model. This
result is a consequence of a more general statement on accuracy conditioned on an arbitrary
event (such as membership to a sensitive group),
which may be of independent interest. We use
this Lipschitz property to prove a non-asymptotic
bound showing that, as the number of samples
increases, the fairness level of private models gets
closer to the one of their non-private counterparts.
This bound also highlights the importance of the
confidence margin of a model on the disparate
impact of differential privacy.

Fairness takes various forms (depending on the task and
context), and several definitions exist. On the one hand, the
goal may be to ensure that similar individuals are treated
similarly. This is captured by individual fairness (Dwork
et al., 2012) and counterfactual fairness (Kusner et al., 2017).
On the other hand, group fairness requires that decisions
made by machine learning models do not unjustly discriminate against subgroups of the population. In this paper, we
focus on group fairness and consider four popular definitions, namely Equalized Odds (Hardt et al., 2016), Equality
of Opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016), Accuracy Parity (Zafar
et al., 2017), and Demographic Parity (Calders et al., 2009).
Differential privacy (Dwork, 2006) has been widely adopted
for controlling how much information the output of an algorithm may leak about its input data. It allows publishing
machine learning models while preventing an adversary
from guessing too confidently the presence (or absence) of
an individual in the training data. To enforce differential
privacy, one typically releases a noisy estimate of the true
model (Dwork, 2006), so as to conceal any sensitive information contained in individual data points. This induces
a trade-off between the strength of the protection and the
utility of the learned model. While this trade-off has been
extensively studied (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Bassily et al.,
2014; Liu et al., 2021), its implications for fairness are not
yet well understood.

1. Introduction
The performance of machine learning models have mainly
been evaluated in terms of utility, that is their ability to
solve specific tasks. However, they can be used in sensitive contexts, and impact people’s lives. It is thus crucial
that users can trust these models. While trustworthiness
encompasses multiple concepts, fairness and privacy have
attracted a lot of interest in the past few years. Fairness
requires models not to unjustly discriminate against specific individuals or subgroups of the population, and privacy
preserves individual-level information about the training
data from being inferred from the model. These two notions have been extensively studied in isolation: there exists
numerous approaches to learn fair models (Caton & Haas,
2020; Mehrabi et al., 2021), or to preserve privacy (Dwork
et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2021). However, only few works
studied the interplay between privacy and fairness. In this
paper, we take a step forward in this direction, proposing a

Contributions. In this work, we quantify the difference in
fairness levels between private and non-private models in
multi-class classification. We derive high probability bounds
e √p/n),
showing that this difference shrinks at a rate of O(
where n is the number of data records, and p the dimension
of the model. To obtain this result, we first prove that the
accuracy of a model conditioned on an arbitrary event (such
as membership to a sensitive group), is pointwise Lipschitz
continuous with respect to the model parameters. This property is inherited by many popular group fairness notions,
such as Equalized Odds, Equality of Opportunity, Accuracy
Parity and Demographic Parity. Consequently, two sufficiently close models will have similar fairness levels. We
then upper-bound the distance between the optimal nonprivate model and the private models obtained with privacy

*
Equal contribution 1 Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille,
UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France. Correspondence
to: Paul Mangold <paul.mangold@inria.fr>, Michaël Perrot
<michael.perrot@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

