Atari-5: Distilling the Arcade Learning Environment down to Five Games

Matthew Aitchison 1 Penny Sweetser 1 Marcus Hutter 2

Abstract

verification of superiority claims through statistical tests on
multiple seeds remains rare, likely, due to the high cost.

The Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) has become an essential benchmark for assessing the performance of reinforcement learning algorithms.
However, the computational cost of generating
results on the entire 57-game dataset limits ALE’s
use and makes the reproducibility of many results
infeasible. We propose a novel solution to this
problem in the form of a principled methodology
for selecting small but representative subsets of
environments within a benchmark suite. We applied our method to identify a subset of five ALE
games, we call Atari-5, which generally produces
57-game median score estimates to within 10%
of their true values. Extending the subset to 10games recovers 80% of the variance for log-scores
for all games within the 57-game set. We show
this level of compression is possible due to a high
degree of correlation between many of the games
in ALE.

While technological improvements have reduced computation costs, this decrease has been greatly outpaced by an
increase in the scale at which RL algorithms are run. For
example, the number of frames used for training to produce
state-of-the-art results on ALE increased by more than onethousand times in the seven years between 2015’s Deep
Q-learning model (Mnih et al., 2015) and the more recent
Agent57 (Badia et al., 2020). Training modern machine
learning models can also produce non-trivial amounts of
carbon emissions (Strubell et al., 2019), for which we provide some analysis in Appendix A. Previous works have
dealt with this challenge by self-selecting ad hoc subsets
of games. However, this approach adds bias and makes
comparison between works more challenging.
In this paper, we outline a principled approach to selecting
subsets of environments from an RL benchmark suite. We
show that, when carefully chosen, a surprisingly small subset of ALE can capture most of the useful information of
a full run. We present a new benchmark, Atari-5, which
produces scores that correlate very closely to median score
estimates on the full dataset, but at less than one-tenth the
cost. We hope that this new benchmark will allow more
researchers to participate in this important field of research,
speed up the development of novel algorithms through faster
iteration, and make the replication of results in RL more
feasible. Our primary contributions are as follows. First, a
methodology for selecting representative subsets of multienvironment RL benchmarks according to a target summary
score. Second, the introduction of the Atari-5 benchmark.
Finally, evidence demonstrating the high degree of correlation between scores for many games within ALE.

1. Introduction
The Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al.,
2013) has become the gold standard for evaluating the performance of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms on
complex discrete control tasks. Since its release in 2013,
the benchmark has gained thousands of citations and almost
all state-of-the-art RL algorithms have featured it in their
work (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Kapturowski et al., 2018;
Horgan et al., 2018; Hessel et al., 2018; Gruslys et al., 2018;
Mnih et al., 2015). However, results generated from the
full benchmark have typically been limited to a few large
research groups.1 We posit that the cost of evaluation on
the full dataset is, for many, not feasible. Additionally, the
1

2. Background and Related Work

2

The University of Australia, Canberra, Australia DeepMind,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Matthew Aitchison
<matthew.aitchison@anu.edu.au>.

The Arcade Learning Environment (ALE). Despite deceptively simple graphics, ALE (Bellemare et al., 2013)
provides a challenging set of environments for RL algorithms. Much of this challenge stems from the fact that,
unlike most other RL benchmarks, ALE contains games
spanning multiple genres, including sport, shooter, maze
and action games. This is important because being able to
achieve goals in a wide range of environments has often

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Of the 17 algorithms listed on paperswithcode.com
with full Atari-57 results, only one was from a research group
outside Google or DeepMind.

1

