Quantitative Universal Approximation Bounds for Deep Belief Networks

Julian Sieber 1 2 Johann Gehringer 2

Abstract

Contributions. In this article we study the approximation properties of deep belief networks for multivariate
continuous probability distributions which have a density
with respect to the Lebesgue measure. We show that, as
m → ∞, the universal approximation property holds for
binary-binary DBNs with two hidden layers of sizes m and
m + 1, respectively. Furthermore, we provide an explicit
quantitative bound on the approximation error in terms of
m. We also present similar estimates for deep narrow networks. More specifically, the main contributions of this
article are:

We show that deep belief networks with binary
hidden units can approximate any multivariate
probability density under very mild integrability
requirements on the parental density of the visible nodes. The approximation is measured in the
Lq -norm for q ∈ [1, ∞] (q = ∞ corresponding to the supremum norm) and in KullbackLeibler divergence. Furthermore, we establish
sharp quantitative bounds on the approximation
error in terms of the number of hidden units.

• For each q ∈ [1, ∞) we show that DBNs with two binary hidden layers and parental density ϕ : Rd → R+
can approximate any probability density f : Rd →
R+ in the Lq -norm, solely under the condition that
ϕ ∈ Lq (Rd ) and f ∈ W 1,q (Rd ), where
(

1. Introduction
Deep belief networks (DBNs) are a class of generative
probabilistic models obtained by stacking restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs, (Smolensky, 1986)). For a brief
introduction to RBMs and DBNs we refer the reader to
the survey articles (Fischer & Igel, 2012; 2014; Montúfar,
2016; Ghojogh et al., 2021). Since their introduction,
see (Hinton et al., 2006; Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006),
DBNs have been successfully applied to a variety of problems in the domains of natural language processing (Hinton, 2009; Jiang et al., 2018), bioinformatics (Wang &
Zeng, 2013; Liang et al., 2014; Cao et al., 2016; Luo et al.,
2019), financial markets (Shen et al., 2015) and computer
vision (Abdel-Zaher & Eldeib, 2016; Kamada & Ichimura,
2016; 2019; Huang et al., 2019). However, our theoretical understanding of these models is limited. The ability
to approximate a broad class of probability distributions—
usually referred to as universal approximation property—
is still an open problem for DBNs with real-valued visible
units, let alone a quantitative understanding of the approximation error in terms of the number of hidden neurons.
As a measure of proximity between two real-valued probability density functions, one typically considers the Lq distance or the Kullback-Leibler divergence.

Lq (Rd ) =

f : Rd → R :
)
 q1
<∞
f (x) dx

Z

q

kf kLq =
Rd

and

W 1,q (Rd ) = f ∈ Lq (Rd ) : f weakly differentiable
and k∇f kLq < ∞ .
In addition, we prove that the error admits a bound

q
1
of order O m− 1− min(q,2) d(q−1)+q for each q ∈
(1, ∞), where m is the number of hidden neurons. A
similar estimate is shown for deep narrow networks.
In particular, we observe that the expected curse of dimensionality effect gets exacerbated due to a curse of
moments effect for high values of q.
• If the target density f is uniformly continuous and the
parental density ϕ is bounded, we provide an approximation result in the L∞ -norm (also known as supremum or uniform norm), where

∞
d
L (R ) = f : Rd → R :

kf kL∞ = sup f (x) < ∞ .

1
Zalando Ireland Limited, 2WML, Windmill Quarter, Dublin
2, D02 F206, Ireland 2 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Julian Sieber <julian.sieber@zalando.ie>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

x∈Rd

1

