Statistical Learning under Heterogenous Distribution Shift

Max Simchowitz * 1 Anurag Ajay * 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2

Abstract

ting that admits favorable distribution shift behavior (Lei
et al., 2021). Here, out-of-distribution generalization is
controlled by the alignment between the second moment
matrices of the training and test distribution, rather than
the significantly worse density ratios. Beyond the linear
setting, ML models including neural networks often suffer from spurious correlation (c.f., Arjovsky et al., 2019),
where the model exploits correlations in the training distribution to learn an accurate-but-incorrect predictor that fails
to generalize to a de-correlated distribution. Though this
phenomenon and other related ones are well-documented
experimentally, a general theory of distribution shift—
particularly one that explains the behavior of deep learning
models in practice—has remained undeveloped.

This paper studies the prediction of a target z
from a pair of random variables (x, y), where the
ground-truth predictor is additive E[z | x, y] =
f? (x) + g? (y). We study the performance of empirical risk minimization (ERM) over functions
f + g, f ∈ F and g ∈ G, fit on a given training distribution, but evaluated on a test distribution which exhibits covariate shift. We show that,
when the class F is “simpler" than G (measured,
e.g., in terms of its metric entropy), our predictor
is more resilient to heterogenous covariate shifts
in which the shift in x is much greater than that in
y. These results rely on a novel Hölder style inequality for the Dudley integral which may be of
independent interest. Moreover, we corroborate
our theoretical findings with experiments demonstrating improved resilience to shifts in “simpler”
features across numerous domains.

A useful theory of distribution shift should make predictions as to which shifts a learned model is most sensitive to
in possible test environments, given properties of the model
which can be evaluated from training data (Xiao et al.,
2020; Koh et al., 2021; Rahimian and Mehrotra, 2019). We
illustrate this point with the following example.
Example 1.1. Consider a quadruped carrying different
payloads across multiple terrains, with a policy trained via
reinforcement learning. Should one expect more degradation in performance with new shapes or sizes of payloads?
Or should a policy suffer more from novel terrains? If
our policy requires camera inputs, should we expect that
changes in lighting conditions or times of day have more
of an effect? Or if the policy relies on tactile sensation,
should we expect changes in weather (e.g., rain on the tactile sensors) to present more of an obstacle?

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning systems are routinely deployed
under distribution shift (Taori et al., 2020; Koh et al., 2021).
However, statistical learning theory has primarily focused
on studying the generalization error in the situation where
the test and the training distributions are identical (Bartlett
and Mendelson, 2002; Vapnik, 2006). In the setting of
covariate shift—where only features/covariates change between training and testing, but the target function remains
fixed—guarantees from statistical learning theory can be
applied via a reweighting argument, leading to the classical
bound involving density ratios depicted in Eq. (3.2). However, this approach may be overly pessimistic and may not
account for the relative differences in performance degradation between different distribution shift settings.

Contributions. This paper gestures towards a richer theory of generalization under covariate shift; one that makes
such actionable predictions about the relative resilience of
a model to the kinds of multifarious shifts illustrated in Example 1.1. More specifically, we highlight a setting we call
heterogenous covariate shift, where the distribution of one
feature shifts more than another.

Well-specified linear regression is perhaps the simplest set*

Equal contribution 1 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research, New York City. Correspondence to:
Max Simchowitz <msimchow@csail.mit.edu>.

Theoretically, we study supervised prediction from a pair
of (possibly non-independent) random variables (x, y). We
think of x as corresponding to “simple features” and y
to more complex ones. We show greater resilience to
heterogenous distribution shifts in which the shift in the
marginal of y is significantly smaller than that of the joint

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

