Data Feedback Loops: Model-driven Amplification of Dataset Biases

Rohan Taori 1 Tatsunori B. Hashimoto 1

Abstract

internet content, the utility of the internet as a data source
may decrease rapidly.

Datasets scraped from the internet have been critical to large-scale machine learning. Yet, its success puts the utility of future internet-derived
datasets at potential risk, as model outputs begin to replace human annotations as a source of
supervision. In this work, we formalize a system
where interactions with one model are recorded as
history and scraped as training data in the future.
We then analyze its stability over time by tracking changes to a test-time bias statistic (e.g. gender bias of model predictions). We find that the
degree of bias amplification is closely linked to
whether the model’s outputs behave like samples
from the training distribution, a behavior which
we characterize and define as uniform faithfulness.
Experiments in three conditional prediction scenarios – image classification, visual role-labeling,
and language generation – demonstrate that models that exhibit a sampling-like behavior are more
faithful and thus more stable. Based on this insight, we propose an intervention to help mitigate
and stabilize unstable feedback systems.

As an example in visual role-labeling, consider a classifier trained on public photos and their associated tags, as
depicted in Figure 1. Instead of manually tagging photos,
some users may instead choose to auto-tag their photos with
the model. These photos, now stored in internet history, may
be scraped as training data for an updated iteration of the
image-tagging model. Any systematic biases introduced by
the model, such as consistently mislabeling female doctors
as nurses as in Figure 1, are now encoded into the training
data. This data feedback gradually degrades the quality of
the internet as a data source, since supervision becomes
driven by model outputs rather than human annotation.
Issues arising from training data that includes previously
model-generated content have already been encountered in
machine translation (Venugopal et al., 2011) and speech
recognition (Radford et al., 2022). These concerns are especially important in situations where model predictions may
exacerbate existing toxicity, harm, or other biases (Gehman
et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2017). In such cases, a viable strategy for model developers is to weigh the benefit of updating
their model to new internet content versus the cost of amplifying biases via such model-induced feedback. However, it
is not yet understood when and to what degree data feedback
is an issue in practice.

1. Introduction
Due to the successes of large-scale training in machine
learning (He et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
2021), datasets derived from publicly available internet data
have become indispensable to the machine learning community. For example, without relying on internet scraping, it
would be cost-prohibitive to manually construct key datasets
such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), The Pile (Gao et al.,
2020), or YFCC100M (Thomee et al., 2016). While the
internet has served as a large, easily-accessible source of
human generated data in the past, the growing deployment
of machine learning systems puts this procedure at risk. As
models begin to create and annotate a significant fraction of
1
Stanford University.
<rtaori@stanford.edu>.

In this work, we define the data feedback setting and carefully study how model biases change under feedback. In
particular, we ask: Are there conditions that stabilize bias
amplification? We answer this in the affirmative, finding
that learning algorithms with stability guarantees produce
models with a bias similar to their current input distributions
– a property we call uniform faithfulness. Importantly, this
form of faithfulness is achieved in realistic experimental
settings. Sampling from a generative model is one natural
way to reach this, as they directly approximate the input
distribution and thus are more likely to be faithful and stable. Surprisingly, however, we find that many prediction
algorithms that do not explicitly perform sampling (such
as image classifiers) can also be faithful, owing to a conjectured phenomenon called Distributional Generalization
(Nakkiran & Bansal, 2020).

Correspondence to: Rohan Taori

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Formally, we quantify the stability of data feedback with a
1

