Using Perturbation to Improve Goodness-of-Fit Tests based on Kernelized Stein
Discrepancy

Xing Liu 1 Andrew B. Duncan 1 2 Axel Gandy 1

Abstract

Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) (Berlinet & Thomas-Agnan,
2011) is used to construct the function class, this discrepancy is called the kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD), and
admits a closed-form expression. This has made KSD popular for applications involving an unnormalised density, such
as Bayesian inference (Liu & Wang, 2016), goodness-of-fit
testing (Liu et al., 2016; Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Jitkrittum et al., 2017), and sample quality measurement (Gorham
& Mackey, 2015; 2017; Gorham et al., 2019); see Anastasiou et al. (2023) for a review.

Kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD) is a scorebased discrepancy widely used in goodness-of-fit
tests. It can be applied even when the target distribution has an unknown normalising factor, such
as in Bayesian analysis. We show theoretically
and empirically that the KSD test can suffer from
low power when the target and the alternative distributions have the same well-separated modes but
differ in mixing proportions. We propose to perturb the observed sample via Markov transition
kernels, with respect to which the target distribution is invariant. This allows us to then employ
the KSD test on the perturbed sample. We provide numerical evidence that with suitably chosen
transition kernels the proposed approach can lead
to substantially higher power than the KSD test.

We focus on goodness-of-fit (GOF) testing, where independent samples from a candidate distribution Q are observed
and the goal is to test for evidence against the null hypothesis that Q matches a target distribution P . When the density
p of P is only available in an unnormalised form (i.e. the
normalisation constant is infeasible to compute) and direct
sampling from P is infeasible, classical tests such as the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Massey, 1951) or two-sample
tests (Gretton et al., 2012; Schrab et al., 2021) cannot be
used, as they require either a tractable cumulative distribution function or samples from P . A GOF test based on KSD,
on the other hand, does not have these limitations.

1. Introduction
Stein discrepancy (SD) (Stein, 1972; Gorham & Mackey,
2015) is a statistical divergence between two probability
measures based on Stein’s method. More specifically, given
two Borel probability measures Q and P supported on X ⊂
Rd , the Stein discrepancy is defined to be
DF (Q, P ) := supf ∈F Ex∼Q [AP f (x)],

However, KSD tests may suffer from low test power when
the target probability measure has well-separated modes.
For example, when Q and P are mixtures of the same components but differ in the mixing proportions, the power will
converge to the test level as the modes of the components
become more and more separated (Fig. 1). This is because
the KSD statistic can be numerically close to 0 if the region where the score functions are practically different has
low Q-probability. This issue, sometimes known as the
blindness to isolated components (Wenliang & Kanagawa,
2020), has been noted in a number of works (Gorham et al.,
2019; Matsubara et al., 2022; Kanagawa et al., 2022) and
addressed in some applications of KSD (Zhang et al., 2022).
However, little work has been devoted to tackling this issue
in the context of GOF testing.

(1)

where F is a set of functions on X and AP is an operator
acting on F such that Ex∼Q [AP f (x)] = 0 for all f ∈ F if
and only if Q ≡ P . When X = Rd and P admits a positive,
continuously differentiable density p with respect to the
Lebesgue measure, then the Langevin-Stein operator is the
natural candidate for AP which has the crucial property that
it only depends on the score function sp (x) := ∇ log p(x)
of p, which does not require evaluation of the (possibly intractable) normalising constant of p. When a Reproducing
1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, UK. 2 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Xing Liu <xing.liu16@imperial.ac.uk>.

Contributions Our contribution is twofold. First, we
demonstrate theoretically and numerically with a bimodal
Gaussian example that the power of KSD tests can converge to the test level when the target distribution has
well-separated modes. This is different from the works

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

