Auxiliary Modality Learning with Generalized Curriculum Distillation

Yu Shen 1 Xijun Wang 1 Peng Gao 1 Ming C. Lin 1

Abstract

cars, but it’s reasonable to equip a few developer’s cars with
Lidar for training. However, this specific type of learning
task, i.e., ”test with fewer modalities than during training”,
is not standardized yet. For example, there is no formal term
or definition. There have been concepts, such as ”learning
with side information” (Hoffman et al., 2016), ”learning
with privileged information” (Garcia et al., 2019), ”learning
with auxiliary modality” (Piasco et al., 2021), ”learning with
partial-modalities” (Wang et al., 2018), and ”modality distillation” (Garcia et al., 2018), etc. We therefore formalize
these learning tasks as Auxiliary Modality Learning (AML)
in Sec. 3.

Driven by the need from real-world applications,
Auxiliary Modality Learning (AML) offers the possibility to utilize more information from auxiliary
data in training, while only requiring data from
one or fewer modalities in testing, to save the
overall computational cost and reduce the amount
of input data for inferencing. In this work, we
formally define “Auxiliary Modality Learning”
(AML), systematically classify types of auxiliary
modality (in visual computing) and architectures
for AML, and analyze their performance. We also
analyze the conditions under which AML works
well from the optimization and data distribution
perspectives. To guide various choices to achieve
optimal performance using AML, we propose a
novel method to assist in choosing the best auxiliary modality and estimating an upper bound
performance before executing AML. In addition,
we propose a new AML method using generalized
curriculum distillation to enable more effective
curriculum learning. Our method achieves the
best performance compared to other SOTA methods.

To apply AML to real-world tasks, there are some key issues: “what types of auxiliary modalities can be used, and
how to add the auxiliary modalities into the network and
make them most effective?” We systematically list and classify auxiliary modalities in visual computing and network
architectures for AML, and then conduct experiments to
address these questions. Specifically, we classify the auxiliary modalities into 3 types: low-level sensing data (Type
1), middle-level equivalent representation (Type 2), and
high-level conceptual information (Type 3) in Sec. 4.1.1,
according to the types of information. We also classify
the network architectures into four types, according to the
mechanism that introduces the auxiliary modality. They are
auxiliary modalities in the input (Type A), in the middle
(Type B), in the end (Type C), and in the teacher (Type D),
as defined in Sec. 4.1.2. In addition, we design experiments
to see which architecture and which auxiliary modality perform best within each task and across tasks (Sec. 4.1.3) that
provides experimental guidelines and theoretical foundation
to our method in Sec. 5.

1. Introduction
Learning from images and videos is among some of the most
popular research focuses (Esteva et al., 2021; Guo et al.,
2022; Chai et al., 2021), as RGB images are informative
and easy to acquire. In addition, RGB camera is cheap and
can be easily deployed. There are also works considering
multiple modalities, i.e., multi-modal learning (Wang, 2021;
Jiang et al., 2021; Joshi et al., 2021). Furthermore, some
works consider to use multiple modalities in training but use
fewer modalities during test since in certain applications it’s
difficult to use all modalities during inference. For example,
it is expensive to deploy Lidar on commodity self-driving

Given this formal framing, we can apply AML to real-world
tasks. There remains the question of explainability: “Why
AML can work without auxiliary modality in the test?” It’s
not obvious that adding auxiliary modality only in training
can always help improve test performance with only the
main modality. In Sec. 4.2, we explore this line of inquiries
from optimization and data perspectives. Specifically, we
introduce a new concept of “supermodel” to support our
claim, which also offers insights and inspiration to design
the new AML method presented in Sec. 5.2.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA. Correspondence
to: Yu Shen <yushen@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Based on the detailed analysis in Sec. 4, we propose a simple

1

