Target-Aware Generative Augmentations for Single-Shot Adaptation

Kowshik Thopalli * 1 Rakshith Subramanyam * 2 Pavan Turaga 2 Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan 1

Abstract

However, it is infeasible to obtain data from every possible target during source model training itself. Test-time
adaptation has emerged as an alternate solution, where a
source-trained model is adapted solely using target data
without accessing the source data. However, the success
of these source-free adaptation (SFDA) methods hinges on
sufficient target data availability (Liang et al.; Yang et al.,
2021). While there exist online adaptation methods such as
TENT (Wang et al., 2021) and MEMO (Zhang et al., 2021),
they are are found to be ineffective under complex distribution shifts and when target data is limited, often producing
on par or only marginally better results than non-adaptation
performance (Thopalli et al., 2022).

In this paper, we address the problem of adapting models from a source domain to a target
domain, a task that has become increasingly
important due to the brittle generalization of
deep neural networks. While several test-time
adaptation techniques have emerged, they typically rely on synthetic toolbox data augmentations in cases of limited target data availability.
We consider the challenging setting of singleshot adaptation and explore the design of augmentation strategies. We argue that augmentations utilized by existing methods are insufficient to handle large distribution shifts, and
hence propose a new approach SiSTA (SingleShot Target Augmentations), which first finetunes a generative model from the source domain using a single-shot target, and then employs novel sampling strategies for curating synthetic target data. Using experiments on a variety of benchmarks, distribution shifts and image corruptions, we find that SiSTA produces
significantly improved generalization over existing baselines in face attribute detection and
multi-class object recognition. Furthermore,
SiSTA performs competitively to models obtained by training on larger target datasets. Our
codes can be accessed at https://github.
com/Rakshith-2905/SiSTA.

In this work, we investigate a practical, yet challenging,
scenario where the goal is to adapt models under unknown
distribution shifts with minimal target data. Specifically,
we focus on the extreme case where only single-shot example is available. In such data scarce settings, it is common
to leverage synthetic augmentations; examples range from
image manipulations to adversarial corruptions (Gokhale
et al., 2023). Despite their wide-spread adoption, the best
augmentation strategy can vary for different shifts, and more
importantly, their utility diminishes in the single-shot case.
Another popular approach is to use generative augmentations (Yue et al., 2022), where data variants are synthesized
through generative models. Despite being more expressive than generic augmentations, they require comparatively
larger datasets for effective training.
We propose SiSTA, a new target-aware generative augmentation technique for SFDA with single-shot target data
(see Figure 1). At its core, SiSTA relaxes the assumption
of requiring source data, and instead assumes access to a
source-trained generative model. We motivate and justify
this assumption using a practical vendor-client implementation in Section 3. In this study, we consider StyelGAN
as the choice for generative modeling, motivated by their
flexibility in disentangling content and style. Our proposed
algorithm has two steps, namely SiSTA-G and SiSTA-S,
to fine-tune a source-trained StyleGAN with the target data,
and to synthesize diverse augmentations respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep models tend to suffer a significant drop in their performance when there is a shift between train and test distributions (Torralba & Efros, 2011). A natural solution
to improve generalization under such domain shifts is to
adapt models using data from the target domain of interest.
*

Equal contribution 1 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Livermore, CA, USA 2 Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
Correspondence to: Kowshik Thopalli <thopalli1@llnl.gov>.

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1. We propose a new target-aware, generative augmentation
technique for single-shot adaptation;
1

