Controlling Type Confounding in Ad Hoc Teamwork with Instance-wise
Teammate Feedback Rectification
Dong Xing 1 2 Pengjie Gu 3 Qian Zheng 1 2 Xinrun Wang 3 Shanqi Liu 4 Longtao Zheng 3 Bo An 3 Gang Pan 1 2

Abstract

community of multi-agent systems, usually known as ad
hoc teamwork (Bowling & McCracken, 2005; Stone et al.,
2010). Consider a scenario where an agent is required to
cooperate with some unknown teammates in an emergency
rescue operation. Due to the urgent situation, the agent has
no opportunity to negotiate with others about their division
of work before the task begins. However, in order to achieve
the common goal, the agent needs to cooperate with others
effectively on the fly, without knowing their abilities. This
forms a typical scenario of ad hoc teamwork. As agents proliferate in the real world and their functions become more diversified, the application of ad hoc teamwork is prevalent in
many domains, such as online games (Canaan et al., 2019),
human-computer interactions (Suriadinata et al., 2021) and
visual navigation (Wang et al., 2021).

Ad hoc teamwork requires an agent to cooperate
with unknown teammates without prior coordination. Many works propose to abstract teammate
instances into high-level representation of types
and then pre-train the best response for each type.
However, most of them do not consider the distribution of teammate instances within a type. This
could expose the agent to the hidden risk of type
confounding. In the worst case, the best response
for an abstract teammate type could be the worst
response for all specific instances of that type.
This work addresses the issue from the lens of
causal inference. We first theoretically demonstrate that this phenomenon is due to the spurious correlation brought by uncontrolled teammate
distribution. Then, we propose our solution, CTCAT, which disentangles such correlation through
an instance-wise teammate feedback rectification.
This operation reweights the interaction of teammate instances within a shared type to reduce the
influence of type confounding. The effect of CTCAT is evaluated in multiple domains, including
classic ad hoc teamwork tasks and real-world scenarios. Results show that CTCAT is robust to the
influence of type confounding, a practical issue
that directly hazards the robustness of our trained
agents but was unnoticed in previous works.

For practical ad hoc teamwork tasks where most teammates
only appear occasionally, learning the best response for each
individual becomes too costly (Rovatsos & Wolf, 2002).
Instead, many works address the problem through the framework of type-based approach (Mirsky et al., 2022). These
works strive to abstract teammate behaviors into high-level
representation of types. During deployment, the agent represents the unknown teammate with a most likely type and
then employs the strategy pre-trained for that type. This
approach works well when the type suitably represents the
teammate, and the agent’s response for that type is properly
trained. However, we notice that most existing works do
not consider the distribution of teammate instances when
pre-training the agent’s best responses. Instead, they are
obtained upon the aggregated behaviors of instances within
a certain type. This could expose the agent to the hidden
risk of type confounding, a problem that was unnoticed in
previous works but would directly hazard the robustness
of our agent. In the worst case, the best response for an
abstract teammate type becomes the worst response for all
specific instances belonging to that type.

1. Introduction
Developing agents that can cooperate with teammates without prior coordination is a well-established problem in the
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China 2 College of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 3 School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 4 College of Control Science and Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Bo
An <boan@ntu.edu.sg>, Gang Pan <gpan@zju.edu.cn>.

To demonstrate the risk of type confounding more intuitively,
we provide an example in Figure 1. Suppose Alice runs a
pet boarding shop where her business is to temporarily take
care of pets from busy owners. Most pets are new to Alice,
so it forms a kind of ad hoc teamwork between her and all
the pets. Alice assumes that in unfamiliar environments,
some pets need more company while others prefer to be

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

