Inferring Relational Potentials in Interacting Systems

Armand Comas Massagué 1 Yilun Du 2 Christian Fernandez 1 Sandesh Ghimire 1 Mario Sznaier 1
Joshua B. Tenenbaum 2 Octavia Camps 1

Abstract

Attraction to player

Systems consisting of interacting agents are
prevalent in the world, ranging from dynamical
systems in physics to complex biological
networks. To build systems which can interact
robustly in the real world, it is thus important to
be able to infer the precise interactions governing
such systems. Existing approaches typically discover such interactions by explicitly modeling the
feed-forward dynamics of the trajectories. In this
work, we propose Neural Interaction Inference
with Potentials (NIIP) as an alternative approach
to discover such interactions that enables greater
flexibility in trajectory modeling: it discovers a
set of relational potentials, represented as energy
functions, which when minimized reconstruct
the original trajectory. NIIP assigns low energy
to the subset of trajectories which respect the
relational constraints observed. We illustrate
that with these representations NIIP displays
unique capabilities in test-time. First, it allows
trajectory manipulation, such as interchanging
interaction types across separately trained models,
as well as trajectory forecasting. Additionally, it
allows adding external hand-crafted potentials
at test-time. Finally, NIIP enables the detection
of out-of-distribution samples and anomalies
without explicit training. Website: https:
//energy-based-model.github.io/
interaction-potentials.

Attraction to goal

Player 1
Player 2
Ball

Figure 1. Interactions between NBA players. Complex dynamics, such as the player trajectories in the NBA, may be explained
using a simple set of interactions. In this setting, one player aims
to block the other one from scoring.

events. Such dynamical systems may be decomposed as a
set of different interacting components, where the interactions among them lead to complex dynamics. Modeling the
dynamics of such systems is hard: often times we only have
access to example trajectories, without knowledge of the
underlying interactions or the dynamics that govern them.
Consider the scenario given in Figure 1, consisting of a
two NBA players playing a basketball game (the rest of the
teams are ommited for clarity). While the motion of individual players may appear stochastic in nature, each player
aims to score the basket on the opposite team’s side of the
court. Thus, we may utilize sets of interactions to explain
their behaviors – One or more offensive players move towards the goal, while a defensive player moves to intercept
them and prevent them from scoring. By applying our underlying knowledge of these interactions between players,
we may forecast the future dynamics of the basketball game
significantly more accurately.

1. Introduction
Dynamical systems are ubiquitous in both nature and everyday life. Such systems emerge naturally in scientific
settings such as chemical pathways and particle dynamics
as well as everyday settings such as in sports teams or social

Most works modeling such complex dynamics do not explicitly disentangle individual interactions between objects.
Instead, they rely on a learned network to implicitly disentangle them (Battaglia et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017;
van Steenkiste et al., 2018). In contrast, (Kipf et al., 2018)
propose Neural Relation Inference (NRI), which learns a
structured set of explicit interaction models between objects
and show how such explicit interaction modeling enables
more effective downstream predictions.

1

Northeastern University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Armand Comas <comasmassague.a@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

