SmoothQuant: Accurate and Efficient
Post-Training Quantization for Large Language Models

Guangxuan Xiao * 1 Ji Lin * 1 Mickael Seznec 2 Hao Wu 2 Julien Demouth 2 Song Han 1
https://github.com/mit-han-lab/smoothquant

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) show excellent performance but are compute- and memoryintensive. Quantization can reduce memory and
accelerate inference. However, existing methods
cannot maintain accuracy and hardware efficiency
at the same time. We propose SmoothQuant, a
training-free, accuracy-preserving, and generalpurpose post-training quantization (PTQ) solution
to enable 8-bit weight, 8-bit activation (W8A8)
quantization for LLMs. Based on the fact that
weights are easy to quantize while activations are
not, SmoothQuant smooths the activation outliers
by offline migrating the quantization difficulty
from activations to weights with a mathematically
equivalent transformation. SmoothQuant enables
an INT8 quantization of both weights and activations for all the matrix multiplications in LLMs,
including OPT, BLOOM, GLM, MT-NLG, and
LLaMA family. We demonstrate up to 1.56×
speedup and 2× memory reduction for LLMs
with negligible loss in accuracy. SmoothQuant
enables serving 530B LLM within a single node.
Our work offers a turn-key solution that reduces
hardware costs and democratizes LLMs.

1

Figure 1: The model size of large language models is developing at a faster pace than the GPU memory in recent years,
leading to a big gap between the supply and demand for
memory. Quantization and model compression techniques
can help bridge the gap.
GPUs or 5×80GB A100 GPUs just for inference. Due to
the huge computation and communication overhead, the
inference latency may also be unacceptable to real-world
applications. Quantization is a promising way to reduce
the cost of LLMs (Dettmers et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022).
By quantizing the weights and activations with low-bit integers, we can reduce GPU memory requirements, in size
and bandwidth, and accelerate compute-intensive operations
(i.e., GEMM in linear layers, BMM in attention). For instance,
INT8 quantization of weights and activations can halve the
GPU memory usage and nearly double the throughput of
matrix multiplications compared to FP16.

Introduction

Large-scale language models (LLMs) show excellent performance on various tasks (Brown et al., 2020a; Zhang
et al., 2022). However, serving LLMs is budget and energyconsuming due to their gigantic model size. For example, the GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020a) model contains 175B
parameters, which will consume at least 350GB of memory to store and run in FP16, requiring 8×48GB A6000

However, unlike CNN models or smaller transformer models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), the activations of LLMs
are difficult to quantize. When we scale up LLMs beyond
6.7B parameters, systematic outliers with large magnitude
will emerge in activations (Dettmers et al., 2022), leading
to large quantization errors and accuracy degradation. ZeroQuant (Yao et al., 2022) applies dynamic per-token activation quantization and group-wise weight quantization
(defined in Figure 3 Sec. 2). It can be implemented efficiently and delivers good accuracy for GPT-3-350M and
GPT-J-6B. However, it can not maintain the accuracy for
the large OPT model with 175 billion parameters (see Section 5.2). LLM.int8() (Dettmers et al., 2022) addresses

*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Guangxuan Xiao <xgx@mit.edu>,
Ji Lin <jilin@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

