Learning Temporally Abstract World Models without Online Experimentation

Benjamin Freed 1 Siddarth Venkatraman 1 Guillaume Sartoretti 2 Jeff Schneider 1 Howie Choset 1

Abstract

2021; Sharma et al., 2020b;a; Achiam et al., 2018; Baumli
et al., 2021; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Shankar & Gupta, 2020).
Most approaches to skill learning are based on model-free
reinforcement learning, in which a skill-selection policy
is directly learned from data, without explicitly forming
a model of how skills influence the state of the environment (Ajay et al., 2020; Pertsch et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
2021; Achiam et al., 2018; Baumli et al., 2021; Eysenbach
et al., 2018; Shankar & Gupta, 2020). However, without
an explicit model of the effect of skills, there is no straightforward way for agents to rapidly transfer their policy to
new tasks, without a lengthy retraining process. On the
other hand, existing model-based approaches to temporal
abstraction require skills to be run repeatedly online in the
environment (Sharma et al., 2020b;a). This lengthy trial-anderror process is particularly ill-suited to learning in physical
environments, where training online on hardware may result
in unreasonable wear and tear, and can be hazardous. In this
work, we introduce (OPOSM), a novel approach to simultaneously decompose a given dataset of demonstrations into a
space of parameterized skills, while also extracting a temporally abstract world model that enables online planning
of skill sequences for downstream tasks without retraining
(Fig. 1). OPOSM outperforms or performs comparably to all
relevant model-based and model-free offline RL baselines
on a number of standard benchmarks, including simulated
robot navigation and manipulation tasks, while allowing
zero-shot transfer to new goals. Finally, we show that our
iterative, model-based re-planning approach provides natural robustness to perturbations in environmental dynamics,
which to our knowledge is unique in the space of offline RL
algorithms.

Agents that can build temporally abstract representations of their environment are better able
to understand their world and make plans on extended time scales, with limited computational
power and modeling capacity. However, existing
methods for automatically learning temporally
abstract world models usually require millions
of online environmental interactions and incentivize agents to reach every accessible environmental state, which is infeasible for most realworld robots both in terms of data efficiency and
hardware safety. In this paper, we present an approach for simultaneously learning sets of skills
and temporally abstract, skill-conditioned world
models purely from offline data, enabling agents
to perform zero-shot online planning of skill sequences for new tasks. We show that our approach
performs comparably to or better than a wide array of state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms on
a number of simulated robotics locomotion and
manipulation benchmarks, while offering a higher
degree of adaptability to new goals. Finally, we
show that our approach offers a much higher degree of robustness to perturbations in environmental dynamics, compared to policy-based methods.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning, despite its success on many complex sequential decision-making problems, still struggles
with long-horizon tasks. As a potential solution, recent deep
RL methods have focused on temporal abstraction, wherein
the agent’s original action space is replaced by a set of temporally extended behavioral primitives, i.e., skills, which
allow the agent to make decisions on a coarser time granularity (Sutton et al., 1999; Ajay et al., 2020; Pertsch et al.,

Similar to our approach, previous model-free offline
skill learning algorithms, e.g., OPAL (Ajay et al., 2020),
PLAS (Zhou et al., 2021), and SPiRL (Pertsch et al., 2021),
extract a set of skills from an offline dataset using a variational inference (VI)-based approach (Blei et al., 2017). In
all three approaches, skills are treated as latent variables,
and an evidence lower bound (ELBO) is maximized to learn
a skill-conditioned low-level policy, describing the mapping from skills (and possibly states) to actions. Unlike
our approach, in these offline model-free skill learning algorithms, a policy was subsequently learned to select among
skills given the state of the environment using a model-

1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA 2 Mechanical Engineering Department, National University
of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Benjamin Freed
<bfreed@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

