Representations and Exploration for Deep Reinforcement Learning
using Singular Value Decomposition

Yash Chandak 1 Shantanu Thakoor 2 Zhaohan Daniel Guo 2 Yunhao Tang 2
Remi Munos 2 Will Dabney 2 Diana Borsa 2

Abstract

the RL task. Additionally, when the reward signal is sparse,
exploring exhaustively becomes impractical and careful consideration is required to determine which parts of the environment should be explored. That is, efficient exploration
depends on an agent’s representation. Therefore, a unified
framework to tackle both representation learning and exploration can be beneficial for tackling challenging problems.

Representation learning and exploration are
among the key challenges for any deep reinforcement learning agent. In this work, we provide a
singular value decomposition-based method that
can be used to obtain representations that preserve
the underlying transition structure in the domain.
Perhaps interestingly, we show that these representations also capture the relative frequency of
state visitations, thereby providing an estimate for
pseudo-counts for free. To scale this decomposition method to large-scale domains, we provide
an algorithm that never requires building the transition matrix, can make use of deep networks,
and also permits mini-batch training. Further, we
draw inspiration from predictive state representations and extend our decomposition method to
partially observable environments. With experiments on multi-task settings with partially observable domains, we show that the proposed method
can not only learn useful representation on DMLab-30 environments (that have inputs involving
language instructions, pixel images, and rewards,
among others) but it can also be effective at hard
exploration tasks in DM-Hard-8 environments.

Approaches for representation learning often include auxiliary tasks for predicting future events, either directly (Jaderberg et al., 2016) or in the latent space (Guo et al., 2020;
2022; Schwarzer et al., 2020). However, in the rich observation setting, fully reconstructing observations may not be
practical, while reconstruction in the latent space is prone to
representation collapse. Alternatively, auxiliary tasks using
contrastive losses can prevent representation collapse (Chen
et al., 2020; Srinivas et al., 2020), but can be quite sensitive
to the choice of negative sampler (Zbontar et al., 2021).
Similarly, approaches targetting exploration often include
reward bonuses based on counts (Bellemare et al., 2016),
or reconstruction errors (Schmidhuber, 1991; Pathak et al.,
2017). While these ideas are appealing, in rich-observation
settings enumerating counts can be challenging and reconstruction can focus on irrelevant details, resulting in misleading bonuses. Methods like RND (Burda et al., 2018) partially address these concerns but are completely decoupled
from any representation learning method. This substantially
limits the opportunity for targeted exploration in the agent’s
model of the environment. A detailed overview of other
related work is deferred to Section 6 and Appendix A.

1. Introduction
Developing reinforcement learning (RL) methods to tackle
problems that have complex observations, partial observability, and sparse reward signals is an active research direction.
Such problems provide interesting challenges because the
observations can often contain multi-modal information
consisting of visual features, text, and voice. Coupled with
partial observability, an agent must look at a sequence of
past observations and learn useful representations to solve
1

In this work we provide De-Rex: de composition-based
representation and exploration, an approach that builds upon
singular value decomposition (SVD) to train both a useful
state representation and a pseudo-count estimate for exploration in rich-observation/high-dimensional settings.
Structure preserving representations: De-Rex uses a
decomposition procedure to learn a state representation that
preserves the transition structure without ever needing to
build the transition matrix (Section 3). Further, our method
requires only access to transition samples in a mini-batch
form and is compatible with deep networks-based decom-

2

University of Massachusetts DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Yash Chandak <ychandak@umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

