Meta-Learning Parameterized Skills

Haotian Fu 1 Shangqun Yu 2 Saket Tiwari 1 Michael Littman 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract

mug, press the button, open the door, etc., see Figure 1), offpolicy methods fail to generalize well compared to on-policy
methods and methods based on fine-tuning [63; 65], even
given a much larger number of adaptation steps. This makes
off-policy methods hard to to apply to realistic problems
despite their superiority on HiP-MDP environments.

We propose a novel parameterized skill-learning
algorithm that aims to learn transferable parameterized skills and synthesize them into a new
action space that supports efficient learning in
long-horizon tasks. We propose to leverage
off-policy Meta-RL combined with a trajectorycentric smoothness term to learn a set of parameterized skills. Our agent can use these learned
skills to construct a three-level hierarchical framework that models a Temporally-extended Parameterized Action Markov Decision Process. We
empirically demonstrate that the proposed algorithms enable an agent to solve a set of difficult
long-horizon (obstacle-course and robot manipulation) tasks.

However, fast adaptation of an entire policy to a new task
is not the only possible form of generalization that we may
want RL agents to display. Another approach is learning
reusable high-level skills [59], which enable an agent to
explore efficiently and solve hard long-horizon tasks using
hierachical methods. In realistic tasks, we want skills that
are flexible—able to be efficiently adapted to many different
situations. For example, a skill that opens a door should
be adjustable to many different types of doors and handles,
from office doors to microwave doors. The most flexible
skills are parametrized: discrete skills augmented with continuous parameters that adjust their behavior, thereby making them more likely to be reusable in new tasks because
they are flexible enough to be applied in diverse situations.
Finding the appropriate parametrization of a skill abtracted
from the primitive action space in such settings is still an
open question.

1. Introduction
To improve Reinforcement Learning (RL)’s generalization
to novel tasks, meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL)
learns a meta-policy from a large number of tasks that aims
to quickly adapt to a new task within the same distribution. Off-policy meta-RL methods [51; 36; 19; 12] normally
train a context-encoder that takes in a few collected trajectories/transitions on a new task as input and output latent
parameters that function as a descriptor of the current task.
That descriptor is fed into the policy as an additional input
to generate actions. Compared to On-policy meta-RL methods [16; 61; 68], off-policy methods generally have much
higher sample efficiency and better or comparable overall performance [45; 68; 51] on tasks whose differences
vary smoothly and can be described by a single vector
(e.g., tasks change between different goal velocity for a
half-cheetah)—a setting also known as Hidden-parameter
MDPs (HiP-MDPs) [13; 32; 21]. However, for tasks with
more diverse variations (e.g., tasks change between pull the

We propose that the problem of learning parameterized skills
is very similar to the HiP-MDP setting, in which off-policy
meta-RL methods successfully generalize. Specifically, by
leveraging Off-policy Meta-RL, we propose to learn parameterized skills [10]—both the skills themselves and the parameter space—as well as a high-level control policy that will
use the learned parameterized skills as the new action space
and perform on new tasks. Our contributions are: 1. We
propose a novel three-level hierarchical RL framework combining off-policy Meta-RL and Parameterized Action MDP
algorithms (MLPS + HPS) to model Temporally-extend
PAMDP problems, which can be used to solve long-horizon
tasks. 2. For low-level policy learning, we propose a novel
trajectory-centric smoothness training objective for learning
parameterized skills capable of expressing diverse behaviors with a smooth parameter space. 3. For high-level and
mid-level policy learning, we propose a novel hierarchical
actor-critic algorithm that, given the learned parameterized
action space, exhibits better performance compared to previous PAMDP algorithms. 4. Using the proposed algorithm, we are able to solve a set of difficult long-horizon

1

Department of Computer Science, Brown University 2 The
University of Massachusetts Amherst. Correspondence to: Haotian
Fu <hfu7@cs.brown.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

