Automatic Intrinsic Reward Shaping for Exploration in Deep Reinforcement
Learning
Mingqi Yuan 1 Bo Li 1 Xin Jin 2 Wenjun Zeng 2

Abstract
State

We present AIRS: Automatic Intrinsic Reward
Shaping that intelligently and adaptively provides high-quality intrinsic rewards to enhance
exploration in reinforcement learning (RL). More
specifically, AIRS selects shaping function from a
predefined set based on the estimated task return
in real-time, providing reliable exploration incentives and alleviating the biased objective problem. Moreover, we develop an intrinsic reward
toolkit 1 to provide efficient and reliable implementations of diverse intrinsic reward approaches.
We test AIRS on various tasks of MiniGrid, Procgen, and DeepMind Control Suite. Extensive simulation demonstrates that AIRS can outperform
the benchmarking schemes and achieve superior
performance with simple architecture.

Total Return

Value
Network

(a)

Task Return

UCB

RL
(b)

Reward Set

Int. Reward

Ext. Reward

Figure 1. (a) AIRS employs two branches in the value network to
disentangle the estimation of total return (evaluated by intrinsic and
extrinsic reward function) and task return (only extrinsic reward
function). (b) AIRS formulates the intrinsic reward selection as a
multi-armed bandit problem and uses the upper confidence bound
(UCB) to make decisions L
based on the estimated task return. Ext.:
Extrinsic. Int.: Intrinsic. : Weighted summation operation.

1. Introduction
Recent approaches have proposed to leverage intrinsic rewards to encourage exploration (Oh et al., 2015; Houthooft
et al., 2016; Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017;
Haber et al., 2018; Ostrovski et al., 2017). For instance,
(Bellemare et al., 2016) leverage a density model to approximate the state visitation frequency and define the intrinsic
reward as inversely proportional to the pseudo-count. As
a result, the agent is encouraged to visit the infrequentlyseen states, increasing the probability of encountering states
with higher task rewards. In contrast, curiosity-driven exploration aims to learn the dynamics of the environment and
utilizes the prediction error as the intrinsic reward (Stadie
et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2020; Burda et al., 2019b). For example, (Pathak et al., 2017) use an inverse-forward dynamics
model to learn the representation of state space, which only
encodes the part that affects the decision-making and ignores environment noise and other irrelevant interference.
After that, the intrinsic reward is defined as the prediction
error of the encoded next-state based on the current stateaction pair.

Striking an appropriate balance between exploration and
exploitation remains a long-standing problem in reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Sufficient exploration can prevent the RL agent from prematurely falling
local optima after finite iterations, contributing to learning
better policies (François-Lavet et al., 2018). To address this
problem, classical exploration strategies such as ϵ-greedy or
Boltzmann exploration will randomly choose all the possible actions with a non-zero probability (Mnih et al., 2015).
But these approaches are inefficient when handling complex
environments with high-dimensional observations. Moreover, extrinsic rewards are consistently found to be sparse
or even absent in many real-world scenarios, and they may
completely fail to learn.
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China 2 Eastern Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang, China. Correspondence to: Xin Jin
<jinxin@eias.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/RLE-Foundation/rllte

Despite the excellent performance of intrinsic rewards, they
cannot guarantee the invariance of the optimal policy, and
1

