Topological Point Cloud Clustering

Vincent P. Grande 1 Michael T. Schaub 1

Abstract

The paradigm of most classical clustering algorithms assumes that there are only a few “fundamental types” within
the observed data and every data point can be assigned to
one of those types. How the notion of type is interpreted
varies in different approaches, but in most cases, the data
is assumed to be a disjoint union of these types plus noise,
and the focus is on identifying an optimal local assignment
of the points to the respective types (clusters). For instance,
many prototypical clustering algorithms like k-means clustering (Steinhaus, 1957) or mixture models like Gaussian
mixtures (Day, 1969) aim to group points together that are
close according to some local distance measure in Rn . Other
variants, like DBSCAN, aim to track dense subsets within
the point cloud (Ester et al., 1996), and subspace clustering
aims to find a collection of low-dimensional linear subspaces according to which the points can be grouped (Chen
& Lerman, 2009). On the other hand, quantifying and utilizing the overall shape of the point cloud, i.e., how it is
globally assembled from the different clusters or how to
find the best possible cluster types to build up the data is
typically not a concern.

We present Topological Point Cloud Clustering
(TPCC), a new method to cluster points in an arbitrary point cloud based on their contribution
to global topological features. TPCC synthesizes
desirable features from spectral clustering and
topological data analysis and is based on considering the spectral properties of a simplicial complex
associated to the considered point cloud. As it
is based on considering sparse eigenvector computations, TPCC is similarly easy to interpret and
implement as spectral clustering. However, by
focusing not just on a single matrix associated
to a graph created from the point cloud data, but
on a whole set of Hodge-Laplacians associated to
an appropriately constructed simplicial complex,
we can leverage a far richer set of topological
features to characterize the data points within the
point cloud and benefit from the relative robustness of topological techniques against noise. We
test the performance of TPCC on both synthetic
and real-world data and compare it with classical
spectral clustering.

In comparison, topological data analysis (TDA), which has
gained significant interest in the last decades (Carlsson &
Vejdemo-Johansson, 2021) emphasises an opposite perspective. Here the dataset is effectively interpreted as one complex object, a topological space, whose “shape” we try to
determine by measuring certain topological features (typically homology) to understand the global make-up of the
entire point cloud. Such topological features are virtually
omnipresent and are very flexible to describe highly complex shapes. For instance, in medicine, they can measure the
topology of vascular networks and can distinguish between
tumorous and healthy cells (Stolz et al., 2022). In public
health studies, they have been used to analyse health care
delivery network efficiency (Gebhart et al., 2021), and in
Biochemistry, persistent homology has been used to analyse
protein binding behaviour (Kovacev-Nikolic et al., 2016).
In Data Science, the Mapper algorithm uses topological
features of data sets to produce a low dimensional representation of high dimensional data sets (Singh et al., 2007).

1. Introduction
A central quest of unsupervised machine learning and pattern recognition is to find meaningful (low-dimensional)
structures within a dataset, where there was only apparent
chaos before. In many cases, a data set consist of a point
cloud in a high-dimensional space, in which each data point
represents a real-world object or relation. Dimensionality
reduction and clustering methods are thus often used as a
first step towards extracting a more comprehensible description of the data at hand, and can yield meaningful insights
into previously hidden connections between the objects.
1
Department of Computer Science, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Vincent
P. Grande <grande@cs.rwth-aachen.de>, Michael T. Schaub
<schaub@cs.rwth-aachen.de>.

One key insight that has driven the success of the ideas
of TDA is that insightful higher-order information is often
encoded in the topological features of (some amenable representation of) the data. However, in contrast to classical

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

