Vector Quantized Wasserstein Auto-Encoder

Tung-Long Vuong 1 2 Trung Le 1 He Zhao 3 Chuanxia Zheng 4 Mehrtash Harandi 1 Jianfei Cai 1
Dinh Phung 1 2

Abstract

Voloshynovskiy et al., 2019) have shown great success in unsupervised representation learning. Although these continuous representation learning methods have been successfully
applied to various problems, ranging from images (Pathak
et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma et al., 2016),
video, and audio (Reed et al., 2017; Oord et al., 2016; Kalchbrenner et al., 2017), in some contexts, input data is more
naturally modeled and encoded as discrete symbols rather
than continuous ones. For example, discrete representations
are a natural fit for complex reasoning, planning, and predictive learning (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). This motivates the
need for learning discrete representations while preserving
the insightful characteristics of the input data. The Vector Quantization Variational Auto-Encoder (VQ-VAE) (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017) is a pioneering generative model
that successfully combines the VAE framework with discrete latent representations. In particular, vector quantized
models learn a compact discrete representation using a deterministic encoder-decoder architecture in the first stage and
subsequently apply this highly compressed representation
to various downstream tasks. Examples include image generation (Esser et al., 2021), cross-modal translation (Kim
et al., 2022), and image recognition (Yu et al., 2021).

Learning deep discrete latent presentations offers
a promise of better symbolic and summarized
abstractions that are more useful to subsequent
downstream tasks. Inspired by the seminal Vector
Quantized Variational Auto-Encoder (VQ-VAE),
most of work in learning deep discrete representations has mainly focused on improving the original VQ-VAE form and none of them has studied learning deep discrete representations from
the generative viewpoint. In this work, we study
learning deep discrete representations from the
generative viewpoint. Specifically, we endow discrete distributions over sequences of codewords
and learn a deterministic decoder that transports
the distribution over the sequences of codewords
to the data distribution via minimizing a WS distance between them. We develop further theories to connect it with the clustering viewpoint of
WS distance, allowing us to have a better and
more controllable clustering solution. Finally,
we empirically evaluate our method on several
well-known benchmarks, where it achieves better
qualitative and quantitative performances than the
other VQ-VAE variants in terms of the codebook
utilization and image reconstruction/generation.

VQ-VAE aims at learning encoder-decoder and a trainable
codebook. The codebook is formed by set of codewords
nz
C = {ck }K
(C ∈ RK×nz ).
k=1 on the latent space Z ∈ R
We denote a M -dimensional discrete latent space related
to the codebook as the M -ary Cartesian power of C:
C M ∈ RM ×nz with M is the number of components in
the latent space. We also denote a latent variable in C M and
its m-th component as z̄n ∈ C M and z̄nm ∈ C respectively.
The encoder fe : Rnx → RM ×nz first map the data examples xn ∈ Rnx to the latent zn ∈ RM ×nz (znm = fem (xn ) is
the m-th component of zn ), followed by a quantization QC
projecting zn onto C M : z¯n = QC (zn ). The quantization
process is modelled as a deterministic categorical posterior distribution such that: z̄nm = argmink ρz (fem (xn ) , ck )
where ρz is a metric on the latent space. The decoder
fd : RM ×nz → Rnx reconstructs accurately the data examples from the discrete latent representations.

1. Introduction
Learning compact yet expressive representations from largescale and high-dimensional unlabeled data is an important
and long-standing task in machine learning (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Chen et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021). Among
many different kinds of methods, Variational Auto-Encoder
(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and its variants (Tolstikhin et al., 2017; Alemi et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2016;
1
Monash University, Australia 2 Vinai, Vietnam 3 CSIRO’s
Data61, Australia 4 University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Tung-Long Vuong <TungLong.Vuong@monash.edu>.

The objective function of VQ-VAE is as follows:


[dx (fd (QC (fe (x))) , x)
Ex∼Px
,
+dz (sg (fe (x)) , z̄) + βdz (fe (x) , sg (z̄))

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

