Revisiting the Linear-Programming Framework
for Offline RL with General Function Approximation

Asuman Ozdaglar 1 Sarath Pattathil 1 Jiawei Zhang 1 Kaiqing Zhang 2

Abstract

2016; Vinyals et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2016). Key to
these successes are two factors: 1) use of rich function approximators, e.g., deep neural networks; 2) access to excessively large interaction data with the environment. Most
successful examples above are extremely data-hungry. In
some cases, the interaction data can be easily obtained in
an online fashion, due to the existence of powerful simulators such as game engines (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al.,
2017) and physics simulators (Todorov et al., 2012).

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find
an optimal policy for sequential decision-making
using a pre-collected dataset, without further interaction with the environment. Recent theoretical progress has focused on developing sampleefficient offline RL algorithms with various relaxed assumptions on data coverage and function approximators, especially to handle the
case with excessively large state-action spaces.
Among them, the framework based on the linearprogramming (LP) reformulation of Markov decision processes has shown promise: it enables
sample-efficient offline RL with function approximation, under only partial data coverage and realizability assumptions on the function classes,
with favorable computational tractability. In this
work, we revisit the LP framework for offline
RL, and provide a new reformulation that advances the existing results in several aspects, relaxing certain assumptions and achieving optimal
statistical rates in terms of sample size. Our key
enabler is to introduce proper constraints in the
reformulation, instead of using any regularization as in the literature, also with careful choices
of the function classes and initial state distributions. We hope our insights bring into light the
use of LP formulations and the induced primaldual minimax optimization, in offline RL.

On the other hand, in many other domains of RL, such
online interaction is impractical, either because data collection is expensive and/or impractical, or the environment
is simply difficult to simulate well. Many real world applications fall into this setting, including robotics and autonomous driving (Levine et al., 2018; Maddern et al.,
2017), healthcare (Tseng et al., 2017), and recommender
systems (Swaminathan et al., 2017). Moreover, even in the
cases where online interaction is available, one might still
want to utilize previously collected data, as effective generalization requires large datasets (Levine et al., 2020). Offline RL has thus provided a promising framework when
one really targets deploying RL in the real-world.
However, in practice, offline RL is known to suffer from the
training instability issue due to the use of function approximation, e.g., neural networks, and the distribution shift
issue due to the mismatch between the offline data distribution and the targeted (optimal) policy distribution (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020). As a result sampleefficiency guarentees for offline RL with function approximation usually relies on strong assumptions on both the
function classes and the dataset. In particular, many earlier results (Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Scherrer, 2014;
Chen & Jiang, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021) require the function classes to be Bellman-complete, i.e., the value function
class is closed under the Bellman operator, and the dataset
to have full coverage, i.e., the data covers the state distributions induced by all policies. Both assumptions are strong:
the former is non-monotone in the function class, i.e., the
assumption can be violated when a richer function class is
used, and is much stronger than the common assumption of
realizability (i.e., the optimal solution lies in the function
class) in statistical learning theory; the latter essentially re-

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous empirical successes of reinforcement learning (RL) in many sequentialdecision making problems (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
Authors are arranged in alphabetical order. 1 Department of
EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Department of
ECE, University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to:
Jiawei Zhang <jwzhang@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

