Implicit Neural Spatial Representations for Time-dependent PDEs

Honglin Chen * 1 Rundi Wu * 1 Eitan Grinspun 2 Changxi Zheng 1 Peter Yichen Chen 3 1

Abstract

vious neural-physics approaches struggle. Videos
and codes are available on the project page.1

Implicit Neural Spatial Representation (INSR)
has emerged as an effective representation of
spatially-dependent vector fields. This work explores solving time-dependent PDEs with INSR.
Classical PDE solvers introduce both temporal and spatial discretizations. Common spatial discretizations include meshes and meshless
point clouds, where each degree-of-freedom corresponds to a location in space. While these
explicit spatial correspondences are intuitive to
model and understand, these representations are
not necessarily optimal for accuracy, memory usage, or adaptivity. Keeping the classical temporal
discretization unchanged (e.g., explicit/implicit
Euler), we explore INSR as an alternative spatial discretization, where spatial information is
implicitly stored in the neural network weights.
The network weights then evolve over time via
time integration. Our approach does not require
any training data generated by existing solvers
because our approach is the solver itself. We
validate our approach on various PDEs with examples involving large elastic deformations, turbulent fluids, and multi-scale phenomena. While
slower to compute than traditional representations,
our approach exhibits higher accuracy and lower
memory consumption. Whereas classical solvers
can dynamically adapt their spatial representation only by resorting to complex remeshing algorithms, our INSR approach is intrinsically adaptive. By tapping into the rich literature of classic
time integrators, e.g., operator-splitting schemes,
our method enables challenging simulations in
contact mechanics and turbulent flows where pre-

1. Introduction
Implicit neural spatial representation (INSR) (Park et al.,
2019; Xie et al., 2021) parameterizes a spatially-dependent
vector field with a neural network. It has been proven to be
instrumental in computer graphics and vision applications,
including volumetric rendering (Mildenhall et al., 2020),
3D reconstruction (Mescheder et al., 2019), signal processing (Du et al., 2021), and geometry processing (Yang et al.,
2021). While existing works have mostly focused on static
representations, this work aims to explore these neural representations for dynamic simulations where the vector fields
evolve over time. In particular, we explore a fundamental
class of physics simulation tasks governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) with both spatial and temporal
dependence,
F (f , ∇f , ∇2 f , . . . , ḟ , f̈ , . . .) = 0,
f (x, t) : Ω × T → Rd ,

(1)

where Ω ∈ Rm and T ∈ R are the spatial and temporal
domains, respectively. Examples include the Navier-Stokes
equations for fluid dynamics and the elastodynamic equation
for solid mechanics.
To computationally simulate these problems, classical methods introduce both spatial and temporal discretizations. On
the one hand, temporal discretization breaks down the entire
temporal range into a finite number of time steps {tn }Tn=0 ,
where T is the number of temporal discretization samples,
and ∆t = tn+1 − tn is the time step size. The solution
to Equation (1) then becomes a list of spatially-dependent
vector fields: {f n (x)}Tn=0 . Classical methods then sequentially integrate from one time step (n) to the next (n + 1), using a wide range of time integrators, such as explicit/implicit
Euler (Ascher & Petzold, 1998). On the other hand, spatial
discretization represents these spatially-dependent vector
fields f n (x) using grids, meshes, or point clouds (meshless
particles). For example, the grid-based linear finite element
method (FEM) (Hughes, 2012) defines a shape function
N i on each grid node and represents the spatially depen-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 3 Computer
Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence
to: Honglin Chen <honglin.chen@columbia.edu>, Rundi Wu
<rundi.wu@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Project webpage: http://www.cs.columbia.edu/cg/INSR-PDE/

