Language Instructed Reinforcement Learning for Human-AI Coordination

Hengyuan Hu 1 Dorsa Sadigh 1

Abstract

coordination is the existence of multiple, mutually incompatible equilibrium policies in a multi-agent system and the
fact that without guidance RL agents can converge to any of
them (Shih et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020). Here equilibrium
policies refer to optimal or near-optimal joint policies in
multi-agent environments. In practice, humans often prefer specific subsets of policies — particular equilibria in
multi-agent games — that align well with our capabilities
and common sense, while reinforcement learning policies
that do not integrate any forms of human priors often converge to policies that are hard for humans to collaborate
with (Bakhtin et al., 2022; Carroll et al., 2019).

One of the fundamental quests of AI is to produce agents that coordinate well with humans.
This problem is challenging, especially in domains that lack high quality human behavioral
data, because multi-agent reinforcement learning
(RL) often converges to different equilibria from
the ones that humans prefer. We propose a novel
framework, instructRL , that enables humans to
specify what kind of strategies they expect from
their AI partners through natural language instructions. We use pretrained large language models to
generate a prior policy conditioned on the human
instruction and use the prior to regularize the RL
objective. This leads to the RL agent converging
to equilibria that are aligned with human preferences. We show that instructRL converges to
human-like policies that satisfy the given instructions in a proof-of-concept environment as well
as the challenging Hanabi benchmark. Finally,
we show that knowing the language instruction
significantly boosts human-AI coordination performance through human evaluations in Hanabi.

Let us consider a simple collaborative game as our running
example. Alice and Bob are collaborating with each other
on a game “Say-Select” as shown in Figure 1. There are
5 balls in front of Alice and Bob. A random number of
them are assigned with +1 reward and the remaining ones
are assigned with -1 reward. Alice (left) can see the values
of the balls while Bob (right, blind-folded) cannot. They
need to collaborate to collect rewards. Alice can refer to
any of the balls by communicating a number from 1 to 5 to
Bob. Bob can either pick up a ball or quit the game. After
collecting the reward associated with the ball, the ball is
re-assigned with -1 reward and put back. The game keeps
running until Bob quits. It is easy to see that from RL
algorithms’ perspective, there are numerous equally optimal
joint policies that achieves perfect results by learning an
arbitrary mapping from Alice’s past action sequences to
Bob’s decision. However, it is unclear how existing RL
algorithms can reliably produce the policies that are most
natural to human. For example, a natural policy is one
shown in Figure 1, where when Alice communicates any
number x, Bob picks up that ball, and if Alice communicates
x twice in a row, Bob should quit.

1. Introduction
One of the most fundamental yet challenging goals of AI is
to create agents that can coordinate with humans in humanAI hybrid environments. In domains where abundant, high
quality human behavioral data is available, such as Diplomacy (FAIR et al., 2022), we can expect AI agents to achieve
human level performance and coordinate effectively with
humans. However, these methods are limited to settings
where high quality human data is readily available. Without
access to human data, we have to rely on techniques such
as reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to learn strong
policies in multi-agent settings.

A popular line of research attempts to address this problem by first producing a diverse set of policies and then
train a common best response strategy that may generalize to any humans partner (Cui et al., 2023; Lupu et al.,
2021; Charakorn et al., 2022). These methods implicitly
require the underlying RL algorithm to generate policies
near the equilibria that humans prefer, which by itself is
challenging and problem dependent. They also have much
higher computational cost in order to produce enough policies to facilitate generalization. In Say-Select, a common

However, the main challenge in leveraging RL for human-AI
1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Hengyuan Hu
<hengyuan.hhu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

