SEGA: Structural Entropy Guided Anchor View
for Graph Contrastive Learning

Junran Wu 1 * Xueyuan Chen 1 * Bowen Shi 1 Shangzhe Li 1 Ke Xu 1 2

Abstract

been applied to various domains because of the scarcity of
datasets with labels. Meanwhile, graph neural networks
(GNNs) have become ubiquitous for graphs because of their
ability to model structural information (Li et al., 2022b;
Zhang et al., 2022). Therefore, graph contrastive learning (You et al., 2020; Suresh et al., 2021; Yang & Hong,
2022), based on the success of contrastive learning in computer vision and natural language processing, has attracted
plenty of research interest after its presentation.

In contrastive learning, the choice of “view” controls the information that the representation captures and influences the performance of the model.
However, leading graph contrastive learning methods generally produce views via random corruption or learning, which could lead to the loss
of essential information and alteration of semantic information. An anchor view that maintains
the essential information of input graphs for contrastive learning has been hardly investigated. In
this paper, based on the theory of graph information bottleneck, we deduce the definition of
this anchor view; put differently, the anchor view
with essential information of input graph is supposed to have the minimal structural uncertainty.
Furthermore, guided by structural entropy, we
implement the anchor view, termed SEGA, for
graph contrastive learning. We extensively validate the proposed anchor view on various benchmarks regarding graph classification under unsupervised, semi-supervised, and transfer learning
and achieve significant performance boosts compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

In contrastive learning, the choice of view controls the information that the representation captures. Researchers have
found that the quality of views influences the performance
of contrastive learning models (Tian et al., 2020) and focus
on the generation of effective views that lead to better performance for graphs through the data augmentation (Suresh
et al., 2021; You et al., 2021). Despite the effectiveness of
these graph views on various tasks, the proposed data augmentations via random corruption or learning suffer from
structural damage and artificially introduced noise, which
could alter the fundamental property of input graphs. Unlike
images, data augmentation on graphs is much harder to provide high-quality contrastive samples due to the rich structural information of various contexts in the graph data (Feng
et al., 2022). So far, little attention has been paid to the anchor view for graph contrastive learning that maintains the
essential information of input graphs regarding graph classification. Therefore, we are eager to provide high-quality
contrastive samples by settling the two questions: (1) What
is the anchor view holding essential information? (2) How
to generate the anchor view for graph contrastive learning?

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has gained popularity recently and
achieved great success in deep learning, e.g., BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019) and MoCo (He et al., 2020). Compared with
supervised learning, self-supervised learning gets equal or
even better performance with limited or no-labeled data
which saves much annotation time and plenty of resources.
As one of the empirical self-supervised learning methods, contrastive learning develops rapidly and recently has

Recently, the information bottleneck theory that encourages model to capture minimal but sufficient information,
that is essential information, has been applied to learn
graph representation, called Graph Information Bottleneck
(GIB) (Wu et al., 2020). In light of GIB, we conclude
that the anchor view with essential information of input
graph is supposed to have the minimal structural uncertainty (i.e., G∗ = min H(G)). Now, with the definition of
target anchor view, the last question is its instantiation for
graph contrastive learning. Thus, a metric for graph structural uncertainty measurement is needed. Recently, based on
the classic uncertainty metric, Shannon entropy (Shannon,

*
Equal contribution 1 State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100094, China. Correspondence to: Shangzhe Li <shangzheli@buaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

