Graph Positional Encoding via Random Feature Propagation

Moshe Eliasof 1 Fabrizio Frasca 2 Beatrice Bevilacqua 3 Eran Treister 1 Gal Chechik 4 5 Haggai Maron 5

Abstract

et al., 2021). Many approaches have been proposed to alleviate these limitations, including two prominent directions
that are based on augmenting the input node features of a
given graph, namely, random and spectral features. The first
approach builds on random node features (RNF) (Abboud
et al., 2020; Sato et al., 2021), and was shown to improve
the expressiveness of MPNNs by increasing their capability
to disambiguate nodes. Unfortunately, even though RNF
theoretically add expressiveness, they do not consistently
improve performance on real-world datasets (Bevilacqua
et al., 2022). A second approach to alleviate the expressivity limitation suggests enhancing input node features with
spectral PE often derived from a partial eigendecomposition of the graph-Laplacian matrix (Dwivedi & Bresson,
2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Lim et al.,
2023; Rampasek et al., 2022). These methods have demonstrated an improvement on graph classification benchmarks
compared to using only the raw input node features.

Two main families of node feature augmentation
schemes have been explored for enhancing GNNs:
random features and spectral positional encoding.
Surprisingly, however, there is still no clear understanding of the relation between these two augmentation schemes. Here we propose a novel family of positional encoding schemes which draws
a link between the above two approaches and improves over both. The new approach, named Random Feature Propagation (RFP), is inspired by the
power iteration method and its generalizations. It
concatenates several intermediate steps of an iterative algorithm for computing the dominant eigenvectors of a propagation matrix, starting from random node features. Notably, these propagation
steps are based on graph-dependent propagation
operators that can be either predefined or learned.
We explore the theoretical and empirical benefits
of RFP. First, we provide theoretical justifications
for using random features, for incorporating early
propagation steps, and for using multiple random
initializations. Then, we empirically demonstrate
that RFP significantly outperforms both spectral
PE and random features in multiple node classification and graph classification benchmarks.

Our approach. This work is based on the observation
that iterative matrix eigenproblem solvers provide a natural
link between random node features and existing spectral
PE methods. Prominent examples of these iterative algorithms include the well-known power method and its generalizations, such as subspace iteration methods (Saad, 2011).
Specifically, these eigensolvers take random vectors and
transform them into eigenvectors by performing a series of
propagation and normalization steps. Importantly, when
the input matrix represents either the graph adjacency or
the Laplacian matrix, the output of these algorithms is the
spectral PE mentioned above.

1. Introduction
GNN architectures such as Message-Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) became very popular for learning with
graph-structured data, but they suffer from various limitations. Primarily, they were shown to have limited expressiveness, which hurts their performance in practice (Morris
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2021; Zhang

In this paper, we propose a family of PE schemes for graph
learning, which we call Random Feature Propagation (RFP),
designed to improve over RNF and eigendecompositionbased PE schemes while retaining the advantages of both
approaches. Given a graph with n nodes, an n × n propagation matrix (e.g., the adjacency matrix), and a normalization
function (e.g., ℓ2 normalization or orthonormalization), the
RFP PE is defined as a concatenation of multiple successive
propagation-and-normalization steps, starting from random
node features. We refer to the output of this process as the
RFP trajectory. As we show in Section 3.1, this approach
can be interpreted as an interpolation between the RNF and
the spectral PE strategies outlined above. Therefore, RFP
provides GNNs with features ranging from pure RNF to

1
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Israel. 2 Department of Computing, Imperial College
London, UK. 3 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA. 4 Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University,
Israel. 5 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to: Moshe Eliasof
<eliasof@post.bgu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

