MetricGAN-OKD: Multi-Metric Optimization of MetricGAN via
Online Knowledge Distillation for Speech Enhancement

Wooseok Shin 1 Byung Hoon Lee 1 Jin Sob Kim 1 Hyun Joon Park 1 Sung Won Han 1

Abstract

dissonance continues to exist between the evaluation metrics
and the Lp distance loss (e.g., L1 or L2 ), typically used as
the objective function. Existing studies have demonstrated
that this problem arises because the Lp loss is not highly
correlated with the evaluation metrics designed to consider
human auditory perception (Bagchi et al., 2018; Fu et al.,
2018; Zhao et al., 2018; Manocha et al., 2020). To reduce
this dissonance, several studies (Fu et al., 2018; Zhao et al.,
2018; Martin-Donas et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2019a; Kim et al.,
2019) have directly optimized the evaluation metrics, such
as the perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ; Rix
et al. 2001) and short-time objective intelligibility (STOI;
Taal et al. 2011). Some (Fu et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018)
have demonstrated that adopting the STOI metric as an
objective function improves speech intelligibility. Others
(Martin-Donas et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2019a; Kim et al.,
2019) have utilized the metric function approximation or
policy gradient approaches owing to the profound complexity and not completely differentiable nature of the PESQ
metric (Fu et al., 2019b). However, the disadvantages of
these methods include the following: (i) Lack of flexibility
and scalability for application to other metrics. (ii) Inefficient training costs and limited performance improvements
(Fu et al., 2019b; 2021).

In speech enhancement, MetricGAN-based approaches reduce the discrepancy between the
Lp loss and evaluation metrics by utilizing a
non-differentiable evaluation metric as the objective function. However, optimizing multiple
metrics simultaneously remains challenging owing to the problem of confusing gradient directions. In this paper, we propose an effective
multi-metric optimization method in MetricGAN
via online knowledge distillation—MetricGANOKD. MetricGAN-OKD, which consists of multiple generators and target metrics, related by a
one-to-one correspondence, enables generators
to learn with respect to a single metric reliably
while improving performance with respect to
other metrics by mimicking other generators. Experimental results on speech enhancement and
listening enhancement tasks reveal that the proposed method significantly improves performance
in terms of multiple metrics compared to existing multi-metric optimization methods. Further,
the good performance of MetricGAN-OKD is explained in terms of network generalizability and
correlation between metrics.

Alternatively, generative adversarial network (GAN; Goodfellow et al. 2014)-based approaches (Pascual et al., 2017;
Donahue et al., 2018), which train a generator using adversarial loss, have been proposed in SE. However, as in the
case of the Lp loss, the conventional adversarial loss that
considers the authenticity of a given sample is not consonant with the optimization of the evaluation metric (Fu et al.,
2019b).

1. Introduction
Speech enhancement (SE) involves the improvement of the
intelligibility and perceptual quality of human speech in
noisy environments. SE is a crucial task in various speechrelated applications, such as automatic speech recognition
(ASR), teleconference systems, and hearing aids. Although
recent deep learning-based models (Tan & Wang, 2018; Yin
et al., 2020; Defossez et al., 2020; Hao et al., 2021; Park
et al., 2022) have significantly improved SE performance,

To overcome the aforementioned problems, MetricGAN
(Fu et al., 2019b), which is a GAN-based architecture that
utilizes non-differentiable evaluation metrics as objective
functions with efficient cost, was proposed. MetricGAN
consists of a surrogate function (discriminator) that learns
the behavior of the metric function and a generator that
generates enhanced speech based on the guidance of the
discriminator. Following demonstrations verifying that MetricGAN optimizes metric scores directly, optimization of
multiple metrics to improve different metrics representing

1

School of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Sung
Won Han <swhan@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

