Efficient Approximations of Complete Interatomic Potentials for Crystal
Property Prediction

Yuchao Lin 1 Keqiang Yan 1 Youzhi Luo 1 Yi Liu 2 Xiaoning Qian 1 3 Shuiwang Ji 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The past decade has witnessed a surge of interests and
rapid developments in machine learning for molecular analysis (Duvenaud et al., 2015). These initial studies mainly
focus on the prediction and generation problems of small
molecules. To enable computational analyses, molecules
need to be featurized in an appropriate mathematical representation form. Recently, with the advances of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017; Battaglia et al.,
2018; Gao et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020), molecules are more
commonly represented as graphs in which each node corresponds to an atom, and each edge corresponds to a chemical
bond (Stokes et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022b). A variety of
molecular graph prediction (Stokes et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2022b) and generation (Shi et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2018;
Luo et al., 2021) methods have been developed based on 2D
molecular graph representations. A key limitation of the 2D
graph representations is that the 3D geometries of molecules
are not captured, but such information may be critical in
many molecular property prediction problems (Hu et al.,
2021). To enable the encoding of 3D molecular geometries
in GNNs, a series of 3D GNN methods have been developed
for prediction (Schütt et al., 2017; Gasteiger et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2022a) and generation (Liu et al.,
2022a; Luo & Ji, 2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022) problems.
In these 3D graph representations, each node is associated
with the corresponding atom’s coordinate in 3D space. Geometric information, such as distances between nodes and
angles between edges, is used during message passing in
GNNs. Recently, these methods have been extended to learn
representations for proteins (Jing et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2023).

We study property prediction for crystal materials. A crystal structure consists of a minimal unit
cell that is repeated infinitely in 3D space. How
to accurately represent such repetitive structures
in machine learning models remains unresolved.
Current methods construct graphs by establishing
edges only between nearby nodes, thereby failing to faithfully capture infinite repeating patterns
and distant interatomic interactions. In this work,
we propose several innovations to overcome these
limitations. First, we propose to model physicsprincipled interatomic potentials directly instead
of only using distances as in many existing methods. These potentials include the Coulomb potential, London dispersion potential, and Pauli repulsion potential. Second, we model the complete set
of potentials among all atoms, instead of only between nearby atoms as in existing methods. This
is enabled by our approximations of infinite potential summations with provable error bounds. We
further develop efficient algorithms to compute
the approximations. Finally, we propose to incorporate our computations of complete interatomic
potentials into message passing neural networks
for representation learning. We perform experiments on the JARVIS and Materials Project benchmarks for evaluation. Results show that the use of
interatomic potentials and complete interatomic
potentials leads to consistent performance improvements with reasonable computational costs.
Our code is publicly available as part of the AIRS
library (https://github.com/divelab/AIRS).

Inspired by the success of GNNs on small molecules, (Xie &
Grossman, 2018) developed the crystal graph convolutional
neural network (CGCNN) for crystal material property prediction. Different from small molecules and proteins, crystal
materials are typically modeled by a minimal unit cell (similar to a small molecule) that is repeated in 3D space with
certain directions and step sizes. In theory, the unit cell is
repeated infinitely in 3D space, but any real-world material
has finite size. However, given that our modeling is at the
atomic level, modeling crystal materials as infinite repeti-

1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA
3
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

