Approximation and Estimation Ability of Transformers
for Sequence-to-Sequence Functions with Infinite Dimensional Input

Shokichi Takakura 1 2 Taiji Suzuki 1 2
tion ability of fully connected neural networks (FNN) for
certain function spaces such as Hölder spaces (SchmidtHieber, 2020) and Besov spaces (Suzuki, 2018). For example, Schmidt-Hieber (2020) showed that FNNs with ReLU
activation can achieve the near minimax optimal rate of the
estimation error for composite functions in Hölder spaces.
Although deep learning can achieve the near optimal rate
for several function classes, the convergence rate is often
strongly affected by the dimensionality of inputs. Some
researches (Nakada & Imaizumi, 2022; Chen et al., 2022)
considered the settings where the data are distributed on a
low dimensional manifold and showed that deep neural networks can avoid the curse of dimensionality. However, this
assumption is relatively strong since the low dimensionality
of the data manifold is easily destroyed by noise injection.
Then, Suzuki (2018) showed that even if the data manifold
is not low dimensional, deep neural networks can avoid the
curse of dimensionality under the assumption that the target
function has anisotropic smoothness. Moreover, Okumoto
& Suzuki (2022) showed that (dilated) convolutional neural
networks (CNN) can avoid the curse of dimensionality even
if inputs are infinite dimensional.

Abstract
Despite the great success of Transformer networks in various applications such as natural language processing and computer vision, their theoretical aspects are not well understood. In this
paper, we study the approximation and estimation
ability of Transformers as sequence-to-sequence
functions with infinite dimensional inputs. Although inputs and outputs are both infinite dimensional, we show that when the target function has
anisotropic smoothness, Transformers can avoid
the curse of dimensionality due to their feature
extraction ability and parameter sharing property.
In addition, we show that even if the smoothness
changes depending on each input, Transformers
can estimate the importance of features for each
input and extract important features dynamically.
Then, we proved that Transformers achieve similar convergence rate as in the case of the fixed
smoothness. Our theoretical results support the
practical success of Transformers for high dimensional data.

Although the learnability of FNNs and CNNs has been intensively studied, that of Transformer networks is not well understood. There are some researches (Edelman et al., 2022;
Gurevych et al., 2022) which studied the learning ability of
Transformers. Edelman et al. (2022) evaluated the capacity
of Transformer networks and derived the sample complexity
to learn sparse Boolean functions. Since they investigated
discrete inputs, the smoothness of the target function was
not considered. Gurevych et al. (2022) studied binary classification tasks and proved that Transformer networks can
avoid the curse of dimensionality when a posteriori probability is represented by the hierarchical composition model
with Hölder smoothness. However, these studies have some
limitations. First, the previous works considered the fixed
length input, although Transformer networks can be applied
to sequences of any length due to the parameter sharing
property, even if the length is infinite. Indeed, Transformers are often applied to very high dimensional data such as
images and languages, and the learnability of Transformers
for such extremely high dimensional data is still unclear.
Second, their analysis is limited to the single output setting.

1. Introduction
Transformer networks, first proposed in Vaswani et al.
(2017), empirically show high performance in various fields
including natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017),
computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and audio processing (Dong et al., 2018), where the dimensionality of
inputs is relatively high. However, despite the growing interest in Transformer models, their theoretical properties are
still unclear.
Aside from the Transformer architecture, there exists a
line of work which studied the approximation and estima1
Department of Mathematical Informatics, the University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Shokichi Takakura
<masayoshi361@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

