Block Subsampled Randomized Hadamard Transform for
Nyström Approximation on Distributed Architectures

Oleg Balabanov 1 Matthias Beaupère 1 Laura Grigori 2 3 Victor Lederer 1

Abstract

very reliable, and not just used as a last resort, as it was not
so long ago. Along with increased efficiency, they can now
provide strong accuracy guarantees with a user-specified
failure probability that can be chosen extremely low, say
10−10 , without much impact on computational costs.

This article introduces a novel structured random
matrix composed blockwise from subsampled
randomized Hadamard transforms (SRHTs). The
block SRHT is expected to outperform wellknown dimension reduction maps, including
SRHT and Gaussian matrices on distributed architectures. We prove that a block SRHT with
enough rows is an oblivious subspace embedding, i.e., an approximate isometry for an arbitrary low-dimensional subspace with high probability. Our estimate of the required number of
rows is similar to that of the standard SRHT. This
suggests that the two transforms should provide
the same accuracy of approximation in the algorithms. The block SRHT can be readily incorporated into randomized methods for computing a
low-rank approximation of a large-scale matrix,
such as the Nyström method. For completeness,
we revisit this method with a discussion of its implementation on distributed architectures.

This article is concerned with randomized methods that
are based on a dimension reduction, called sketching (Woodruff et al., 2014), with oblivious ℓ2 -subspace embeddings (OSEs) defined below.
Definition 1.1. Let 0 ≤ ε < 1 and 0 < δ < 1. A random
matrix Ω ∈ Rl×n is said to be a (ε, δ, d) OSE, if for any
fixed d-dimensional subspace V ⊆ Rn ,
∀x ∈ V, |∥x∥22 − ∥Ωx∥22 | ≤ ε∥x∥22

(1)

holds with probability at least 1 − δ.

1
Sorbonne Université, Inria, CNRS, Université de Paris, Laboratoire Jacques-Louis Lions, Paris, France. 2 Work performed
while at Sorbonne Université, Inria, CNRS, Université de Paris,
Laboratoire Jacques-Louis Lions, Paris, France. 3 Paul Scherrer
Institute, Laboratory for Simulation and Modelling, 5232 PSI Villigen, and École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Institute of Mathematics, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Oleg Balabanov <olegbalabanov@gmail.com>.

It is a consequence of the Johnson-Lindenstrauss
lemma (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984) that there
exist (ε, δ, d) OSEs of sizes l = O(ε−2 (d + log 1δ ). The
fact that n does not appear in the right-hand-side and the
logarithmic dependence on the probability of failure δ
shows the potential of a dimension reduction with such
embeddings. There are several distributions that are known
to satisfy the OSE property with the optimal or close
to optimal l. The Gaussian, Rademacher distributions,
sub-sampled randomized Hadamard transform (SRHT),
sub-sampled randomized Fourier transform, and CountSketch matrix are ones of the most popular distributions.
The random sketching matrix in the algorithm should
be chosen depending on the computational architecture
to yield the most benefit. For instance, the SRHT is
a structured matrix that can be efficiently applied to a
vector in a sequential computational environment, while
the application of a Rademacher matrix is efficient in a
highly parallel environment. In this paper we propose a
novel OSE, called block SRHT, which should be superior
to all currently existing ones, including the recent (Teng
et al., 2020; Charalambides et al., 2022), on a distributed
computational architecture, with not too many processors.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The OSEs are used in a variety of randomized methods for
machine learning, scientific computing, and signal processing. Perhaps one of the most representative applications is

1. Introduction
Randomization has become a powerful tool for tackling massive problems in numerical algebra and data science (Mahoney et al., 2011; Woodruff et al., 2014; Vershynin, 2018; Martinsson & Tropp, 2020). Modern randomized methods can, in particular, provide solutions to
problems of dimensions beyond the reach of deterministic methods, and allow effective use of computational resources. Recent significant development has made them

1

