Towards Practical Preferential Bayesian Optimization
with Skew Gaussian Processes
Shion Takeno 1 2 3 Masahiro Nomura 2 Masayuki Karasuyama 1

Abstract

sition (Zhou et al., 2021) because it is easier for humans
to judge which one is better than to give an absolute rating (Kahneman & Tversky, 2013). The system (i.e., the optimization method) in the human-in-the-loop optimization
presents choices and receives preferential feedback interactively. To reduce the waiting time for users, the system
is required to quickly present the new options to users by
learning from the observed feedback information.

We study preferential Bayesian optimization (BO)
where reliable feedback is limited to pairwise
comparison called duels. An important challenge
in preferential BO, which uses the preferential
Gaussian process (GP) model to represent flexible
preference structure, is that the posterior distribution is a computationally intractable skew GP.
The most widely used approach for preferential
BO is Gaussian approximation, which ignores
the skewness of the true posterior. Alternatively,
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based preferential BO is also proposed. In this work, we first
verify the accuracy of Gaussian approximation,
from which we reveal the critical problem that
the predictive probability of duels can be inaccurate. This observation motivates us to improve the
MCMC-based estimation for skew GP, for which
we show the practical efficiency of Gibbs sampling and derive the low variance MC estimator.
However, the computational time of MCMC can
still be a bottleneck in practice. Towards building a more practical preferential BO, we develop
a new method that achieves both high computational efficiency and low sample complexity, and
then demonstrate its effectiveness through extensive numerical experiments.

An important challenge in preferential BO, which uses the
preferential Gaussian process (GP) model to represent preference structure, is that the posterior distribution is computationally intractable skew GP. The existing approaches to this
difficulty are twofold: The first approach is the Gaussian
approximation, such as Laplace approximation (LA) and expectation propagation (EP) (Chu & Ghahramani, 2005b;a).
Actually, most of the preferential BO algorithms proposed
so far are based on this Gaussian approximation (Brochu
et al., 2010; Nielsen et al., 2015; González et al., 2017; Siivola et al., 2021; Fauvel & Chalk, 2021), leading to good
computational efficiency. However, the predictive accuracy can be poor, as discussed in Section 3.1, because the
Gaussian approximation ignores the skewness of the exact posterior represented as the skew GP (Benavoli et al.,
2020; 2021a;b). The second approach is to directly employ
the skew GP model using the Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method (Benavoli et al., 2020; 2021a;b). Benavoli
et al. (2020; 2021a;b) argued that the Gaussian approximation has poor estimation accuracy, and their MCMC-based
estimation is effective in preferential BO. However, the
experimental evidence was insufficient to show why the
Gaussian approximation degrade the preferential BO.

1. Introduction
Preferential Bayesian optimization (BO) has been an attractive approach for solving problems where reliable feedback is limited to pairwise comparison, the so-called duels. This preference setting often appears in human-in-theloop optimization problems such as visual design optimization (Koyama et al., 2020) and generative melody compo-

The aim of this study is to build truly practical preferential
BO with experimental evidence to support it. To this end, we
first evaluate the accuracy of the Gaussian approximationbased methods, which have been most used in the preferential BO literature. Our experiments reveal that those methods fail to correctly predict the probability of duel outcomes,
which is critical in the preferential BO setting. This result
implies that it is important to consider the skewness of the
true posterior, and then we also improve MCMC for skew
GP estimation. Specifically, we present MC estimators that
reduce the estimation variance for skew GP. Furthermore,
we empirically clarify the high computational efficiency

1

Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 CyberAgent,
Tokyo, Japan 3 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Shion Takeno <shion.takeno@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

