Robustness in Multimodal Learning under Train-Test Modality Mismatch

Brandon McKinzie 1 Vaishaal Shankar 1 Joseph Cheng 2 Yinfei Yang 3 Jonathon Shlens 1 Alexander Toshev 1
Various Discrepancies between
Training and Evaluation Setups
Setup 1

Setup 2

Setup N

Robustness
Performance

Text

Text

st

Text

iv

e

…

Ap
ur
O

Evaluation
Modalities

pr
oa

ch

C

on

Training
Modalities

Multimodal learning is defined as learning over
multiple heterogeneous input modalities such as
video, audio, and text. In this work, we are concerned with understanding how models behave as
the type of modalities differ between training and
deployment, a situation that naturally arises in
many applications of multimodal learning to hardware platforms. We present a multimodal robustness framework to provide a systematic analysis
of common multimodal representation learning
methods. Further, we identify robustness shortcomings of these approaches and propose two intervention techniques leading to 1.5×-4× robustness improvements on three datasets, AudioSet,
Kinetics-400 and ImageNet-Captions. Finally, we
demonstrate that these interventions better utilize
additional modalities, if present, to achieve competitive results of 44.2 mAP on AudioSet 20K.

Performance and Robustness
across all Setups

tr
a

Abstract

…
Text

Text

17.5

25

32.5

40

Text

Figure 1. Multimodal experimental setup and results. We study
representation learning for multimodal models which exhibit discrepancies between training and evaluation modalities. We define
an analysis framework for this setup, study existing pretraining
methods, and propose methods to improve robustness and performance.

fit overall predictive performance. Second, models should
gracefully degrade in the absence of modalities at test time.
Both properties are unique to the multimodal setting.
To address these challenges, we study the problem of multimodal robustness. How do models behave when arbitrary
combinations of modalities may be added or removed at
test time? Supervised learning typically trains a model on a
labeled dataset and examines how performance deteriorates
as the hold-out validation set diverges from the training
set (Recht et al., 2019; Shankar et al., 2021; Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2019). In our setting, we wish to instead build
models in which one may flexibly swap in or out individual modalities that the model has seen during pretraining,
downstream training, or both (Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
Machine learning models in the real world operate on a wide
range of hardware platforms and sensor suites. Deployed
models must operate on platforms ranging from wearable
devices to autonomous vehicles in which a diverse suite of
sensors provide a continuous commentary about the environment. Building a traditional machine learning model in this
setting is challenging because jointly measuring data across
all sensors might be infeasible. Likewise, sensor modalities
may be added (or fail) at any time indicating that the tacit
assumption of i.i.d. data may not occur in the real world.

One approach for achieving a flexible and performant representation to a suite of modalities is to have a model to learn
a shared representation invariant to the modality identities
– and subsequently train a discriminative model on top of
that learned representation (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Several approaches for learning a shared representation have
been explored in the literature, but recently, two prominent approaches – masked autoencoders (Gong et al., 2022;
Geng et al., 2022) and contrastive learning (Radford et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2022b) – have demonstrated extraordinary
promise in the setting of multimodal representations (Akbari
et al., 2021). We focus our work on benchmarking robustness in representation learning, and ask how to improve

Hence, properties of robustness across modalities become
paramount when deploying a machine learning system to
operate in a multimodal setting. First, a model should be
able to operate on modalities not explicitly observed during training. For instance, we hope that the presence of
additional modalities with no explicit labels may still bene1
Apple ML Research 2 Work done while at Apple 3 Apple. Correspondence to: Alexander Toshev <toshev@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

