Two-Scale Gradient Descent Ascent Dynamics Finds Mixed Nash Equilibria of
Continuous Games: A Mean-Field Perspective

Yulong Lu 1

Abstract

formalized as a minmax optimization problem of the form
min max K(x, y),

Finding the mixed Nash equilibria (MNE) of a
two-player zero sum continuous game is an important and challenging problem in machine learning.
A canonical algorithm to finding the MNE is the
noisy gradient descent ascent method which in the
infinite particle limit gives rise to the Mean-Field
Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) dynamics on the
space of probability measures. In this paper, we
first study the convergence of a two-scale MeanField GDA dynamics for finding the MNE of the
entropy-regularized objective. More precisely we
show that for each finite temperature (or regularization parameter), the two-scale Mean-Field
GDA with a suitable finite scale ratio converges
exponentially to the unique MNE without assuming the convexity or concavity of the interaction
potential. The key ingredient of our proof lies
in the construction of new Lyapunov functions
that dissipate exponentially along the Mean-Field
GDA. We further study the simulated annealing
of the Mean-Field GDA dynamics. We show that
with a temperature schedule that decays logarithmically in time the annealed Mean-Field GDA
converges to the MNE of the original unregularized objective.

x∈X y∈Y

where the function K is the game objective, x and y represent the player strategies. When K is nonconvex in x or
nonconcave in y, finding the pure Nash (Nash, 1951) equilibria of K is difficult and sometimes impossible since the pure
Nash equilibrium may not even exist. On the other hand, the
mixed Nash equilibria (MNE) (Glicksberg, 1952) where the
pure strategies are replaced by mixed strategies modeled by
a probability distribution over the set of strategies, do exist
for more general objective functions. Formally the mixed
Nash equilibria consist of pairs of probability distributions
µ and ν that solve
min

max E0 (µ, ν), where
Z Z
E0 (µ, ν) :=
K(x, y)µ(dx)ν(dy).
µ∈P(X ) ν∈P(Y)

X

(1)

Y

Here P(X ) and P(Y) denote the space of probability measures (or the set of all mixed strategies) on the state spaces
X and Y respectively. Thanks to Glicksberg’s theorem
(Glicksberg, 1952), a MNE exists if X and Y are finite or
if X and Y are compact and K is continuous. While MNE
exist in much generality, it is still difficult to find them.
Several progress have been made recently for finding MNE
of high dimensional game problems with applications in
GANs. For instance, the work (Hsieh et al., 2019) proposed
a mirror-descent algorithm for finding MNE of (1) and applied the algorithms for Wasserstein GANs with provable
convergence guarantees. The recent work (Domingo-Enrich
et al., 2020; Ma & Ying, 2021) proposed and analyzed an
entropy-regularized version of (1):

1. Introduction
Minmax learning underpins numerous machine learning methods including Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020), adversarial training
(Madry et al., 2018) and reinforcement learning (Busoniu
et al., 2008). Minmax learning is often formulated as a zerosum game between min and max players and hence can be

min

max Eτ (µ, ν), where
Z Z
Eτ (µ, ν) :=
K(x, y)dν(y)dµ(x) − τ H(µ) + τ H(ν).
µ∈P(X ) ν∈P(Y)

1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA . Correspondence to:
Yulong Lu <yulonglu@umass.edu>.

X

Y

(2)
Here H(µ) = − log dµ
dµ
is
the
entropy
functional
of
dx
the probability measure µ, and the parameter τ > 0 is the
entropy regularization parameter(or temperature). Observe
that the objective functional Eτ is strongly convex in µ
R

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

