Calibrating Multimodal Learning

Huan Ma * 1 2 Qingyang Zhang * 1 Changqing Zhang 1 3
Bingzhe Wu 2 Huazhu Fu 4 Joey Tianyi Zhou 4 5 Qinghua Hu 1 3

Abstract

available multimodal cues for further data analysis tasks.
Numerous approaches have been proposed to build multimodal learning paradigms for various tasks (Wang et al.,
2019; Antol et al., 2015; Bagher Zadeh et al., 2018; Kishi
et al., 2019). Despite above progresses, the reliability of
current multimodal learning methods remains largely unexplored. In the setting of classification, one key aspect
of the reliability is to build a high-quality confidence estimator (Moon et al., 2020; Corbière et al., 2019; Guo et al.,
2017), which can quantitatively characterize the probability
that predictions will be correct. With such an estimator,
further processing can be taken to improve the performance
of the system (e.g., human assistance) when the predictive
uncertainty is high. This is especially useful in high-stake
scenarios (Hafner et al., 2019; Qaddoum & Hines, 2012).

Multimodal machine learning has achieved remarkable progress in a wide range of scenarios.
However, the reliability of multimodal learning
remains largely unexplored. In this paper, through
extensive empirical studies, we identify current
multimodal classification methods suffer from unreliable predictive confidence that tend to rely
on partial modalities when estimating confidence.
Specifically, we find that the confidence estimated
by current models could even increase when some
modalities are corrupted. To address the issue, we
introduce an intuitive principle for multimodal
learning, i.e., the confidence should not increase
when one modality is removed. Accordingly, we
propose a novel regularization technique, i.e., Calibrating Multimodal Learning (CML) regularization, to calibrate the predictive confidence of previous methods. This technique could be flexibly equipped by existing models and improve the
performance in terms of confidence calibration,
classification accuracy, and model robustness.

In the setting of multimodal learning, in addition to exact
overall prediction confidence, the relationship between the
confidence and the number of modalities should also be
taken into concerns. Intuitively, the confidence of an ideal
multimodal classifier should not increase when one modality is removed (for brevity, we initialize the question as “one
modality", and the same phenomenon is observed when
removing more than one modality). An illustrative example
of an ideal confidence estimator is shown in Fig. 1, where
the confidence gradually decreases when the observed information becomes less comprehensive. However, we conduct
extensive empirical studies on current methods and observe
that when one modality is removed, the overall confidence
estimated by them can even increase. This observation contradicts the common assumption of multimodal learning
since modalities are assumed to be predictive of the target
for most multimodal learning tasks (Wu et al., 2022) and the
principle “the essence of information is to eliminate uncertainty (Shannon)” in informatics (Soni & Goodman, 2017;
Burgin, 2002). Intuitively, this implies that the models are
more inclined to believe in a unique modality and is prone
to be affected by this modality, which has also been shown
in prior works (Wu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2020). This
further impairs the robustness of the learned models, i.e.,
the models are easy to be influenced when some modalities
are corrupted, since the models can not make decisions according to a trustworthy confidence (probability) estimator.

1. Introduction
Multimodal data widely exist in real-world applications
such as medical analysis (Perrin et al., 2009), social media (Wang et al., 2019), and autonomous driving (Khodayari
et al., 2010). To fully explore the potential value of each
modality, multimodal learning emerges as a promising way
to train a machine learning (ML) model by integrating all
*

Equal contribution 1 College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 2 AI Lab, Tencent, Shenzhen,
China 3 Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
4
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 5 Centre
for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Correspondence to:
Changqing Zhang <zhanchangqing@tju.edu.cn>, Bingzhe Wu
<bingzhewu@tencent.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A natural idea to address the above issue is to employ re1

