Discrete Key-Value Bottleneck

Frederik Träuble 1 Anirudh Goyal 2 Nasim Rahaman 1 3 Michael Mozer 4
Kenji Kawaguchi 5 Yoshua Bengio 3 6 7 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 7

Abstract

1. Introduction

Deep neural networks perform well on classification tasks where data streams are i.i.d. and labeled data is abundant. Challenges emerge with
non-stationary training data streams such as continual learning. One powerful approach that has
addressed this challenge involves pre-training of
large encoders on volumes of readily available
data, followed by task-specific tuning. Given
a new task, however, updating the weights of
these encoders is challenging as a large number
of weights needs to be fine-tuned, and as a result, they forget information about the previous
tasks. In the present work, we propose a model
architecture to address this issue, building upon
a discrete bottleneck containing pairs of separate
and learnable key-value codes. Our paradigm will
be to encode; process the representation via a
discrete bottleneck; and decode. Here, the input
is fed to the pre-trained encoder, the output of
the encoder is used to select the nearest keys, and
the corresponding values are fed to the decoder
to solve the current task. The model can only
fetch and re-use a sparse number of these keyvalue pairs during inference, enabling localized
and context-dependent model updates. We theoretically investigate the ability of the discrete
key-value bottleneck to minimize the effect of
learning under distribution shifts and show that
it reduces the complexity of the hypothesis class.
We empirically verify the proposed method under
challenging class-incremental learning scenarios
and show that the proposed model — without any
task boundaries — reduces catastrophic forgetting across a wide variety of pre-trained models,
outperforming relevant baselines on this task.

Current neural networks achieve state-of-the-art results
across a range of challenging problem domains. Most of
these advances are limited to learning scenarios where the
training data is sampled i.i.d. from some assumed joint distribution P (X, Y ) = P (Y |X)P (X) in the supervised case.
In reality, learning scenarios are often far from i.i.d. and exhibit various distribution shifts; for instance during continual
learning, when the training distribution changes over time.
Despite all successes, the training of deep neural networks
on non-stationary training data streams remains challenging.
For instance, training neural networks without additional
modifications on some small dataset or input distribution
may quickly lead to over-fitting and catastrophic forgetting
of previous knowledge (Chen & Liu, 2018; Thrun, 1995;
Van de Ven & Tolias, 2019). One paradigm that has dominated in recent work is the use of models pre-trained on
large amounts of data e.g. in a self-supervised manner (Chen
et al., 2020; Azizi et al., 2021; Caron et al., 2021; Brown
et al., 2020). These models are then re-purposed for smaller
datasets via either (a) fine-tuning, which may involve changing large numbers of parameters, or (b) introducing a small
number of new parameters to adapt the model (Houlsby
et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2022).
Building upon this pre-training paradigm, we introduce
an approach (see Figure 1 for an overview of the model
architecture) to distil information into a discrete set of code
pairs, each consisting of a coupled key and value code. In
a nutshell, we follow a three-step process: encode, process
via a discrete bottleneck, and decode.
In the first step, an input is fed to the encoder to obtain a
continuous-valued representation that is projected into C
lower-dimensional heads. In the second step, these heads are
used to search for the closest key within head-specific keyvalue codebooks, and corresponding continuously learnable
value codes taken from a discrete set are fetched. In the third
step, these value codes are passed through a downstream
decoder to produce the final output. By freezing all components except for the value codes, the model can continue to
improve its performance locally on input-dependent value
codes without affecting the prediction and key-value pairs
of prior training samples.

1
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 Google DeepMind
Mila 4 Google Research, Brain Team 5 National University of Singapore 6 Université de Montréal 7 CIFAR Fellow. Correspondence
to: Frederik Träuble <frederik.traeuble@tuebingen.mpg.de>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

