Structure Learning of Latent Factors via
Clique Search on Correlation Thresholded Graphs

Dale S. Kim 1 Qing Zhou 1

Abstract

that the number of latent factors is less than the number of
observed variables, hence serving as a dimension reduction
procedure in this sense.

Despite the widespread application of latent factor
analysis, existing methods suffer from the following weaknesses: requiring the number of factors
to be known, lack of theoretical guarantees for
learning the model structure, and nonidentifiability of the parameters due to rotation invariance
properties of the likelihood. We address these
concerns by proposing a fast correlation thresholding (CT) algorithm that simultaneously learns
the number of latent factors and a rotationally
identifiable model structure. Our novel approach
translates this structure learning problem into the
search for so-called independent maximal cliques
in a thresholded correlation graph that can be easily constructed from the observed data. Our clique
analysis technique scales well up to thousands of
variables, while competing methods are not applicable in a reasonable amount of running time.
We establish a finite-sample error bound and highdimensional consistency for the structure learning
of our method. Through a series of simulation
studies and a real data example, we show that
the CT algorithm is an accurate method for learning the structure of factor analysis models and is
robust to violations of its assumptions.

To learn the parameters of factor analysis models, three
problems must be addressed: (1) the number of latent factors
must be determined, (2) the support of the coefficients must
be found, and (3) a unique solution must be determined
from rotationally equivalent parameters. Prior work on
learning factor analysis models typically use a constraintbased or a score-based approach. Constraint-based methods
involve analyzing permutations of correlations and partial
correlations among the observed variables for constraints
that would be implied by potential models (Scheines et al.,
1998; Silva et al., 2006). However, we note that the focus
of these algorithms is to construct equivalence classes of
possible models and can be computationally demanding. In
contrast, our goal is to develop efficient methods for learning
and estimating a single model output in this work.
Score-based methods are generally more amenable to single
model outputs. Traditional Exploratory Factor Analysis
(EFA) typically maximizes the likelihood, restricting the
latent factors to be orthogonal. An oblique factor solution
can be extracted by rotating the orthogonal solution, subject
to the model constraints. There are numerous procedures
for such rotations, which typically yield different solutions
(for a review of such methods see Browne, 2001). After
rotation, additional structure may be learned by setting small
elements of Λ to zero if they are below an ad-hoc threshold
(Ford et al., 1986; Howard, 2016). The major criticisms
of EFA are the subjective use of these rotation criteria and
thresholding steps, and requiring the number of latent factors
to be known a priori.

1. Introduction
Factor analysis is a commonly used multivariate technique
which conceptualizes observed variables as a function of
unobserved latent factors. Methods and discussions have appeared in a variety of fields, particularly the social sciences,
such as psychology (Reise et al., 2000), sociology (Werts
et al., 1973), education (Schreiber et al., 2006), and epidemiology (Martı́nez et al., 1998). It is generally assumed

As a potential solution to these problems in EFA, penalized
methods also have been developed. Most relevant to oblique
factor analysis models are adding LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996)
and MCP (Zhang, 2010) penalties to the likelihood, which
were developed by Hirose and Yamamoto (2014b). Instead
of rotating factor coefficients after maximizing the likelihood, penalized EFA can achieve sparse solutions by directly maximizing a penalized likelihood. This requires
the use of tuning parameters, followed by model selection
with the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) or cross-

1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of California, Los Angeles, United States. Correspondence to: Qing Zhou
<zhou@stat.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

