TIPS: Topologically Important Path Sampling for Anytime Neural Networks

Guihong Li 1 Kartikeya Bhardwaj 2 Yuedong Yang 1 Radu Marculescu 1

Abstract

2023). We note that all these techniques focus on generating
static neural architectures that can achieve high accuracy
under specific hardware constraints.

Anytime neural networks (AnytimeNNs) are a
promising solution to adaptively adjust the model
complexity at runtime under various hardware
resource constraints. However, the manuallydesigned AnytimeNNs are biased by designers’
prior experience and thus provide sub-optimal
solutions. To address the limitations of existing
hand-crafted approaches, we first model the training process of AnytimeNNs as a discrete-time
Markov chain (DTMC) and use it to identify the
paths that contribute the most to the training of
AnytimeNNs. Based on this new DTMC-based
analysis, we further propose TIPS, a framework
to automatically design AnytimeNNs under various hardware constraints. Our experimental results show that TIPS can improve the convergence
rate and test accuracy of AnytimeNNs. Compared to the existing AnytimeNNs approaches,
TIPS improves the accuracy by 2%-6.6% on multiple datasets and achieves SOTA accuracy-FLOPs
tradeoffs.

Recently, anytime neural networks (AnytimeNNs) have
been proposed as an orthogonal direction to static neural
networks (Huang et al., 2018; Yu & Huang, 2019a; Bengio
et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). AnytimeNNs adjust the model size at runtime by selecting subnetworks from a static supernet (Chen et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019; Yu & Huang, 2019a;b; Yu et al., 2019). Compared to
the static techniques, AnytimeNNs can automatically adapt
(at runtime) the model complexity based on the available
hardware resources. However, the existing AnytimeNNs
are manually designed by selecting a few candidate subnetworks. Hence, such hand-crafted AnytimeNNs are likely
to miss the subnetworks that can offer better performance.
These limitations of existing manual design approaches motivate us to analyze the properties of AnytimeNNs and then
provide a new algorithmic solution. Specifically, in this
work, we address two key questions:
1. How can we quantify the importance of various operations (e.g., convolutions, residual additions, etc.) to
the convergence rate and accuracy of AnytimeNNs?

1. Introduction

2. Are there topological (i.e., related to network structure)
properties that can help us design better AnytimeNNs?

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successful in many areas, such as computer vision or natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021). However, the intensive computational requirements
of existing large models limit their deployment on resourceconstrained devices for Internet-of-Things (IoT) and edge
applications. To improve the hardware efficiency of DNNs,
multiple techniques have been proposed, such as quantization (Qin et al., 2020; Han et al., 2016), pruning (Luo et al.,
2017; Han et al., 2015), knowledge distillation (Hinton et al.,
2015), and neural architecture search (NAS) (Zoph & Le,
2017; Liu et al., 2019; Stamoulis et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020;

To answer these questions, we analyze the AnytimeNNs
from a graph theory perspective. This idea is motivated
by the observation that the topological features of DNNs
can accurately indicate their gradient propagation properties and test performance (Bhardwaj et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2021b). Inspired by the network structure analysis,
given an AnytimeNN, we propose a Discrete-Time Markov
Chain (DTMC)-based framework to explore the relationships among different subnetworks. We then propose two
new topological metrics, namely Topological Accumulated
Score (TAS) and Topological Path Score (TPS) to analyze
the gradient properties of AnytimeNNs. Based on these two
metrics, we finally propose a new training method, i.e., Topologically Important Path Sampling (TIPS), to improve the
convergence rate and test performance of AnytimeNNs. The
experimental results show that our proposed approach outperforms SOTA approaches by a significant margin across

1
Department of ECE, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 2 Qualcomm AI Research, San Deigo, CA; work done while
Kartikeya Bhardwaj was at Arm, Inc. Correspondence to: Radu
Marculescu <radum@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

