Predictive Flows for Faster Ford-Fulkerson
Sami Davies * 1 Benjamin Moseley * 2 Sergei Vassilvitskii * 3 Yuyan Wang * 3

Abstract

When flow algorithms are deployed in practice, they are
often used to solve several problem instances arising naturally over time. However, the theoretical analysis, as well
as many implementations, considers solving each new problem from scratch to derive worst-case guarantees. This
approach needlessly discards information that may exist
between instances. We are interested in discovering whether
flow problems can be solved more efficiently by leveraging
information from past examples. Seeding an algorithm from
a non-trivial starting point is referred to as a warm-start.

Recent work has shown that leveraging learned
predictions can improve the running time of algorithms for bipartite matching and similar combinatorial problems. In this work, we build on this idea
to improve the performance of the widely used
Ford-Fulkerson algorithm for computing maximum flows by seeding Ford-Fulkerson with predicted flows. Our proposed method offers strong
theoretical performance in terms of the quality of
the prediction. We then consider image segmentation, a common use-case of flows in computer
vision, and complement our theoretical analysis
with strong empirical results.

We are motivated by the question: can one warm-start
Ford-Fulkerson to improve theoretical and empirical performance? Towards this goal, we leverage the recently developed algorithms with predictions framework (a.k.a learningaugmented algorithms). Research over the past several years
has showcased the power of augmenting an algorithm with a
learned prediction, leading to improvements in caching (Im
et al., 2022; Lindermayr and Megow, 2022; Lykouris and
Vassilvitskii, 2021), scheduling (Im et al., 2021a; Lattanzi
et al., 2020), clustering (Lattanzi et al., 2021), matching
(Chen et al., 2022a; Dinitz et al., 2021), and more (see the
survey by Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii (2022)). An algorithm is learning-augmented if it can use a prediction that
relays information about the problem instance. Most prior
work uses predictions to overcome uncertainty in the online
setting. However, recent work by Dinitz et al. (2021)—and
the follow-up work by Chen et al. (2022a)—instead focuses
on improving the run-time of bipartite matching algorithms
by predicting the dual variables and using these to warmstart the primal-dual algorithm.

1. Introduction
The Ford-Fulkerson method is one of the most ubiquitous in
combinatorial optimization, both in theory and in practice.
While it was first developed for solving the maximum flow
problem, many problems in scheduling (Ahuja et al., 1993),
computer vision (Vineet and Narayanan, 2008), resource
allocation, matroid intersection (Im et al., 2021b), and other
areas are solvable by finding a reduction to a flow problem.
Theoretically, max flow algorithms exist that are asymptotically much faster than the original Ford-Fulkerson formulation, most recently the near-linear time algorithm of Chen
et al. (2022b). However—as often happens—algorithms
with great theoretical guarantees might be difficult to implement in practice. Indeed, algorithms used in practice
still leave room for improvement. In fact, for computing
max flows in networks, practitioners often stick to older
algorithms such as Dinic’s algorithm (Bhadra et al., 2020),
push-relabel (Cherkassky and Goldberg, 1997), pseudoflow
(Chandran and Hochbaum, 2009), or these algorithms layered with heuristics to fit particular settings.

Motivated by the idea of warm-starting combinatorial optimization algorithms, we seek to provide faster run-time
guarantees for flow problems via warm-start. The paper
will focus on flow problems generally, but will additionally
showcase a common, practical use-case in computer vision:
image segmentation. In the image segmentation problem,
the input is an image containing an object/ foreground, and
the goal is to locate the foreground in the image.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston IL, USA 2 Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA 3 Google
Research, NYC NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yuyan Wang
<wangyy@google.com>.

1.1. Our contributions
For a graph G = (V, E) equipped with a capacity vector
|E|
c ∈ Z≥0 , let f be a flow on G, where fe is the flow value
on each edge e ∈ E. Let F ∗ be the collection of all feasible,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

