Tractable Control for Autoregressive Language Generation

Honghua Zhang * 1 Meihua Dang * 1 Nanyun Peng 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract

Lexical Constraint α: sentence contains keyword “winter”

Despite the success of autoregressive large language models in text generation, it remains a major challenge to generate text that satisfies complex constraints: sampling from the conditional
distribution Pr(text | α) is intractable for even the
simplest lexical constraints α. To overcome this
challenge, we propose to use tractable probabilistic models (TPMs) to impose lexical constraints
in autoregressive text generation models, which
we refer to as GeLaTo (Generating Language
with Tractable Constraints). To demonstrate the
effectiveness of this framework, we use distilled
hidden Markov models, where we can efficiently
compute Pr(text | α), to guide autoregressive generation from GPT2. GeLaTo achieves state-of-theart performance on challenging benchmarks for
constrained text generation (e.g., CommonGen),
beating various strong baselines by a large margin.
Our work not only opens up new avenues for controlling large language models but also motivates
the development of more expressive TPMs.

Constrained Generation: Pr(xt+1 | α, x1:t = "the weather is")
intractable
Pre-trained
Language Model

Tractable
Probabilistic Model

Minimize KL-divergence

xt+1

PrLM(xt+1 | x1:t)

xt+1

PrTPM(α | xt+1, x1:t)

cold

0.05

cold

0.50

warm

0.10

warm

0.01

xt+1

p(xt+1 | α, x1:t)

cold

0.025

warm

0.001

Figure 1. Given some lexical constraint α that we want our pretrained language models to follow in generation, the conditional
distribution Pr(xt+1 | x1:t , α) is often intractable. We propose
to control and guide the autoregressive generation process of pretrained LMs via tractable probabilistic models, which do support
efficient computation of Pr(xt+1 | x1:t , α).

1. Introduction

pre-trained LMs is to either finetune them on task-specific
datasets or to condition them on certain prompts. However,
fine-tuning and prompting are by nature approximate solutions and do not guarantee that the desired constraints are
satisfied (Meng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). The major
difficulty of constrained language generation lies in the autoregressive nature of LMs: they only model the next token
distribution given some prefix PrLM (xt+1 | x1:t ), while the
conditional distribution PrLM (x1:n | α) given a constraint
α as simple as, e.g., a keyword appearing at the end of a
sentence, is often intractable (Roth, 1996).

Large pre-trained language models (LMs) (Radford et al.,
2019; Lewis et al., 2020) have achieved remarkable performance on a wide range of challenging language generation
tasks such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015;
Luong et al., 2015), summarization (Liu et al., 2015; Xu &
Durrett, 2019) and open-domain creative generation (Yao
et al., 2019; Tian & Peng, 2022). Nevertheless, many practical language generation applications require fine-grained
control of LMs to follow complex lexical constraints (e.g.,
given a source document, generate a summary that contains
certain keywords). The common paradigm for controlling
*

efficient

Aside from language models based on neural architectures,
one line of research in machine learning focuses on the development of tractable probabilistic models (TPMs) (Poon
& Domingos, 2011; Kulesza & Taskar, 2012; Choi et al.,
2020b; Zhang et al., 2021). TPMs model joint probability
distributions and allow for efficient conditioning on various families of logical constraints (Kisa et al., 2014; Choi
et al., 2015; Bekker et al., 2015). In this paper, we propose
GeLaTo (Generating Language with Tractable Constraints),

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to:
Honghua Zhang <hzhang19@cs.ucla.edu>, Meihua Dang <mhdang@cs.ucla.edu>, Nanyun Peng <violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu>,
Guy Van den Broeck <guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

