Spatial Implicit Neural Representations for Global-Scale Species Mapping

Elijah Cole 1 Grant Van Horn 2 Christian Lange 3 Alexander Shepard 4 Patrick Leary 4 Pietro Perona 1
Scott Loarie 4 Oisin Mac Aodha 3

Abstract

small number of species in limited areas, many of which are
already out of date by the time they are released.

Estimating the geographical range of a species
from sparse observations is a challenging and important geospatial prediction problem. Given a set
of locations where a species has been observed,
the goal is to build a model to predict whether
the species is present or absent at any location.
This problem has a long history in ecology, but
traditional methods struggle to take advantage
of emerging large-scale crowdsourced datasets
which can include tens of millions of records
for hundreds of thousands of species. In this
work, we use Spatial Implicit Neural Representations (SINRs) to jointly estimate the geographical
range of 47k species simultaneously. We find that
our approach scales gracefully, making increasingly better predictions as we increase the number
of species and the amount of data per species
when training. To make this problem accessible to machine learning researchers, we provide
four new benchmarks that measure different aspects of species range estimation and spatial representation learning. Using these benchmarks, we
demonstrate that noisy and biased crowdsourced
data can be combined with implicit neural representations to approximate expert-developed range
maps for many species.

The range of a species is typically estimated through Species
Distribution Modeling (SDM) (Elith & Leathwick, 2009),
the process of using species observation records to develop a
statistical model for predicting whether a species is present
or absent at any location. With enough presence-absence
data (i.e. records of where a species has been confirmed to
be present and absent) this problem can be approached using
standard statistical learning methods (Beery et al., 2021).1
However, presence-absence data is scarce due to the difficulty of verifying that a species is truly absent from an area.
Presence-only data (i.e. verified observation locations, with
no confirmed absences) is much more abundant as it is easier to collect. For instance, the community science platform
iNaturalist (iNa) has collected over 141M presence-only
observations to date across 429k species. Though presenceonly data is not without drawbacks (Hastie & Fithian, 2013),
it is important to develop methods that can take advantage
of this vast supply of data.
Deep learning is one of our best tools for making use of
large-scale datasets. Deep neural networks also have a key
advantage over many existing SDM methods because they
can jointly learn the distribution of many species in the same
model (Chen et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2018; Mac Aodha
et al., 2019). By learning representations that share information across species, the models can make improved
predictions (Chen et al., 2017). However, the majority of
current deep learning approaches need presence-absence
data for training, which prevents them from scaling beyond
the small number of species and regions for which sufficient
presence-absence data is available.

1. Introduction
We are currently observing a dramatic decline in global biodiversity, which has severe ramifications for natural resource
management, food security, and ecosystem services that are
crucial to human health (Watson et al., 2019; Rosenberg
et al., 2019). In order to take effective conservation action
we must understand species’ ranges, i.e. where they live.
However, we only have estimated ranges for a relatively

Our work makes the following contributions:
(i) We show that implicit neural representations trained with
noisy crowdsourced presence-only data can be used to estimate dense species’ ranges. We call these models Spatial
Implicit Neural Representations (SINRs).2
1

The term “presence-absence” should not be taken to convey
absolute certainty about whether a species is present or absent.
False absences (i.e. non-detections) and, to a lesser extent, false
presences are a serious concern in SDM (MacKenzie et al., 2002).
2
We slightly abuse the terminology by using “SINR” to refer
to both the model and the representation it parameterizes.

1

Caltech 2 Cornell 3 University of Edinburgh 4 iNaturalist. Correspondence to: Elijah Cole <ecole@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

