Structured Cooperative Learning with Graphical Model Priors

Shuangtong Li 1 Tianyi Zhou 2 Xinmei Tian 1 3 Dacheng Tao 4

Abstract

Graphical Model Prior P(Y)
Cooperation
Graph

We study how to train personalized models for different tasks on decentralized devices with limited
local data. We propose “Structured Cooperative
Learning (SCooL)”, in which a cooperation graph
across devices is generated by a graphical model
prior to automatically coordinate mutual learning
between devices. By choosing graphical models
enforcing different structures, we can derive a rich
class of existing and novel decentralized learning
algorithms via variational inference. In particular,
we show three instantiations of SCooL that adopt
Dirac distribution, stochastic block model (SBM),
and attention as the prior generating cooperation
graphs. These EM-type algorithms alternate between updating the cooperation graph and cooperative learning of local models. They can automatically capture the cross-task correlations among
devices by only monitoring their model updating
in order to optimize the cooperation graph. We
evaluate SCooL and compare it with existing decentralized learning methods on an extensive set
of benchmarks, on which SCooL always achieves
the highest accuracy of personalized models and
significantly outperforms other baselines on communication efficiency. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ShuangtongLi/SCooL.

Yij
K×K

case 1.2

Ɵi

case 2.1

case 2.2

Prior P(Ɵi )

Yij

Ɵj

Di: cat vs. tiger
Dj: wolf vs. dog

Clients

Ɵi
Di

K

Figure 1. SCooL framework. Left: SCooL optimizes a K × K
cooperation graph Y together with K personalized models θ1:K
for K tasks, which transfer knowledge across the K clients via
decentralized learning. Right: SCooL’s probabilistic model. Y
is generated from a graphical model prior while θi or data Di per
client is generated based on Y . We discuss configurations (cases
in Section 3.2) of the probabilistic model and derive EM-type
algorithms (Section 3.3) that alternately updates Y and θ1:K .

and thus has to cooperate with others by sharing knowledge,
i.e., through cooperative learning. However, it is usually
difficult for a client in the decentralized learning setting to
decide when to cooperate with which clients in order to
achieve the greatest improvement on its own task, especially
when the personal tasks and local data cannot be shared
across clients. Moreover, frequently communicating with
all other clients is usually inefficient or infeasible. Hence,
it is critical to find a sparse cooperation graph only relating
clients whose cooperative learning is able to bring critical
improvement to their personalization performance. Since
the local models are kept being updated, it is also necessary to accordingly adjust the graph to be adaptive to such
changes in the training process.

1. Introduction
Decentralized learning of personalized models (DLPM) is
an emerging problem in a broad range of applications, in
which multiple clients target different yet relevant tasks but
no central server is available to coordinate or align their
learning. A practical challenge is that each single client may
not have sufficient data to train a model for its own task

Structural learning of a cooperation graph on the fly with decentralized learning of local models is an open challenge and
can be prone to high variance caused by client heterogeneity
and local data deficiency. Inspired Bayesian methods and
their priors, we propose “Structured Cooperative Learning
(SCooL)”. SCooL applies a probabilistic graphical model
(PGM) as a structured prior enforcing certain structures
such as clusters when generating the cooperation graph. By
combining such a graphical model prior with the expressive
power of neural networks on learning local tasks, we are
able to develop a general framework for DLPM, from which

1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 University
of Maryland, College Park 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 4 The University of
Sydney. Correspondence to: Tianyi Zhou <tianyi@umd.edu>,
Xinmei Tian <xinmei@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

