Streaming Active Learning with Deep Neural Networks

Akanksha Saran 1 Safoora Yousefi 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 1 John Langford 1 Jordan T. Ash 1

Abstract

pense associated with fitting these neural architectures —
when used in conjunction with a sequentially growing training set, as one has in active learning, the model cannot be
initialized from the previous round of optimization without
damaging generalization performance. Instead, practitioners typically re-initialize model parameters each time new
data are acquired and train the model from scratch (Ash &
Adams, 2020). This structure has repositioned active learning to focus on the batch domain, where we are interested
in simultaneously labeling a batch of k samples to be integrated into the training set. The model is typically retrained
only after the entire batch has been labeled.

Active learning is perhaps most naturally posed as
an online learning problem. However, prior active
learning approaches with deep neural networks
assume offline access to the entire dataset ahead
of time. This paper proposes VeSSAL, a new algorithm for batch active learning with deep neural
networks in streaming settings, which samples
groups of points to query for labels at the moment they are encountered. Our approach trades
off between uncertainty and diversity of queried
samples to match a desired query rate without
requiring any hand-tuned hyperparameters. Altogether, we expand the applicability of deep neural networks to realistic active learning scenarios,
such as applications relevant to HCI and large,
fractured datasets.

In the convex case, where a model can easily be updated
to accommodate for a single sample, active learning algorithms have tended to focus on uncertainty or sensitivity.
That is, a label for a given sample should be requested if
the model is highly uncertain about its corresponding label, or if incorporating this sample into the training set
will greatly reduce the set of plausible model weights. In
contrast, a high-performing, batch-mode active learning algorithm must also consider diversity. If two samples are
relatively similar to each other, it is inefficient to include
them both in the batch, regardless of the model’s uncertainty
about their labels; having only one such sample labeled and
integrated into the current hypothesis may be enough to
resolve the model’s uncertainty on the other.

1. Introduction
Active learning considers a supervised learning situation
where unlabeled data are abundant, but acquiring labels is
expensive (Settles, 2010; Dasgupta, 2011). One example
of this might be classifying underlying disorders from histological images, where obtaining labels involves querying
medical experts. Another might be predicting drug efficacy, where labels corresponding to candidate molecules
could require clinical trials or intensive computational experiments. In these settings, we typically want to carefully
consider what samples to request labels for, and to obtain
labels for data that are maximally useful for progressing the
performance of the model.

Popular approaches for batch active learning rely on samplers that require all unlabeled data to be simultaneously
available. This reliance poses several major concerns for
the deployment of these algorithms. For one, the run time
of these methods is conditioned on the number of unlabeled
samples in a way that makes them unusable for extremely
large datasets. To exacerbate the issue, it is unclear how to
deploy these algorithms on modern databases, where samples might be stored in a fractured manner and cannot easily
be made available in their entirety.

Active learning is a classic problem in machine learning,
with traditional approaches typically considering the convex
and well-specified regime (Settles, 2010; Dasgupta, 2011;
Hanneke, 2014a). Much recent interest in active learning
has turned to the neural network case, which requires some
special considerations. One such consideration is the ex-

It is especially unclear how to perform active learning in
a streaming setting, where data are not all simultaneously
available, and we do not know how many samples will
be encountered. Here we might instead prefer to specify
an acceptable labeling rate rather than a fixed acceptable
batch size. In this streaming setup, it is further desirable to
commit to a decision about whether to include an unlabeled

1
Microsoft Research NYC 2 Microsoft Bing. Correspondence
to: Akanksha Saran <akankshasaran@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

