Learning Distributions over Quantum Measurement Outcomes

Weiyuan Gong 1 Scott Aaronson 2
Ω(d2 ) copies of ρ from the information-theoretical perspective (Haah et al., 2017; O’Donnell & Wright, 2016; Chen
et al., 2022b). These state tomography procedures have been
pushed to the limit of their capabilities after the recent advances in experimental quantum platforms (Preskill, 2018),
recalling that the dimension of the quantum state d = 2n
increases exponentially in the number of qubits.

Abstract
Shadow tomography for quantum states provides
a sample efficient approach for predicting the measurement outcomes of quantum systems. However, these shadow tomography procedures yield
poor bounds if there are more than two outcomes
per measurement. In this paper, we consider
a general problem of learning properties from
quantum states: given an unknown d-dimensional
quantum state ρ and M unknown quantum measurements M1 , ..., MM with K ≥ 2 outcomes,
estimating the probability distribution for applying Mi on ρ to within total variation distance ϵ. Compared to the special case when
K = 2, we have to learn unknown distributions instead of values. Here, we propose an online shadow tomography procedure that solves
this problem with high success probability requiring Õ(K log2 M log d/ϵ4 ) copies of ρ. We further prove an information-theoretic lower bound
showing that at least Ω(min{d2 , K + log M }/ϵ2 )
copies of ρ are required to solve this problem with
high success probability. Our shadow tomography procedure requires sample complexity with
only logarithmic dependence on M and d and is
sample-optimal concerning the dependence on K.

However, demanding full descriptions of quantum states
may be excessive for concrete quantum problems. Following this conceptual different line of research, the quantum shadow tomography problem developed by (Aaronson,
2019; 2007) considers the case when we are given an unknown d-dimensional quantum state and M known quantum
events regarded as a two-outcome quantum measurement
that outputs 1 (or “accept”) with probability Tr(Ei ρ) and
outputs 0 (or “reject”) otherwise. The goal is to estimate
each expectation Eρ [Ei ] = Tr(Ei ρ) to within additive error
±ϵ. This shadow tomography problem for two-outcome
POVMs is a quantum analog of the classical adaptive data
analysis (Dwork et al., 2015; 2010), which can be solved
with poly(log M, log d, 1/ϵ) samples (Bassily et al., 2021).
Recently, (Bădescu & O’Donnell, 2021) proved the best
known upper bound on sample complexity for this problem
as N = Õ(log2 M log d/ϵ4 ).

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Weiyuan Gong
<wygong8@gmail.com>.

In quantum mechanics, the prediction of some intriguing
properties requires quantum measurements with K > 2
measurement outcomes. In addition, in practical tasks, many
quantum properties are represented by the expectation values of quantum observables, which are obtained by computing the probability distribution of each measurement
outcome and averaging the eigenvalue corresponding to the
outcome. In this case, the measurement M outputs results
j = 1, ..., K with probability Eρ [Ej ] = Tr(Ej ρ), which
are
PKexpectations of quantum events E1 , ..., EK that satisfy
j=1 Ej = I. Our goal is to approximate the probability
distribution over the outcomes of M within total variation
distance ϵ. Recalling that K can be as large as Θ(d) in the
extreme case, it is an important factor to concern in practical
shadow tomography. In this paper, we study the shadow tomography problem of K-outcome quantum measurements,
which can be formulated as follows

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Problem 1.1 (Shadow Tomography of K-outcome Measurements). We consider an unknown d-dimensional quantum
state, as well as M quantum measurements M1 , ..., MM ,

1. Introduction
The statistical learning theory problem of extracting information based on empirical observations is of fundamental
importance in a number of fields. In quantum physics, a fundamental problem is to obtain the properties of a quantum
system based on statistical results from quantum measurements. A general method to obtain the full information of
an unknown d-dimensional quantum state ρ, called quantum state tomography, completely recovers the density matrix to within a small error. This task is proved to require
1

1

