Learning Controllable Degradation
for Real-World Super-Resolution via Constrained Flows

Seobin Park * 1 Dongjin Kim * 2 Sungyong Baik 3 Tae Hyun Kim 2

Abstract

eral image restoration tasks, such as image super-resolution
(SR) (Dong et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2018a) and image
denoising (Zhang et al., 2017). The datasets used in these
restoration tasks consist of pairs of low- and high-quality images, and they are used to learn a complex mapping between
the low-quality image and the corresponding high-quality
image. In general, these datasets are produced by assuming simple degradation models, such as bicubic downsampling (Agustsson & Timofte, 2017) and additive Gaussian
noise (Zhang et al., 2017). However, deep SR networks
trained with these synthetic datasets struggle with mapping the real-world low-resolution (LR) photos to its highresolution (HR) counterparts due to discrepancies between
the distributions of synthetic train images and real-world
test images (i.e., domain misalignment) (Cai et al., 2019).
As a result, several studies have been conducted to generate
new SR datasets that enable the SR networks to handle realworld LR images rather than synthetic LR images created
by bicubic downsampling.

Recent deep-learning-based super-resolution (SR)
methods have been successful in recovering highresolution (HR) images from their low-resolution
(LR) counterparts, albeit on the synthetic and simple degradation setting: bicubic downscaling. On
the other hand, super-resolution on real-world images demands the capability to handle complex
downscaling mechanism which produces different artifacts (e.g., noise, blur, color distortion)
upon downscaling factors. To account for complex downscaling mechanism in real-world LR
images, there have been a few efforts in constructing datasets consisting of LR images with realworld downsampling degradation. However, making such datasets entails a tremendous amount of
time and effort, thereby resorting to very few number of downscaling factors (e.g., ×2, ×3, ×4). To
remedy the issue, we propose to generate realistic SR datasets for unseen degradation levels by
exploring the latent space of real LR images and
thereby producing more diverse yet realistic LR
images with complex real-world artifacts. Our
quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate the accuracy of the generated LR images,
and we show that the various conventional SR
networks trained with our newly generated SR
datasets can produce much better HR images.

Recently, a few works have been proposed to simulate complex real-world degradation, attempting to produce more
realistic SR datasets (Xiao et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2020; Wolf
et al., 2021). In particular, RealSR dataset proposed in (Cai
et al., 2019) includes the image pairs of real LR and HR photos of the same scene taken by changing the focal lengths of
a DSLR camera. For a given scene, an image captured with
a longer focal length (e.g., 105mm) serves as an HR image,
while an image captured with a shorter focal length (e.g.,
35mm) serves as an LR image. Then, an LR-HR image pair
of the given scene (e.g., ×3 degradation level or scale factor) is created by using a pixel-wise alignment process with
image registration algorithm (Cai et al., 2019). The dataset
construction process is, however, time-consuming and burdensome, which makes it almost infeasible to create LR-HR
pairs by continuously changing the degradation level. Thus,
RealSR dataset is only composed of images with very few
number of SR degradation levels (e.g., ×2, ×3, ×4), which
severely restricts the practical usage in training the SR networks for real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Recent studies on deep learning methodologies and large
train datasets remarkably improved the performance of sev*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University,
Seoul, Korea 3 Department of Data Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Tae Hyun Kim <taehyunkim@hanyang.ac.kr>.

Therefore, we propose to develop a method that can synthesize realistic LR images that are not available in conventional real-world SR datasets by controlling the degradation

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

