Cramming: Training a Language Model on a Single GPU in One Day

Jonas Geiping 1 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract

ford et al., 2019). The nowadays accepted (but historically
surprising) key behavior of these systems is that they reliably scale – they continuously improve in performance
when the number of model parameters and amount of data
grow. These increases in performance are well-described by
various power laws as studied by Kaplan et al. (2020). This
sets up a dominant paradigm in which scaling is the key to
performance improvement (Sutton, 2019).

Recent trends in language modeling have focused
on increasing performance through scaling, and
have resulted in an environment where training
language models is out of reach for most researchers and practitioners. While most in the
community are asking how to push the limits of
extreme computation, we ask the opposite question: How far can we get with a single GPU in
just one day?

The power of scale has set off a race to produce extremely
large models, which in turn has created an environment
where few researchers or practitioners feel that they are
capable of training a language model. The original BERT
model Devlin et al. (2019), which became a cornerstone
transformer for many practical applications in natural language understanding, already required a significant amount
of computation to train. Yet, the reproduction and improvements in Liu et al. (2019) further increased its performance
by cranking up the level of computation by orders of magnitude. As these pre-trained checkpoints became popular
for a range of downstream applications (Wolf et al., 2020),
the competition for the largest language model became a
focal point for industrial labs. This led to training runs that
improved the performance of pretrained language models at
the expense of computation at the zettaFLOP scale (Raffel
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2021) and later
at the extremely large yottaFLOP scale (Brown et al., 2020;
Black et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Rae et al., 2022).

We investigate the downstream performance
achievable with a transformer-based language
model trained completely from scratch with
masked language modeling for a single day on a
single consumer GPU. Aside from re-analyzing
nearly all components of the pretraining pipeline
for this scenario and providing a modified pipeline
with performance close to BERT, we investigate
why scaling down is hard, and which modifications actually improve performance in this scenario. We provide evidence that even in this
constrained setting, performance closely follows
scaling laws observed in large-compute settings.
Through the lens of scaling laws, we categorize
a range of recent improvements to training and
architecture and discuss their merit and practical applicability (or lack thereof) for the limited
compute setting.

Our goal is to turn this trend on its head and investigate how
to best scale down language model training and what tradeoffs emerge when doing so: What downstream performance
can be achieved by a modest researcher when training from
scratch with a single GPU for a single day? The ability to
train a language model to the performance level of BERT
with such modest resources has several interesting implications. For one, if scaled-down model pretraining is a viable
analogue of large-compute pretraining, then this opens up
a host of further academic investigations that are currently
hard to realize for large-scale models. For example, research
questions about the differences between existing and new
pre-training tasks, tracing model predictions to data points
(Ilyas et al., 2022), security questions such as membership
inference (Carlini et al., 2022) and data poisoning (Geiping
et al., 2021), and a wide range of empirical investigations
into topics such as stability or generalization that arise

We provide code to reproduce all experiments at
github.com/JonasGeiping/cramming.

1. Scaling Up and Scaling Down
Large-scale training of machine learning models with transformer architectures has lead to ground-breaking improvements in many sub-fields of natural language processing
including language understanding and natural language generation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Rad1
Dep. of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College
Park. Correspondence to: Jonas Geiping <jgeiping@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

