The Acquisition of Physical Knowledge
in Generative Neural Networks
Luca M. Schulze Buschoff 1 Eric Schulz 1 Marcel Binz 1

Abstract

their cognitive development (see Figure 1A for an example).
It, therefore, serves as an ideal testbed for our investigation.

As children grow older, they develop an intuitive
understanding of the physical processes around
them. Their physical understanding develops in
stages, moving along developmental trajectories
which have been mapped out extensively in previous empirical research. Here, we investigate
how the learning trajectories of deep generative
neural networks compare to children’s developmental trajectories using physical understanding
as a testbed. We outline an approach that allows
us to examine two distinct hypotheses of human
development – stochastic optimization and complexity increase. We find that while our models
are able to accurately predict a number of physical processes, their learning trajectories under
both hypotheses do not follow the developmental
trajectories of children.

In the present paper, we set out to formalize and test two
distinct hypotheses of children’s development. The first is
the idea of development as stochastic optimization, which
argues that cognitive development results from some form
of stochastic optimization procedure (Gopnik et al., 2017;
Ullman & Tenenbaum, 2020; Giron et al., 2022; Wolff,
1987). The second is the idea of development as complexity
increase, which instead stipulates that the knowledge structures involved in human reasoning become more complex
over time (Baillargeon, 2002; Binz & Endres, 2019).
First, we show how both hypotheses can be instantiated
in a β-variational autoencoder (β-VAE) framework. We
then probe models with different degrees of complexity and
optimization on physical reasoning tasks using violationof-expectation (VOE) methods (Piloto et al., 2018; Smith
et al., 2019). Finally, we compare the learning trajectories
of these artificial systems to the developmental trajectories
of children.
We find that even fairly generic deep generative neural networks acquire many physical concepts. However, the order
in which they acquire these concepts under both hypotheses
does not align well with the acquisition order of children –
neither hypothesis fully captures the learning trajectories of
children. Thus, we conclude that the investigated models
do not acquire their knowledge in accordance with Turing’s
proposal.

1. Introduction
More than 70 years ago, Turing (1950) famously suggested
that “instead of trying to produce a programme to simulate
the adult mind, why not rather try to produce one which
simulates the child’s? If this were then subjected to an
appropriate course of education one would obtain the adult
brain.” If we want to take Turing’s proposal seriously, we
have to ask ourselves: how do children learn?

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 surveys previous literature on models of human-like physical knowledge and developmental trajectories. In Section 3,
we illustrate how to instantiate the development as stochastic optimization and development as complexity increase
hypotheses in the β-VAE framework. We then apply these
models to different physical reasoning domains in Section
4. Section 5 concludes this report with a general discussion
of our findings.

Developmental psychologists have investigated children’s
learning in a number of different realms. One of the most
well-studied is their acquisition of physical knowledge (Baillargeon, 1996; 2004; Spelke & Kinzler, 2007; Lake et al.,
2017). Here, prior empirical work provides us with a precise
understanding of the stages that children undergo during
1
MPRG Computational Principles of Intelligence, Max
Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Luca Schulze Buschoff <luca.schulzebuschoff@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

