GFlowNet-EM for Learning Compositional Latent Variable Models
Edward J. Hu * 1 Nikolay Malkin * 1 Moksh Jain 1 Katie Everett 2 3 Alexandros Graikos 4 Yoshua Bengio 1 5

Abstract

𝑠0

Latent variable models (LVMs) with discrete compositional latents are an important but challenging setting due to a combinatorially large number of possible configurations of the latents. A
key tradeoff in modeling the posteriors over latents is between expressivity and tractable optimization. For algorithms based on expectationmaximization (EM), the E-step is often intractable
without restrictive approximations to the posterior.
We propose the use of GFlowNets, algorithms for
sampling from an unnormalized density by learning a stochastic policy for sequential construction
of samples, for this intractable E-step. By training
GFlowNets to sample from the posterior over latents, we take advantage of their strengths as amortized variational inference algorithms for complex distributions over discrete structures. Our
approach, GFlowNet-EM, enables the training
of expressive LVMs with discrete compositional
latents, as shown by experiments on non-contextfree grammar induction and on images using discrete variational autoencoders (VAEs) without
conditional independence enforced in the encoder.

𝑠1

GFlowNet sampling trajectory
𝑠2
Q3

Q7

𝑠3 = 𝑧 Q4
Q3

Q7

Q3

the cats drink tea
the cats drink tea
the cats drink tea
the cats drink tea
𝑝 𝜃 (𝑧) 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥|𝑧) = 𝑝 root
𝜃 (Q4) · 𝑝 𝜃 (Q7 Q3 | Q4) · 𝑝 𝜃 (the cats | Q7) · 𝑝 𝜃 (drink tea | Q3)
E-step
Sample 𝑥 ∼ data
Update conditional GFlowNet
with reward 𝑅(𝑧) = 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑧) 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥|𝑧)

M-step
Sample 𝑥 ∼ data
Sample 𝑧 from conditional GFlowNet
Gradient update on log 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑧) 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥|𝑧)

Figure 1. GFlowNet-EM for training a latent variable model
𝑝 𝜃 (𝑧) 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑥|𝑧) to maximize likelihood of observed data 𝑥. The
generative model here is a probabilistic context-free grammar. The
GFlowNet samples a latent parse tree 𝑧 from an approximation
to the posterior 𝑝 𝜃 (𝑧|𝑥). GFlowNet-EM can flexibly handle noncontext-free grammars, black-box priors on tree shape, etc. (§5.2).

relationships between abstract concepts. Modeling this discrete compositional latent structure allows for combining
existing concepts in new ways, an important inductive bias
for human-like generalization (Goyal & Bengio, 2022).
One family of approaches for maximum-likelihood estimation in LVMs is based on the expectation-maximization
algorithm (EM; Dempster et al., 1977), which we review
in §2.1. However, inference of the posterior over latent
variables, which is needed in the E-step of EM, is generally
intractable when there are combinatorially large number of
possible configurations for the latents, such as when the
latent random variable does not factorize and represents a
discrete compositional structure like a tree or graph. One
can approximately sample from this posterior by running
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which can be prohibitively expensive and suffer from poor mixing properties.
Another approach is to impose conditional independence
assumptions on the generative model or on the posterior
approximation; the latter is known as variational EM (see
§2.1). Both limit the expressivity of the LVM. One such
example studied here is the induction of context-free grammars (Baker, 1979), which has a generative model under
which the expansion of a symbol is independent of its context.

Code: github.com/GFNOrg/GFlowNet-EM.

1. Introduction
In the real world, we often observe high-dimensional
data that is generated from lower-dimensional latent variables (Bishop, 2006). In particular, it is often natural for
these latent variables to have a discrete, compositional structure for data domains like images and language. For example, an image might be decomposed into individual objects
that have a relationship between their positions, and natural
language utterances contain individual words that describe
* Equal contribution 1 Mila, Université de Montréal 2 Google

Research 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Stony Brook
University 5 CIFAR Fellow. Correspondence to: Edward J. Hu
<edward@edwardjhu.com>.

Generative flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021;
2023), which we review in §2.2, are an amortized inference
method for sampling from unnormalized densities by sequentially constructing samples using a learned stochastic

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine

Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

