Regression with Label Permutation in Generalized Linear Model

Guanhua Fang
School of Management, Fudan University
670 Guoshun Road, Shanghai 200433, China
fanggh@fudan.edu.cn

Ping Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
pinli@linkedin.com

Abstract

rate and biased. Research on the unlabeled problem has
a long history and can be traced back to 1970s under
the name “broken sample problem” (DeGroot et al., 1971;
Goel, 1975; DeGroot and Goel, 1976; 1980; Chan and Loh,
2001; Bai and Hsing, 2005; Slawski et al., 2020). In recent
years, we have witnessed a renaissance of this problem due
to its wide applications, such as data integration, privacy
protection, computer vision, robotics, sensor networks,
etc. See Unnikrishnan et al. (2015); Pananjady et al. (2018;
2017); Slawski and Ben-David (2019); Zhang et al. (2019);
Slawski et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2022); Zhang and Li
(2023a) and the references therein for more explanations.

The assumption that response and predictor belong to the same statistical unit may be violated
in practice. Unbiased estimation and recovery
of true label ordering based on unlabeled data
are challenging tasks and have attracted increasing attentions in the recent literature. In this
paper, we present a relatively complete analysis of label permutation problem for the generalized linear model with multivariate responses.
The theory is established under different scenarios, with knowledge of true parameters, with partial knowledge of underlying label permutation
matrix and without any knowledge. Our results
remove the stringent conditions required by the
current literature and are further extended to the
missing observation setting which has never been
considered in the field of label permutation problem. On computational side, we propose two
methods, “maximum likelihood estimation” algorithm and “two-step estimation” algorithm, to
accommodate for different settings. When the
proportion of permuted labels is moderate, both
methods work effectively. Multiple numerical experiments are provided and corroborate our theoretical findings.

Important applications of label permutation include linkage
record, data de-anonymization, and header-free communication. In linkage record (Newcombe and Kennedy, 1962;
Fellegi and Sunter, 1969), people would like to integrate
multiple databases, where each contains different pieces of
information about the same identity, into one comprehensive database. In this process, the biggest challenge is how
to find the matching across different databases. For data deanonymization (Nazarov et al., 2018), the task is to identify
the labels, which aims to preserve privacy, with public data.
It can be seen as the inverse problem of privacy protection.
For the header-free communication (Pananjady et al., 2017;
Shi and Shi, 2019), we have a sensor network where the
sensor identity is omitted during communication to reduce
the transmission cost and latency. In this scenario, reconstruction of signal involves recovering the unknown correspondence.

1. Introduction

In the literature, for the sake of simplicity, linear models are often considered for studying the label permutation problem. However, the linear model assumption may
be violated when the error distribution is skewed or heavy
tailed. Additionally, linear models cannot capture the structure of count data which is another popular data type
and is becoming increasingly ubiquitous (e.g. survival
analysis (Fleming and Harrington, 2011), online streaming services (Cugola and Margara, 2012), educational testing (Templin and Henson, 2010), etc). With these in mind,
in this paper, we specifically adopt the formulation of generalized linear model (GLM) to take care of multivariate

A key assumption in regression problems is that responsepredictor pairs correspond to the same statistical unit.
In practice, this assumption may be violated when different subsets of variables are collected asynchronously
and are merged together with certain label disagreements.
That is, responses and predictors may not be perfectly
paired together so that the statistical inferences based
on such label-contaminated data sets could be inaccuProceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

