Efficient Exploration via Epistemic-Risk-Seeking Policy Optimization

Brendan O’Donoghue 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) involves an agent interacting
with an environment over time attempting to maximize its
total return (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Puterman, 2014; Meyn,
2022). Initially the agent does not know about the environment and must learn about it from experience. As the
agent navigates the environment it receives noisy observations which it can use to update its (posterior) beliefs about
the environment (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015). Therefore,
the RL problem is a statistical inference problem wrapped
in a control problem, and the two problems must be tackled
simultaneously for good data efficiency (Lu et al., 2021).
This is because the policy of the agent affects the data it will
collect, which in turn affects the policy, and so on. This is
in contrast to supervised learning, where the performance
of a classifier (for instance) does not influence the data it
will later observe. Failure to properly consider the statistical aspect of the RL problem will result in agents that
require exponential amounts of experience for good performance. So far, deep RL as a field has largely accepted
this tradeoff, requiring enormous computational budgets to
solve relatively simple problems. On the other hand, correctly considering the statistical inference problem and the
control problem together has the potential to dramatically
reduce the compute requirements to solve problems and potentially unlock new domains and capabilities far outside of
the range of current agents.

Exploration remains a key challenge in deep reinforcement learning (RL). Optimism in the face
of uncertainty is a well-known heuristic with theoretical guarantees in the tabular setting, but how
best to translate the principle to deep reinforcement learning, which involves online stochastic gradients and deep network function approximators, is not fully understood. In this paper we propose a new, differentiable optimistic
objective that when optimized yields a policy
that provably explores efficiently, with guarantees even under function approximation. Our
new objective is a zero-sum two-player game derived from endowing the agent with an epistemicrisk-seeking utility function, which converts uncertainty into value and encourages the agent to
explore uncertain states. We show that the solution to this game minimizes an upper bound
on the regret, with the ‘players’ each attempting to minimize one component of a particular
regret decomposition. We derive a new modelfree algorithm which we call ‘epistemic-riskseeking actor-critic’ (ERSAC), which is simply
an application of simultaneous stochastic gradient ascent-descent to the game. Finally, we discuss a recipe for incorporating off-policy data
and show that combining the risk-seeking objective with replay data yields a double benefit
in terms of statistical efficiency. We conclude
with some results showing good performance of
a deep RL agent using the technique on the challenging ‘DeepSea’ environment, showing significant performance improvements even over other
efficient exploration techniques, as well as improved performance on the Atari benchmark.

Understood in this way, RL is about choosing what actions
to take, and consequently which data to collect, in order
to maximize long-term return. To do this an agent must
sometimes take actions that lead to states where it has epistemic uncertainty about the value of those states, and sometimes take actions that lead to more certain payoff. The
tension between these two modes is the ‘explore-exploit’
dilemma (Auer, 2002; Kearns & Singh, 2002; Dimitrakakis
& Ortner, 2018). When it comes to exploration in deep
RL there are two main focus areas of research. The primary line of work is generating better estimates of uncertainty, typically by exploiting some aspect of a neural network (Singh et al., 2004; Barto, 2013; Stadie et al., 2015;
Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Burda et al.,
2018; Pathak et al., 2017). Getting accurate uncertainty
estimates from deep neural networks is a ‘holy grail’ of research in deep learning in general (Osband et al., 2021),

1
Google DeepMind, London. Correspondence to: Brendan
O’Donoghue <bodonoghue85@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

