Modeling Dynamic Environments with Scene Graph Memory

Andrey Kurenkov 1 Michael Lingelbach 1 Tanmay Agarwal 1 Emily Jin 1 Chengshu Li 1 Ruohan Zhang 1
Li Fei-Fei 1 Jiajun Wu 1 Silvio Savarese 2 Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n 3

Abstract

munication networks, or even biological networks. We
investigate a novel instance of this problem: temporal link
prediction with partial observability, i.e. when the past
observations of the graph contain only parts of it. This
setting maps naturally to a common problem in embodied
AI: using past sensor observations to predict the state of a
dynamic environment represented by a graph. Graphs are
used frequently as the state representation of large scenes
in the form of scene graphs (Johnson et al., 2015; Armeni
et al., 2019; Ravichandran et al., 2022a; Hughes et al., 2022),
a relational object-centric representation where nodes are
objects or rooms, and edges encode relationships such as
inside or onTop. Link prediction could be applied to
partially observed, dynamic scene graphs to infer relationships between pairs of objects enabling various downstream
decision-making tasks for which scene graphs have been
shown to be useful such as navigation (Amiri et al., 2022;
Santos & Romero, 2022), manipulation (Agia et al., 2022;
Zhu et al., 2021) and object search (Ravichandran et al.,
2022a; Xu et al., 2022).

Embodied AI agents that search for objects in
large environments such as households often need
to make efficient decisions by predicting object locations based on partial information. We pose this
as a new type of link prediction problem: link
prediction on partially observable dynamic
graphs. Our graph is a representation of a scene
in which rooms and objects are nodes, and their
relationships are encoded in the edges; only parts
of the changing graph are known to the agent at
each timestep. This partial observability poses a
challenge to existing link prediction approaches,
which we address. We propose a novel state representation – Scene Graph Memory (SGM) – with
captures the agent’s accumulated set of observations, as well as a neural net architecture called a
Node Edge Predictor (NEP) that extracts information from the SGM to search efficiently. We evaluate our method in the Dynamic House Simulator,
a new benchmark that creates diverse dynamic
graphs following the semantic patterns typically
seen at homes, and show that NEP can be trained
to predict the locations of objects in a variety of
environments with diverse object movement dynamics, outperforming baselines both in terms of
new scene adaptability and overall accuracy. The
codebase and more can be found this URL.

In this paper, we study link prediction in dynamic, partially
observable graphs with a focus on using this formalism
to perform object search with an embodied AI agent in a
large scene. Although this is a popular problem, most past
works assumes a static scene with the agent having no prior
memory of it, whereas we focus on dynamic scenes with
a continually learning agent. For that, we first propose a
novel state representation named a scene graph memory
(SGM) that encodes the nodes and edges the agent has
observed—including those that may no longer be true—in
a single graph with reference to the time the nodes and
edges were lastly observed. The SGM enables the agent to
gradually build up a representation of all of its observations,
which can then be the input to a link prediction model.

1. Introduction
Temporal link prediction is the problem of estimating the
likelihood of edges being present in the future in a dynamically changing graph based on past observed instances
of the full graph (Divakaran & Mohan, 2020). This type
of problem appears when analyzing social networks, com-

Existing solutions for dynamic link prediction assume full
observability (knowing all the nodes and edges in graphs
from prior timesteps) and are not well suited to this new
kind of link prediction problem. Therefore, we introduce
a novel solution for dynamic link prediction in partial
observable settings based on a neural net architecture we
call a Node Edge Predictor (NEP). The NEP is designed
to predict the likelihood of a single node’s edges with a
self-attention mechanism that “compares” them.

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Salesforce AI Research 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Andrey Kurenkov
<andreyk@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

