Tensor Gaussian Process with Contraction for Multi-Channel Imaging Analysis

Hu Sun 1 Ward Manchester 2 Meng Jin 3 Yang Liu 4 Yang Chen 1

Abstract

Li et al., 2018; Papadogeorgou et al., 2021). Given m-mode
tensor covariate X ∈ RI1 ×I2 ×···×Im and scalar label y ∈ R,
the existing literature approaches the regression problem
mainly via:
E[y|X ] = α + ⟨W, X ⟩ ,
(1)

Multi-channel imaging data is a prevalent data
format in scientific fields such as astronomy and
biology. The structured information and the high
dimensionality of these 3-D tensor data makes
the analysis an intriguing but challenging topic
for statisticians and practitioners. The low-rank
scalar-on-tensor regression model, in particular,
has received widespread attention and has been reformulated as a tensor Gaussian Process (TensorGP) model with multi-linear kernel in Yu et al.
(2018). In this paper, we extend the Tensor-GP
model by introducing an integrative dimensionality reduction technique, called tensor contraction,
with a Tensor-GP for a scalar-on-tensor regression
task with multi-channel imaging data. This is motivated by the solar flare forecasting problem with
high dimensional multi-channel imaging data. We
first estimate a latent, reduced-size tensor for each
data tensor and then apply a multi-linear TensorGP on the latent tensor data for prediction. We
introduce an anisotropic total-variation regularization when conducting the tensor contraction
to obtain a sparse and smooth latent tensor. We
then propose an alternating proximal gradient descent algorithm for estimation. We validate our
approach via extensive simulation studies and applying it to the solar flare forecasting problem.

where α is the intercept, W is the regression coefficient
tensor that matches the shape of X and ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes tensor inner product following Kolda & Bader (2009). This
formulation can be readily adopted under the framework of
generalized linear model (Zhou et al., 2013) while simultaneously preserving the tensor structure of X . Typically,
tensor data is of ultra-high dimensions and thus W is also
of high dimensionality. Various constraints have been introduced on W, such as tensor norm regularization (Guo et al.,
2011; Zhou & Li, 2014) and tensor rank constraints (Papadogeorgou et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2021). These constraints
induce a sparse and low-rank structure over W, making
inferences of the high-order correlation between the scalar
label and the tensor covariates tractable and interpretable.
Gaussian Process (GP) (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006) is an
alternative approach to modeling complex correlation structures, and has been applied to tensor regression problems
(Kang et al., 2018), where a GP prior is imposed on W. In
Yu et al. (2018), it is established that the tensor regression
model (1), together with a low-rank constraint on W, leads
c as the tensor Gaussian Process
to the same estimator W
(Tensor-GP) coupled with a multi-linear kernel on the prior
of W. A multi-linear kernel function k(·, ·) for m-mode
tensors X ∈ RI1 ×I2 ×···×Im can be defined in a Kronecker
product form as:

⊤
′
k(Xi , Xj ) = vec (Xi ) ⊗m
K
vec (Xj ) ,
m′ =1 m+1−m

1. Introduction
Regression models that deal with scalar labels and tensor
covariates, i.e. scalar-on-tensor regression, have received
widespread attention over the past decade (Hung & Wang,
2013; Zhou et al., 2013; Zhou & Li, 2014; Kang et al., 2018;

where vec (·) is the vectorization operator and ⊗ denotes
the matrix Kronecker product and K1 , . . . , Km capture the
mode-specific covariance structure of the regression coefficient tensor W and are assumed to be low-rank. Interpreting
this GP regression model can be hard since one needs to
inspect the multi-linear kernel which deals
Qm with the tensor
data at its original dimensionality d = m′ =1 Im′ .

1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Department of Climate and Space Sciences and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 3 Solar & Astrophysics
Lab, Lockheed Martin 4 W.W. Hansen Experimental Physics Laboratory, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Yang Chen
<ychenang@umich.edu>.

The capability of the multi-linear Tensor-GP to provide
uncertainty quantification on the prediction makes it an attractive alternative to its counterpart in (1), but a sufficient

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

