Training Deep Surrogate Models with Large Scale Online Learning

Lucas Meyer 1 2 Marc Schouler 1 Robert A. Caulk 1 Alejandro Ribes 2 Bruno Raffin 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
PDEs are powerful mathematical tools commonly used to
describe the dynamics of complex phenomena. Although
these tools remain foundational to scientific advancements
in fluid dynamics, mechanics, electromagnetism, biology,
chemistry or geosciences, running classical PDEs solvers,
based on numerical techniques such as Finite Elements, Finite Volumes, or Spectral Methods, can be computationally
prohibitive (Burden et al., 2015).

The spatiotemporal resolution of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) plays important roles in
the mathematical description of the world’s physical phenomena. In general, scientists and engineers solve PDEs numerically by the use of computationally demanding solvers. Recently, deep
learning algorithms have emerged as a viable alternative for obtaining fast solutions for PDEs.
Models are usually trained on synthetic data generated by solvers, stored on disk and read back
for training. This paper advocates that relying
on a traditional static dataset to train these models does not allow the full benefit of the solver
to be used as a data generator. It proposes an
open source online training framework1 for deep
surrogate models. The framework implements
several levels of parallelism focused on simultaneously generating numerical simulations and
training deep neural networks. This approach suppresses the I/O and storage bottleneck associated
with disk-loaded datasets, and opens the way to
training on significantly larger datasets. Experiments compare the offline and online training
of four surrogate models, including state-of-theart architectures. Results indicate that exposing
deep surrogate models to more dataset diversity,
up to hundreds of GB, can increase model generalization capabilities. Fully connected neural
networks, Fourier Neural Operator (FNO), and
Message Passing PDE Solver prediction accuracy
is improved by 68%, 16% and 7%, respectively.

Training deep surrogate models of PDEs emerges as an alternative and complementary approach (Stevens et al., 2020).
In most cases, scientists introduce physical knowledge to
machine learning algorithms by developing surrogate models (Raissi et al., 2019) or shaping neural network architectures to mimic traditional solvers (Li et al., 2021; Pfaff et al.,
2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022). Other studies developed
models to improve the approximation obtained by a solver
at a coarse resolution, faster than it would take to run the
solver directly at the desired resolution (Um et al., 2020;
Kochkov et al., 2021). Most deep-learning algorithms proposed in the literature are supervised; they are trained on
simulations generated by the same solvers they intend to
replace or accelerate. Meanwhile, training deep surrogate
models that can approximate the solution for a family of
parameterized PDEs, requires generating large datasets for
a good coverage of the parameter space.
In its general form, a PDE describes the evolution of a
quantity u defined in space and time as below:

u : Ω × T −→ Ω′
(x, t) 7−→ u(x, t)

1

Du = f

(1)

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG
Industrial AI Laboratory SINCLAIR, EDF Lab Paris-Saclay. Correspondence to: Lucas Meyer <lucas.meyer@inria.fr>.

u(x, t = 0) = u0

(2)

u(x ∈ ∂Ω, t) = u∂Ω

(3)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code and documentation are respectively available at https:
//gitlab.inria.fr/melissa/melissa and https:
//melissa.gitlabpages.inria.fr/melissa/

where Ω ⊂ Rdin , Ω′ ⊂ Rdout and T ⊂ R+ . D is a differential
operator and f is referred to as a forcing term accounting
for external forces applied to the system. u0 and u∂Ω are
respectively the initial and boundary conditions. All these
variables contribute to the parametrization of PDEs and are

2

1

