Data-Driven Subgroup Identification for Linear Regression

Zachary Izzo 1 Ruishan Liu 2 James Zou 2

Abstract

is fit on the entire dataset, implicitly assuming that there
are uniform relationships between the covariates and target
variable across the whole population. In practice, the data
may instead come from a heterogeneous population, where
different subgroups of the population may obey qualitatively
different trends.

Medical studies frequently require to extract the
relationship between each covariate and the outcome with statistical confidence measures. To
do this, simple parametric models are frequently
used (e.g. coefficients of linear regression) but
usually fitted on the whole dataset. However, it is
common that the covariates may not have a uniform effect over the whole population and thus a
unified simple model can miss the heterogeneous
signal. For example, a linear model may be able
to explain a subset of the data but fail on the rest
due to the nonlinearity and heterogeneity in the
data. In this paper, we propose DDGroup (datadriven group discovery), a data-driven method to
effectively identify subgroups in the data with a
uniform linear relationship between the features
and the label. DDGroup outputs an interpretable
region in which the linear model is expected to
hold. It is simple to implement and computationally tractable for use. We show theoretically that,
given a large enough sample, DDGroup recovers
a region where a single linear model with low
variance is well-specified (if one exists), and experiments on real-world medical datasets confirm
that it can discover regions where a local linear
model has improved performance. Our experiments also show that DDGroup can uncover subgroups with qualitatively different relationships
which are missed by simply applying parametric
approaches to the whole dataset.

For example, suppose we fit a linear model with features
including several patient biomarkers, as well as blood concentration of a particular drug, to predict blood pressure.
After fitting the model to the whole dataset, we find that
there is a statistically signficant negative coefficient on the
drug concentration. We may be tempted to conclude that
this drug should be administered to a general patient in order
to reduce blood pressure. However, there may be a small
subgroup in the data (say, patients over the age of 80) for
whom the drug actually increases blood pressure. In this
case, naively fitting a single model to the entire dataset not
only reduces our predictive accuracy, it also leads to adverse
outcomes for this subgroup of the population.
Modern high-capacity models such as neural networks can
help to avoid this problem as they represent a much richer
function class. However, these models are often inherently
difficult to interpret, making them unsuitable if the primary
goal is to draw scientific or clinical conclusions about the
data rather than simply having good predictive performance.
This motivates our desire to find interpretable regions in the
data where interpretable models (such as linear regression)
perform well. We call this the subgroup selection problem.
1.1. Our Contributions
In this work, we consider a flexible formalization of the
subgroup selection problem. We propose an general algorithmic framework and a specific instantiation, DDGroup
(data-driven group discovery), for data-driven subgroup selection. We prove that DDGroup has desirable theoretical
properties, and results on synthetic and real data show the
effectiveness of DDGroup in practice.

1. Introduction
In scientific and medical analyses, simple parameteric models are frequently fit to data to draw qualitative or quantitative conclusions about the relationships between different
variables of interest. Typically, a single interpretable model
1

Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, USA
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University,
USA. Correspondence to: Zachary Izzo <zizzo@stanford.edu>.

1.2. Related Work

2

Subgroup identification is an important topic in biostatistics
(Lipkovich et al., 2017). Here, the main focus is on identifying subsets of the population with a significant beneficial

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

