Sequential Underspecified Instrument Selection
for Cause-Effect Estimation
Elisabeth Ailer 1 2 Jason Hartford 3 4 Niki Kilbertus 1 2 5

Abstract

(treatment X) causally influence health and disease (outcome Y )? How does the transcriptome of a cell (treatment
X) causally influence its function (outcome Y )? Typically,
the high-dimensional treatment and the outcome are heavily
confounded via unknown mechanisms, rendering the strong
assumptions required for cause-effect estimation, i.e., computing p(y | do(x)), from observational data sampled from
p(x, y) untenable. Hence, experimentation is indispensable
for the ultimate goal of identifying and estimating these
causal relationships. Whenever we can intervene directly
on the treatment, we have direct access to p(y | do(x)) and
cause-effect relationships can be captured by mere association in experiments. We are motivated by two crucial
realizations: (a) oftentimes practically feasible experiments
do not intervene directly on the treatment X but some other
variable Z; (b) still, the scientific goal is to estimate the
effect of the high-dimensional X on the outcome Y (instead
of the effect of the actual intervention on Z).

Instrumental variable (IV) methods are used to estimate causal effects in settings with unobserved
confounding, where we cannot directly experiment on the treatment variable. Instruments are
variables which only affect the outcome indirectly
via the treatment variable(s). Most IV applications focus on low-dimensional treatments and
crucially require at least as many instruments as
treatments. This assumption is restrictive: in the
natural sciences we often seek to infer causal effects of high-dimensional treatments (e.g., the
effect of gene expressions or microbiota on health
and disease), but can only run few experiments
with a limited number of instruments (e.g., drugs
or antibiotics). In such underspecified problems,
the full treatment effect is not identifiable in a
single experiment even in the linear case. We
show that one can still reliably recover the projection of the treatment effect onto the instrumented
subspace and develop techniques to consistently
combine such partial estimates from different sets
of instruments. We then leverage our combined estimators in an algorithm that iteratively proposes
the most informative instruments at each round of
experimentation to maximize the overall information about the full causal effect.

Regarding (a), administering certain antibiotics has a strong
and highly predictable effect on the gut microbiome, but it
does not break causal links from potentially unobserved confounders to X; similarly, applying various drug (dosages)
to cell cultures influences the transcriptome, but again does
not directly intervene on it. Even targeted gene knockouts
or CRISPR/Cas gene editing (Zhang et al., 2015; Fu et al.,
2013) do not constitute interventions as defined in causal
inference (Pearl, 2009). They do not strip the microbiome or
transcriptome free of any other causal influences, i.e., they
may still be confounded with the outcome of interest. As for
(b), ultimately we give a certain antibiotic to learn about how
the microbiome causally influences disease (p(y | do(x)))
and not merely about what overall effect the antibiotic has
on disease (p(y | do(z))).

1. Introduction
Motivation. Understanding cause-effect relationships in
high-dimensional systems is a common challenge in various
scientific areas. For example, how does our gut microbiome

In such settings, the variable experimented on (antibiotics,
drugs, gene knockout/edits) can at most serve as an instrument Z for the treatment: (A1) Z (strongly) affects the
treatment (Z ̸⊥⊥ X). (A2) Z is independent of unobserved
confounders U (Z ⊥⊥ U ). (A3) Z “only affects the outcome
via the treatment” (Y ⊥⊥ Z | {X, U }). Whether we can ascertain these conditions depends on the setting. For example,
orally administered sub therapeutic dosages of antibiotics
(such that no antibiotics can be detected in the bloodstream)
may satisfy this condition (Ailer et al., 2021). Similarly,

1

HelmholtzAI, Helmholtz Munich, Munich, Germany 2 School
of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University
Munich, Munich, Germany 3 MILA - Quebec Artificial Intelligence
Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 4 Recursion, Montreal Quebec
Canada 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany.
Correspondence to: Elisabeth Ailer <elisabeth.ailer@helmholtzmunich.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

