On the Connection Between MPNN and Graph Transformer

Chen Cai 1 Truong Son Hy 1 Rose Yu 1 Yusu Wang 1

Abstract

VN

Transformer
Graph Transformer (GT) recently has emerged
as a new paradigm of graph learning algorithms,
outperforming the previously popular Message
Passing Neural Network (MPNN) on multiple
benchmarks. Previous work (Kim et al., 2022)
shows that with proper position embedding, GT
can approximate MPNN arbitrarily well, implying
that GT is at least as powerful as MPNN. In this
paper, we study the inverse connection and show
that MPNN with virtual node (VN), a commonly
used heuristic with little theoretical understanding, is powerful enough to arbitrarily approximate
the self-attention layer of GT. In particular, we
first show that if we consider one type of linear
transformer, the so-called Performer/Linear Transformer (Choromanski et al., 2020; Katharopoulos
et al., 2020b), then MPNN + VN with only O(1)
depth and O(1) width can approximate a selfattention layer in Performer/Linear Transformer.
Next, via a connection between MPNN + VN
and DeepSets, we prove the MPNN + VN with
O(nd ) width and O(1) depth can approximate
the self-attention layer arbitrarily well, where d is
the input feature dimension. Lastly, under some
assumptions, we provide an explicit construction
of MPNN + VN with O(1) width and O(n) depth
approximating the self-attention layer in GT arbitrarily well. On the empirical side, we demonstrate that 1) MPNN + VN is a surprisingly strong
baseline, outperforming GT on the recently proposed Long Range Graph Benchmark (LRGB)
dataset, 2) our MPNN + VN improves over early
implementation on a wide range of OGB datasets
and 3) MPNN + VN outperforms Linear Transformer and MPNN on the climate modeling task.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: MPNN + VN and Graph Transformers.

1. Introduction
MPNN (Message Passing Neural Network) (Gilmer et al.,
2017) has been the leading architecture for processing graphstructured data. Recently, transformers in natural language
processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Kalyan et al., 2021) and
vision (d’Ascoli et al., 2021; Han et al., 2022) have extended
their success to the domain of graphs. There have been
several pieces of work (Ying et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021;
Kreuzer et al., 2021; Rampášek et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022)
showing that with careful position embedding (Lim et al.,
2022), graph transformers (GT) can achieve compelling
empirical performances on large-scale datasets and start to
challenge the dominance of MPNN.
MPNN imposes a sparsity pattern on the computation graph
and therefore enjoys linear complexity. It however suffers
from well-known over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018; Oono
& Suzuki, 2019; Cai & Wang, 2020) and over-squashing
(Alon & Yahav, 2020; Topping et al., 2021) issues, limiting
its usage on long-range modeling tasks where the label of
one node depends on features of nodes far away. GT relies
purely on position embedding to encode the graph structure
and uses vanilla transformers on top. 1 It models all pairwise
interactions directly in one layer, making it computationally
more expensive. Compared to MPNN, GT shows promising
results on tasks where modeling long-range interaction is
the key, but the quadratic complexity of self-attention in GT

1
University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Chen Cai <c1cai@ucsd.edu>.

1

GT in this paper refers to the practice of tokenizing graph
nodes and applying standard transformers on top (Ying et al., 2021;
Kim et al., 2022). There exists a more sophisticated GT (Kreuzer
et al., 2021) that further conditions attention on edge types but it is
not considered in this paper.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

