Solving High-Dimensional PDEs with Latent Spectral Models
Haixu Wu 1 Tengge Hu 1 Huakun Luo 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

(Wazwaz, 2002; Roubı́ček, 2013). Thus, solving PDEs is the
shared foundation problem among many scientific and engineering areas and can further benefit essential real-world
applications, like airflow modeling for airfoil design, atmospheric simulation for weather forecasting and stress test
in civil engineering. Recently, deep models have achieved
great progress in various tasks (He et al., 2016; Devlin et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2021). In view of the great nonlinear modeling capability of deep models, they have been widely used
to solve PDEs by approximating the mapping between inputoutput pairs in PDE-governed tasks (Hao et al., 2022; Raissi
et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Cao, 2021).

Deep models have achieved impressive progress
in solving partial differential equations (PDEs).
A burgeoning paradigm is learning neural operators to approximate the input-output mappings of
PDEs. While previous deep models have explored
the multiscale architectures and various operator
designs, they are limited to learning the operators
as a whole in the coordinate space. In real physical science problems, PDEs are complex coupled equations with numerical solvers relying on
discretization into high-dimensional coordinate
space, which cannot be precisely approximated
by a single operator nor efficiently learned due to
the curse of dimensionality. We present Latent
Spectral Models (LSM) toward an efficient and
precise solver for high-dimensional PDEs. Going beyond the coordinate space, LSM enables an
attention-based hierarchical projection network to
reduce the high-dimensional data into a compact
latent space in linear time. Inspired by classical
spectral methods in numerical analysis, we design
a neural spectral block to solve PDEs in the latent
space that approximates complex input-output
mappings via learning multiple basis operators,
enjoying nice theoretical guarantees for convergence and approximation. Experimentally, LSM
achieves consistent state-of-the-art and yields a
relative gain of 11.5% averaged on seven benchmarks covering both solid and fluid physics. Code
is available at https://github.com/thuml/LatentSpectral-Models.

Concretely, in real-world applications, PDEs are usually
discretized into high-dimensional coordinate spaces, such
as point cloud, mesh and grid. For example, as shown in
Figure 1(c), the fluid simulation task governed by spatiotemporal continuous Navier-Stokes equations (Temam, 2001)
can be discretized into successive grid frames, where the dimension of coordinate space is equal to the number of pixels
in all frames. However, this high-dimensionality will bring
thorny challenges to the solving process. Firstly, according to the phenomenon of curse of dimensionality (Trunk,
1979; Han et al., 2017), the solving process will cause huge
computation cost in the high-dimensional space. Secondly,
due to intricate interactions among multiple physical variates of coupled equations in high-dimensional coordinate
space, the input-output mappings will be too complex to be
approximated by a rough deep model (Trunk, 1979; Karniadakis et al., 2021). Thus, how to efficiently and precisely
approximate complex mappings between high-dimensional
input-output pairs is the key problem to solving PDEs.
In previous works, the well-acknowledged paradigm is to
learn neural operators to approximate the complex inputoutput mappings (Li et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021). Extensive
designs of operators have been proposed, such as approximating the integral operator in Fourier space (Li et al.,
2021; Tran et al., 2023), capturing the global information by
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Cao, 2021; Liu et al.,
2022) and etc. Note that all these designs attempt to learn
the operator as a whole to approximate input-output mappings. However, in high-dimensional space, the input-output
mappings can be too complex to be covered by a single operator, which may suffer from optimization problems and
limited performance. Besides, some works introduce the

1. Introduction
Extensive real-world phenomena are governed by underlying partial differential equations (PDEs), such as turbulence,
atmospheric circulation and stress of deformed materials
1

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University.
Haixu Wu <whx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to:
Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

