Generalization Analysis for Contrastive Representation Learning

Yunwen Lei 1 Tianbao Yang 2 Yiming Ying 3 Ding-Xuan Zhou 4

Abstract

embedding space, which can be formulated as minimizing
the following objective (Chen et al., 2020; Oord et al., 2018)

Recently, contrastive learning has found impressive success in advancing the state of the art in
solving various machine learning tasks. However,
the existing generalization analysis is very limited or even not meaningful. In particular, the
existing generalization error bounds depend linearly on the number k of negative examples while
it was widely shown in practice that choosing
a large k is necessary to guarantee good generalization of contrastive learning in downstream
tasks. In this paper, we establish novel generalization bounds for contrastive learning which do
not depend on k, up to logarithmic terms. Our
analysis uses structural results on empirical covering numbers and Rademacher complexities to
exploit the Lipschitz continuity of loss functions.
For self-bounding Lipschitz loss functions, we
further improve our results by developing optimistic bounds which imply fast rates in a low
noise condition. We apply our results to learning
with both linear representation and nonlinear representation by deep neural networks, for both of
which we derive Rademacher complexity bounds
to get improved generalization bounds.

k
 X


Ex,x+ ,{x− }k log 1+
exp −f (x)⊤ f (x+ )−f (x−
)
,
i
i

i=1

i=1

where k is the number of negative examples. The hope is
that the learned representation f (x) would capture the latent
structure and be beneficial to other downstream learning
tasks (Arora et al., 2019; Tosh et al., 2021a). CRL has
achieved impressive empirical performance in advancing
the state-of-the-art performance in various domains such
as computer vision (He et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020) and natural language
processing (Brown et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2021; Radford
et al., 2021).
The empirical success of CRL motivates a natural question
on theoretically understanding how the learned representation adapts to the downstream tasks, i.e.,
How would the generalization behavior of downstream ML
models benefit from the representation function built from
positive and negative pairs? Especially, how would the number of negative examples affect the learning performance?
Arora et al. (2019) provided an attempt to answer the above
questions by developing a theoretical framework to study
CRL. They first gave generalization bounds for a learned
representation function in terms of Rademacher complexities. Then, they showed that this generalization behavior
measured by an unsupervised loss guarantees the generalization behavior of a linear classifier in the downstream
classification task. However, the generalization bounds
there enjoy a linear dependency on k, which would not
be effective if k is large. Moreover, this is not consistent
with many studies which show a large number of negative
examples (Chen et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020a; Hénaff
et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2020) is necessary for good generalization performance. For example, the work (He et al.,
2020) used 65536 negative examples in unsupervised visual
representation learning, for which the existing analysis requires n ≥ (65536)2 d training examples to get non-vacuous
bounds (Arora et al., 2019). Yuan et al. (2022) has demonstrated the benefits using all negative data for each anchor
data for CRL and proposed an efficient algorithm for optimizing global contrastive loss. Therefore, the existing

1. Introduction
The performance of machine learning (ML) models often
depends largely on the representation of data, which motivates a resurgence of contrastive representation learning
(CRL) to learn a representation function f : X 7→ Rd from
unsupervised data (Chen et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2020;
He et al., 2020). The basic idea is to pull together similar
pairs (x, x+ ) and push apart disimilar pairs (x, x− ) in an
1
Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong Kong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M
University 3 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Albany 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Yiming Ying
<yying@albany.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

