Gradient Descent Monotonically Decreases the Sharpness of
Gradient Flow Solutions in Scalar Networks and Beyond

Itai Kreisler * 1 Mor Shpigel Nacson * 2 Daniel Soudry 2 Yair Carmon 1

Abstract

However, recent empirical work (Cohen et al., 2021; Wu
et al., 2018; Xing et al., 2018; Gilmer et al., 2022) reveals
that the descent assumption often fails to hold when applying GD to neural networks. Through an extensive empirical
study, Cohen et al. (2021) identify two intriguing phenomena. The first is progressive sharpening: the sharpness
increases during training until reaching the threshold value
of η2 . The second is the edge of stability (EoS) phase: after reaching η2 , the sharpness oscillates around that value
and the training loss exhibits non-monotonic oscillatory behaviour while decreasing over a long time scale.

Recent research shows that when Gradient Descent (GD) is applied to neural networks, the
loss almost never decreases monotonically. Instead, the loss oscillates as gradient descent converges to its “Edge of Stability” (EoS). Here, we
find a quantity that does decrease monotonically
throughout GD training: the sharpness attained
by the gradient flow solution (GFS)—the solution
that would be obtained if, from now until convergence, we train with an infinitesimal step size.
Theoretically, we analyze scalar neural networks
with the squared loss, perhaps the simplest setting where the EoS phenomena still occur. In this
model, we prove that the GFS sharpness decreases
monotonically. Using this result, we characterize
settings where GD provably converges to the EoS
in scalar networks. Empirically, we show that
GD monotonically decreases the GFS sharpness
in a squared regression model as well as practical
neural network architectures.

Since the training loss and sharpness exhibit chaotic and
oscillatory behaviours during the EoS phase (Zhu et al.,
2023), we ask:
During the EoS phase, is there a quantity
that GD does monotonically decrease?
In this paper, we identify such a quantity, which we term
the gradient flow solution (GFS) sharpness. Formally, we
consider minimizing a smooth loss function L : RD → R
using GD with step size η > 0,


w(t+1) = w(t) − η∇L w(t)

1. Introduction
The conventional analysis of gradient descent (GD) for
smooth functions assumes that its step size η is sufficiently
small so that the loss decreases monotonically in each step.
In particular, η should be such that the loss sharpness (i.e.,
the maximum eigenvalue of its Hessian) is no more than
2
η for the entire GD trajectory. Such assumption is prevalent when analyzing GD in the context of general functions
(e.g., Lee et al., 2016), and even smaller steps sizes are used
in theoretical analyses of GD in neural networks (e.g., Du
et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Elkabetz & Cohen, 2021).
*

or gradient flow (GF)


ẇ(t) = −∇L w(t) .
We denote by SGF (w) the gradient flow solution (GFS), i.e.,
the limit of the gradient flow trajectory when initialized at
w; see Figure 1 for illustration. Using this notion we define
the GFS sharpness as follows.
Definition 1.1 (GFS sharpness). The GFS sharpness of
weight w, written as ϕ (w), is the sharpness of SGF (w),
i.e., the largest eigenvalue of ∇2 L (SGF (w)).

1

Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Israel.
Correspondence to: Itai
Kreisler <kreisler@mail.tau.ac.il>, Mor Shpigel Nacson
<mor.shpigel@gmail.com>.

Why is the GFS sharpness interesting? GFS sharpness
has two strong relations to the standard sharpness, a quantity
central to the EoS phenomena and also deeply connected
to generalization in neural networks (e.g., Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2017; Foret et al., 2020;

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

