The Optimal Approximation Factors in
Misspecified Off-Policy Value Function Estimation

Philip Amortila 1 Nan Jiang 1 Csaba Szepesvári 2

Abstract

in the sense that their guarantees automatically scale with
the degree of misspecification.

Theoretical guarantees in reinforcement learning
(RL) are known to suffer multiplicative blow-up
factors with respect to the misspecification error
of function approximation. Yet, the nature of such
approximation factors—especially their optimal
form in a given learning problem—is poorly understood. In this paper we study this question in
linear off-policy value function estimation, where
many open questions remain. We study the approximation factor in a broad spectrum of settings,
such as presence vs. absence of state aliasing
and full vs. partial coverage of the state space.
Our core results include instance-dependent upper
bounds on the approximation factors with respect
to both the weighted L2 -norm (where the weighting is the offline state distribution) and the L∞
norm. We show that these approximation factors
are optimal (in an instance-dependent sense) for a
number of these settings. In other cases, we show
that the instance-dependent parameters which appear in the upper bounds are necessary, and that
the finiteness of either alone cannot guarantee a
finite approximation factor even in the limit of
infinite data.

When the ground truth solution is not representable by the
function class, a natural relaxed objective is to instead recover the best-in-class function in the function class, i.e. the
function which is closest to the true solution as measured
by some norm. The “minimal” error incurred by the bestin-class function is called the misspecification error. The
ratio between the error of the attained solution and that of
the best-in-class solution is called the approximation factor
or approximation ratio.
Existing error bounds for misspecified RL problems often
suffer large approximation factors in addition to other statistical errors (Chen & Jiang, 2019). Unlike the statistical
errors, these error terms represent the “bias” of the solution,
and thus do not decrease even asymptotically as the sample
size goes to infinity. It is rarely the case that attention is
brought to whether these blowup factors are necessary, or if
the ratios attained are optimal.
In a myriad of settings which are easier than RL (such as in
linear regression or empirical risk minimization), it is indeed
possible to recover an approximation factor of 1 (or arbitrarily close to 1) (Wainwright, 2019; Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014). Whether or not similar guarantees are possible in RL problems, or what the optimal ratios would be, has
been largely unstudied. Towards studying this question, we
formulate an offline RL problem with linear features, and
examine the optimal approximation ratio achieved by any
estimator (even asymptotic ones). Attainable approximation
factors may depend on the number of samples available,
but the optimal asymptotic approximation factor is as low
as it can be since even “sample-inefficient” estimators are
allowed.

1. Introduction
Realizability assumptions are pervasive amongst theoretical
guarantees in reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximation. These assumptions posit that the true optimal
solution, a value function to be estimated from data, belongs
to the function class which is used. In practice, however,
the realizability assumption rarely holds, and the degree
to which it is violated is largely unknown. Thus, we need
algorithms that do not rely on the realizability assumption

Concretely, our learning problem is that of linear off-policy
value function estimation in infinite-horizon discounted
Markov Reward Processes (MRPs). Despite the apparent
simplicity of this setting, even here an understanding of the
blowup factors remains open. In this problem, the learner
is given access to a feature-map φ : S → Rd and an offline
dataset of tuples (si , ri , s′i ) from the MRP. The states si are
sampled i.i.d. from an off-policy distribution µ that may be

1

University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 2 University
of Alberta.
Correspondence to:
Philip Amortila
<philipa4@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

