Enabling First-Order Gradient-Based Learning
for Equilibrium Computation in Markets

Nils Kohring 1 Fabian R. Pieroth 1 Martin Bichler 1

Abstract

various auction applications, ranging from treasury and industrial procurement auctions to spectrum sales. Depending
on the circumstances and behavioral assumptions, optimal
strategies may differ drastically, starting from strategies,
such as understating demand (bid-shading) (Krishna, 2009)
and overstating demand (overbidding) (Ott & Beck, 2013),
or much more convoluted strategies. However, computing
such equilibria and approximations a priori remains challenging. Analytical equilibria can only be derived under
strong assumptions such as in single-item auctions or the
independent private values model.

Understanding and analyzing markets is crucial,
yet analytical equilibrium solutions remain largely
infeasible. Recent breakthroughs in equilibrium
computation rely on zeroth-order policy gradient
estimation. These approaches commonly suffer
from high variance and are computationally expensive. The use of fully differentiable simulators
would enable more efficient gradient estimation.
However, the discrete allocation of goods in economic simulations is a non-differentiable operation. This renders the first-order Monte Carlo
gradient estimator inapplicable and the learning
feedback systematically misleading. We propose
a novel smoothing technique that creates a surrogate market game, in which first-order methods
can be applied. We provide theoretical bounds
on the resulting bias which justifies solving the
smoothed game instead. These bounds also allow choosing the smoothing strength a priori such
that the resulting estimate has low variance. Furthermore, we validate our approach via numerous
empirical experiments. Our method theoretically
and empirically outperforms zeroth-order methods in approximation quality and computational
efficiency.

A recent approach based on policy optimization uses randomized finite difference approximations of the gradient
(Bichler et al., 2021). They proposed an algorithm called
neural pseudogradient ascent (NPGA), which parametrizes
the bidding strategies using neural networks and follows
the approximate gradient dynamics of the game via simultaneous gradient ascent of all agents. The gradients are
computed via evolution strategies (ES) (Salimans et al.,
2017), which smoothen the objective by adding noise in
the parameter space, thereby treating the environment as a
black box. Compared with the well-known REINFORCE
algorithm, where the actions are perturbed, this also results
in zeroth-order gradient estimates with better precision and
lower variance but much higher computational cost.
Under the differentiable programming paradigm, there is a
growing interest in computing gradients for numerous reinforcement learning applications that allow for first-order
gradient estimates. It is possible to create a full computational graph for applications with a certain amount of
structure. First-order methods have the advantage of much
lower variance, which leads to faster convergence rates to
local minima of non-convex objective functions (Mohamed
et al., 2020). However, there are two common problems in
employing first-order methods. First, most reinforcement
learning environments are provided only as black boxes.
This implies that there is no explicit access to the underlying state transition function and the gradient can only be
estimated by repeatedly evaluating the reward function. The
wide applicability of zeroth-order policy optimization, like
REINFORCE and more advanced actor-critic techniques
(Schulman et al., 2017), contributes to their popularity. Sec-

1. Introduction
Auctions are at the center of modern economic theory. Given
some private valuation of goods available for purchase, participants must place bids on the market that maximize their
expected payoff while remaining unaware of the other participants’ valuations. In the seminal paper (Vickrey, 1961)
the foundation for most auction theory results of today was
laid. It is crucial to understand the strategic behavior in
1

School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to: Nils Kohring
<nils.kohring@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

