Bandits with Knapsacks: Advice on Time-Varying Demands

Lixing Lyu 1 Wang Chi Cheung 2

Abstract

lem, an online knapsack problem involving model uncertainty introduced by (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013). The agent
has d ≥ 1 types of resources. At each time step t, the agent
pulls an arm, which generates an array of outcomes consisting of the random reward the amounts of the d resources
consumed. If some resource(s) are exhausted, then the agent
stops pulling any arm. The objective is to maximize the expected total reward over a known horizon T , subject to the
budget constraints on the d resources.

We consider a non-stationary Bandits with Knapsack problem. The outcome distribution at each
time is scaled by a non-stationary quantity that
signifies changing demand volumes. Instead of
studying settings with limited non-stationarity, we
investigate how online predictions on the total
demand volume Q allows us to improve our performance guarantees. We show that, without any
prediction, any online algorithm incurs a linearin-T regret. In contrast, with online predictions
on Q, we propose an online algorithm that judiciously incorporates the predictions, and achieve
regret bounds that depends on the accuracy of the
predictions. These bounds are shown to be tight
in settings when prediction accuracy improves
across time. Our theoretical results are corroborated by our numerical findings.

The BwK problem was first studied in a stationary stochastic setting, dubbed stochastic BwK, where the outcome of
an arm follows a stationary but latent probability distribution. (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013; Agrawal & Devanur, 2014)
provide online algorithms for stochastic BwK with regret
sub-linear in T . The regret is the difference between the
optimum and the expected cumulative reward earned by
the algorithm, and a sub-linear-in-T regret implies the convergence to opimality as T grows. An alternative setting,
adversarial BwK, is introduced by (Immorlica et al., 2019).
Each arm’s outcome distribution can change arbitrarily over
time. Contrary to stochastic BwK, it is impossible to achieve
a regret sub-linear in T , even when the outcome distribution is changed only once during the horizon (Liu et al.,
2022). It begs a question: could a non-stationary BwK problem be more tractable under a less adversarial model than
(Immorlica et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022)?

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit problem (MAB) is a classical model
on sequential decision making. The MAB problem features the trade-off between exploration and exploitation, i.e.,
between exploring for new information about the underlying system and exploiting the potentially optimal solution
based on current information. MAB problems have been
studied extensively over many decades, with diverse applications such as recommendation systems, ad allocation,
resource allocation, revenue management and network routing/scheduling.

Practically, while stationary models could be a strong assumption, it could be too pessimistic to assume the underlying model to be adversarily changing and completely latent.
Consider the example of ad allocation. On one hand, the
internet traffic is constantly changing, leading to a nonstationary model. On the other hand, forecast information
is often available. Some advertisements are intrinsically
more attractive than others, regardless of the internet traffic,
meaning that the click probability of an ad can be regarded
as stationary. How could the platform harness the probem
structure? Can the allocator utilize forecast information on
the internet traffic to improve his/her decisions?

Many of these mentioned applications involve resource constraints. For example, a seller experimenting with product
prices may have limited product inventory. This motivates
the formulation of the bandits with knapsack (BwK) prob1

Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Industrial
Systems Engineering and Management, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Lixing Lyu <lyulixing@u.nus.edu>, Wang Chi Cheung <isecwc@nus.edu.sg>.

Motivated by the discussions above, we consider the NonStationary BwK with Online Advice problem (NS-BwKOA). An outcome involve an adversarial and a stochastic
component. The mean reward and mean type-i resource
consumption of pulling arm a at time t are equal to qt · r(a)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

