Optimal Arms Identification with Knapsacks

Shaoang Li 1 Lan Zhang 1 Yingqi Yu 1 Xiang-Yang Li 1

Abstract

would like to identify the best ingredient to minimize harm
to the patients or maximize the medical therapeutic effect.
A series of efforts have been made to solve variants of BAI
problems (Xu et al., 2020; Katz-Samuels & Jamieson, 2020;
Zhang & Ong, 2021; Zhong et al., 2021).

Best Arm Identification (BAI) is a general online
pure exploration framework to identify optimal
decisions among candidates via sequential interactions. We pioneer the Optimal Arms identification with Knapsacks (OAK) problem, which
extends the BAI setting to model the resource
consumption. We present a novel OAK algorithm
and prove the upper bound of our algorithm by
exploring the relationship between selecting optimal actions and the structure of the feasible region. Our analysis introduces a new complexity
measure, which builds a bridge between the OAK
setting and bandits with knapsacks problem. We
establish the instance-dependent lower bound for
the OAK problem based on the new complexity
measure. Our results show that the proposed algorithm achieves a near-optimal probability bound
for the OAK problem. In addition, we demonstrate that our algorithm recovers or improves the
state-of-the-art upper bounds for several special
cases, including the simple OAK setting and some
classical pure exploration problems.

The bandits with knapsacks (BwK) framework was introduced by (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013) to deal with a more
general and realistic setting that takes the resource consumption into consideration. In the BwK setting, the optimal
fixed distribution over arms may outperform the arm with
the highest expected reward. The support of optimal distribution is composed of the arms with optimal ‘bang-per-buck,’
i.e., reward per unit of resource consumption, thus there are
multiple ‘optimal arms’ (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013). Existing works focus on maximizing the accumulated reward
under the resource constraints by finding the optimal fixed
distribution (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013; Agrawal & Devanur,
2014).
In this paper, we consider a common situation in which
the decision-maker needs to identify all optimal arms with
the knapsack constraints, and define it as the optimal arms
identification (OAK) problem. In the OAK setting, there
exists a fixed set of arms and the hard constrained capacity
for each resource; each arm is associated with an unknown
reward distribution and an unknown consumption distribution. During the exploration, the decision-maker chooses
an arm in each round and only observes a scalar-valued
reward independently sampled from the reward distribution
and a resource consumption vector independently sampled
from the consumption distribution. Once one or more resource budget constraint is violated then the exploration
stops. The decision-maker aims to maximize the probability
of identifying all optimal arms with the resource knapsacks.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits exemplify the exploration-exploitation
trade-off framework in online decision-making problems.
The decision-maker selects arms (actions, options, decisions) sequentially and learns from the rewards to maximize
the expected cumulative rewards over a number of trials.
Many applications need to identify the best action over the
candidates, and the rewards or loss during the exploration is
ignored, which is defined as the best arm identification (BAI)
problem (Audibert et al., 2010). For example, in a medical
trial problem with m candidate ingredients and T patients
that can be admitted to the medical trial (the exploration
phase is limited by a fixed budget T ), the decision-maker

The OAK problem encompasses a wide range of applications due to the presence of resource constraints in pure
exploration decision problems. For example, during the
medical testing phase, the selection of ingredients may be
constrained by the supply and monetary cost of each component, and the decision-maker would like to identify the
ingredients that minimize harm to the patients or maximize the medical therapeutic effect. Similarly, the dynamic
pricing problem involves sellers who face limited supply
and aim to determine the optimal policy for maximizing

1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
Correspondence to: Lan Zhang <zhanglan@ustc.edu.cn>, XiangYang Li <xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

