On the Within-Group Fairness of Screening Classifiers

Nastaran Okati 1 Stratis Tsirtsis 1 Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez 1

Abstract

stakes domains, including medicine (Etzioni et al., 2003;
Shen et al., 2019), recruiting (Cowgill, 2018; Raghavan
et al., 2020) and content moderation (Gorwa et al., 2020).
In the machine learning literature, algorithmic screening
has been studied together with other high-stakes decision
making problems as a supervised learning problem (CorbettDavies et al., 2017; Kilbertus et al., 2020; Sahoo et al., 2021).
Under this view, algorithmic screening consists of designing
both a screening classifier, which estimates the probability that a candidate is qualified, and a screening policy,
which shortlists candidates using the candidates’ probability
values estimated by the screening classifier. Only very recently, a line of work has focused specifically on algorithmic
screening (Wang et al., 2022; Jin & Candès, 2022; Wang &
Joachims, 2023). Therein, Wang et al. (2022) argue that, to
increase the efficiency of the selection process without decreasing the quality of the shortlisted candidates, the focus
should be on screening policies that find the smallest shortlist of candidates containing a desired average number of
qualified candidates with high probability without making
any distributional assumptions on the candidates. Further,
this work has shown that, if the screening classifier is calibrated (Dawid, 1982), such distribution-free guarantees can
be achieved using threshold decision rules as screening policies, and the more granular the predictions of the classifier,
the smaller the shortlists provided by such policies.

Screening classifiers are increasingly used to identify qualified candidates in a variety of selection
processes. In this context, it has been recently
shown that if a classifier is calibrated, one can
identify the smallest set of candidates which contains, in expectation, a desired number of qualified candidates using a threshold decision rule.
This lends support to focusing on calibration as
the only requirement for screening classifiers. In
this paper, we argue that screening policies that
use calibrated classifiers may suffer from an understudied type of within-group unfairness—they
may unfairly treat qualified members within demographic groups of interest. Further, we argue
that this type of unfairness can be avoided if classifiers satisfy within-group monotonicity, a natural
monotonicity property within each group. Then,
we introduce an efficient post-processing algorithm based on dynamic programming to minimally modify a given calibrated classifier so
that its probability estimates satisfy within-group
monotonicity. We validate our algorithm using
US Census survey data and show that withingroup monotonicity can often be achieved at a
small cost in terms of prediction granularity and
shortlist size.

In this work, our starting point is the realization that any
threshold decision rule that uses calibrated screening classifiers may be biased against qualified candidates within
demographic groups of interest. More specifically, it may
shortlist one or more candidates from a group who are less
likely to be qualified than one or more rejected candidates
from the same group. Unfortunately, this type of withingroup unfairness may perpetuate historical biases against
minority groups since it may preclude the best candidates
from the groups—the candidates who are more likely to
be qualified—to move forward in the selection process and
have a chance to be selected (Yang et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
As many selection processes receive hundreds or even thousands of applications, it has become increasingly common
to rely on automated screening tools to shortlist a tractable
set of promising candidates. These shortlisted candidates
then move forward in the selection process and are evaluated
in detail, possibly multiple times, until one or more qualified
candidates are selected. The benefits and harms posed by
automated screening have been investigated in many high-

Our contributions. We first show that to avoid such withingroup unfairness, screening classifiers need to satisfy a natural monotonicity property within each of the groups of
interest, which we refer to as within-group monotonicity.
Then, we develop a set partitioning post-processing framework to minimally modify any calibrated classifier such that

1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems. Correspondence
to: Nastaran Okati <nastaran@mpi-sws.org>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

