SDDM: Score-Decomposed Diffusion Models on Manifolds
for Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation

Shikun Sun 1 † Longhui Wei 2 Junliang Xing 1 Jia Jia 1 3 Qi Tian 2

Abstract

main with energy guidance (Zhao et al., 2022) or statistical (Choi et al., 2021) guidance outperforms generative
adversarial network (Goodfellow et al., 2014)(GAN)-based
methods (Fu et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2017; Yi et al., 2017;
Park et al., 2020; Benaim & Wolf, 2017; Zheng et al., 2021;
Shen et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2020; Lee
et al., 2018) and achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

Recent score-based diffusion models (SBDMs)
show promising results in unpaired image-toimage translation (I2I). However, existing methods, either energy-based or statistically-based,
provide no explicit form of the interfered intermediate generative distributions. This work
presents a new score-decomposed diffusion model
(SDDM) on manifolds to explicitly optimize the
tangled distributions during image generation.
SDDM derives manifolds to make the distributions of adjacent time steps separable and decompose the score function or energy guidance into an
image “denoising” part and a content “refinement”
part. To refine the image in the same noise level,
we equalize the refinement parts of the score function and energy guidance, which permits multiobjective optimization on the manifold. We also
leverage the block adaptive instance normalization module to construct manifolds with lower dimensions but still concentrated with the perturbed
reference image. SDDM outperforms existing
SBDM-based methods with much fewer diffusion
steps on several I2I benchmarks.

SBDMs provide a diffusion model to guide how imageshaped data from a Gauss distribution is iterated step by step
into an image of the target domain. In each step, SBDM
gives score guidance which, from an engineering perspective, can be mixed with energy and statistical guidance to
control the generation process. However, firstly due to the
stochastic differential equations of the inverse diffusion process, the coefficient of the score guidance is not changeable.
Secondly how energy guidances affect the intermediate distributions is still not clear. As a result, the I2I result is often
unsatisfactory, especially when iterations are inadequate.
Moreover, there has yet to be a method to ensure that the
intermediate distributions are not negatively interfered with
during the above guidance process.
To overcome these limitations, we propose to decompose the
score function from a new manifold optimization perspective, thus better exerting the energy and statistical guidance.
To this end, we present SDDM, a new score-decomposed
diffusion model on manifolds to explicitly optimize the tangled distributions during the conditional image generation
process. When generating an image from score guidance,
an SBDM actually performs two distinct tasks, one is image “denoising”, and the other is content “refinement” to
bring the image-shaped data closer to the target domain
distribution with the same noise level. Based on this new
perspective, SDDM decomposes the score function into two
different parts, one for image denoising and the other for
content refinement. To realize this decomposition, we take
statistical guidance as the manifold restriction to get an explicit division between the data distributions in neighboring
time steps. We find that the tangent space of the manifold
naturally separates the denoising part and the refinement
part of the score function. In addition, the tangent space can
also split out the denoising part of the energy guidance, thus
achieving a more explanatory conditional generation.

1. Introduction
Score-based diffusion models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song
et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Bao
et al., 2022a; Lu et al., 2022) (SBDMs) have recently made
significant progress in a series of conditional image generation tasks. In particular, in the unpaired image-to-image
translation (I2I) task (Pang et al., 2021), recent studies have
shown that a pre-trained SBDM on the target image do†

Work done when interning at Huawei Cloud. 1 Department of
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 2 Huawei Cloud. 3 Beijing National Research Center for
Information Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Jia Jia
<jiajia@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

