Multi-agent Online Scheduling: MMS Allocations for Indivisible Items

Shengwei Zhou 1 Rufan Bai 1 Xiaowei Wu 1

Abstract

2019; Li et al., 2021). We focus on the online scheduling
problem where jobs arrive online and each incoming job
should be assigned by the algorithm immediately. Contrast to the classic online scheduling models that focus on
allocation to machines and object on optimizing global objectives, e.g., maximizing the minimum load (Tan & Wu,
2007; Max et al., 2022; Cheng, 2022), or minimizing the
maximum load (Kellerer et al., 2015), we consider the allocation to agents and study the online scheduling problem in
a multi-agent perspective. The problem coincides with the
online maximin share (MMS) allocation problem proposed
by Amanatidis et al. (2022), which falls into the class of fair
allocation problems.

We consider the problem of fairly allocating a
sequence of indivisible items that arrive online
in an arbitrary order to a group of n agents with
additive normalized valuation functions, we consider both the allocation of goods and chores and
propose algorithms for approximating maximin
share (MMS) allocations. When agents have identical valuation functions the problem coincides
with the semi-online machine covering problem
(when items are goods) and load balancing problem (when items are chores), for both of which
optimal competitive ratios have been achieved. In
this paper, we consider the case when agents have
general valuation functions. For the allocation of
goods, we show that no competitive algorithm exists even when there are only three agents and propose an optimal 0.5-competitive algorithm for the
case of two agents. For the allocation of chores,
we propose a (2 − 1/n)-competitive
algorithm
√
for n ≥ 3 agents and a 2 ≈ 1.414-competitive
algorithm for two agents. Besides, we show that
no algorithm can do better than 15/11 ≈ 1.364competitive for two agents.

In the fair allocation problem, there is a set M of m indivisible items (jobs) and a group N of n (heterogeneous) agents,
where each agent i ∈ N has a valuation function vi on the
items. For indivisible items, each item e ∈ M must be
allocated to exactly one of the agents in N . Therefore each
allocation corresponds to a partitioning of the items into n
bundles (X1 , . . . , Xn ), where agent i ∈ N receives bundle
Xi . When agents have positive values on the items, we call
the items goods, e.g., consider the allocation of gifts to kids;
when agents have negative values on the items, we call the
items chores, e.g., when allocating tasks to workers. In this
paper, we study both the allocation of goods and chores. For
the case of chores, we assume that agents have positive costs
on the items and refer to the valuation function of agent i as
a cost function ci : 2N → R+ .

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning algorithms usually focus on
global objectives such as efficiency or maximizing profit and
have no guarantee of fairness between individuals. As learning decision-making is increasingly involved in our daily
life, the problem of algorithm bias has received increasing attention. Motivated by several real-world problems in
which decision processes impact human beings who must
be treated fairly and unbiasedly, there is increasing attention
on fair learning algorithms (Chen et al., 2019; Backurs et al.,

Different fairness notions have been proposed to measure
how fair an allocation is, e.g., the envy-freeness (EF) (Foley, 1967; Lipton et al., 2004; Caragiannis et al., 2019),
proportionality (PROP) (Steihaus, 1948) and maximin fair
share (MMS) (Budish, 2011). In this paper, we focus on
the fairness notion of MMS. Informally speaking, the MMS
value MMSi of an agent i ∈ N is the best she can guarantee if she gets to partition items into n bundles but is the
last agent to pick a bundle. An allocation is called MMS
if every agent receives a bundle with objective no worse
than her MMS value. For the case of goods, that means
vi (Xi ) ≥ MMSi for all i ∈ N ; for the case of chores, that
means ci (Xi ) ≤ MMSi for all i ∈ N . Similar to several
works on online scheduling (Ebenlendr et al., 2005; Wu
et al., 2007; Angelelli et al., 2007; Cheng et al., 2005; Lee
& Lim, 2013), we consider the setting of semi-online in

1

IOTSC, University of Macau, Macao SAR, China. This
project is funded by the Science and Technology Development
Fund (FDCT), Macau SAR (file no. 0014/2022/AFJ, 0085/2022/A,
0143/2020/A3 and SKL-IOTSC-2021-2023) . Correspondence to:
Xiaowei Wu <xiaoweiwu@um.edu.mo>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

