Dual Propagation:
Accelerating Contrastive Hebbian Learning with Dyadic Neurons

Rasmus Høier 1 D. Staudt 1 Christopher Zach 1

Abstract
Activity difference based learning algorithms—
such as contrastive Hebbian learning and equilibrium propagation—have been proposed as biologically plausible alternatives to error backpropagation. However, on traditional digital chips
these algorithms suffer from having to solve a
costly inference problem twice, making these
approaches more than two orders of magnitude
slower than back-propagation. In the analog realm
equilibrium propagation may be promising for
fast and energy efficient learning, but states still
need to be inferred and stored twice. Inspired
by lifted neural networks and compartmental neuron models we propose a simple energy based
compartmental neuron model, termed dual propagation, in which each neuron is a dyad with two
intrinsic states. At inference time these intrinsic
states encode the error/activity duality through
their difference and their mean respectively. The
advantage of this method is that only a single inference phase is needed and that inference can be
solved in layerwise closed-form. Experimentally
we show on common computer vision datasets,
including Imagenet32x32, that dual propagation
performs equivalently to back-propagation both
in terms of accuracy and runtime.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) A fully connected network with compartmental
neurons. (b) Close-up of neuron i in layer k. Solid arrows
indicate identity connections and dashed arrows indicate
sign inversion. The neuron possesses positively and nega+
−
tively nudged states zk,i
and zk,i
and propagates two types
−
1 +
of signals. The mean 2 (zk,i + zk,i
) is propagated upstream
+
−
to layer k + 1 while the difference 12 (zk,i
− zk,i
) is propagated downstream to layer k − 1.

lenge is the energy consumption of using back-propagation
to train deep neural networks (Strubell et al., 2019), which
can be largely attributed to floating point processing but also
to the required fine-grained synchronization of the individual steps—therefore preventing the utilization of e.g. energy
efficient analog circuits (Yi et al., 2022). Consequently,
taking inspiration from biological motivated learning algorithms may contribute to making deep neural networks
substantially more energy efficient. Research along these
lines has converged on the idea of encoding weight updates
in terms of neuronal activity differences, Neural Gradient
Representation by Activity Differences (NGRAD) (Lillicrap et al., 2020). NGRAD methods differ in terms of what
is meant by activity difference. Some approaches use the
difference in neuron activity at different times, while others
compute the difference between different sub-states within
individual neurons.

1. Introduction
In spite of the massive success of the error back-propagation
(BP) method for training deep neural networks, there are
several theoretical and practical reasons to consider alternatives. One theoretical reason is the question of biological
plausibility, which was already raised in (Crick, 1989) soon
after the publication of the influential back-propagation paper (Rumelhart et al., 1986). A significant practical chal-

Contrastive Hebbian learning (Movellan, 1991; Xie & Seung, 2003) and its modern incarnation (Scellier & Bengio,
2017) fall into the NGRAD category of methods and replace
the fine-grained synchronization in BP with globally synchronizing two inference phases. This allows continuous
and asynchronous transmission of neural activity signals

1

Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden. Correspondence
to: Rasmus Høier <hier@chalmers.se>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

