Towards Reliable Neural Specifications

Chuqin Geng * 1 2 Nham Le * 3 Xiaojie Xu 1 2 Zhaoyue Wang 1 2 Arie Gurfinkel 3 Xujie Si 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
The advances in deep neural networks (DNNs) have brought
a wide societal impact in many domains such as transportation, healthcare, finance, e-commerce, and education. This
growing societal-scale impact has also raised some risks
and concerns about errors in AI software, their susceptibility to cyber-attacks, and AI system safety (Dietterich &
Horvitz, 2015). Therefore, the challenge of verification and
validation of AI systems, as well as, achieving trustworthy AI (Wing, 2021), has attracted much attention of the
research community. Existing works approach this challenge by building on formal methods – a field of computer
science and engineering that involves verifying properties
of systems using rigorous mathematical specifications and
proofs (Wing, 1990). Having a formal specification — a precise, mathematical statement of what AI system is supposed
to do is critical for formal verification. Most works (Katz
et al., 2017; 2019; Huang et al., 2017; 2020; Wang et al.,
2021) use the specification of adversarial robustness for classification tasks that states that the NN correctly classifies
an image as a given adversarial label under perturbations
with a specific norm (usually L8 ). Generally speaking, existing works use a paradigm of data as specification — the
robustness of local neighborhoods of reference data points
with ground-truth labels is the only specification of correct
behaviors. However, from a learning perspective, this would
lead to overfitted specification, since only local neighborhoods of reference inputs get certified and the generalization
to unseen data points may not be guaranteed.

Having reliable specifications is an unavoidable
challenge in achieving verifiable correctness, robustness, and interpretability of AI systems. Existing specifications for neural networks are in
the paradigm of data as specification. That is,
the local neighborhood centering around a reference input is considered to be correct (or robust). While existing specifications contribute
to verifying adversarial robustness, a significant
problem in many research domains, our empirical study shows that those verified regions are
somewhat tight, and thus fail to allow verification of test set inputs, making them impractical
for some real-world applications. To this end,
we propose a new family of specifications called
neural representation as specification. This form
of specifications uses the intrinsic information of
neural networks, specifically neural activation patterns (NAPs), rather than input data to specify the
correctness and/or robustness of neural network
predictions. We present a simple statistical approach to mining neural activation patterns. To
show the effectiveness of discovered NAPs, we
formally verify several important properties, such
as various types of misclassifications will never
happen for a given NAP, and there is no ambiguity between different NAPs. We show that by
using NAP, we can verify a significant region of
the input space, while still recalling 84% of the
data on MNIST. Moreover, we can push the verifiable bound to 10 times larger on the CIFAR10
benchmark. Thus, we argue that NAPs can potentially be used as a more reliable and extensible
specification for neural network verification.

As a concrete example, Figure 1 illustrates the fundamental
limitation of such overfitted specifications. Specifically, a
testing input like the one shown in Figure 1a can hardly
be verified even if all local neighborhoods of all training
images have been certified using the L8 norm. This is because adversarial examples like Figure 1c fall into a much
closer region compared to testing inputs (e.g., Figure 1a),
as a result, the truly verifiable region for a given reference
input like Figure 1b can only be smaller. All neural network
verification approaches following such data-as-specification
paradigm inherit this limitation regardless of their underlying verification techniques. In order to avoid such a limitation, a new paradigm for specifying what is correct or wrong
is necessary. The intrinsic challenge is that manually giving
a proper specification on the input space is no easier than

*

Equal contribution 1 McGill University 2 Mila Quebec AI Institute 3 University of Waterloo 4 University of Toronto. Correspondence to: Chuqin Geng <chuqin.geng@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

