A Universal Unbiased Method for Classification from Aggregate Observations

Zixi Wei 1 Lei Feng 2 3 Bo Han 4 3 Tongliang Liu 5 6 3 Gang Niu 3 Xiaofeng Zhu 7 Heng Tao Shen 7

Abstract

promising performance on various classification tasks, while
such a success heavily relies on a large number of highquality labels for individual instances (Jordan & Mitchell,
2015). In many real-world scenarios, it could be prohibitive
to collect strong supervision information for individual instances, due to privacy issues, confidentiality concerns, or
unaffordable annotation costs. These challenges of individual annotations motivate us to consider the supervision for
groups of instances, instead of individual instances.

In conventional supervised classification, true labels are required for individual instances. However, it could be prohibitive to collect the true
labels for individual instances, due to privacy concerns or unaffordable annotation costs. This motivates the study on classification from aggregate
observations (CFAO), where the supervision is
provided to groups of instances, instead of individual instances. CFAO is a generalized learning
framework that contains various learning problems, such as multiple-instance learning and learning from label proportions. The goal of this paper
is to present a novel universal method of CFAO,
which holds an unbiased estimator of the classification risk for arbitrary losses—previous research
failed to achieve this goal. Practically, our method
works by weighing the importance of each label
for each instance in the group, which provides purified supervision for the classifier to learn. Theoretically, our proposed method not only guarantees the risk consistency due to the unbiased risk
estimator but also can be compatible with arbitrary losses. Extensive experiments on various
problems of CFAO demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed method.

The supervision of groups of instances can be feasible in
many realistic applications. For example, to protect the
information of individual data points, some summary statistics of groups of data could be disclosed. For the drug
activity prediction task (Dietterich et al., 1997), individual
annotations are inaccessible, while group annotations are
provided. Besides, collecting the supervision information
of groups of instances could incur much fewer costs when
the annotations costs are unaffordable for individual instances (Zhou, 2018). In addition, making predictions about
individual-level behavior based on group-level data also has
gained much attention from other fields, such as ecological inference (Schuessler, 1999; Flaxman et al., 2015) and
preference learning (Fürnkranz & Hüllermeier, 2003; Chu
& Ghahramani, 2005).
The feasibility of group supervision motivates us to investigate the task of classification from aggregate observations
(CFAO), where we aim to learn a classifier with only supervision on groups of instances. In CFAO, training data
are represented by groups of instances and we can only observe the aggregate information of the group. CFAO can be
considered as a general learning framework, which contains
various learning problems with different types of aggregate
information. A well-known problem belonging to CFAO is
multiple-instance learning (Maron & Lozano-Pérez, 1997;
Carbonneau et al., 2018), where the aggregate information
is whether the group has at least one positive instance. Another typical problem is learning from label proportions
(Yu et al., 2013; Scott & Zhang, 2020), where the aggregate
information is the proportion of instances from each class
in the group. In recent years, CFAO has received increasing attention and some interesting problems of CFAO have
been investigated. Bao et al. (2018a) studied classification
from pairwise similarities, where the aggregate information
is whether two instances in the group belong to the same

1. Introduction
Classification is one of the most frequently encountered
problems in machine learning (Kotsiantis et al., 2006). Over
the past ten years, deep learning models have achieved
1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan 4 Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong Baptist University, China 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates 6 Sydney AI Centre,
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
7
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China. Correspondence
to: Lei Feng <lfengqaq@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

