Layered State Discovery for Incremental Autonomous Exploration

Liyu Chen 1 Andrea Tirinzoni 2 Alessandro Lazaric 2 Matteo Pirotta 2

Abstract

learning near-optimal policies to reach them. Lim & Auer
(2012) also devised the first sample efficient exploration
algorithm (U CB E XPLORE) for this setting, while its sample
complexity and optimality guarantees were later improved
by D IS C O (Tarbouriech et al., 2020b) and VALAE (Cai
et al., 2022).

We study the autonomous exploration (AX) problem proposed by Lim & Auer (2012). In this
setting, the objective is to discover a set of optimal policies reaching a set SL→ of incrementally L-controllable states. We introduce a novel
layered decomposition of the set of incrementally L-controllable states that is based on the
iterative application of a state-expansion operator. We leverage these results to design Layered Autonomous Exploration (LAE), a novel algorithm for AX that attains a sample complex→
→
ΓL(1+) A log12 (SL(1+)
)/2 ),
ity of Õ(LSL(1+)
→
where SL(1+)
is the number of states that are
incrementally L(1 + )-controllable, A is the
number of actions, and ΓL(1+) is the branching factor of the transitions over such states.
LAE improves over the algorithm of Tarbouriech
et al. (2020b) by a factor of L2 and it is the
first algorithm for AX that works in a countablyinfinite state space. Moreover, we show that,
under a certain identifiability assumption, LAE
achieves minimax-optimal sample complexity of
Õ(LSL→ A log12 (SL→ )/2 ), outperforming existing algorithms and matching for the first time the
lower bound proved by Cai et al. (2022) up to
logarithmic factors.

In this paper, we make several contributions to this problem:
• Given an initial state s0 , the autonomous exploration
objective is built upon the concept of incrementally Lcontrollable states, i.e., states that can be reached within
L steps from s0 by only traversing incrementally Lcontrollable states1 . While the original definition of the
set of incrementally L-controllable states SL→ involves
considering all possible partial orders of states in the environment, we derive an equivalent constructive definition
that reveals the layered structure of SL→ , where each layer
can be obtained as the set of states that can be reached
in L steps by only traversing states in the previous layers
(see Section 2.1).
• We then leverage the layered structure of SL→ to design
Layered Autonomous Exploration (LAE), a novel algorithm that keeps exploring the environment to learn policies to reach newly discovered states until a new layer can
be consolidated and a new step of discovery and learning
is started. We prove that the sample complexity of LAE
→
is bounded as Õ(LSL(1+)
ΓL(1+) A/2 ), where L is the
→
exploration radius, SL(1+) is the number of states that
are incrementally controllable from the initial state within
L(1 + ) steps, ΓL(1+) is the branching factor of the transition function over such states, A is the number actions,
and  is target accuracy. As illustrated in Table 1, this improves the sample complexity of D IS C O by a factor of L2
→
and it avoids the scaling with S2L
of VALAE, which in
→
some MDPs may be much larger than SL(1+)
, thus making the bound of LAE preferable. Indeed, in Lemma 43
→
in appendix we show that S2L
may be even exponentially
→
larger than SL(1+) .

1. Introduction
A distinctive feature of intelligent beings is the ability to
explore an unknown environment without any supervision
or extrinsic reward while learning skills that solve tasks
(e.g., reaching goal states) of increasing difficulty. Lim
& Auer (2012) first proposed a formal framework of autonomous exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) as
the process of progressively discovering states within a certain distance from an initial state s0 at the same time as

• Under a certain layer identifiability condition (see Assumption 2), we further improve the sample complexity of

1

University of Southern California 2 Meta. Correspondence to:
Liyu Chen <liyuc@usc.edu>.

1
We say that a state s is L-controllable if there exists a policy
that reaches s from s0 in less than L steps on average. In general
an L-controllable state may be reached by policies traversing states
that are not L-controllable themselves.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

