DADAO: Decoupled Accelerated Decentralized Asynchronous Optimization

Adel Nabli 1 2 Edouard Oyallon 1

Abstract

nected hardware have brought significant changes in the
way we process data. These developments have led to the
need for efficient and scalable methods for distributed optimization, particularly in the context of machine learning.
Indeed, in scenarios where data is distributed across multiple nodes, such as in edge computing or distributed sensor
networks, leveraging the local resources of each device is
a topic of significant interest. In other settings, such as
clusters, spreading the compute load is ideally done to obtain a linear speedup in the number of nodes. In a typical
distributed training framework, the goal is to minimize a
sum of functions (fi )i≤n split across n nodes of a computer network. A corresponding optimization procedure
involves alternating local computations on the nodes and
communications along the edges E of the network. In the
decentralized setting, there is no central machine aggregating the information sent by the workers: nodes are only
allowed to communicate with their neighbors in the network.
This work addresses simultaneously multiple limitations of
existing decentralized algorithms while guaranteeing fast
convergence rates.

This work introduces DADAO: the first decentralized, accelerated, asynchronous, primal, firstorder algorithm to minimize a sum of L-smooth
and µ-strongly convex functions distributed over a
given network of size n. Our key insight is based
on modeling the local gradient updates and gossip
communication procedures with separate independent Poisson Point Processes. This allows us to decouple the computation and communication steps,
which can be run in parallel, while making the
whole approach completely asynchronous. This
leads to communication acceleration compared to
synchronous approaches. Our new method employs primal gradients and does not use a multiconsensus inner loop nor other ad-hoc mechanisms such as Error Feedback, Gradient Tracking,
or a Proximal operator. By relating the inverse of
the smallest positive eigenvalue of the Laplacian
matrix χ1 and the maximal resistance χ2 ≤ χ1 of
the graph to a sufficient minimal communication
rate between the nodes of the network,
we show
q
L
that our algorithm requires O(n µ log( 1ϵ )) local
q
√
1
gradients and only O(n χ1 χ2 L
µ log( ϵ )) communications to reach a precision ϵ, up to logarithmic terms. Thus, we simultaneously obtain an accelerated rate for both computations and communications, leading to an improvement over stateof-the-art works, our simulations further validating the strength of our relatively unconstrained
method.

Synchronous lock. Optimal methods (Scaman et al.,
2017; Kovalev et al., 2021a) have been derived for synchronous first-order algorithms, whose executions are
blocked until all nodes have reached a predefined state (e.g.,
they must all finish computing local gradients before the
round of communication begins), which limits their efficiency in practice as they can heavily be impacted by a few
slow nodes or edges in the graph (the straggler problem).
To tackle the synchronous lock, we rely on the continuized
framework (Even et al., 2021a), itself derived from the randomized gossip model (Boyd et al., 2006). In randomized
gossip, nodes update their local values at random times using pairwise communication updates named gossip. Thus,
iterates are randomized, labeled with a continuous-time index that only need local clocks to be synchronized at the
beginning of the procedure (in opposition to a global iteration count that has to be known by all at all time) and
performed locally with no regards to a specific global ordering of events. While based on discrete events and thus
readily implementable, the continuized framework simplifies the analysis by leveraging continuous proof tools.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the increased amount of available data as
well as the proliferation of highly-parallelizable and con1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, Paris, France 2 Mila, Concordia
University, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Adel Nabli
<adel.nabli@sorbonne-universite.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

