Preprocessors Matter! Realistic Decision-Based Attacks on Machine Learning Systems

Chawin Sitawarin 1 Florian Tramèr 2 Nicholas Carlini 3

Abstract

sary can fool machine learning models with adversarial
examples (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2014). Most
prior work focuses on white-box attacks, where an adversary
has perfect knowledge of the entire machine learning system (Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Yet, real adversaries rarely
have this level of access (Tramèr et al., 2019), and must
thus instead resort to black-box attacks (Chen et al., 2017).
Decision-based attacks (Brendel et al., 2018a) are a particularly practical attack vector, as these attacks only require
the ability to query a target model and observe its decisions.

Decision-based attacks construct adversarial
examples against a machine learning (ML)
model by making only hard-label queries. These
attacks have mainly been applied directly to
standalone neural networks. However, in practice,
ML models are just one component of a larger
learning system. We find that by adding a
single preprocessor in front of a classifier,
state-of-the-art query-based attacks are up to
seven× less effective at attacking a prediction
pipeline than at attacking the model alone.
We explain this discrepancy by the fact that
most preprocessors introduce some notion of
invariance to the input space. Hence, attacks
that are unaware of this invariance inevitably
waste a large number of queries to re-discover or
overcome it. We therefore develop techniques
to (i) reverse-engineer the preprocessor and
then (ii) use this extracted information to attack
the end-to-end system.
Our preprocessors
extraction method requires only a few hundreds
queries, and our preprocessor-aware attacks
recover the same efficacy as when attacking the
model alone. The code can be found at https:
//github.com/google-research/
preprocessor-aware-black-box-attack.

However, existing decision-based attacks (Brendel et al.,
2018b; Cheng et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2020) have primarily been evaluated against standalone ML
models “in the lab”, thereby ignoring the components of
broader learning systems that are used in practice. While
some decision-based attacks have been demonstrated on
production systems as a proof-of-concept (e.g., Ilyas et al.
(2018); Brendel et al. (2018a); Li et al. (2020)), it is not
well understood how these attacks perform on end-to-end
learning systems compared to standalone models.
We show that existing decision-based attacks are significantly less effective against end-to-end systems compared to standalone machine learning models. For example, a standard decision-based attack can evade a ResNet
image classifier on ImageNet with an average ℓ2 -distortion
of 3.7 (defined formally later). Yet, if we instead attack
an end-to-end learning system that simply preprocesses the
classifier’s input before classifying it—e.g., by resizing or
compressing the image—the attack achieves an average ℓ2
distortion of 28.5—a 7× increase! We further find that
extensive hyperparameter tuning and running the attacks for
more iterations fail to resolve this issue. We thus argue that
existing decision-box attacks have fundamental limitations
that make them sub-optimal in practice.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is widely used in security-critical systems,
for example for detecting abusive, harmful or otherwise
unsafe online content (Waseem et al., 2017; Clarifai; Jha &
Mamidi, 2017). It is critical that such systems are robust
against adversaries who seeks to evade them.

To remedy this, we develop improved attacks that achieve
the same success rate when attacking systems with unknown preprocessors, as when attacking standalone
models. Our attacks combine decision-based attacks with
techniques developed for model extraction (Tramèr et al.,
2016). Our attacks first query the system to reverse-engineer
the preprocessor(s) used in the input pipeline, and then
mount a modified preprocessor-aware decision-based attack.
Our extraction procedure is efficient and often requires only
a few hundred queries to identify commonly used preproces-

Yet, an extensive body of work has shown that an adver1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Berkeley, USA. Work partially done while the author was at
Google. 2 ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. 3 Google DeepMind,
Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to: Chawin Sitawarin
<chawins@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

