On Balancing Bias and Variance in
Unsupervised Multi-Source-Free Domain Adaptation

Maohao Shen 1 Yuheng Bu 2 Gregory Wornell 1

Abstract

proposed to mitigate this issue by transferring the knowledge
learned from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target
domain. One prevailing UDA strategy to resolve the domain shift issue is domain alignment, i.e., learning domaininvariant features either by minimizing the discrepancy between the source and target data (Long et al., 2015; 2018;
Peng et al., 2019) or through adversarial training (Ganin &
Lempitsky, 2015; Tzeng et al., 2017). However, traditional
UDA methods require access to labeled source data and only
apply to the single source domain adaptation, which cannot
fulfill the emerging challenges in real-world applications.

Due to privacy, storage, and other constraints,
there is a growing need for unsupervised domain
adaptation techniques in machine learning that do
not require access to the data used to train a collection of source models. Existing methods for multisource-free domain adaptation (MSFDA) typically train a target model using pseudo-labeled
data produced by the source models, which focus
on improving the pseudo-labeling techniques or
proposing new training objectives. Instead, we
aim to analyze the fundamental limits of MSFDA.
In particular, we develop an information-theoretic
bound on the generalization error of the resulting target model, which illustrates an inherent
bias-variance trade-off. We then provide insights
on how to balance this trade-off from three perspectives, including domain aggregation, selective pseudo-labeling, and joint feature alignment,
which leads to the design of novel algorithms.
Experiments on multiple datasets validate our theoretical analysis and demonstrate the state-of-art
performance of the proposed algorithm, especially
on some of the most challenging datasets, including Office-Home and DomainNet.

In practice, the source data might not be available due to various reasons: privacy preservation, i.e., the data that contains
sensitive information, such as health and financial status, is
unsuitable to be made public; and storage limitations, i.e.,
large-scale datasets, such as high-resolution videos, require
substantial storage space. Due to these practical concerns,
the source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) problem has attracted increasing attentions (Yang et al., 2020; Kim et al.,
2020; Liang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020), which aims to
address the data-free challenge by adapting the pretrained
source model to the unlabeled target domain.
The other practical concern is that the source data is usually collected from multiple domains with different underlying distributions, such as the street scene from different
cities (Cordts et al., 2016) and the biomedical images with
different modalities (Dou et al., 2018). Taking such practical
consideration into account, multi-source domain adaptation
(MSDA) (Guo et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2019) aims to adapt
to the target domain by properly aggregating the knowledge
from multiple source domains.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models trained in a standard supervised
manner suffer from the problem of domain shift (QuiñoneroCandela et al., 2008), i.e., directly applying the model
trained on the source domain to a distinct target domain
usually results in poor generalization performance. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) techniques have been

A more challenging scenario is to combine both the data-free
and multi-source settings, i.e., the source data collected from
multiple domains with distinct distributions is not accessible
due to some practical constraints. For example, federated
learning (Truong et al., 2021) aggregates the information
learned from a group of heterogeneous users. To preserve
user privacy, the data of each user is stored locally, and only
the trained models are transmitted to the central server.

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
2
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University
of Florida, Gainesville, USA. Correspondence to: Maohao Shen
<maohao@mit.edu>.

We consider the Multi-Source-Free Domain Adaptation
(MSFDA) problem to overcome these two challenges. The

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

