Superhuman Fairness

Omid Memarrast 1 Linh Vu 1 Brian Ziebart 1

Abstract
Figure 1. Three sets of
decisions (black dots)
with different predictive
performance and group
disparity values defining
the sets of 100%-, 67%-,
and 33%-superhuman
fairness-performance
values (red shades) based
on Pareto dominance.

The fairness of machine learning-based decisions
has become an increasingly important focus in the
design of supervised machine learning methods.
Most fairness approaches optimize a specified
trade-off between performance measure(s) (e.g.,
accuracy, log loss, or AUC) and fairness measure(s) (e.g., demographic parity, equalized odds).
This begs the question: are the right performancefairness trade-offs being specified? We instead recast fair machine learning as an imitation learning
task by introducing superhuman fairness, which
seeks to simultaneously outperform human decisions on multiple predictive performance and
fairness measures. We demonstrate the benefits
of this approach given suboptimal decisions.

2020) is of limited use since knowing the stakeholder tradeoffs still leaves the question of how different stakeholders preferences should be prioritized. Rather than seeking
optimal decisions for specific performance-fairness (meta)trade-offs, we propose a more modest, yet more practical
objective: produce decisions preferred by all stakeholders over human-produced decisions with maximal frequency. This provides an opportunity for superhuman decisions that Pareto dominate human decisions across predictive performance and fairness measures (Figure 1) without
identifying an explicit desired trade-off. We argue that for
many algorithmic fairness tasks, frequently outperforming
human decisions across all relevant predictive performance
and fairness measures may be sufficient for replacing human
decision-makers with algorithmic decision-makers.

1. Introduction
The social impacts of algorithmic decisions based on machine learning have motivated various group and individual fairness properties that decisions should ideally satisfy
(Calders et al., 2009; Hardt et al., 2016). Unfortunately, impossibility results prevent multiple common group fairness
properties from being simultaneously satisfied (Kleinberg
et al., 2016). Thus, no set of decisions can be universally fair
to all groups and individuals for all notions of fairness. Instead, specified weightings, or trade-offs, of different criteria
are often optimized (Liu & Vicente, 2022). Identifying an
appropriate trade-off to prescribe to these fairness methods
is a daunting task open to application-specific philosophical
and ideological debate that could delay or completely derail
the adoption of algorithmic methods.

To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to define
fairness objectives for supervised machine learning with
respect to noisy human decisions rather than using prescriptive trade-offs or hard constraints. We leverage and extend a
recently-developed imitation learning method for subdominance minimization (Ziebart et al., 2022). Instead of using
the subdominance to identify a target trade-off, as previous
work does in the inverse optimal control setting of sequential decision-making to estimate a cost function, we use it to
directly optimize our fairness-aware classifier. We develop
a method based on policy gradient optimization (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) that allows flexible classes of probabilistic decision policies (e.g., aware or unaware of protected
group membership status) to be optimized for given sets of
performance/fairness measures and demonstrations.

We consider the motivating scenario of multiple (errorprone) stakeholders with different notions of fairness and
desired performance-fairness trade-offs collaboratively producing decisions. Preference elicitations (Hiranandani et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Omid Memarrast
<omemar2@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We conduct extensive experiments on standard fairness
datasets (Adult and COMPAS) using accuracy as a per1

