DUET: 2D Structured and Approximately Equivariant Representations

Xavier Suau 1 Federico Danieli 1 T. Anderson Keller 1 2 Arno Blaas 1 Chen Huang 1 Jason Ramapuram 1
Dan Busbridge 1 Luca Zappella 1

Abstract

Figure 1. DUET. The backbone f yields a 2d representation for
each transformed image f (τg (x)) (e.g., τg is a rotation by g degrees). The group marginal is obtained as the softmax (sm) of the
sum of the rows, and is compared to the prescribed target (red)
with our group loss LG . The content is obtained by summing
the columns, and contrasted (LC ) with the other view through a
projection head h. The final representation for downstream tasks
is the 2d one, which has been optimized through its marginals.

Multiview Self-Supervised Learning (MSSL) is
based on learning invariances with respect to a set
of input transformations. However, invariance partially or totally removes transformation-related information from the representations, which might
harm performance for specific downstream tasks
that require such information. We propose 2D
strUctured and approximately EquivarianT representations (coined DUET), which are 2d representations organized in a matrix structure, and
equivariant with respect to transformations acting
on the input data. DUET representations maintain information about an input transformation,
while remaining semantically expressive. Compared to SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) (unstructured and invariant) and ESSL (Dangovski et al.,
2022) (unstructured and equivariant), the structured and equivariant nature of DUET representations enables controlled generation with lower reconstruction error, while controllability is not possible with SimCLR or ESSL. DUET also achieves
higher accuracy for several discriminative tasks,
and improves transfer learning.

However, one can always find a downstream task for which
the chosen transformations are relevant. For example, MSSL
representations which learn to be color invariant are likely
to fail at predicting fruit ripeness where color information is
required (Tian et al., 2020), or at the tasks of generation or
segmentatation (Kim et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

One way to maintain information in the representations is
by preserving all possible information from the input, as
pursued by InfoMax (Linsker, 1988) frameworks. However,
it has been shown empirically and theoretically that for tasks
like classification, invariance to nuisance information allows
for greater data efficiency and downstream performance
(Laptev et al., 2016; Tschannen et al., 2019). In an attempt to
simultaneously satisfy the demands of information-rich representations (allowing for generalization to different tasks)
and complex invariances (allowing for powerful discriminative representations), modern machine learning research has
pursued the concept of structured representations. Colloquially, a representation can be considered structured with respect to a set of transformations if firstly, the transformation
between two inputs can be easily recovered by comparing
their representations, and secondly, there is a known method

The field of representation learning has evolved at a rapid
pace in recent years, partially due to the popularity of
Multiview Self-Supervised Learning (MSSL) (Chen et al.,
2020; He et al., 2019; Caron et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020;
Zbontar et al., 2021). The main idea of MSSL is to learn
transformation-invariant representations by comparing data
views that underwent different transformations. If the transformations alter only task-irrelevant information, and if representations of multiple views are similar, then those representations should only contain task-relevant information.
1
Apple 2 University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Xavier
Suau <xsuaucuadros@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

