On the Power of Foundation Models
Yang Yuan 1 2 3

Abstract

ent in network structure, dataset and training algorithms,
the foundation models are similar in terms of the training
process: the model is first trained with a large unlabeled
dataset on a pretext task, and then being applied to other
downstream tasks with the parameters frozen. Freezing the
parameter is necessary because training a foundation model
is very expensive, and the downstream tasks usually have
limited data samples, which makes retraining less attractive.

With infinitely many high-quality data points, infinite computational power, an infinitely large foundation model with a perfect training algorithm
and guaranteed zero generalization error on the
pretext task, can the model be used for everything? This question cannot be answered by the
existing theory of representation, optimization or
generalization, because the issues they mainly investigate are assumed to be nonexistent here. In
this paper, we show that category theory provides
powerful machinery to answer this question. We
have proved three results. The first one limits the
power of prompt-based learning, saying that the
model can solve a downstream task with prompts
if and only if the task is representable. The second
one says fine tuning does not have this limit, as
a foundation model with the minimum required
power (up to symmetry) can theoretically solve
downstream tasks for the category defined by pretext task, with fine tuning and enough resources.
Our final result can be seen as a new type of generalization theorem, showing that the foundation
model can generate unseen objects from the target category (e.g., images) using the structural
information from the source category (e.g., texts).
Along the way, we provide a categorical framework for supervised and self-supervised learning,
which might be of independent interest.

Given a set of downstream tasks, which of them are solvable
by the foundation models, and which are not? This is a
very fundamental question. The existing theory attacks this
question through various perspectives like dataset quality
and quantity, computational power, network structure, etc.
However, as we collect trillions of data points, build gigantic
GPU data centers, and optimize huge networks with billions
of parameters, a simple question just pops up:
Where are we heading to?
Specifically, with infinitely many high-quality data points,
infinite computational power, an infinitely large foundation
model with a perfect training algorithm and guaranteed
zero generalization error on the pretext task, can the model
be used for every downstream task? As we will see, this
question is not about model representation, optimization
or generalization, but structural representation of the tasks.
Category theory, as the theory of mathematical structures,
is the ideal tool for answering this question.
For the downstream tasks, there are mainly two types of
methods: prompt tuning and fine tuning. Prompt tuning
does not train with the downstream tasks. Instead, it only
sends a task specific prompt to the model, so that the model
can “switch” its working mode for solving the task. Fine
tuning trains a small network connecting to the foundation
model with the labeled dataset for the downstream task.

1. Introduction
Foundation models have recently exhibited remarkable proficiency in addressing a myriad of complex downstream tasks
that were very difficult or impossible for the previous methods (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh
et al., 2022; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2020;
Radford et al., 2018; 2019; He et al., 2022). Being differ-

In Theorem 1, we show that with prompt tuning, the model
can solve the task if and only if the task is “representable”
in the category defined by the pretext task. If the category
does not have complicated structures, our theorem indicates
that the power of prompt tuning is limited. For example,
in Corollary 1, we show that by training with the pretext
task of predicting the rotation of an image (Gidaris et al.,
2018), the foundation model is not able to solve complicated
downstream tasks like segmentation or classification.

1

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Correspondence to: Yang
Yuan <yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

