Entity Divider with Language Grounding in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Ziluo Ding * 1 Wanpeng Zhang * 1 Junpeng Yue 1 Xiangjun Wang 2 Tiejun Huang 1 3 Zongqing Lu 1 3

Abstract

the environment dynamics at the entity level, the languagebased agent can adapt to new settings with unseen entities
or dynamics. In addition, language-based RL provides a
framework for enabling agents to reach user-specified goal
states described by natural language (Küttler et al., 2020;
Tellex et al., 2020; Branavan et al., 2012). Language description can express abstract goals as sets of constraints on
the states and drive generalization.

We investigate the use of natural language to drive
the generalization of policies in multi-agent settings. Unlike single-agent settings, the generalization of policies should also consider the influence of other agents. Besides, with the increasing
number of entities in multi-agent settings, more
agent-entity interactions are needed for language
grounding, and the enormous search space could
impede the learning process. Moreover, given a
simple general instruction, e.g., beating all enemies, agents are required to decompose it into
multiple subgoals and figure out the right one to
focus on. Inspired by previous work, we try to
address these issues at the entity level and propose a novel framework for language grounding
in multi-agent reinforcement learning, entity divider (EnDi). EnDi enables agents to independently learn subgoal division at the entity level
and act in the environment based on the associated
entities. The subgoal division is regularized by
agent modeling to avoid subgoal conflicts and promote coordinated strategies. Empirically, EnDi
demonstrates the strong generalization ability to
unseen games with new dynamics and expresses
the superiority over existing methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/PKU-RL/EnDi.

However, in multi-agent settings, things could be different. First, the policies of others also affect the dynamics
of the environment, while the text manual does not provide
such information. Therefore, the generalization of policies
needs to consider the influence of others apart from how
entities behave in a new environment. Second, with the
increasing number of entities in multi-agent settings, so is
the number of agent-entity interactions needed for language
grounding. The enormous search space could impede the
learning process. Third, sometimes it is unrealistic to give
detailed instructions to tell exactly what to do for each agent.
On the contrary, a simple goal instruction, e.g., beating all
enemies or collecting all the treasuries, is more convenient
and effective. Therefore, learning subgoal division and cultivating coordinated strategies based on one single general
instruction is required.
The key to generalization in previous works (Zhong et al.,
2019; Hanjie et al., 2021) is grounding language to dynamics at the entity level. By doing so, agents can reason over
the dynamic rules of all the entities in the environment.
Since the dynamic of the entity is the basic component of
the dynamics of the environment, such language grounding is invariant to a new distribution of dynamics or tasks,
making the generalization more reliable. Inspired by this,
in multi-agent settings, the influence of policies of others
should also be reflected at the entity level for better generalization. In addition, after jointly grounding the text manual
and the language-based goal (goal instruction) to environment entities, each entity has been associated with explicit
dynamic rules and relationships with the goal state. Thus,
the entities with language grounding can also be utilized to
form a sub-goal division strategy.

1. Introduction
The generalization of reinforcement learning (RL) agents
to new environments is challenging, even to environments
slightly different from those seen during training (Finn et al.,
2017). Recently, language grounding has been proven to be
an effective way to grant RL agents the generalization ability
(Zhong et al., 2019; Hanjie et al., 2021). By relating the dynamics of the environment with the text manual specifying
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 inspir.ai 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

We present two goal-based multi-agent environments based
on two previous single-agent settings, i.e., MESSENGER
(Hanjie et al., 2021) and RTFM (Zhong et al., 2019), which

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

