Label Distributionally Robust Losses for Multi-class Classification:
Consistency, Robustness and Adaptivity

Dixian Zhu 1 Yiming Ying 2 Tianbao Yang 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

In the past decades, multi-class classification has been
used in a variety of areas, including image recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2009; Deng et al., 2009; Geusebroek
et al., 2005; Hsu & Lin, 2002), natural language processing (Lang, 1995; Brown et al., 2020; Howard & Ruder,
2018), etc. Loss functions have played an important role
in multi-class classification (Janocha & Czarnecki, 2017;
Kornblith et al., 2021).

We study a family of loss functions named labeldistributionally robust (LDR) losses for multiclass classification that are formulated from distributionally robust optimization (DRO) perspective,
where the uncertainty in the given label information are modeled and captured by taking the worse
case of distributional weights. The benefits of
this perspective are several fold: (i) it provides a
unified framework to explain the classical crossentropy (CE) loss and SVM loss and their variants,
(ii) it includes a special family corresponding to
the temperature-scaled CE loss, which is widely
adopted but poorly understood; (iii) it allows us
to achieve adaptivity to the uncertainty degree of
label information at an instance level. Our contributions include: (1) we study both consistency
and robustness by establishing top-k (∀k ≥ 1)
consistency of LDR losses for multi-class classification, and a negative result that a top-1 consistent
and symmetric robust loss cannot achieve top-k
consistency simultaneously for all k ≥ 2; (2) we
propose a new adaptive LDR loss that automatically adapts the individualized temperature parameter to the noise degree of class label of each
instance; (3) we demonstrate stable and competitive performance for the proposed adaptive LDR
loss on 7 benchmark datasets under 6 noisy label and 1 clean settings against 13 loss functions,
and on one real-world noisy dataset. The method
is open-sourced at https://github.com/
Optimization-AI/ICML2023_LDR.

In machine learning (ML), the most classical loss functions
include the cross-entropy (CE) loss and the Crammer-Singer
(CS) Loss (aka the SVM loss). Before the deep learning
era, the CS loss have been widely studied and utilized for
learning a linear or kernelized model (Crammer & Singer,
2002). However, in the deep learning era the CE loss seems
to dominate the CS loss in practical usage (He et al., 2016).
One reason is that the CE loss is consistent for multi-class
classification (i.e., yielding Bayes optimal classifier with
infinite number of samples), while the CS loss is generally not consistent unless under an exceptional condition
that the maximum conditional probability of a class label
given the input is larger than 0.5 (Zhang, 2004), which
might hold for simple tasks such as MNIST classification
but unlikely holds for complicated tasks, e.g., ImageNet
classification (Beyer et al., 2020; Tsipras et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the CE loss has been found to be vulnerable to
noise in the labels (Ghosh et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019).
Hence, efforts have been devoted to robustifying the CE loss
such that it becomes noise-tolerant. A sufficient condition
for the loss function to be noise-tolerant is known as the
symmetric property (Ghosh et al., 2017), i.e., the sum of
losses over all possible class labels for a given data point
is a constant. Following the symmetric property, multiple
variants of CE loss have been proposed to enjoy the noisetolerance property. However, a symmetric loss alone is
usually not enough to achieve good performance in practice
due to slow convergence (Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018; Ma et al.,
2020). Hence, a loss that interpolates between the CE loss
and a symmetric loss usually achieves better performance
on real-world noisy datasets (Wang et al., 2019; Zhang &
Sabuncu, 2018; Englesson & Azizpour, 2021; Ma et al.,
2020), e.g., on the WebVision data with 20% noisy data (Li

1
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA 2 University at Albany, Albany, USA 3 Texas A&M University, College Station,
USA. Correspondence to: Dixian Zhu, Tianbao Yang <dixianzhu@uiowa.edu, tianbao-yang@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

