Transformed Distribution Matching for Missing Value Imputation

He Zhao 1 Ke Sun 1 Amir Dezfouli 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 1

Abstract

The key to missing value imputation is how to model the
data distribution with a considerable amount of missing
values, which is a notoriously challenging problem. To
address this challenge, existing approaches either choose
to model the conditional data distribution instead (i.e., the
distribution of one feature conditioned on the other features), such as in Heckerman et al. (2000); Raghunathan et al.
(2001); Gelman (2004); Van Buuren et al. (2006); Van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn (2011); Liu et al. (2014); Zhu
& Raghunathan (2015) or use deep generative models to
capture the data distribution, such as in Gondara & Wang
(2017); Ivanov et al. (2018); Mattei & Frellsen (2019); Nazabal et al. (2020); Gong et al. (2021); Peis et al. (2022);
Yoon et al. (2018); Li et al. (2018); Yoon & Sull (2020); Dai
et al. (2021); Fang & Bao (2022); Richardson et al. (2020);
Ma & Ghosh (2021); Wang et al. (2022). Alternatively, a
recent interesting idea proposed by Muzellec et al. (2020)
has found success, whose key insight is that any two batches
of data (with missing values) come from the same data distribution. Thus, a good method should impute the missing
values to make the empirical distributions of the two batches
matched, i.e., distributionally close to each other. This is a
more general and applicable assumption that can be used
in various data under different missing value mechanisms.
In this paper, we refer to this idea as distribution matching
(DM), the appealing property of which is that it bypasses
modelling the data distribution explicitly or implicitly, a
difficult task even without missing values.

We study the problem of imputing missing values
in a dataset, which has important applications in
many domains. The key to missing value imputation is to capture the data distribution with incomplete samples and impute the missing values accordingly. In this paper, by leveraging the fact that
any two batches of data with missing values come
from the same data distribution, we propose to impute the missing values of two batches of samples
by transforming them into a latent space through
deep invertible functions and matching them distributionally. To learn the transformations and impute the missing values simultaneously, a simple
and well-motivated algorithm is proposed. Our
algorithm has fewer hyperparameters to fine-tune
and generates high-quality imputations regardless
of how missing values are generated. Extensive
experiments over a large number of datasets and
competing benchmark algorithms show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance1 .

1. Introduction
In practice, real-world data are usually incomplete and consist of many missing values. For example, in the medical
domain, the health record of a patient may have considerable missing items as not all of the characteristics are
properly recorded or not all of the tests have been done
for the patient (Barnard & Meng, 1999). In this paper,
we are interested in imputing missing values in an unsupervised way (Van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011;
Yoon et al., 2018; Mattei & Frellsen, 2019; Muzellec et al.,
2020; Jarrett et al., 2022). Here the meaning of “unsupervised” is twofold: We do not know the ground truth of
the missing values during training and we do not assume a
specific downstream task.

As the pioneering study, Muzellec et al. (2020) does DM
by minimising the optimal transport (OT) distance whose
cost function is the quadratic distance in the data space
between data samples. However, real-world data usually
exhibit complex geometry, which might not be captured
well by the quadratic distance in the data space. This can
lead to wrong imputations and poor performance. In this
paper, we propose a new, straightforward, yet powerful DM
method, which first transforms data samples into a latent
space through a deep invertible function and then does distribution matching with OT in the latent space. In the latent
space, the quadratic distance of two samples is expected
to better reflect their (dis)similarity under the geometry of
the data considered. In the missing-value setting, learning
a good transformation is non-trivial. We propose a simple
and elegant algorithm that learns the transformations and

1

CSIRO’s Data61, Australia. Correspondence to: He Zhao
<he.zhao@ieee.org>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code at https://github.com/hezgit/TDM

1

