The Impact of Exploration on Convergence and Performance
of Multi-Agent Q-Learning Dynamics

Aamal Hussain 1 Francesco Belardinelli 1 Dario Paccagnan 1

Abstract

rium (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018; Ganesh Nagarajan et al.,
2020), whilst arbitrarily small exploration leads to convergence (Leonardos et al., 2021). Similarly studied classes
of games include potential games (Leonardos & Piliouras,
2022) and games with two players and two actions (Kianercy & Galstyan, 2012).

Understanding the impact of exploration on the
behaviour of multi-agent learning has, so far, benefited from the restriction to potential, or network
zero-sum games in which convergence to an equilibrium can be shown. Outside of these classes,
learning dynamics rarely converge and little is
known about the effect of exploration in the face
of non-convergence. To progress this front, we
study the smooth Q-Learning dynamics. We show
that, in any network game, exploration by agents
results in the convergence of Q-Learning to a
neighbourhood of an equilibrium. This holds independently of whether the dynamics reach the equilibrium or display complex behaviours. We show
that increasing the exploration rate decreases the
size of this neighbourhood and also decreases the
ability of all agents to improve their payoffs. Furthermore, in a broad class of games, the payoff
performance of Q-Learning dynamics, measured
by Social Welfare, decreases when the exploration
rate increases. Our experiments show this to be
a general phenomenon, namely that exploration
leads to improved convergence of Q-Learning, at
the cost of payoff performance.

Beyond these restrictive classes however, the picture is
much less clear. Whilst recent work has shown that high
exploration rates always lead to convergence (Hussain et al.,
2023), it is also well known that learning dynamics often
display complex behaviours, including limit cycles (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018; Galla, 2011) and chaos (Bielawski
et al., 2021; Galla & Farmer, 2013; Sanders et al., 2018;
Mukhopadhyay & Chakraborty, 2020; Sato et al., 2002).
The latter case represents a particularly strong barrier towards understanding the asymptotic behaviour of learning.
In short, the prospect of convergence to an equilibrium cannot be taken for granted. Unfortunately, little is known about
the impact of exploration in the face of non-convergent dynamics.
Yet understanding exploration remains an important endeavour as it allows agents to avoid suboptimal, or potentially
unsafe areas of their state space (Leonardos & Piliouras,
2022; Bura et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2021). In addition, it is
empirically known that the choice of exploration rate impacts the expected total reward (Cai et al., 2020). This has
lead to an increased interest in studying the influence of exploration on learning in single-agent settings (Schäfer et al.,
2021; Piliouras, 2020). It is then paramount to understand
the effect of exploration also in multi-agent environments
outside the restrictions of potential, or network zero-sum
settings. This leads us to our central question:

1. Introduction
Learning in games requires agents to explore their state
space. Whilst it is known that the rate of exploration impacts the behaviour of the learning dynamic (Tuyls et al.,
2006), understanding precisely this impact often relies on
placing restrictions on the structure of the interaction. A
primary example of this are network zero-sum games, which
model perfect competition between agents. Here it is known
that, without exploration, agents cannot reach an equilib-

How does exploration affect reinforcement learning
dynamics in arbitrary games, even if convergence to an
equilibrium cannot be guaranteed?

1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Aamal Hussain <aamal.hussain15@imperial.ac.uk>.

Main Contributions To answer this question, we consider
the smooth Q-Learning (SQL) dynamic, a learning dynamic
which quantifies the tendency for agents to explore their
state space whilst also seeking to maximise their payoffs.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We then lift the assumption of convergence to an equilib1

