PreNAS: Preferred One-Shot Learning Towards
Efficient Neural Architecture Search
Haibin Wang * 1 Ce Ge * 1 Hesen Chen 1 Xiuyu Sun 1

Abstract
Isomers

The wide application of pre-trained models is
driving the trend of once-for-all training in oneshot neural architecture search (NAS). However,
training within a huge sample space damages
the performance of individual subnets and requires much computation to search for an optimal model. In this paper, we present PreNAS, a search-free NAS approach that accentuates target models in one-shot training. Specifically, the sample space is dramatically reduced
in advance by a zero-cost selector, and weightsharing one-shot training is performed on the
preferred architectures to alleviate update conflicts. Extensive experiments have demonstrated
that PreNAS consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art one-shot NAS competitors for both Vision Transformer and convolutional architectures,
and importantly, enables instant specialization
with zero search cost. Our code is available at
https://github.com/tinyvision/PreNAS.

100
80

Preferred Arch.
Redundant Arch.

60

Performance

Figure 1. PreNAS first identifies the preferred architectures via
zero-cost proxies within similar architectures, denoted as isomers,
and then performs concentrated one-shot learning on only preferred
architectures to achieve better convergence. The size of triangles
implies different resource consumption of the architectures.

architectures for a given task with minimal human intervention. One-shot NAS is a kind of NAS family that performs
search through a well-trained weight-sharing model, known
as a supernet. By training and evaluating possible subnets
within a search space using only one single supernet, oneshot NAS significantly reduces the computational cost compared to other NAS methods that train and evaluate every
model individually from scratch. One-shot NAS has demonstrated strong performance and has been applied to both
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformerbased architectures (Chitty-Venkata et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made significant strides in a wide range
of tasks, including image classification (Tan & Le, 2019;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), speech recognition (Hsu et al.,
2021), and natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019).
One of the key factors contributing to their success is the
design of model architectures, which can have a decisive
impact on the final performance. However, manual design
of model architectures is often time-consuming and requires
significant expertise across different tasks. As a result, there
is a growing need for automated design process.

In order to reliably search for high-performance models,
one-shot NAS solutions mostly employ a redundant learning strategy. During the training phase, a plethora of subnets
are sampled from a vast search space (can be 109 or even
much larger) to iteratively update the supernet; during the
search phase, sufficient candidate subnets are populated to
rank the optimal architecture. While this redundant strategy
has indeed achieved good performance and reduced the uncertainty of NAS, it may also be limiting the cutting-edge
breakthrough of one-shot NAS. To summarize, there are
two specific issues to be concerned. (i) Search efficiency.
Each search under the given resource constraints requires
the evaluation of several thousand models, which is time-

Neural architecture search (NAS) is a promising approach
to address the challenges, with the goal of finding optimal
*
Equal contribution 1 Alibaba Group, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiuyu Sun <xiuyu.sxy@alibaba-inc.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

