H-Likelihood Approach to Deep Neural Networks with Temporal-Spatial
Random Effects for High-Cardinality Categorical Features

Hangbin Lee * 1 Youngjo Lee * 1

Abstract

of the data and ignore underlying correlation structures, despite large-scale data in the real world often being clustered
by multiple categorical features. Recently, there have been
emerging attempts to enhance the prediction for clustered
data by introducing the random effects into the DNN models
(Tran et al., 2020; Mandel et al., 2021; Simchoni & Rosset,
2021; 2022).

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are one of the
most powerful tools for prediction, but many of
them implicitly assume that the data are statistically independent. However, in the real world,
it is common for large-scale data to be clustered
with temporal-spatial correlation structures. Variational approaches and integrated likelihood approaches have been proposed to obtain approximate maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs) for
correlated data. However, due to the large size
of data, they cannot provide exact MLEs. In this
study, we propose a new hierarchical likelihood
approach to DNNs with correlated random effects for clustered data. By jointly optimizing
the the negative h-likelihood loss, we can provide exact MLEs for both mean and dispersion
parameters, as well as the best linear unbiased
predictors for the random effects. Moreover, the
hierarchical likelihood allows a computable procedure for restricted maximum likelihood estimators
of dispersion parameters. The proposed two-step
algorithm enables online learning for the neural
networks, whereas the integrated likelihood cannot decompose like a widely-used loss function
in DNNs. The proposed h-likelihood approach
offers several advantages, which we demonstrate
through numerical studies and real data analyses.

Simchoni & Rosset (2021; 2022) proposed linear mixed
model neural network (LMMNN) models with single independent random effects and extended LMMNN models
to multiple random effects allowing temporal-spatial correlation structure. However, their conventional integrated
likelihood approach is computationally intractable because
it does not allow decomposition like an ordinary loss function in DNNs. They proposed the use of block-diagonal approximation to the covariance matrix to obtain approximate
maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs) for their LMMNN
models. However, their approximate likelihood can give
a severe bias in parameter estimation for models with correlated random effects. Also, this difficulty prevents them
from obtaining restricted maximum likelihood estimators
(REMLEs) for LMMNN models. Variational approach can
be an alternative. However, this cannot provide exact MLEs
either but only approximate MLEs.
Lee & Nelder (1996) proposed the use of h-likelihood as
an extension of classical likelihood for statistical models
with random effects. In LMMs, the h-likelihood is Henderson’s joint likelihood (Henderson et al., 1959) of which the
joint maximization gives the MLEs for fixed effects and the
best linear unbiased predictors (BLUPs) for random effects.
However, it does not give MLEs for variance components by
a simple joint maximization. This causes the computational
difficulty of Simchoni & Rosset (2021; 2022). In this paper,
we introduce the new h-likelihood for LMMNN models with
various temporal-spatial random effects from the multiple
categorical features. The proposed negative h-likelihood
serves as a loss function, which allows the exact MLEs for
all fixed parameters and BLUPs for random effects. The proposed negative h-likelihood for LMMNN models allows the
highly non-linear functions of input variables and multiple
random effects with complex covariance structures, which
is the key to overcoming the computational difficulties in

1. Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) models have served as the
method of learning highly nonlinear relationship between
the input and output variables with strong prediction performance (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016). However, most DNN models implicitly assume independence
1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Seoul
08826, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Youngjo Lee
<youngjo@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

