End-to-end Training of Deep Boltzmann Machines
by Unbiased Contrastive Divergence with Local Mode Initialization

Shohei Taniguchi 1 Masahiro Suzuki 1 Yusuke Iwasawa 1 Yutaka Matsuo 1

Abstract

Wu, 2017; Ma, 2020), multimodal learning (Srivastava &
Salakhutdinov, 2012), and collaborative filtering (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007). Boltzmann machines also have the
potential as powerful generative models because it is known
as a universal approximator of the probability mass function
on discrete variables (Le Roux & Bengio, 2008). Among
them, deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs) (Salakhutdinov &
Larochelle, 2010), which are multi-layered undirected models, can capture complex structures by their deep structure
while retaining the advantages of the Boltzmann machine.

We address the problem of biased gradient estimation in deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs). The
existing method to obtain an unbiased estimator
uses a maximal coupling based on a Gibbs sampler, but when the state is high-dimensional, it
takes a long time to converge. In this study, we
propose to use a coupling based on the MetropolisHastings (MH) and to initialize the state around
a local mode of the target distribution. Because
of the propensity of MH to reject proposals, the
coupling tends to converge in only one step with
a high probability, leading to high efficiency. We
find that our method allows DBMs to be trained
in an end-to-end fashion without greedy pretraining. We also propose some practical techniques
to further improve the performance of DBMs. We
empirically demonstrate that our training algorithm enables DBMs to show comparable generative performance to other deep generative models,
achieving the FID score of 10.33 for MNIST.

However, the training of DBMs is known to be quite difficult. The difficulty in training is largely related to the gradient estimation in DBMs. Maximum likelihood learning
of DBMs requires to estimate the gradient of their marginal
log-likelihood. However, this gradient estimator tends to be
biased because it involves several approximations. Specifically, this gradient estimator includes the expectation over
the posterior and their joint distribution. Since these distributions are intractable in DBMs, some approximations
are required, such as a variational approximation (for the
posterior) and a persistent Gibbs sampler (for the joint distribution) (Salakhutdinov & Larochelle, 2010). Such approximations typically lead to biased gradient estimations.
Both theoretical and empirical studies have shown that biased gradient estimators harm the convergence property of
stochastic approximation algorithms (Carreira-Perpinan &
Hinton, 2005; Schulz et al., 2010; Fischer & Igel, 2010).
Therefore, it is necessary to seek an unbiased gradient estimator to mitigate the learning difficulties of DBM.

1. Introduction
Boltzmann machines (Fahlman et al., 1983; Ackley et al.,
1985; Hinton et al., 1984; 1986), which are energy-based
models defined over binary vectors, have played an important role in the history of deep learning. For example,
restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs), Boltzmann machines with a single hidden layer, have been used for the
pretraining of feedforward neural networks (FNNs) (Hinton
et al., 2006; Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton, 2007;
Bengio et al., 2006; Ranzato et al., 2006). Although Boltzmann machines are rarely used for pretraining today, they
have many applications as undirected generative models,
e.g., missing value imputation of incomplete data (Wang &

Recently, Jacob et al. (2020) have established a theory of
an unbiased Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method
that removes the bias of an MCMC-based estimator using a technique called couplings. The unbiased MCMC
method enables us to construct an unbiased estimator of
some expectation over an intractable random variable in a
finite time. Based on this theory, Qiu et al. (2020) have proposed the unbiased contrastive divergence (UCD) algorithm,
in which an unbiased gradient estimator of the marginal
log-likelihood for energy-based latent variable models like
RBMs and DBMs is constructed using a Gibbs-samplerbased coupling. They have shown that the UCD algorithm
is empirically effective in avoiding non-convergent behavior

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo, 7-chōme-3-1
Hongō, Bunkyo City, Tokyo 113-8654, Japan. Correspondence to:
Shohei Taniguchi <taniguchi@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

