Generating Language Corrections for Teaching Physical Control Tasks

Megha Srivastava 1 Noah Goodman 1 2 Dorsa Sadigh 1

Abstract

understand what “make a sharper left turn” means, even
if they are unfamiliar with the specific control dynamics
of the task. While recent works have focused on learning
control policies that incorporate natural language feedback
from users (Broad et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2023; Sharma
et al., 2022), few have considered the reverse direction of
automatically generating language corrections to provide to
human users. Such corrections can be useful for enhancing
human-AI interaction in decision making contexts (Lai &
Tan, 2019), improving interactive data collection (Gandhi
et al., 2022; Gopalan et al., 2022), and more generally teaching humans how to perform physical control tasks such as
for rehabilitation, flying an aircraft, or operating surgical
robots. (Hayws et al., 2009; Maciejasz et al., 2014; Srivastava et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Schrum et al., 2022).

AI assistance continues to help advance applications in education, from language learning to intelligent tutoring systems, yet current methods for
providing students feedback are still quite limited. Most automatic feedback systems either
provide binary correctness feedback, which may
not help a student understand how to improve, or
require hand-coding feedback templates, which
may not generalize to new domains. This can
be particularly challenging for physical control
tasks, where the rich diversity in student behavior
and specialized domains make it challenging to
leverage general-purpose assistive tools for providing feedback. We design and build CORGI, a
model trained to generate language corrections
for physical control tasks, such as learning to ride
a bike. CORGI takes in as input a pair of student
and expert trajectories, and then generates natural
language corrections to help the student improve.
We collect and train CORGI over data from three
diverse physical control tasks (drawing, steering,
and joint movement). Through both automatic
and human evaluations, we show that CORGI can
(i) generate valid feedback for novel student trajectories, (ii) outperform baselines on domains
with novel control dynamics, and (iii) improve
student learning in an interactive drawing task.

How do humans typically provide natural language feedback? Consider a parent who is teaching their child how
to ride a bike. One form of corrective feedback they may
provide are general, vague utterances (e.g. “that was okay,
try again”) that provide positive or negative reinforcement,
but may not be very informative on how to improve. On the
other extreme, the parent may provide precise feedback (e.g.
“wider grip on the handle-bars”) that clearly conveys how
the child should adjust their behavior, but requires access to
domain-specific information such as referring to handle bars,
which is only applicable to the setting of teaching how to
ride a bike. This results in a trade-off between helpfulness,
or the ability to provide sufficient information to help a student improve, of corrections and their generality, or ability
to be understood and conveyed across different settings.

1. Introduction

In fact, existing works on automatic feedback generation in
domains such as programming and language learning reflect
this trade-off (Settles et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022). Some
systems provide simple binary feedback (e.g. whether a
program ran successfully), which may not be very helpful
to the student, while others require hand-coded, templates
(e.g. grammar checking) that lack generality. Due to the
rich diversity of physical control tasks and variation in ways
a student might under-perform, we seek to strike a balance
by learning to generate helpful comparative corrections (e.g.
“brake sooner”) that can also generalize to novel trajectories
within the same control space. To achieve this, we choose
to leverage the expressive capabilities of language models
(LMs), driven by the key insight that LMs may encode phys-

In our daily lives, we need to learn a variety of physical
control tasks (e.g. driving a car or athletic sports) that benefit from receiving feedback of different modalities, such as
visual demonstrations or haptic guidance. One of the most
general forms of corrective feedback, however, is natural
language – a person learning how to ride a bike can easily
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 2 Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Megha Srivastava
<megha@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

