Model Transferability with Responsive Decision Subjects

Yatong Chen 1 Zeyu Tang 2 Kun Zhang 2 3 Yang Liu 1 4

Abstract

learning models interact with human agents, and will ultimately face data distributions that reflect human agents’
responses to the models. For instance, when a model is used
to decide loan applications, candidates may adapt their features based on the model specification in order to maximize
their chances of approval; thus the loan decision classifier
observes a new shifted distribution caused by its own deployment (e.g., see Figure 1 for a demonstration). Similar
observations can be articulated for application in the insurance sector, e.g., insurance companies may develop policy
such that customers’ behaviors might adapt to lower premium (Haghtalab et al., 2020), the education sector, e.g.,
teachers may want to design courses in a way that students
are less incentivized to cheat (Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020),
and so on.

Given an algorithmic predictor that is accurate
on some source population consisting of strategic
human decision subjects, will it remain accurate
if the population respond to it? In our setting, an
agent or a user corresponds to a sample (X, Y )
drawn from a distribution D and will face a model
h and its classification result h(X). Agents can
modify X to adapt to h, which will incur a distribution shift on (X, Y ). Our formulation is motivated by applications where the deployed machine
learning models are subjected to human agents,
and will ultimately face responsive and interactive
data distributions. We formalize the discussions
of the transferability of a model by studying how
the performance of the model trained on the available source distribution (data) would translate to
the performance on its induced domain. We provide both upper bounds for the performance gap
due to the induced domain shift, as well as lower
bounds for the trade-offs that a classifier has to
suffer on either the source training distribution or
the induced target distribution. We provide further instantiated analysis for two popular domain
adaptation settings, including covariate shift and
target shift.

F EATURE

W EIGHT

O RIGINAL VALUE

Income

2

$ 6,000

−→

A DAPTED VALUE
$ 6,000

Education Level

3

College

−→

College

Debt

-10

$40,000

−→

$20,000

Savings

5

$20,000

−→

$0

Figure 1. An example of an agent who originally has both savings
and debt, observes that the classifier penalizes debt (weight -10)
more than it rewards savings (weight +5), and concludes that their
most efficient adaptation is to use their savings to pay down debt.

In this paper, we provide a general framework for quantifying the transferability of a decision rule when facing responsive decision subjects. What we would like to achieve
is some characterizations of the performance guarantee of
a classifier — that is, given a model primarily trained on
the source distribution DS , how good or bad will it perform
on the distribution it induces D(h), which depends on the
model h itself. A key concept in our setting is the induced
risk, defined as the error a model incurs on the distribution
induced by itself:

1. Introduction
Decision-makers are increasingly required to be transparent
on their decision-making rules to offer the “right to explanation” (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017; Selbst & Powles, 2018;
Ustun et al., 2019). Being transparent also invites potential
adaptations from the population, leading to potential shifts.
We are motivated by settings where the deployed machine
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, California, United States. 2 Department
of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania, United
States. 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 4 ByteDance Research. Correspondence to: Yang Liu <yangliu@ucsc.edu>.

Induced Risk : ErrD(h) (h) := PD(h) (h(X) ̸= Y )

(1)

Most relevant to the above formulation are the works of literature on strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016a), and
performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020). In strategic
classification, agents are modeled as rational utility maximizers, and under a specific agent’s response model, game

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

