Dual Focal Loss for Calibration
Linwei Tao * 1 Minjing Dong * 1 Chang Xu 1

Abstract

ploying models in real-world applications. Despite their
high accuracy, most DNNs struggle to accurately reflect the
actual probabilities of their predictions through their confidence scores. For instance, if a DNN assigns a confidence
score of 0.8 to a set of predictions, it should be correct 80%
of the time. However, DNNs tend to overestimate the actual probability of correct predictions, making it difficult
for downstream components to rely on them. Therefore,
calibrating the uncertainty of DNNs can be crucial for their
successful deployment in real-world applications.

The use of deep neural networks in real-world applications require well-calibrated networks with
confidence scores that accurately reflect the actual probability. However, it has been found that
these networks often provide over-confident predictions, which leads to poor calibration. Recent
efforts have sought to address this issue by focal loss to reduce over-confidence, but this approach can also lead to under-confident predictions. While different variants of focal loss have
been explored, it is difficult to find a balance between over-confidence and under-confidence. In
our work, we propose a new loss function by
focusing on dual logits. Our method not only
considers the ground truth logit, but also take
into account the highest logit ranked after the
ground truth logit. By maximizing the gap between these two logits, our proposed dual focal
loss can achieve a better balance between overconfidence and under-confidence. We provide
theoretical evidence to support our approach and
demonstrate its effectiveness through evaluations
on multiple models and datasets, where it achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/Linwei94/DualFocalLoss

In recent years, there has been increasing attention on understanding the causes of poor calibration in deep neural
networks (DNNs) and finding ways to improve it. One
main focus has been on the role of the loss function, as it
has been shown to have a strong influence on calibration.
Prior work has proposed various techniques to improve
calibration by adding a calibration regularization term to
the cross-entropy loss, such as Maximum Mean Calibration Error (MMCE) (Kumar et al., 2018), AvUC (Krishnan
& Tickoo, 2020), Soft Calibration Objective (Karandikar
et al., 2021) and Meta Calibration (Bohdal et al., 2021),
and others have proposed alternatives like Brier loss (Hui
& Belkin, 2020). It has also been shown that replacing
Cross-Entropy (CE) loss with Focal Loss (FL) can improve
calibration performance (Mukhoti et al., 2020). The inverse focal loss has also been proposed to preserve sample
hardness information, which benefits post-hoc calibration
methods (Wang et al., 2021). Although variants of focal loss
are proposed to improve calibration performance by alleviating the over-confidence problems, there exist trade-offs
between over-confidence and under-confidence in loss function design, which existing techniques cannot tackle. For
example, focal loss achieves better calibration error through
guiding networks to provide predictions with higher entropy,
which leads to under-confidence. On the contrary, inverse
focal loss aims at preserving the sample hardness while aggravating the over-confidence issue. Neither over-confident
nor under-confident predictions are feasible for downstream
components, which motivates us to explore this trade-off
through the lens of loss function design.

1. Introduction
It is well-established that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
have achieved exceptional results in computer vision tasks,
such as image classification (He et al., 2016; Zagoruyko &
Komodakis, 2016), object detection (He et al., 2017; Tian
et al., 2019), and semantic segmentation (Long et al., 2015;
Cheng et al., 2021). The focus has primarily been on achieving accurate predictions for state-of-the-art performance.
However, the reliability of the predicted confidence scores,
also known as uncertainty, is just as important when de*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing Science, University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Linwei Tao <linwei.tao@sydney.edu.au>, Chang Xu <c.xu@sydney.edu.au>.

Current loss functions for calibrating DNNs typically rely
on a single logit corresponding to the ground truth label,
while the impact of other logits on calibration has yet to
be thoroughly studied. This can make it difficult for the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

