Tighter Bounds on the Expressivity of Transformer Encoders

David Chiang 1 Peter Cholak 1 Anand Pillay 1

Abstract
Characterizing neural networks in terms of betterunderstood formal systems has the potential to
yield new insights into the power and limitations
of these networks. Doing so for transformers remains an active area of research. Bhattamishra
and others have shown that transformer encoders
are at least as expressive as a certain kind of
counter machine, while Merrill and Sabharwal
have shown that fixed-precision transformer encoders recognize only languages in uniform TC0 .
We connect and strengthen these results by identifying a variant of first-order logic with counting quantifiers that is simultaneously an upper
bound for fixed-precision transformer encoders
and a lower bound for transformer encoders. This
brings us much closer than before to an exact
characterization of the languages that transformer
encoders recognize.

uniform TC0
Pro

p. 4

Theorem 5

transformer encoders

Bhattamishra
et al., 2020

FOC [+; MOD]

Theorem 2

Pro
p.

Merrill &
Sabharwal, 2022

10

simplified stateless
counter machines

fixed-precision
transformer encoders
Figure 1. Overview of results. Arrows indicate inclusion, and thick
arrows indicate strict inclusion. We show that FOC [+; MOD] is
simultaneously a tighter upper bound on fixed-precision transformer encoders than uniform TC0 is, and a tighter lower bound
on transformer encoders than SSCMs are.

1. Introduction
Characterizing neural networks in terms of betterunderstood formal systems has the potential to yield new
insights into the power and limitations of these networks.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) were linked to finite
automata from the start (McCulloch & Pitts, 1943; Kleene,
1956) and have continued to be studied using finite automata
(see, e.g., the survey by Forcada & Carrasco (2001)). Convolutional neural networks, too, have been related to finite
automata (Schwartz et al., 2018).

transformer encoders are at least as powerful as simplified
stateless counter machines (SSCMs), which test whether
the numbers of occurrences of input symbols satisfy a given
linear constraint. As an upper bound, Merrill & Sabharwal
(2022) restrict to fixed-precision transformer encoders and
show that they are in uniform TC0 .
Here, we study transformers in relation to first-order logic.
(Merrill & Sabharwal (2022) also relate them to firstorder logic, but indirectly through circuits.) We define
FOC [+; MOD], which is first-order logic with counting
quantifiers, where positions have modular predicates but
not ordering, and counts have ordering and addition (§4).
We then connect and strengthen the two above-mentioned
results by showing that FOC [+; MOD] is simultaneously an
upper bound for fixed-precision transformer encoders (§5)
and a lower bound for transformer encoders (§6).

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been studied in
relation to counter machines (Bhattamishra et al., 2020),
Boolean circuits (Hao et al., 2022; Merrill et al., 2022; Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023), and programming languages (Weiss
et al., 2021), obtaining various upper and lower bounds on
their expressivity. (Section 7 gives a more detailed survey.)
As a lower bound, Bhattamishra et al. (2020) show that
1 University of Notre Dame, USA. Correspondence to: David
Chiang <dchiang@nd.edu>.

These two results counterbalance each other. As an
upper bound on fixed-precision transformer encoders,
FOC [+; MOD] might be imagined to define languages far
beyond the power of transformers, but the lower bound assures us that it does not have any expressivity that does any-

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

