Thompson Sampling with Less Exploration is Fast and Optimal

Tianyuan Jin 1 Xianglin Yang 1 Xiaokui Xiao 1 Pan Xu 2

Abstract

unknown mean value µi . The agent will pull arms sequentially for T time steps. At each time t ∈ [T ], the agent first
chooses an arm At ∈ [K] to play based on its past observations and then receives a reward rt , which is independently
sampled from the reward distribution of arm At . The goal
is to maximize the cumulative reward over T times, which
is equivalent to minimizing the regret, Rµ (T ), defined as
follows.

We propose ϵ-Exploring Thompson Sampling (ϵTS), a modified version of the Thompson Sampling (TS) algorithm (Agrawal & Goyal, 2017)
for multi-armed bandits. In ϵ-TS, arms are selected greedily based on empirical mean rewards
with probability 1 − ϵ, and based on posterior
samples obtained from TS with probability ϵ.
Here, ϵ ∈ (0, 1) is a user-defined constant. By
reducing exploration, ϵ-TS improves computational efficiency compared to TS while achieving better regret bounds. We establish that ϵ-TS is
both minimax optimal and asymptotically optimal
for various popular reward distributions, including Gaussian, Bernoulli, Poisson, and Gamma.
A key technical advancement in our analysis is
the relaxation of the requirement for a stringent
anti-concentration bound of the posterior distribution, which was necessary in recent analyses that
achieved similar bounds (Jin et al., 2021b; 2022).
As a result, ϵ-TS maintains the posterior update
structure of TS while minimizing alterations, such
as clipping the sampling distribution or solving
the inverse of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between reward distributions, as done in
previous work. Furthermore, our algorithm is
as easy to implement as TS, but operates significantly faster due to reduced exploration. Empirical evaluations confirm the efficiency and optimality of ϵ-TS.

Rµ (T ) := T · max µi −
i∈[K]

T
X

µAt .

(1.1)

t=1

We assume without loss of generality in this paper that
arm 1 is the optimal arm with the largest mean reward,
i.e., µ1 = maxi∈[K] µi . For a fixed bandit instance (namely,
µ1 , . . . , µK are fixed but unknown), when T goes to infinity,
Lai & Robbins (1985) show that the regret of any algorithm
is at least C(µ) log(T )(1 − o(1)), where
C(µ) =

∆i
,
kl(µi , µ1 )
i>1

X

(1.2)

∆i = µ1 − µi , and kl(µi , µ1 ) is the KL-divergence between
two reward distributions with mean µi and µ1 respectively.
A bandit algorithm is said to be asymptotically optimal if
its regret can be upper bounded by C(µ) log(T )(1 − o(1))
for some constant C(µ). Well-known algorithms such as
Thompson Sampling (Agrawal & Goyal, 2017; Kaufmann
et al., 2012; Korda et al., 2013), KL-UCB (Garivier &
Cappé, 2011; Ménard & Garivier, 2017), and Bayes-UCB
(Kaufmann, 2016) are all shown to be asymptotically optimal. When the time horizon T is fixed, Auer et al. (2002)
show that no√algorithm can achieve a worst-case regret
lower than C KT for some universal constant C. Here
the worst-case regret is defined as the maximum regret of
the algorithm on any possible bandit instance. √
A bandit
algorithm that achieves the worst-case regret O( KT ) is
said to be minimax optimal.

1. Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) is an elementary model to
trade off exploration and exploitation in sequential decisionmaking problems. In such problems, an agent has a set
[K] = {1, 2, · · · , K} of K arms to play with, where each
arm i ∈ [K] is associated with a reward distribution with an

In this paper, we focus on the setting where reward distributions are from the one-parameter family distributions (Korda
et al., 2013; Garivier et al., 2016). In this setting, a bandit
instance can be parameterized by {θ1 , · · · , θK }, and arm
i ∈ [K] has reward distribution p(·|θi ) and mean reward
µi = µ(θi ). This family contains most common distributions such as Bernoulli, Gaussian, Poisson, and Gamma,

1

National University of Singapore 2 Duke University. Correspondence to: Tianyuan Jin <tianyuan@u.nus.edu>, Pan Xu
<pan.xu@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

