Regret Minimization and Convergence to Equilibria
in General-sum Markov Games
Liad Erez * 1 Tal Lancewicki * 1 Uri Sherman * 1 Tomer Koren 1 2 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract

Shapley, 1953), which can be seen as a generalization of a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) to the multiagent setup. In
this model, the transition dynamics are governed by the joint
action profile of all agents, implying that the environment as
perceived by any individual agent is non-stationary. While
providing powerful modeling capabilities, this comes at the
cost of marked challenges in algorithm design. Furthermore, in its full generality the model considers multiplayer
general-sum games, where it is well-known that computing
a Nash equilibrium is computationally intractable already in
the simpler model of normal form games (Daskalakis et al.,
2009; Chen et al., 2009).

An abundance of recent impossibility results establish that regret minimization in Markov games
with adversarial opponents is both statistically and
computationally intractable. Nevertheless, none
of these results preclude the possibility of regret
minimization under the assumption that all parties adopt the same learning procedure. In this
work, we present the first (to our knowledge) algorithm for learning in general-sum Markov games
that provides sublinear regret guarantees when
executed by all agents. The bounds we obtain
are for swap regret, and thus, along the way, imply convergence to a correlated equilibrium. Our
algorithm is decentralized, computationally efficient, and does not require any communication
between agents. Our key observation is that online
learning via policy optimization in Markov games
essentially reduces to a form of weighted regret
minimization, with unknown weights determined
by the path length of the agents’ policy sequence.
Consequently, controlling the path length leads to
weighted regret objectives for which sufficiently
adaptive algorithms provide sublinear regret guarantees.

Contemporary research works that study general-sum
Markov games consider objectives that roughly fall into
one of two categories; sample complexity of learning an approximate (coarse) correlated equilibrium, or regret against
an arbitrary opponent. The sample complexity setup assumes all players learn using the same algorithm, while in
the regret minimization setting, where the vast majority of
results are negative (e.g., Bai et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2022), the opponents are assumed to be adversarial, and in particular do not use the same algorithm as the
learner nor attempt to minimize their regret. Curiously, developing (or, asking if there exist) algorithms that minimize
individual regret given that all players adopt the same algorithm has been largely overlooked. Considering the intrinsic
nature of MARL problems, where agents learn interactively
from experience, it is of fundamental interest not only to
arrive at an equilibrium, but to control the loss incurred
during the learning process. Moreover, this is precisely the
objective considered by a long line of works into learning in
normal form games (Syrgkanis et al., 2015; Chen & Peng,
2020; Daskalakis et al., 2021; Anagnostides et al., 2022b).
Thus, we are motivated to ask;

1. Introduction
Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL; see Busoniu
et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2021) studies statistical and computational properties of learning setups that consist of multiple
agents interacting within a dynamic environment. One of
the most well studied models for MARL is Markov Games
(also known as stochastic games, introduced originally by
* Equal contribution

Can we design algorithms for learning in general-sum
Markov games that, when adopted by all agents,
provide sublinear individual regret guarantees?

1 Blavatnik School of Computer Sci-

ence, Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv.
Correspondence to: Liad Erez <liaderez@mail.tau.ac.il>, Tal
Lancewicki <lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il>, Uri Sherman <urisherman@mail.tau.ac.il>.

In this work, we answer the above question affirmatively,
and present the first (to our knowledge) algorithm for
general-sum Markov games which guarantees sublinear regret compared to the best fixed Markov policy in hindsight.
We consider finite horizon Markov games in two settings;

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

