OCD: Learning to Overfit with Conditional Diffusion Models

Shahar Lutati 1 Lior Wolf 1

Abstract

Second, instead of retraining a neural network each time,
we can learn to predict the weights of the locally-trained
neural network for each set of input samples. This idea utilizes a dynamic, input-dependent architecture, also known
as a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2016).

We present a dynamic model in which the
weights are conditioned on an input sample x
and are learned to match those that would be obtained by finetuning a base model on x and its
label y. This mapping between an input sample
and network weights is approximated by a denoising diffusion model. The diffusion model we
employ focuses on modifying a single layer of
the base model and is conditioned on the input,
activations, and output of this layer. Since the
diffusion model is stochastic in nature, multiple
initializations generate different networks, forming an ensemble, which leads to further improvements. Our experiments demonstrate the wide
applicability of the method for image classification, 3D reconstruction, tabular data, speech separation, and natural language processing. Our
code is attached as supplementary material.

Third, we can take the approach to an extreme and consider
local regions that contain a single sample. During training,
we finetune the base model for each training sample separately. In this process, which we call “overfitting”, we train
on each specific sample s = (x, y) from the training set,
starting with the weights of the base model and obtaining a
model fθs . We then learn a model g that maps between x
(without the label) and the shift in the weights of fθs from
those of the base model. Given a test sample x, we apply the learned mapping g to it, obtain model weights, and
apply the resulting model to x.
The overfitted models are expected to be similar to the
base model, since the samples we overfit are part of the
training set of the base model. As a result, it is likely
that a diffusion process would be able to generate the
weights of the fine-tuned networks. Recently, diffusion
models, such as DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) and DDIM (Song
et al., 2020) were shown to be highly successful in generating perceptual samples (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021b; Kong
et al., 2021). Here, we employ such models as hypernetworks, i.e., as means for conditionally generating network
weights.

1. Introduction
Here is a simple local algorithm: For each testing pattern,
(1) select the few training examples located in the vicinity
of the testing pattern, (2) train a neural network with only
these few examples, and (3) apply the resulting network to
the testing pattern.

In order to make the diffusion models suitable for predicting network weights, we make three adjustments. First, we
automatically select a specific layer of the neural model and
modify only this layer. This considerably reduces the size
of the generated data and, in our experience, is sufficient
for supporting the overfitting effect. Second, we condition
the diffusion process on the input of the selected layer, its
activations, and its output. Third, since the diffusion process assumes unit variance scale (Ho et al., 2020), we learn
the scale of the weight modification separately.

Bottou & Vapnik (1992)
Thirty years after the local learning method in the epigraph
was introduced, it can be modernized in a few ways. First,
instead of training a neural network from scratch on a handful of samples, the method can finetune, with the same samples, a base model that is pre-trained on the entire training set. The empirical success of transfer learning methods (Han et al., 2021) suggests that this would lead to an
improvement.

Similarly to other diffusion processes, our hypernetwork
is initialized with normal noise and different initializations
lead to slightly different results. Using this feature of the
diffusion model, we generate multiple models from the
same instance and use the resulting ensemble technique
to further improve the prediction accuracy. Our method is

1

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University.
Correspondence to: Shahar Lutati <shahar761@gmail.com>,
Lior Wolf <wolf@cs.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

