ClimaX: A foundation model for weather and climate
Tung Nguyen 1 2 Johannes Brandstetter 3 Ashish Kapoor 1 Jayesh K. Gupta * 1 Aditya Grover * 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modeling weather and climate is an omnipresent challenge
for science and society. With rising concerns around extreme weather events and climate change, there is a growing
need for both improved weather forecasts for disaster mitigation and climate projections for long-term policy making
and adaptation efforts (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2021). Currently, numerical methods for global modeling of weather
and climate are parameterized via various general circulation models (GCM) (Lynch, 2008). GCMs represent system
of differential equations relating the flow of energy and matter in the atmosphere, land, and ocean that can be integrated
over time to obtain forecasts for relevant atmospheric variables (Lynch, 2008; Bauer et al., 2015). While extremely
useful in practice, GCMs also suffer from many challenges,
such as accurately representing physical processes and initial conditions at fine resolutions, as well as technological
challenges in large-scale data assimilation and computational simulations (Bauer et al., 2020). These factors limit
their use in many scenarios, especially in simulating atmospheric variables quickly at very short time scales (e.g., a
few hours) or accurately at long time scales (e.g., beyond
5-7 days) (Zhang et al., 2019).

Recent data-driven approaches based on machine
learning aim to directly solve a downstream forecasting or projection task by learning a datadriven functional mapping using deep neural networks. However, these networks are trained using
curated and homogeneous climate datasets for specific spatiotemporal tasks, and thus lack the generality of currently used computationally intensive
physics-informed numerical models for weather
and climate modeling. We develop and demonstrate ClimaX, a flexible and generalizable deep
learning model for weather and climate science
that can be trained using heterogeneous datasets
spanning different variables, spatio-temporal coverage, and physical groundings. ClimaX extends
the Transformer architecture with novel encoding and aggregation blocks that allow effective
use of available compute and data while maintaining general utility. ClimaX is pretrained with
a self-supervised learning objective on climate
datasets derived from CMIP6. The pretrained ClimaX can then be fine-tuned to address a breadth
of climate and weather tasks, including those
that involve atmospheric variables and spatiotemporal scales unseen during pretraining. Compared to existing data-driven baselines, we show
that this generality in ClimaX results in superior performance on benchmarks for weather forecasting and climate projections, even when pretrained at lower resolutions and compute budgets. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/ClimaX.

In contrast, there has been a steady rise in data-driven approaches for forecasting of atmospheric variables, especially
for meteorological applications (Grover et al., 2015; Dueben
& Bauer, 2018; Weber et al., 2020; Scher & Messori, 2019;
Scher, 2018; Kashinath et al., 2021; Schultz et al., 2021;
Reichstein et al., 2019; Huntingford et al., 2019; Schneider et al., 2017). The key idea here is to train deep neural
networks to predict the target atmospheric variables using
decades of historical global datasets, such as the ERA-5
reanalysis dataset (Hersbach et al., 2020). Unlike GCMs,
these networks are not explicitly grounded in physics, and
lack general-purpose utility for Earth system sciences as
they are trained for a specific predictive modeling task. Yet,
with growing compute and datasets, there is emerging evidence that these models can achieve accuracies competitive
with state-of-the-art numerical models in many scenarios,
such as nowcasting of precipitation (Ravuri et al., 2021;
Sønderby et al., 2020) and medium-range forecasting of
variables like temperature, wind and humidity (Weyn et al.,
2020; Rasp & Thuerey, 2021; Keisler, 2022; Pathak et al.,
2022; Bi et al., 2022; Lam et al., 2022). While these trends

*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Autonomous Systems and
Robotics Research 2 UCLA 3 Microsoft Research AI4Science.
Correspondence to: Tung Nguyen <tungnd@cs.ucla.edu>,
Jayesh K. Gupta <jayesh.gupta@microsoft.com>, Aditya Grover
<adityag@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

