On Pre-Training for Visuo-Motor Control:
Revisiting a Learning-from-Scratch Baseline

Nicklas Hansen 1 * Zhecheng Yuan 2 * Yanjie Ze 1 3 * Tongzhou Mu 1 *
Aravind Rajeswaran 4 † Hao Su 1 † Huazhe Xu 2 5 † Xiaolong Wang 1 †

Abstract

Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022), and freeze the vision model
weights for downstream policy learning. When compared
to simple Learning-from-Scratch (LfS) methods for visuomotor control, these works find that frozen pre-trained representations help achieve higher sample efficiency and/or
asymptotic performance across various task domains.

In this paper, we examine the effectiveness of pretraining for visuo-motor control tasks. We revisit
a simple Learning-from-Scratch (LfS) baseline
that incorporates data augmentation and a shallow
ConvNet, and find that this baseline is surprisingly
competitive with recent approaches (PVR, MVP,
R3M) that leverage frozen visual representations
trained on large-scale vision datasets – across a
variety of algorithms, task domains, and metrics
in simulation and on a real robot. Our results
demonstrate that these methods are hindered by a
significant domain gap between the pre-training
datasets and current benchmarks for visuo-motor
control, which is alleviated by finetuning. Based
on our findings, we provide recommendations
for future research in pre-training for control and
hope that our simple yet strong baseline will aid
in accurately benchmarking progress in this area.1

However, there exists a rich body of work on strategies
to improve performance of LfS methods, such as auxiliary self-supervised representation learning (Srinivas et al.,
2020; Schwarzer et al., 2021) or using carefully curated
data augmentations (Laskin et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al.,
2021; Yarats et al., 2021; Raileanu et al., 2020; Hansen et al.,
2021). To gain a sharp understanding of the advantages of
visual pre-training for visuo-motor control, it is necessary
to establish strong LfS baselines.
Towards this end, we adopt the experimental setups of prior
works without modification, and implement strong LfS baselines that leverage shallow ConvNet encoders and random
shift data augmentation (Kostrikov et al., 2021; Yarats et al.,
2021). Surprisingly, we find that this modified LfS baseline can achieve results competitive with prior works that
leverage frozen pre-trained visual representations. While
our contributions are incremental in nature, we believe that
our work contains must-know insights for anyone working
on pre-trained representations for visuo-motor control.

1. Introduction
Large-scale pre-training has delivered promising results
in computer vision (Doersch et al., 2015; He et al., 2020;
van den Oord et al., 2018; Alayrac et al., 2022) and natural
language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
Radford et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022). Recent works
have extended the pre-training paradigm to visuo-motor
control by leveraging pre-trained visual representations for
policy learning (Parisi et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2022; Xiao
et al., 2022; Ze et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022). These works
train a visual representation using large out-of-domain vision datasets like ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and

We evaluate our approach across a variety of task domains,
algorithm classes, and evaluation metrics. Specifically, we
examine 4 task domains (Adroit (Rajeswaran et al., 2018),
DMControl (Tassa et al., 2018), PixMC (Xiao et al., 2022),
and a real robot setup), 3 algorithm classes: imitation learning (behavior cloning), on-policy RL (PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017)), and off-policy RL (DrQ-v2 (Yarats et al., 2021)),
and multiple evaluation metrics including sample-efficiency,
asymptotic performance, visual robustness, and computational cost. To our surprise, our carefully designed LfS
baseline is found to be competitive with frozen pre-trained
representations across most settings and metrics, and in
some cases even outperforms them. At present, frozen pretrained representations are found to mostly be advantageous
in terms of computational cost.

Equal contribution † Equal advising 1 University of California
San Diego 2 Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Meta AI 5 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Correspondence to: Nicklas
Hansen <nihansen@ucsd.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/gemcollector/learning-from-scratch.

1

