Fair and Accurate Decision Making through Group-Aware Learning

Ramtin Hosseini 1 Li Zhang 1 Bhanu Garg 1 Pengtao Xie 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning by grouping is an outstanding human learning skill
aiming to organize a set of given problems into different subgroups and domains where each subgroup contains similar
problems that can be solved independently and efficiently.
In this paper, we formulate Learning by Grouping (LBG) as
an optimization problem and investigate its effectiveness in
ML. Our proposed framework contains two types of model:
1) Group Assignment Model (GAM); and 2) Group-Specific
Classification Models (GSCM). The GAM model takes a
data example as input and predicts the subgroup it belongs
to – a K-way classification problem, where K is the number of GSCM models (i.e., experts). For each subgroup k,
a GSCM model performs the supervised learning on the
target task. We then apply the GAM and the K GSCM
models to improve the existing machine learning models’
fairness and accuracy. Additionally, we extend our LBG
formulation to the neural architecture search to obtain the
most suitable task-specific GSCM models. We depict the
high-level learning process in Fig 1.

The integration of machine learning models in
various real-world applications is becoming more
prevalent to assist humans in their daily decisionmaking tasks as a result of recent advancements
in this field. However, it has been discovered
that there is a tradeoff between the accuracy and
fairness of these decision-making tasks. In some
cases, these AI systems can be unfair by exhibiting bias or discrimination against certain social
groups, which can have severe consequences in
real life. Inspired by one of the most well-known
human learning skills called grouping, we address
this issue by proposing a novel machine learning
(ML) framework where the ML model learns to
group a diverse set of problems into distinct subgroups to solve each subgroup using its specific
sub-model. Our proposed framework involves
three stages of learning, which are formulated
as a three-level optimization problem: 1) grouping problems into subgroups, 2) learning groupspecific sub-models for problem-solving, and 3)
updating group assignments of training examples
by minimizing validation loss. These three learning stages are performed end-to-end in a joint
manner using gradient descent. To improve fairness and accuracy, we develop an efficient optimization algorithm to solve this three-level optimization problem. To further decrease the risk
of overfitting in small datasets using our LBG
method, we incorporate domain adaptation techniques in the second stage of training. We further
apply our method to differentiable neural architecture search (NAS) methods. The LBG implementation can be found in the Skillearn repository at
here.

We formulate LBG as a three-stage optimization problem.
First, we learn the Group-Assignment Model (GAM); then,
we train Group-Specific Classification Models (GSCMs);
finally, we apply the GAM and the GSCMs to the validation
set to learn the subgroups for subgroup assignment and the
learnable architecture. We develop a gradient-based method
to solve this three-level optimization problem. In previous
related works, mixture-of-expert methods learn the experts
– analogous to GSCMs; and the gating network – similar
to GAM. The mixture-of-experts (MoE) methods learn the
gating network and the experts jointly on the training data,
which has a high risk of overfitting the gating network to
the training data. We address this problem of overfitting
by MoE methods by formulating a three-stage optimization
framework that learns the subgroups for the subgroup assignment tasks on the validation set instead of the training
examples.
Currently, the majority of state-of-the-art neural network
performance is achieved through architectures that are manually designed by humans. However, this process of designing and evaluating neural network architectures by human
experts is both time-consuming and may not end with the
most suitable task-specific architecture. In recent years,

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UCSD,
San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Ramtin Hosseini <rhossein@eng.ucsd.edu>, Pengtao Xie <p1xie@eng.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

