FAIRER: Fairness as Decision Rationale Alignment

Tianlin Li 1 Qing Guo 2 3 Aishan Liu 4 Mengnan Du 5 Zhiming Li 1 Yang Liu 6 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made significant progress, but often suffer from fairness
issues, as deep models typically show distinct accuracy differences among certain subgroups (e.g.,
males and females). Existing research addresses
this critical issue by employing fairness-aware
loss functions to constrain the last-layer outputs
and directly regularize DNNs. Although the fairness of DNNs is improved, it is unclear how the
trained network makes a fair prediction, which
limits future fairness improvements. In this paper, we investigate fairness from the perspective
of decision rationale and define the parameter
parity score to characterize the fair decision process of networks by analyzing neuron influence
in various subgroups. Extensive empirical studies
show that the unfair issue could arise from the
unaligned decision rationales of subgroups. Existing fairness regularization terms fail to achieve
decision rationale alignment because they only
constrain last-layer outputs while ignoring intermediate neuron alignment. To address the issue,
we formulate the fairness as a new task, i.e., decision rationale alignment that requires DNNs’ neurons to have consistent responses on subgroups at
both intermediate processes and the final prediction. To make this idea practical during optimization, we relax the naive objective function and
propose gradient-guided parity alignment, which
encourages gradient-weighted consistency of neurons across subgroups. Extensive experiments on
a variety of datasets show that our method can
significantly enhance fairness while sustaining a
high level of accuracy and outperforming other
approaches by a wide margin.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are increasingly being used
in high-stakes applications in our society. However, as deep
learning is increasingly adopted for many applications that
have brought convenience to our daily lives (He et al., 2016;
Devlin et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2013), DNNs still suffer
from the fairness problem and often exhibit undesirable
discrimination behaviors (News, 2021; 2020). For example,
for an intelligent task (e.g., salary prediction), a trained
DNN easily presents distinct accuracy values in different
subgroups (e.g., males and females). The discriminatory
behaviors contradict people’s growing demand for fairness,
which would cause severe social consequences. To alleviate
such fairness problems, a line of mitigation strategies has
been constantly proposed (Zemel et al., 2013; Sarhan et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2019).
A direct regularization method to improve fairness is to
relax fairness metrics as constraints in the training process (Madras et al., 2018). This regularization method is
designed to reduce the disparities between different subgroups in the training and testing data (See Fig. 1 (a) vs.
(b)). Although this method easily improves the fairness of
DNN models, it is still unclear how the trained network
makes a fair decision1 . For example, we do not know how
the fairness regularization terms actually affect the final
network parameters and let them make a fair prediction.
Without such an understanding, we would not know the
effective direction for further fairness enhancement. Existing work does not address this question and the majority of
them concentrate on the last-layer outputs (i.e., predictions)
while ignoring the internal process. In this work, we propose to study the fairness from the perspective of decision
rationale and analyze existing fairness-regularized methods
through a decision-rationale-aware analysis method. The
term ‘decision rationale’ is known as the reason for making
a decision and could be represented as the influence of neurons in a DNN (Khakzar et al., 2021). Specifically, for each
intermediate neuron (i.e., a parameter of the DNN 2 ), we
can calculate the loss change on a subgroup before and after

1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Institute
of High Performance Computing (IHPC), A*STAR, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
4
Beihang University, China 5 New Jersey Institute of Technology,
USA 6 Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China. Corresponding author:
Qing Guo <tsingqguo@ieee.org>.

1
The ‘decision’ here means the prediction results of the DNN
regarding given inputs. The name follows the interpretable works
(Du et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018b; Khakzar et al., 2021).
2
We follow Molchanov et al. (2016; 2019) to use the terms
"neuron" and "parameter" interchangeably.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

