Cell-Free Latent Go-Explore

Quentin Gallouédec 1 Emmanuel Dellandréa 1

Abstract

RL approaches rely, may not be sufficient to collect data
that is diverse and informative enough for the agent to learn
anything. In these cases, the agent must adopt an efficient
exploration strategy to reach high reward areas, which may
require a significant amount of interactions.

In this paper, we introduce Latent Go-Explore
(LGE), a simple and general approach based on
the Go-Explore paradigm for exploration in reinforcement learning (RL). Go-Explore was initially
introduced with a strong domain knowledge constraint for partitioning the state space into cells.
However, in most real-world scenarios, drawing
domain knowledge from raw observations is complex and tedious. If the cell partitioning is not
informative enough, Go-Explore can completely
fail to explore the environment. We argue that the
Go-Explore approach can be generalized to any
environment without domain knowledge and without cells by exploiting a learned latent representation. Thus, we show that LGE can be flexibly combined with any strategy for learning a latent representation. Our results indicate that LGE, although
simpler than Go-Explore, is more robust and outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of
pure exploration on multiple hard-exploration environments including Montezuma’s Revenge. The
LGE implementation is available as open-source
at https://github.com/qgallouedec/
lge.

Recently, Ecoffet et al. (2021) introduced a new paradigm
in which a goal-conditioned agent is trained to reach states
it has already encountered, and then explore from there.
The agent thus iteratively pushes back the frontier of its
knowledge of the environment. We call this family of algorithms return-then-explore. Ecoffet et al. (2021) provide
Go-Explore, an algorithm of this new family, that outperforms by several orders of magnitude the state-of-the-art
scores on the game Montezuma’s Revenge, known as a hardexploration problem. Go-Explore relies on a grouping of
observations into cells. These cells are used both to select
target observations at the frontier of yet undiscovered states
and to build a subgoal trajectory for the agent to follow to
reach the final goal cell. As Ecoffet et al. (2021) initially
spotted, the cell design is not obvious. It requires detailed
knowledge of the observation space, the dynamics of the
environment, and the subsequent task. If any important information about the dynamics of the environment is missing
from the cell representation, the agent may fail to explore at
all. For example, in Montezuma’s Revenge, possession of
a key is a crucial piece of information that when included
in the cell representation increases exploration by several
orders of magnitude. We also demonstrate in Appendix B
that the cell design has a major influence on the results.

1. Introduction
RL algorithms aim to learn a policy by maximizing a reward
signal. In some cases, the rewards from the environment
are sufficiently informative for the agent to learn a complex
policy, and therefore achieve impressive results, including
world level in Go (Silver et al., 2016), StarCraft (Vinyals
et al., 2019), or learning sophisticated robotic tasks (Lee
et al., 2019). However, many real-world environments provide extremely sparse (Bellemare et al., 2016), deceptive
(Lehman & Stanley, 2011) rewards, or none at all. In such
environments, random exploration, on which many current

In this paper, we present Latent Go-Explore (LGE), a new
algorithm derived from Go-Explore which operates without
cells. This new algorithm meets the definition of a returnthen-explore family of algorithms since the agent samples
a final goal state at the frontier of the achieved states, returns to it, and then explores further from it. Our main
contribution consists of three major improvements.
• A latent representation is learned simultaneously with
the exploration of the agent to provide the most up-todate and informative representation possible.

1

Univ Lyon, Centrale Lyon, CNRS, INSA Lyon, UCBL, LIRIS,
UMR5205, F-69130 Ecully, France. Correspondence to: Quentin
Gallouédec <quentin.gallouedec@ec-lyon.fr>.

• Sampling of the final goal is based on a non-parametric
density model in latent space. This leverages the
learned latent representation for sampling the states

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

