Dynamical Linear Bandits

Marco Mussi 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In a large variety of sequential decision-making problems,
a learner must choose an action that, when executed, determines an evolution of the underlying system state that is
hidden to the learner. In these partially observable problems,
the learner observes a reward (i.e., feedback) representing
the combined effect of multiple actions played in the past.
For instance, in online advertising campaigns, the process
that leads to a conversion, i.e., marketing funnel (Court et al.,
2009), is characterized by complex dynamics and comprises
several phases. When heterogeneous campaigns/platforms
are involved, a profitable budget investment policy has to
account for the interplay between campaigns/platforms. In
this scenario, a conversion (e.g., a user’s purchase of a promoted product) should be attributed not only to the latest ad
the user was exposed to, but also to previous ones (Berman,
2018).

In many real-world sequential decision-making
problems, an action does not immediately reflect
on the feedback and spreads its effects over a
long time frame. For instance, in online advertising, investing in a platform produces an instantaneous increase of awareness, but the actual reward, i.e., a conversion, might occur far in the
future. Furthermore, whether a conversion takes
place depends on: how fast the awareness grows,
its vanishing effects, and the synergy or interference with other advertising platforms. Previous
work has investigated the Multi-Armed Bandit
framework with the possibility of delayed and aggregated feedback, without a particular structure
on how an action propagates in the future, disregarding possible dynamical effects. In this paper, we introduce a novel setting, the Dynamical
Linear Bandits (DLB), an extension of the linear
bandits characterized by a hidden state. When an
action is performed, the learner observes a noisy
reward whose mean is a linear function of the
hidden state and of the action. Then, the hidden
state evolves according to linear dynamics, affected by the performed action too. We start by
introducing the setting, discussing the notion of
optimal policy, and deriving an expected regret
lower bound. Then, we provide an optimistic regret minimization algorithm, Dynamical Linear
Upper Confidence Bound (DynLin-UCB),
´ ? that
¯
d T
r
suffers an expected regret of order O p1´ρq
,
3{2
where ρ is a measure of the stability of the system, and d is the dimension of the action vector.
Finally, we conduct a numerical validation on a
synthetic environment and on real-world data to
show the effectiveness of DynLin-UCB in comparison with several baselines.

The joint consideration of each funnel phase is a fundamental step towards an optimal investment solution while
considering the advertising campaigns/platforms independently leads to sub-optimal solutions. Consider, for instance,
a simplified version of the funnel with two types of campaigns: awareness (i.e., impression) ads and conversion
ads. The first kind of ad aims at improving brand awareness, while the latter aims at creating the actual conversion.
If we evaluate the performances in terms of conversions
only, we will discover that impression ads are not instantaneously effective in creating conversions, so we will be
tempted to reduce the budget invested in such a campaign.
However, this approach is sub-optimal because impression
ads increase the chance to convert when a conversion ad is
shown after the impression (e.g., Hoban & Bucklin, 2015).
In addition, the effect of some ads, especially impression
ads delivered via television, may be delayed. It has been
demonstrated (Chapelle, 2014) that users remember advertising over time in a vanishing way, leading to consequences
that non-dynamical models cannot capture. This kind of
interplay comprises more general scenarios than the simple
reward delay, including the case where the interaction is
governed by a dynamics hidden to the observer.

1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Marco Mussi <marco.mussi@polimi.it>.

While this scenario can be indubitably modeled as a Partially
Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP, Åström,
1965), the complexity of the framework and its general-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

