Semi-Offline Reinforcement Learning for Optimized Text Generation

Changyu Chen 1 2 Xiting Wang 3 Yiqiao Jin 4 Victor Ye Dong 5 Li Dong 3 Jie Cao 5 Yi Liu 5 Rui Yan 1

Abstract

have demonstrated superior performance in aligning with
user intent compared to GPT-3 (Zhao et al., 2023).

In reinforcement learning (RL), there are two major settings for interacting with the environment:
online and offline. Online methods explore the
environment at significant time cost, and offline
methods efficiently obtain reward signals by sacrificing exploration capability. We propose semioffline RL, a novel paradigm that smoothly transits from offline to online settings, balances exploration capability and training cost, and provides a
theoretical foundation for comparing different RL
settings. Based on the semi-offline formulation,
we present the RL setting that is optimal in terms
of optimization cost, asymptotic error, and overfitting error bound. Extensive experiments show that
our semi-offline approach is efficient and yields
comparable or often better performance compared
with state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/ChangyuChen347/semioffline-RL.

In reinforcement learning, there are two major settings for
interacting with the environment: online and offline.
Online RL (Fig. 1(a)). The language model in this setting generates word token ŷt by sampling from its output
probability distribution, and obtains the reward signal about
the samples to learn how well they fulfill the final objective (Paulus et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Schulman et al.,
2017; Le et al., 2022). The online setting allows the language model to fully explore the environment: the model
can interact with the environment to see the reward of different samples and hence obtains a comprehensive understanding about the final objective, which is crucial for finding the
optimal generation. While good generation can usually be
found when the number of samples approaches infinity, it
is empirically time-intensive to obtain even only a few samples from large pretrained language models. While there are
many aspects of time cost in online RL (Wang et al., 2018;
Zhao et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2022), this paper focuses on the forward propagations of language models. In particular, optimizing with K
samples requires KT forward propagations (FPs) through
the language models, where T is the maximum number of
tokens in the generated text. This cost is quite large and
impractical in some real-world scenarios (Wang et al., 2021)
considering the complexity of large language models.

1. Introduction
Pretrained language models have achieved great success
in improving text generation quality (Devlin et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2019). Recent research shows that a key for further improving pretrained language models is reinforcement
learning (RL), which provides a principled solution for directly optimizing the final objective such as ROUGE (Lin
& Hovy, 2003), factual correctness (Goodrich et al., 2019),
and human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022). Recent large pretrained models that incorporate reinforcement learning, e.g.,
InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), ChatGPT1 , and GPT-42 ,

Offline RL (Fig. 1(b)). This setting eliminates the need for
generating text during the training process by utilizing a
static dataset for learning. Example static data y1 , · · · , yT
includes demonstrations or ground-truth labels (Pang & He,
2020; Jaques et al., 2019; Serban et al., 2017; Zhu et al.,
2023) for an input x, as well as text pre-generated with
beam search (Liu et al., 2022). By avoiding generating text
in an autoregressive manner during training, offline methods
mitigate the expensive optimization costs associated with
online methods and reduces the cost from KT forward propagations to K. However, offline methods cannot explore
the environment to find the optimal generation: language
models are only given the reward signals for specific static
data, which prevents them from better understanding the
final objective and converging to a better solution.

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 The work was done during the author’s
internship at Microsoft Research Asia. 3 Microsoft Research Asia,
Beijing, China 4 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
5
Microsoft, Redmond, USA. Correspondence to: Xiting Wang
<xitwan@microsoft.com>, Rui Yan <ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/
2
https://openai.com/research/gpt-4

The above analysis shows that different RL settings have
1

