The Wisdom of Hindsight Makes Language Models
Better Instruction Followers
Tianjun Zhang * 1 Fangchen Liu * 1 Justin Wong 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has seen wide success in
finetuning large language models to better align
with instructions via human feedback. The socalled algorithm, Reinforcement Learning with
Human Feedback (RLHF) demonstrates impressive performance on the GPT series models. However, the underlying reinforcement learning algorithm is complex and requires additional training
for reward and value networks. In this paper, we
consider an alternative approach: converting feedback to instruction by relabeling the original one
and training the model for better alignment in a
supervised manner. Such an algorithm doesn’t
require any additional parameters except for the
original language model and maximally reuses the
pretraining pipeline. To achieve this, we formulate instruction alignment problem for language
models as a goal-reaching problem in decision
making. We propose Hindsight Instruction Relabeling (HIR), a novel algorithm for aligning
language models with instructions. The resulting two-stage algorithm shed light to a family of
reward-free approaches that utilize the hindsightly
relabeled instructions based on feedback. We evaluate the performance of HIR extensively on 12
challenging BigBench reasoning tasks and show
that HIR outperforms the baseline algorithms and
is comparable to or even surpasses supervised finetuning. The implementation of HIR is available at
https://github.com/tianjunz/HIR.

Figure 1. Average Performance on BigBench. HIR demonstrates
a significant average performance gain over 12 tasks on BigBench
compared to all baselines using FLAN-T5-Large.

an instruction (Bender et al., 2021; Bommasani et al., 2021;
Weidinger et al., 2021). Such behavior is undesirable since
the langue model could make up facts, generate toxic text
or simply not be able to follow the intended behavior made
by the instructions (Bender et al., 2021; Bommasani et al.,
2021; Weidinger et al., 2021). As a result, a considerable
amount of research effort has been put into designing better
finetuning algorithms that can align the outputs of language
models with human instructions (Leike et al., 2018; Askell
et al., 2021). The most widely adopted approach is to deploy
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to optimize for a
manually defined or learned “alignment score” (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Uesato et al., 2022). Impressive progress has
been made in this direction, including the more recently
released GPT series model (OpenAI, 2022).
Despite their good performance in the alignment, however,
most of the prior work either uses Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) to optimize for a trained
alignment score module (Ouyang et al., 2022) or tries to
apply imitation learning to a final-answer or reward-model
filtered dataset (Uesato et al., 2022). The former approach is
rather complex, sensitive to hyperparameters, and requires
additional training in the reward model and value network.
The latter one is less data-effective as it only makes use of
the success instruction-output pairs, completely abandoning
the ones that do not align.

1. Introduction
Recent studies have shown that large language models could
demonstrate unintended behavior when prompting it with
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Tianjun Zhang <tianjunz@berkeley.edu>,
Fangchen Liu <fangchen liu@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

