From Perception to Programs: Regularize, Overparameterize, and Amortize

Hao Tang 1 Kevin Ellis 1

Abstract

bols should be grounded in perception, and that symbol
processing should be implemented by learnable programlike representations. However, we also propose that rather
than hand-code a preordained set of primitive symbols, AI
systems should learn to carve the perceptual world into
their own discretization. What constitutes a ‘symbol’ may
vary across domain and across datasets, and can be hard
for human engineers to anticipate. By jointly learning the
symbols, as well as synthesizing the programs that operate
on them, we hope to side-step the pitfalls associated with
hand-engineered representations.

We develop techniques for synthesizing neurosymbolic programs. Such programs mix discrete symbolic processing with continuous neural computation. We relax this mixed discrete/continuous problem and jointly learn all
modules with gradient descent, and also incorporate amortized inference, overparameterization,
and a differentiable strategy for penalizing lengthy
programs. Collectedly this toolbox improves the
stability of gradient-guided program search, and
suggests ways of learning both how to parse continuous input into discrete abstractions, and how
to process those abstractions via symbolic code.

Delivering on the above promises requires synthesizing neurosymbolic programs, which poses unique technical challenges. Unlike conventional programs, which are discrete,
a neurosymbolic program has both continuous weights and
discrete program structure, both of which must be synthesized. In addition to solving a mixed discrete/continuous
problem, synthesizing a neurosymbolic program is severely
underconstrained. It is under constrained because it is not
clear what parts of the problem should be handled by symbolic processing, and what should be handled by neural
networks. Because neural nets are universal function approximators, they can in theory satisfy any program learning
problem, at least on the training data.

1. Introduction
We seek steps toward AI systems that learn to symbolically process perceptual input. Consider, for example, a
system which learns to infer the 3D structure of objects:
starting from pixels, it must infer low-level symbols (curves,
parts), and then organize them according to symbolic relationships (symmetry, part repetitions, part hierarchy). Or,
consider a system which learns to control a moving object that navigates around obstacles: starting from sensory
data (lidar, RGBD), it must first parse the world (into objects, proximities, freespace), and then compute trajectories using high-level computations (PID controllers, etc.).
Similar perceptual-symbolic problems arise when learning
structured world models from pixels, inferring instructions
from natural language, or constructing visual analogies. We
propose framing such tasks as neurosymbolic program
synthesis: learning neural components that extract symbols from perception, and synthesizing programs to further
process those symbols with more complex computations.

Our main technical contribution is a suite of methods for
circumventing the above two challenges. We assume a
multitask setup where the learner is exposed to a variety
of neurosymbolic programming tasks. Having multiple
tasks introduces extra constraints, and also allows learning
across tasks how to search for programs. Hence multitasking can address both the ill-posed nature of the problem,
and also the intractable search aspect due to the mixed discrete/continuous nature of the problem.
Concretely, our method trains a neural search policy to
synthesize neurosymbolic programs. It uses a differentiable
interpreter to backprop gradients from the desired program
output all the way back to the parameters of the search
policy. We overparametrize the program search space to
ease continuous optimization, but this overparametrization
leads to bloated programs with too much code, hence we
regularize the length of the programs to produce concise,
interpretable code. We therefore call our method ROAP
(Regularize, Overparametrize, Amortize, for Programs).

Our ultimate goal is to develop general methods that could,
we hope, apply to challenging neurosymbolic tasks like
those previously mentioned. We take the stance that sym1
Cornell University.
Correspondence to:
<haotang@cs.cornell.edu>.

Hao Tang

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

