Hypothesis Transfer Learning with Surrogate Classification Losses:
Generalization Bounds through Algorithmic Stability

Anass Aghbalou 1 Guillaume Staerman 2

Abstract

assumption is often too restrictive to hold in practice. In
many real-world applications, a hypothesis is learnt and deployed in different environments that exhibit a distributional
shift. A more realistic assumption is that the marginal distributions of training (source) and testing (target) domains
are different but related. This is the framework of domain
adaptation (DA), where the learner is provided little or no
labeled data from the target domain but a large amount of
data from the source domain. This problem arises in various real-world applications like natural language processing
(Dredze et al., 2007; Ruder et al., 2019), sentiment analysis
(Blitzer et al., 2007b; Liu et al., 2019), robotics (Zhang et al.,
2012; Bousmalis et al., 2018) and many other areas.

Hypothesis transfer learning (HTL) contrasts domain adaptation by allowing for a previous task
leverage, named the source, into a new one, the
target, without requiring access to the source data.
Indeed, HTL relies only on a hypothesis learnt
from such source data, relieving the hurdle of
expansive data storage and providing great practical benefits. Hence, HTL is highly beneficial
for real-world applications relying on big data.
The analysis of such a method from a theoretical
perspective faces multiple challenges, particularly
in classification tasks. This paper deals with this
problem by studying the learning theory of HTL
through algorithmic stability, an attractive theoretical framework for machine learning algorithms
analysis. In particular, we are interested in the
statistical behaviour of the regularized empirical
risk minimizers in the case of binary classification. Our stability analysis provides learning guarantees under mild assumptions. Consequently,
we derive several complexity-free generalization
bounds for essential statistical quantities like the
training error, the excess risk and cross-validation
estimates. These refined bounds allow understanding the benefits of transfer learning and comparing the behaviour of standard losses in different
scenarios, leading to valuable insights for practitioners.

Several works shed light on the theory of DA (Blitzer et al.,
2007a; Mansour et al., 2009; Ben-David et al., 2010; Zhang
et al., 2012; Cortes et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2019) and suggest schemes that generally rely on minimizing some similarity distances between the source and the target domains.
However, the theoretical analysis shows that a DA procedure needs many unlabeled data from both domains to be
efficient. Besides, even when unlabeled data are abundant,
minimizing a similarity distance can be time-consuming in
many scenarios.
To tackle this practical limitation, a new framework that
relies only on the source hypothesis was introduced, the
so-called hypothesis transfer learning (HTL) (Li & Bilmes,
2007; Orabona et al., 2009; Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013;
Perrot & Habrard, 2015; Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2017; Du
et al., 2017). HTL is tailored to the scenarios where the
user has no direct access to the source domain nor to the
relatedness between the source and target environments. As
a direct consequence, HTL does not introduce any assumptions about the similarity between the source and target
distributions. It has the advantage of not storing abundant
source data in practice.

1. Introduction
Traditional supervised machine learning methods share the
common assumption that training data and test data are
drawn from the same underlying distribution. However, this

In this work, we analyze HTL through Regularized Empirical Risk Minimization (RERM) in the binary classification
framework. Our working assumptions encompass many
widely used surrogate losses, such as the exponential loss
used by several boosting algorithms like AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire, 1997), the logistic loss, the softplus loss,
which serves as a smooth approximation of the hinge loss

1

Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, LTCI,
Palaiseau, France. 2 Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, ´
Palaiseau, 91120, France. Correspondence to: Anass Aghbalou
<anass.aghablou@telecom-paris.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

