SLAMB: Accelerated Large Batch Training with Sparse Communication

Hang Xu 1 Wenxuan Zhang 1 Jiawei Fei 1 Yuzhe Wu 2 TingWen Xie 2 Jun Huang 2 Yuchen Xie 2
Mohamed Elhoseiny 1 Panos Kalnis 1

Abstract

many others. For example, BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) has
340M parameters and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) has up to
175B parameters. In order to train such models within reasonable time, large-scale distributed training is commonly
utilized. Unfortunately, synchronous stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and its variants do not scale-up well due to
two challenges: (i) using SGD with very large batch size
typically degrades generalization accuracy; and (ii) scaling
efficiency is severely compromised due to communication
overhead.

Distributed training of large deep neural networks
requires frequent exchange of massive data between machines, thus communication efficiency
is a major concern. Existing compressed communication methods are either not compatible
with large batch optimization algorithms, or do
not provide sufficient speedup in large scale. In
this paper, we combine sparsification-based gradient compression with the layer-wise adaptive moments optimizer for large batch training (LAMB).
We propose SLAMB, a novel communicationefficient optimizer that supports large batch sizes
and scales to thousands of GPUs. SLAMB
employs momentum masking, local error compensation, and element-wise adaptive rescaling
to achieve accurate layer-wise weight updates,
which translates to fast convergence for very large
batches. Our empirical results show that, compared to the state-of-the-art, SLAMB transmits
half the amount of data in large-batch BERT pretraining, without sacrificing accuracy. Moreover,
SLAMB achieves excellent scalability in large
computing infrastructures. For instance, SLAMB
with 128 GPUs reduces the training time of Swin
Transformer pre-training on ImageNet to 5.35
hours, which is 2 hours faster than the state-ofthe-art. At the extreme, we trained BERT-XL
(2.8B parameters) on 1,024 NVIDIA A100 GPUs,
where SLAMB achieved 90% scaling efficiency.

The generalization issue of large-scale training can be addressed by layer-wise adaptive large batch training techniques, such as LARS (You et al., 2018) and LAMB (You
et al., 2020). For instance, LAMB can scale the batch size
of Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) from 512 to 64K for BERT
pre-training, without affecting accuracy. However, communication is still a major performance bottleneck, due to
the frequent gradient synchronization. We find that LAMB
suffers from low scaling efficiency in large-scale distributed
training. As illustrated in Table 1, by scaling LAMB to
1,024 GPUs, the scaling efficiency over the baseline (i.e.,
Adam on 8 GPUs) is only 53%; essentially, almost half of
the 1,024 GPUs are heavily underutilized. To alleviate this,
compressed communication has been proposed to accelerate
the training speed by reducing the volume of the exchanged
data. 1-bit LAMB (Li et al., 2022) combines 1-bit quantized
compression with LAMB. However, due to its warm-up
strategy, 1-bit LAMB reduces the volume of communicated
data only by 4.6 times; in Table 1 we show that the resulting
scaling efficiency on 1,024 GPUs is 80.9%.

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming unprecedentedly large in various machine learning fields, including computer vision, natural language processing, and

In this paper, we address these challenges by combining
large batch optimization (i.e., LAMB) with sparse communication and propose a novel communication-efficient
large batch optimization algorithm, called SLAMB1 . Our
method scales efficiently to thousands of GPUs, without
compromising accuracy. Our contributions are:

1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 2 Meituan, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Hang Xu <hang.xu@kaust.edu.sa>, Panos Kalnis
<panos.kalnis@kaust.edu.sa>.

• We develop a novel communication efficient layer-wise
adaptive algorithm SLAMB for large batch DNN optimization. SLAMB employs momentum masking, local

1. Introduction

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

SLAMB: Sparse Layer-wise Adaptive Moments optimizer for large Batch training.
Code is available at
https://github.com/hangxu0304/SLAMB

1

