Quantum Lower Bounds for Finding Stationary Points of Nonconvex Functions

Chenyi Zhang 1 2 Tongyang Li 3 4

Abstract

previous literature had established quantum speedups for
solving linear systems (Harrow et al., 2009; Childs et al.,
2017), semidefinite programs (Brandão & Svore, 2017;
Brandão et al., 2019; van Apeldoorn et al., 2020b; van
Apeldoorn & Gilyén, 2019; Kerenidis & Prakash, 2020),
general convex optimization (Chakrabarti et al., 2020; van
Apeldoorn et al., 2020a), etc.

Quantum computing is an emerging technology that has been rapidly advancing in the past
decades. In this paper, we conduct a systematic study of quantum lower bounds on finding approximate stationary points of nonconvex functions, and we consider the following two important settings: 1) having access to p-th order derivatives; or 2) having access to stochastic gradients.
1+p 
The classical query lower bounds are Ω − p
regarding the first setting and Ω(−4 ) regarding
the second setting (or Ω(−3 ) if the stochastic gradient function is mean-squared smooth). In this
paper, we extend all these classical lower bounds
to the quantum setting. They match the classical algorithmic results respectively, demonstrating that there is no quantum speedup for finding
-stationary points of nonconvex functions with
p-th order derivative inputs or stochastic gradient
inputs, whether with or without the mean-squared
smoothness assumption. Technically, we prove
our quantum lower bounds by showing that the
sequential nature of classical hard instances in all
these settings also applies to quantum queries, preventing any quantum speedup other than revealing
information of the stationary points sequentially.

More recently, nonconvex optimization has been a primary
research direction in machine learning, since the landscapes
of many models, including neural networks, are typically
nonconvex. Finding the global optimum of a nonconvex
function, even approximately, is NP-hard in general (Murty
& Kabadi, 1987; Nemirovski & Yudin, 1983). To give efficient optimization algorithms for nonconvex functions, a
first step is to find stationary points (Agarwal et al., 2017;
Birgin et al., 2017; Carmon et al., 2018; 2017; Nesterov,
2003; Nesterov & Polyak, 2006). However, quantum algorithms for nonconvex optimization are less understood.
Based on gradient descents, Zhang et al. (2021) proposed a
quantum algorithm that can find an -approximate secondorder stationary point of a d-dimensional nonconvex function and improve the logarithmic dimension dependence
from log6 d in the classical result (Jin et al., 2018) to log2 d,
but the  dependence remains the same. The dependence
in log d is further improved to linear in Childs et al. (2022).
Moreover, Liu et al. (2022) showed that quantum tunneling can provide quantum speedups in the task of finding an
unknown local minimum starting from a known one.

1. Introduction

Meanwhile, various results have been developed concerning
the classical lower bounds for finding -approximate firstorder stationary points (i.e., points with gradient smaller
than ) of nonconvex functions under different assumptions.
In particular, Carmon et al. (2020a) discussed the setting
where the objective function f has Lipschitz p-th order
derivative and proved that any randomized classical algo1+p 
rithm has to make at least Ω − p derivative queries to
guarantee an Ω(1) success probability in the worst case.
Using a similar approach, Carmon et al. (2021) proved a
deterministic classical lower bound for first-order method
of order Ω(−12/7 ) for functions with Lipschitz first and
second derivatives.

Quantum computing is an emerging technology with wide
applications. Among those, quantum algorithms for optimization are of general interest. On the one hand, optimization algorithms have wide applications in machine learning,
statistics, operations research, and many other areas. On the
other hand, it is crucial in quantum computing to figure out
the extent of quantum speedups in specific problems, and
1

Computer Science Department, Stanford University 2 Institute
for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
3
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University. Correspondence
to: Tongyang Li <tongyangli@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

As for stochastic settings, Arjevani et al. (2020; 2022) thoroughly investigated classical lower bounds under different
1

