Constrained Decision Transformer for Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning

Zuxin Liu * 1 Zijian Guo * 1 Yihang Yao 1 Zhepeng Cen 1 Wenhao Yu 2 Tingnan Zhang 2 Ding Zhao 1

Abstract

the task (Lu et al., 2022). The optimal driving policies
should satisfy a set of constraints, such as traffic laws and
physical dynamics. Simply maximizing the reward may
cause constraint violations and catastrophic consequences
in safety-critical applications (Chen et al., 2021a).

Safe reinforcement learning (RL) trains a constraint satisfaction policy by interacting with the
environment. We aim to tackle a more challenging problem: learning a safe policy from an offline dataset. We study the offline safe RL problem from a novel multi-objective optimization
perspective and propose the ϵ-reducible concept
to characterize problem difficulties. The inherent
trade-offs between safety and task performance inspire us to propose the constrained decision transformer (CDT) approach, which can dynamically
adjust the trade-offs during deployment. Extensive experiments show the advantages of the proposed method in learning an adaptive, safe, robust, and high-reward policy. CDT outperforms
its variants and strong offline safe RL baselines
by a large margin with the same hyperparameters
across all tasks, while keeping the zero-shot adaptation capability to different constraint thresholds,
making our approach more suitable for real-world
RL under constraints.

Safe reinforcement learning aims to obtain a rewardmaximizing policy within a constrained manifold (Garcıa
& Fernández, 2015; Brunke et al., 2021), showing advantages to satisfy the safety requirements in real-world applications (Ray et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2022). However, most deep
safe RL approaches focus on the safety during deployment,
i.e., after training, while ignoring the constraint violation
costs during training (Xu et al., 2022b). The requirement of
collecting online interaction samples brings challenges in
ensuring training safety, because it is a non-trivial task to
prevent the agent from executing unsafe behaviors during
the learning process. Though carefully designed correction
systems or even human interventions can be used as a safety
guard to filter unsafe action in training (Saunders et al.,
2017; Dalal et al., 2018; Wagener et al., 2021), it could be
expensive to be applied due to the low sample efficiency of
many RL approaches (Xie et al., 2021).
This paper studies the problem of learning constrained policies from offline datasets such that the safety requirements
can be met both in training and deployment. Several recent
works tackle the problem by bridging the ideas in offline
RL and safe RL domains, such as using pessimistic estimations (Xu et al., 2022a) or the stationary distribution
correction technique (Liu et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022). A
constrained optimization formulation and Lagrange multipliers are usually adopted when updating the policy, targeting
to find the most rewarding policy while satisfying the constraints (Le et al., 2019). However, these approaches require
setting a constant constraint threshold before training, and
thus the trained agents can not be adapted to other constraint conditions. We believe the capability of adapting
the trained policy to different constraint thresholds is important for many practical applications, because imposing
stricter constraints is usually at the cost of sacrificing the
task performance and inducing conservative behaviors (Liu
et al., 2022b). Therefore, we aim to study a training scheme
such that the trained agent can dynamically adjust its constraint threshold, such that we can control its deployment
conservativeness without further fine-tuning or re-training.

1. Introduction
Learning high-reward policies from offline datasets has been
a prevalent topic in reinforcement learning (RL) and has
shown great promise in broad applications (Fu et al., 2020;
Prudencio et al., 2022). Various learning paradigms are
proposed to extract as much information as possible from
pre-collected trajectories while preventing the policy from
overfitting (Kostrikov et al., 2021; Sinha et al., 2022). However, in the real world, many tasks can hardly be formulated
by solely maximizing a scalar reward function, and the existence of various constraints restricts the domain of feasible
solutions (Gulcehre et al., 2020). For example, though numerous self-driving datasets are collected (Sun et al., 2020),
it is hard to define a single reward function to describe
*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google
Deepmind. Correspondence to: Zuxin Liu <zuxinl@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

