MolDiff: Addressing the Atom-Bond Inconsistency Problem in 3D Molecule
Diffusion Generation
Xingang Peng 1 2 Jiaqi Guan 3 Qiang Liu 4 Jianzhu Ma 5

Abstract

Hoogeboom et al., 2022). For instance, deep learning models have been proposed to generate multiple 3D molecule
conformations which have the potential to be further developed as drugs (Xu et al., 2022; Guan et al., 2022) or can
directly bind given protein pockets(Luo et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2022).

Deep generative models have recently achieved
superior performance in 3D molecule generation.
Most of them first generate atoms and then add
chemical bonds based on the generated atoms in a
post-processing manner. However, there might be
no corresponding bond solution for the temporally
generated atoms as their locations are generated
without considering potential bonds. We define
this problem as the atom-bond inconsistency problem and claim it is the main reason for current approaches to generating unrealistic 3D molecules.
To overcome this problem, we propose a new diffusion model called MolDiff which can generate
atoms and bonds simultaneously while still maintaining their consistency by explicitly modeling
the dependence between their relationships. We
evaluated the generation ability of our proposed
model and the quality of the generated molecules
using criteria related to both geometry and chemical properties. The empirical studies showed
that our model outperforms previous approaches,
achieving a three-fold improvement in success
rate and generating molecules with significantly
better quality.

The current 3D drug generation models have limited success
rates in producing realistic molecules. This is mainly due
to the way atoms and bonds are generated, where most
models first predict atom types and positions and then add
chemical bonds based on a lookup table of canonical bond
lengths. However, this two-step process can introduce biases
and lead to unrealistic topologies, such as extra-large ring
structures that are uncommon in real molecules or violate
atom valency constraints (1(a, b)). Additionally, ignoring
bonds during training can make the model less robust to
noise. For example, small errors may cause the lookup table
to reject the correct aromatic bonds, as shown in Figure
1(c), where atom i should be connected to j and k to form a
benzene ring.
Additionally, the chemical bonds are not determined solely
by the distances and types of atoms. For instance, as shown
in the left pane of Fig. 1(d), even though both bonds are
carbon-carbon single bonds, their lengths could be different
depending on whether they connect aromatic atoms or not.
The right pane of Fig. 1(d) shows that both the nitrogenoxygen single bond and the aromatic bond can have the same
length. Another evidence is that Hoogeboom et al. (2022)
found that their 3D molecule diffusion model, named EDM,
made more errors for bond predictions on the drug-like
dataset GEOM-Drug than on the QM9 dataset which only
contains molecules with up to nine heavy atoms, indicating
that post-processing bond types are difficult for large druglike molecules. To demonstrate the influence of this suboptimal procedure, we list multiple typically unrealistic 3D
molecules generated by EDM (Hoogeboom et al., 2022) in
Fig. 1(e).

1. Introduction
Small molecule drugs perform biological functions by binding to particular protein pockets based on their 3D structures.
Recently, both academia and industry started to focus on
designing small molecule drugs in the 3D space instead of
only using 2D graphs (Gebauer et al., 2019; Luo & Ji, 2022;
1

School of Intelligence Science and Techology, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Institute for Artifical Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA 4 University
of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA 5 Institute for AI Industry Research,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jianzhu
Ma <majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To address this atom-bond inconsistency problem, we propose a new 3D molecule design model, named MolDiff,
which can jointly sample atoms and bonds based on a probabilistic diffusion model. The difficulty of applying the diffusion model is that even adding small noise to atoms makes

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

