Test-Time Style Shifting: Handling Arbitrary Styles in Domain Generalization

Jungwuk Park * 1 Dong-Jun Han * 2 Soyeong Kim 1 Jaekyun Moon 1

Abstract

Given a training set that consists of multiple (or a single)
source domains, the goal of DG is to achieve generalization
capability to predict well on an arbitrary target domain.
Existing works tackle this problem via meta-learning (Li
et al., 2019; 2018a; Zhao et al., 2021), data augmentation
(Nam et al., 2021; Shankar et al., 2018; Yue et al., 2019;
Zhou et al., 2020) or domain alignment (Li et al., 2018b;c;b;
Erfani et al., 2016). Recently, motivated by the observations
(Huang & Belongie, 2017; Li et al., 2021; Dumoulin et al.,
2017) that the domain characteristic of data has a strong
correlation with the feature statistics (or style statistics)
of the early layers of CNNs, the authors of (Zhou et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2022)
proposed to generate new style statistics during training via
style augmentation.

In domain generalization (DG), the target domain
is unknown when the model is being trained, and
the trained model should successfully work on
an arbitrary (and possibly unseen) target domain
during inference. This is a difficult problem, and
despite active studies in recent years, it remains
a great challenge. In this paper, we take a simple
yet effective approach to tackle this issue. We propose test-time style shifting, which shifts the style
of the test sample (that has a large style gap with
the source domains) to the nearest source domain
that the model is already familiar with, before
making the prediction. This strategy enables the
model to handle any target domains with arbitrary
style statistics, without additional model update
at test-time. Additionally, we propose style balancing, which provides a great platform for maximizing the advantage of test-time style shifting by
handling the DG-specific imbalance issues. The
proposed ideas are easy to implement and successfully work in conjunction with various other
DG schemes. Experimental results on different
datasets show the effectiveness of our methods.

However, DG is still regarded as a challenging problem
since the target domain is unknown during training, and
the trained model should be able to handle arbitrary, and
possibly unseen target domains during inference; the target
domain could have a significantly large discrepancy with the
source domains due to domain shift, limiting the prediction
performance. As an example, consider the well-known
PACS dataset (Li et al., 2017) in Fig. 1, which shows the
t-SNE of feature-level styles statistics of the samples. It can
be seen that the Sketch domain has a large style gap with
other source domains, which results in limited performance
when Sketch domain becomes the target.

1. Introduction
The huge success of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) relies on the assumption that the domains of the
training data and the test data are the same. However, this
assumption does not hold in practice. For example, in selfdriving cars, although we may only have train images on
sunny days and foggy days during training (source domains),
we would have to make predictions for images on snowy
days during testing (unseen target domain). Due to the
practical significance of this problem setup, domain generalization (DG) is receiving considerable attention nowadays.

Contributions. In this paper, we take a simple yet effective approach to improve the DG performance when there
is a significant domain shift between the source and target
domains. Specifically, in order to handle arbitrary target domains during inference, we propose test-time style shifting,
which shifts the style of the test sample (that has a large
style gap with the source domains) to the nearest source domain that the model is already familiar with, before making
the prediction. Note that our scheme only performs style
shifting in the style-space and thus does not require any
model updates at test-time. Moreover, our test-time style
shifting does not require additional changes in the model
architecture or the objective function, making our scheme
to be more compatible with any tasks/models.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South
Korea. 2 Purdue University, USA. Correspondence to: Jaekyun
Moon <jmoon@kaist.edu>.

In order to maximize the effectiveness of test-time style
shifting, the model should be well-trained on the styles

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

