Effective Neural Topic Modeling with Embedding Clustering Regularization

Xiaobao Wu 1 Xinshuai Dong 2 Thong Nguyen 3 Anh Tuan Luu 1

Abstract

Topic#1: just show even come time one good really going know
Topic#2: just even really something come going like actually things get

Topic models have been prevalent for decades
with various applications. However, existing
topic models commonly suffer from the notorious topic collapsing: discovered topics semantically collapse towards each other, leading to
highly repetitive topics, insufficient topic discovery, and damaged model interpretability. In this
paper, we propose a new neural topic model, Embedding Clustering Regularization Topic Model
(ECRTM). Besides the existing reconstruction
error, we propose a novel Embedding Clustering
Regularization (ECR), which forces each topic
embedding to be the center of a separately aggregated word embedding cluster in the semantic space. This enables each produced topic to
contain distinct word semantics, which alleviates topic collapsing. Regularized by ECR, our
ECRTM generates diverse and coherent topics
together with high-quality topic distributions of
documents. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that ECRTM effectively addresses the topic collapsing issue and
consistently surpasses state-of-the-art baselines
in terms of topic quality, topic distributions of
documents, and downstream classification tasks.

Topic#3: just one even something come way really like always good
Topic#4: just get going come one know even really something way
Topic#5: just like inside get even look come one everything away

Table 1: Top related words of the discovered topics by
NSTM (Zhao et al., 2021b) on IMDB. These topics semantically collapse towards each other with many uninformative and repetitive words. Repetitions are underlined.

(a) ETM

(b) NSTM

(c) WeTe

(d) ECRTM

Figure 1: t-SNE visualization of word embeddings (•) and
topic embeddings (▲) under 50 topics. These show while
the topic embeddings mostly collapse together in previous
state-of-the-art models, our ECRTM successfully avoids
the collapsing.

(Blei et al., 2003) or matrix factorization (Kim et al., 2015;
Shi et al., 2018) and (2) neural topic models (Miao et al.,
2016; 2017; Srivastava & Sutton, 2017; Gupta et al., 2019).

1. Introduction

However, despite the current achievements, existing topic
models commonly suffer from topic collapsing: the discovered topics tend to semantically collapse towards each
other (Srivastava & Sutton, 2017), as exemplified in Table 1. We see these collapsed topics include many uninformative and repetitive words. This brings about several issues: (1) Topic collapsing results in highly repetitive topics,
which are less useful for downstream applications (Wallach
et al., 2009; Nan et al., 2019). (2) Topic collapsing incurs
insufficient topic discovery. Many latent topics are undisclosed, making the topic discovery insufficient to understand documents (Dieng et al., 2020). (3) Topic collapsing
damages the interpretability of topic models. It becomes
difficult to infer the real underlying topics that a document
contains (Huynh et al., 2020). In consequence, topic collapsing impedes the utilization and extension of topic mod-

Topic models have achieved great success in document
analysis via discovering latent semantics. They have facilitated various downstream applications (Boyd-Graber
et al., 2017), like content recommendation (McAuley &
Leskovec, 2013), summarization (Ma et al., 2012), and
information retrieval (Wang et al., 2007). Current topic
models can be roughly classified as two lines: (1) conventional topic models with probabilistic graphical models
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to:
Xiaobao Wu <xiaobao002@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Anh Tuan Luu <anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

