Synthetic Data, Real Errors: How (Not) to Publish and Use Synthetic Data

Boris van Breugel 1 Zhaozhi Qian 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract
Generating synthetic data through generative models is gaining interest in the ML community and
beyond, promising a future where datasets can
be tailored to individual needs. Unfortunately,
synthetic data is usually not perfect, resulting in
potential errors in downstream tasks. In this work
we explore how the generative process affects the
downstream ML task. We show that the naive synthetic data approach—using synthetic data as if it
is real—leads to downstream models and analyses that do not generalize well to real data. As a
first step towards better ML in the synthetic data
regime, we introduce Deep Generative Ensemble
(DGE)—a framework inspired by Deep Ensembles that aims to implicitly approximate the posterior distribution over the generative process model
parameters. DGE improves downstream model
training, evaluation, and uncertainty quantification, vastly outperforming the naive approach on
average. The largest improvements are achieved
for minority classes and low-density regions of
the original data, for which the generative uncertainty is largest.

Figure 1. Synthetic data is not perfect, which affects downstream
ML tasks, e.g. training a prediction model. The naive synthetic
data approach generates one synthetic dataset and treats it like
it is real. We propose using an ensemble of generative models
for capturing the generative uncertainty, implicitly encoded into
different synthetic data distributions.

some downstream task, e.g. statistical analyses or training
an ML supervised model. The hope is that downstream
results are equally valid in the real-world—e.g. a prediction
model trained on synthetic data will do well on real data.
Evidently, whether this is true will rely entirely on how well
the synthetic data describes the real data.

1. Introduction
Data is the foundation of most science. Recent advances in
deep generative modelling have seen a steep rise in methods
that aim to replace real data with synthetic data. The general
idea is that synthetic data resembles the real data, while
guaranteeing privacy (Ho et al., 2021; Yoon et al., 2020;
Jordon et al., 2019; van Breugel et al., 2023), improving
fairness (Xu et al., 2018; 2019a; van Breugel et al., 2021),
augmenting the dataset size (Antoniou et al., 2017; Dina
et al., 2022; Das et al., 2022; Bing et al., 2022), or simulating
distributional shifts (Yoon et al., 2018). Often the aim is to
be able to use the synthetic data in place of the real data for
1
DAMTP, University of Cambridge 2 Alan Turing Institute.
Correspondence to: Boris van Breugel <bv292@cam.ac.uk>.

This brings us to the focus of this work: how do we do good
ML on synthetic data, given that the generative process
underlying the synthetic data is not perfect. If we are the
data publisher, how should we create and publish synthetic
data for it to be most useful to downstream users? And
if we are the downstream user, can we create models that
are more robust to potential errors, evaluate models reliably
using synthetic data, and how do we estimate uncertainty
for the downstream results? If we envision a future where
synthetic data plays a significant role in research, these are
pertinent questions.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Let us first highlight why this is an important topic in practice. First, synthetic data is not perfect. Deep generative
models may fail in numerable ways, with consequences such
1

