Optimality of Thompson Sampling with Noninformative Priors
for Pareto Bandits
Jongyeong Lee 1 2 Junya Honda 3 2 Chao-Kai Chiang 1 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract

problem (Bubeck et al., 2012). Since only partial observations are available, the agent has to estimate unknown
distributions to guess which arm is optimal while avoiding
playing suboptimal arms that induce loss of resources. Thus,
the agent has to cope with the dilemma of exploration and
exploitation.

In the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem, a
randomized probability matching policy called
Thompson sampling (TS) has shown excellent performance in various reward models. In addition
to the empirical performance, TS has been shown
to achieve asymptotic problem-dependent lower
bounds in several models. However, its optimality
has been mainly addressed under light-tailed or
one-parameter models that belong to exponential
families. In this paper, we consider the optimality
of TS for the Pareto model that has a heavy tail
and is parameterized by two unknown parameters.
Specifically, we discuss the optimality of TS with
probability matching priors that include the Jeffreys prior and the reference priors. We first prove
that TS with certain probability matching priors
can achieve the optimal regret bound. Then, we
show the suboptimality of TS with other priors,
including the Jeffreys and the reference priors.
Nevertheless, we find that TS with the Jeffreys
and reference priors can achieve the asymptotic
lower bound if one uses a truncation procedure.
These results suggest carefully choosing noninformative priors to avoid suboptimality and show
the effectiveness of truncation procedures in TSbased policies.

In this problem, Thompson sampling (TS), a randomized
Bayesian policy that plays an arm according to the posterior
probability of being optimal, has been widely adopted because of its outstanding empirical performance (Chapelle
& Li, 2011; Russo et al., 2018). Following its empirical
success, theoretical analysis of TS has been conducted for
several reward models such as Bernoulli models (Agrawal
& Goyal, 2012; Kaufmann et al., 2012), one-dimensional
exponential families (Korda et al., 2013), Gaussian models (Honda & Takemura, 2014), and bounded support models (Riou & Honda, 2020; Baudry et al., 2021) where asymptotic optimality of TS was established. Here, an algorithm is
said to be asymptotically optimal if it can achieve the theoretical problem-dependent lower bound derived by Lai et al.
(1985) for one-parameter models and Burnetas & Katehakis
(1996) for multiparameter or nonparametric models. Note
that the performance of any reasonable algorithms cannot
be better than these lower bounds.
Apart from the problem-dependent regret analysis, several works studied the problem-independent or priorindependent bounds of TS (Bubeck & Liu, 2013; Russo
& Van Roy, 2016; Agrawal & Goyal, 2017). In this paper,
we study how the choice of noninformative priors affects
the performance of TS for any given problem instance. In
other words, we focus on the asymptotic optimality of TS
depending on the choice of noninformative priors.

1. Introduction
In the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, an agent plays
an arm and observes a reward only from the played arm,
which is partial feedback (Thompson, 1933; Robbins, 1952).
The rewards are further assumed to be generated from the
distribution of the corresponding arm in the stochastic MAB

The asymptotic optimality of TS has been mainly considered
in the one-parameter model, while its optimality under the
multiparameter model has not been well-studied. To the best
of our knowledge, the asymptotic optimality of TS in the
noncompact multiparameter model is only known for the
Gaussian bandits (Honda & Takemura, 2014) where both the
mean and variance are unknown. They showed that TS with
the uniform prior is optimal while TS with the Jeffreys prior
and reference prior cannot achieve the lower bound. The
success of the uniform prior is due to its frequent playing

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of Systems Science,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence to: Jongyeong
Lee <lee@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

