How Powerful are Shallow Neural Networks with Bandlimited Random Weights?

Ming Li 1 Sho Sonoda 2 Feilong Cao 3 Yu Guang Wang 4 5 Jiye Liang 6

Abstract

1. Introduction

We investigate the expressive power of depth-2
bandlimited random neural networks. A random
net is a neural network where the hidden layer
parameters are frozen with random assignment,
and only the output layer parameters are trained
by loss minimization. Using random weights for
a hidden layer is an effective method to avoid nonconvex optimization in standard gradient descent
learning. It has also been adopted in recent deep
learning theories. Despite the well-known fact
that a neural network is a universal approximator,
in this study, we mathematically show that when
hidden parameters are distributed in a bounded
domain, the network may not achieve zero approximation error. In particular, we derive a new
nontrivial approximation error lower bound. The
proof utilizes the technique of ridgelet analysis, a
harmonic analysis method designed for neural networks. This method is inspired by fundamental
principles in classical signal processing, specifically the idea that signals with limited bandwidth
may not always be able to perfectly reconstruct
the original signal. We corroborate our theoretical
results with various simulation studies, and generally, two main take-home messages are offered: (i)
Not any distribution for selecting random weights
is feasible to build a universal approximator; (ii) A
suitable assignment of random weights exists but
to some degree is associated with the complexity
of the target function.

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in utilizing
random methods for training neural networks as they have
been shown to have the potential to significantly accelerate
the training process, particularly for large-scale datasets and
real-time processing requirements (Scardapane & Wang,
2017; Cao et al., 2018). In this study, we examine the capability of shallow random networks in a bandlimited context,
where the hidden parameters are confined to a specific range.
Past research has, in some cases, deliberately or unintentionally limited the distribution range of parameters. For
instance, uniform distributions were used due to technical
limitations, or normal random vectors with insufficiently
small variance were employed due to the default configurations of the software. Analogous to the well-established
principle in signal processing (or Fourier analysis) that bandlimited signals may not be able to accurately reproduce the
original signal, bandlimited neural networks may not fully
exhibit their function approximation capabilities. However,
unlike classical Fourier analysis, the correlation between
bandwidth and approximation error has yet to be clearly
defined. One challenge in this area is that neural networks
do not possess an orthonormal basis, but rather a frame.
Through the use of ridgelet analysis, a Fourier-like analysis
developed specifically for neural networks, we have derived
a new lower bound for approximation error.
This study considers a shallow neural network gd (x) =
Pd
m
with activation
j=1 cj σ(aj · x − bj ) of input x ∈ R
function σ and parameters (aj , bj , cj ) ∈ Rm × R × R for
each j ∈ [d] := {1, . . . , d}, and the random training method
with two steps:

1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China 2 Deep Learning Theory Team, RIKEN AIP, Tokyo,
Japan 3 College of Sciences, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou,
China 4 Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 5 School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 6 Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China. Correspondence to: Ming
Li <mingli@zjnu.edu.cn>, Sho Sonoda <sho.sonoda@riken.jp>.

Step I: Randomly initialize hidden parameters
(aj , bj ) to a given data-independent probability distribution Q(a, b), and freeze them; then
Step II: Statistically determine output parameters
cj given a dataset Dn = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 .
A variety of neural network architectures have been developed that utilize random training methods, including
random vector functional-link (RVFL) networks (Igelnik &
Pao, 1995), random feature expansions (Rahimi & Recht,
2008a;b; 2009), random weight networks (Saxe et al., 2011),

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

