Human-Timescale Adaptation in an Open-Ended Task Space
Jakob Bauer † 1 Kate Baumli † 1 Feryal Behbahani † 1 Avishkar Bhoopchand † 1 Nathalie Bradley-Schmieg † 1
Michael Chang † 1 Natalie Clay † 1 Adrian Collister † 1 Vibhavari Dasagi † 1 Lucy Gonzalez † 1 Karol Gregor † 1
Edward Hughes † 1 Sheleem Kashem † 1 Maria Loks-Thompson † 1 Hannah Openshaw † 1 Jack Parker-Holder † 1
Shreya Pathak † 1 Nicolas Perez-Nieves † 1 Nemanja Rakicevic † 1 Tim Rocktäschel † 1 Yannick Schroecker † 1
Satinder Singh † 1 Jakub Sygnowski † 1 Karl Tuyls † 1 Sarah York † 1 Alexander Zacherl † 1 Lei Zhang † 1

Abstract

Score: 0

Foundation models have shown impressive adaptation and scalability in supervised and selfsupervised learning problems, but so far these
successes have not fully translated to reinforcement learning (RL). In this work, we
demonstrate that training an RL agent at scale
leads to a general in-context learning algorithm
that can adapt to open-ended novel embodied 3D problems as quickly as humans. In
a vast space of held-out environment dynamics, our adaptive agent (AdA) displays on-the-fly
hypothesis-driven exploration, efficient exploitation of acquired knowledge, and can successfully be prompted with first-person demonstrations. Adaptation emerges from three ingredients: (1) meta-reinforcement learning across a
vast, smooth and diverse task distribution, (2) a
policy parameterised as a large-scale attentionbased memory architecture, and (3) an effective
automated curriculum that prioritises tasks at the
frontier of an agent’s capabilities. We demonstrate characteristic scaling laws with respect to
network size, memory length, and richness of the
training task distribution. We believe our results
lay the foundation for increasingly general and
adaptive RL agents that perform well across everlarger open-ended domains.

Score: 13

Score: 16

DEAD
END

AdA’s trajectory
Object caried
Object dropped

Trial 1

No test-time experience

Exploration

REWARD

REWARD

Trial 2

20 seconds of experience

Success

Trial 3

40 seconds of experience

Reﬁnement

Figure 1: Adaptation in minutes. Example trajectories of our
agent (AdA) solving a held-out task in a complex 3D environment within minutes of test-time experience without any further
agent training. Initial trials (Exploration) show a policy that uncovers hidden environment dynamics. After just seconds of testtime experience (Success), AdA finds a valid solution to the task.
Later (Refinement), it improves this solution, gradually finding
a more rewarding behaviour. The solid white lines show agent
movement. The dashed coloured lines show the agent carrying an
object of the corresponding colour. For a full description of the
task, see Figure E.1. Videos of AdA’s behaviour are available on
our microsite and accompanying results reel.

the reward is sparse and the task space is vast and diverse
(Yang et al., 2019). Outside RL, foundation models in
semi-supervised learning have generated significant interest (Bommasani et al., 2021) due to their ability to adapt
in few shots from demonstrations across a broad range
of tasks. These models are designed to provide a strong
foundation of general knowledge and skills that can be
built upon and adapted to new situations via fine-tuning or
prompting with demonstrations (Brown et al., 2020). Crucial to this success has been attention-based memory architectures like Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which
show power-law scaling in performance with the number
of parameters (Tay et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Meta-RL has been shown to be effective for fast in-context
adaptation (e.g. Yu et al. (2020); Zintgraf (2022)). However, meta-RL has had limited success in settings where

In this work, we pave the way for training an RL foundation
model; that is, an agent that has been pre-trained on a vast
task distribution and that, at test time, can adapt few-shot
to a broad range of downstream tasks. We introduce Adaptive Agent (AdA), an agent capable of human-timescale
adaptation in a vast open-ended task space with sparse rewards. AdA does not require any prompts (Reed et al.,

†
Alphabetical order, see Adaptive Agent Team for contributions 1 DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Feryal Behbahani <feryal@google.com>, Edward Hughes <edwardhughes@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

