Fed-CBS: A Heterogeneity-Aware Client Sampling Mechanism for Federated
Learning via Class-Imbalance Reduction

Jianyi Zhang 1 Ang Li 2 Minxue Tang 1 Jingwei Sun 1 Xiang Chen 3 Fan Zhang 4 Changyou Chen 5
Yiran Chen 1 Hai Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the booming of IoT devices, a considerable amount of
data is generated at the network edge, providing valuable
resources for learning insightful information and enabling
intelligent applications such as self-driving, video analytics,
anomaly detection, etc. The traditional wisdom is to train
machine learning models by collecting data from devices
and performing centralized training. Data migration usually
raises serious privacy concerns. Federated learning (FL)
(McMahan et al., 2017a) is a promising technique to mitigate such privacy concerns, enabling a large number of
clients to learn a shared model collaboratively, and the learning process is orchestrated by a central server. In particular,
the participating clients first download a global model from
the central server and then compute local model updates
using their local data. The clients then transmit the local
updates to the server, where the local updates are aggregated
and then the global model is updated accordingly.

Due to the often limited communication bandwidth of edge devices, most existing federated
learning (FL) methods randomly select only a
subset of devices to participate in training at each
communication round. Compared with engaging
all the available clients, such a random-selection
mechanism could lead to significant performance
degradation on non-IID (independent and identically distributed) data. In this paper, we present
our key observation that the essential reason resulting in such performance degradation is the
class-imbalance of the grouped data from randomly selected clients. Based on this observation, we design an efficient heterogeneity-aware
client sampling mechanism, namely, Federated
Class-balanced Sampling (Fed-CBS), which can
effectively reduce class-imbalance of the grouped
dataset from the intentionally selected clients.
We first propose a measure of class-imbalance
which can be derived in a privacy-preserving way.
Based on this measure, we design a computationefficient client sampling strategy such that the actively selected clients will generate a more classbalanced grouped dataset with theoretical guarantees. Experimental results show that Fed-CBS outperforms the status quo approaches in terms of test
accuracy and the rate of convergence while achieving comparable or even better performance than
the ideal setting where all the available clients
participate in the FL training.

In practice, due to limited communication and computing
capabilities, one usually can not engage all the available
clients in FL training to fully utilize all the local data. Therefore, most FL methods only randomly select a subset of
the available clients to participate in the training in each
communication round. However, in practice, the data held
by different clients are often typically non-IID (independent
and identically distributed) due to various user preferences
and usage patterns. This leads to a serious problem that the
random client selection strategy often fails to learn a global
model that can generalize well for most of the participating
clients under non-IID settings (Goetz et al., 2019; Cho et al.,
2020; Nishio & Yonetani, 2019; Yang et al., 2020).
Several heuristic client selection mechanisms have been
proposed to tackle the non-IID challenge. For example, in
the method of (Goetz et al., 2019), the clients with larger
local loss will have a higher probability to be selected to
participate in the training. Power-of-Choice (Cho et al.,
2020) selects several clients with the largest loss from a randomly sampled subset of all the available clients. However,
selecting clients with a larger local loss may not guarantee
that the final model can have a smaller global loss. Another limitation of previous research on client selection is

1
Duke University 2 University of Maryland, College Park
George Mason University 4 Yale University 5 The State University of New York at Buffalo. Correspondence to: Jianyi Zhang
<jianyi.zhang@duke.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

