Buying Information for Stochastic Optimization

Mingchen Ma 1 Christos Tzamos 1

Abstract

sible solution in advance (offline stochastic optimization) or
adaptively (adaptive stochastic optimization) to optimize the
objective function in expectation. Formally, the two types
of stochastic optimization problems can be defined in the
following way.

Stochastic optimization is one of the central problems in Machine Learning and Theoretical Computer Science. In the standard model, the algorithm is given a fixed distribution known in advance. In practice though, one may acquire at a
cost extra information to make better decisions.
In this paper, we study how to buy information for
stochastic optimization and formulate this question as an online learning problem. Assuming the
learner has an oracle for the original optimization
problem, we design a 2-competitive deterministic
algorithm and a e/(e − 1)-competitive randomized algorithm for buying information. We show
that this ratio is tight as the problem is equivalent to a robust generalization of the ski-rental
problem, which we call super-martingale stopping. We also consider an adaptive setting where
the learner can choose to buy information after
taking some actions for the underlying optimization problem. We focus on the classic optimization problem, Min-Sum Set Cover, where the goal
is to quickly find an action that covers a given
request drawn from a known distribution. We
provide an 8-competitive algorithm running in
polynomial time that chooses actions and decides
when to buy information about the underlying
request.

Definition 1.1 (Offline Stochastic Optimization). Let S
be a set of scenarios and X (S) be a set of actions. Let
ℓ(A, s) : 2X × S → R+ be a loss function. An offline
stochastic optimization problem (X , S, ℓ, D) is to find a
set of actions A that minimize Es∼D ℓ(A, s), where D is a
distribution over S.
Definition 1.2 (Adaptive Stochastic Optimization). Let S
be a set of scenarios and X (S) be a set of actions. Initially, a random scenario s is drawn according to a distribution D. Then, the learner sequentially chooses actions
a1 , a2 , . . . and after the t-th action observes a (possibly randomized) outcome r((a1 , a2 , . . . , at ), s) ∈ R. The goal of
the learner is to take a sequence of actions A that minimizes
Es∼D ℓ(A, s) for a given loss function ℓ(A, s), possibly exploiting the information gained about s along the way.
A huge body of work among different communities such as
machine learning, theoretical computer science, statistics,
and operations research has studied stochastic optimization
problems given their numerous applications. For example,
methods of offline stochastic optimization have been widely
applied to problems such as training machine learning models (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2009; Bottou, 2010; Kingma &
Ba, 2014) and mechanism design (Nisan & Ronen, 1999;
Hartline, 2013; Roughgarden, 2016). On the other hand,
many adaptive stochastic optimization problems such as
Pandora’s Box problem (Weitzman, 1979; Chawla et al.,
2020), active learning (Dasgupta, 2004; Settles, 2012) and
optimal decision tree (Adler & Heeringa, 2012; Li et al.,
2020) have also been applied to areas like artificial intelligence, microeconomics, and operations research.

1. Introduction
1.1. Offline and Adaptive Stochastic Optimization
Stochastic optimization is one of the core problems in machine learning and theoretical computer sciences. In stochastic optimization, the input parameters of the problems are
random variables drawn from a known distribution. Given
the distribution of the parameters, a learner constructs a fea-

A common assumption in these works is that the distribution
D of the scenario s is considered as a given. However,
such an assumption is not realistic in practice. A learner
in practice has many ways to gain extra knowledge on the
optimization problem he is going to solve. With the extra
knowledge, it is reasonable that the learner updates the
prior distribution D to some posterior distribution D′ and
uses a better strategy to solve the problem. As a concrete

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Mingchen Ma <mma54@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

