Optimal Shrinkage for Distributed Second-Order Optimization

Fangzhao Zhang 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract

estimator of the global Hessian inverse. As a result, Newton
steps computed by averaging local Newton steps can be far
from exact.

In this work, we address the problem of Hessian inversion bias in distributed second-order
optimization algorithms. We introduce a novel
shrinkage-based estimator for the resolvent of
gram matrices which is asymptotically unbiased,
and characterize its non-asymptotic convergence
rate in the isotropic case. We apply this estimator
to bias correction of Newton steps in distributed
second-order optimization algorithms, as well as
randomized sketching based methods. We examine the bias present in the naive averaging-based
distributed Newton’s method using analytical expressions and contrast it with our proposed biasfree approach. Our approach leads to significant
improvements in convergence rate compared to
standard baselines and recent proposals, as shown
through experiments on both real and synthetic
datasets.

Different ways to reduce the inversion bias mentioned above
have already been studied by a line of prior work. A particularly related one is the determinantal averaging method
proposed by
Dereziński & Mahoney
Pm
Pm (2019). The authors
show that i=1 det(Hi )Hi−1 / i=1 det(Hi ) serves as an
unbiased estimator of the global Hessian inverse when the
data is uniformly distributed to each agent. However, this
method has shortcomings involving the overhead of computing local Hessian determinants, and potential numerical
instabilities in computing determinants of local Hessian
when the data dimensions are large.
In this work, we borrow tools from random matrix theory and study the problem of estimation of the covariance
resolvent when the data is randomly distributed. A key
observation is that the inverses of positive semidefinite
Hessians typically have the form of a covariance resolvent
( n1 X T D2 X + λI)−1 where n1 X T D2 X is the empirical covariance of an appropriately chosen matrix in which D is
diagonal and X is a data matrix. We propose an asymptotically unbiased estimator of the covariance resolvents in the
form of a shrinkage formula (Theorem 2.2) whose informal
version is stated below, and we also characterize its nonasymptotic convergence rate (see Section 2.1.1). Specifically, under some weak assumptions on the data distribution,
we have the following result:

1. Introduction
In a distributed setting, where multiple agents have access
only to subsets of the entire dataset, accurate estimation of
the Hessian inverse and Newton steps is crucial for the effective application of second-order optimization algorithms. A
straightforward way for estimating Hessian inverse is to simply collect and average all local Hessian inverses, however,
this is usually not accurate due to the existence of inversion
bias, i.e., in general

Theorem. (informal, see Theorem 2.2 for the assumptions)
For a random data matrix A ∈ Rn×d , let dλ denote the
effective dimension of the true covariance matrix Σn , and
Σ̂n denote the empirical covariance matrix. Then, we have

−1 
lim
E γ Σ̂n + λI
− (Σn + λI)−1 = 0,

m

lim

m→∞

1 X −1
H − H −1 ̸= 0
m i=1 i

where m represents the total number of agents, such as
distributed workers, and Hi is the local Hessian computed
by worker i (see Theorem 2.5 for more details). Therefore,
a naive averaging of local Hessian inverses leads to a biased

n,d→∞

d
n →y∈[0,1)

where γ =

1
d .
1− nλ

1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Fangzhao Zhang <zfzhao@stanford.edu>.

This result implies that a simple scaling of the Hessian by
1
dλ removes the inversion bias, where dλ is the effective

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

dimension of the covariance. Since the Hessian inverse is
related to covariance resolvents, this theorem can help reducing Hessian inversion bias in the large data regime. We

1− n

1

