The Statistical Benefits
of Quantile Temporal-Difference Learning for Value Estimation

Mark Rowland 1 Yunhao Tang 1 Clare Lyle 1 Rémi Munos 1 Marc G. Bellemare 2 Will Dabney 1

Abstract

tistical reasons.

We study the problem of temporal-differencebased policy evaluation in reinforcement learning.
In particular, we analyse the use of a distributional reinforcement learning algorithm, quantile
temporal-difference learning (QTD), for this task.
We reach the surprising conclusion that even if
a practitioner has no interest in the return distribution beyond the mean, QTD (which learns
predictions about the full distribution of returns)
may offer performance superior to approaches
such as classical TD learning, which predict only
the mean return, even in the tabular setting.

In this paper, however, we reach a surprising conclusion:
Even in the tabular setting, there are many scenarios where
quantile temporal-difference learning (QTD; Dabney et al.,
2018b), a distributional RL algorithm which aims to learn
quantiles of the return distribution, can more accurately estimate the expected return than classical temporal-difference
learning (TD; Sutton, 1984; 1988) which predicts only the
expected return.
To complement this core finding, we conduct novel theoretical analysis to establish what kinds of value predictions
QTD converges to, and crucially how this depends on the
number of quantiles that the algorithm estimates. We also
examine how both TD and QTD trade-off between the variance of their updates, and their expected progress towards
their asymptotic predictions. We find that when estimating
a sufficient number of quantiles, QTD is able to converge
to value predictions close to the true value function V π , yet
with individual updates that are guaranteed to be of bounded
magnitude.

1. Introduction
Distributional approaches to reinforcement learning (RL)
aim to learn the full probability distribution over random
returns an agent may encounter, rather than just the expectation of the random return (Morimura et al., 2010a;b;
Bellemare et al., 2017; 2023). These methods have seen
recent empirical successes in domains such as stratospheric
balloon navigation (Bellemare et al., 2020), simulated race
car control (Wurman et al., 2022), and algorithm discovery
(Fawzi et al., 2022), as well as forming a core component of
many successful agents in common simulated reinforcement
learning benchmarks (Bellemare et al., 2013; Machado et al.,
2018; Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al., 2018b;a; Yang
et al., 2019; Vieillard et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021), often
improving over agents that estimate only the expected return.
Notably, the success of these distributional approaches has
typically been observed in combination with deep neural
networks, and it is commonly hypothesised that the benefits of the distributional approach stem from its interaction
with non-linear function approximators such as deep neural
networks (Bellemare et al., 2017; Imani and White, 2018;
Dabney et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022a), rather than for sta-

These insights lead to several testable hypotheses, which
we use to conduct a further empirical study to better characterise domains in which QTD offers superior performance
to TD, and vice versa, and find several common trends. In
particular, we find that in environments with significant
stochasticity, QTD often performs better (and in contrast, in
(near-)deterministic environments, TD is clearly preferable),
and that estimating a low number of quantiles may have
adverse effects on the accuracy of QTD’s predictions. By
investigating a variant of QTD, we also find evidence that
estimation specifically of the return distribution may lead to
useful variance-reduction properties.
These findings have consequences for both theoreticians
and practitioners. For the former, QTD represents a distinct
fundamental approach to the problem of value prediction in
RL, often with complementary performance to classical TD,
and raises a range of open questions. For the latter, QTD for
mean estimation can be considered as a plug-in alternative
to TD, in tabular settings and beyond.

1
DeepMind 2 Google Research, Brain team. Correspondence to:
Mark Rowland <markrowland@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

