DevFormer: A Symmetric Transformer for Context-Aware Device Placement

Haeyeon Kim* 1 Minsu Kim* 2 Federico Berto 2 Joungho Kim 1 Jinkyoo Park 2
Figure 1 (FEDE)
5

Abstract
12

In this paper, we present D EV F ORMER, a novel
transformer-based architecture for addressing the
complex and computationally demanding problem of hardware design optimization. Despite
the demonstrated efficacy of transformers in domains including natural language processing and
computer vision, their use in hardware design
has been limited by the scarcity of offline data.
Our approach addresses this limitation by introducing strong inductive biases such as relative
positional embeddings and action-permutation
symmetricity that effectively capture the hardware context and enable efficient design optimization with limited offline data. We apply
D EV F ORMER to the problem of decoupling capacitor placement and show that it outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in both simulated and
real hardware, leading to improved performances
while reducing the number of components by
more than 30%. Finally, we show that our approach achieves promising results in other offline contextual learning-based combinatorial optimization tasks.

22

14

12
22

12
14

22
5

14

14

[𝟓𝟓, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏]

5

12
22

22
14

[𝟓𝟓, 𝟏𝟏𝟐, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏]

5

12

14

22

[𝟓, 𝟏𝟒, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏, 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏]

Figure 1: Example
of action-permutation
(AP)
symmetric soluAP-Symmetric
Solution
Group
tions: different action trajectories lead to the same solution group.

Industrial & Systems Engineering

puting resources, making the application of machine learning (ML) techniques in hardware design more and more
crucial.

Recent studies have shown the potential of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for sequential decision-making
in various tasks in chip design, including chip placement
(Mirhoseini et al., 2021; Agnesina et al., 2020), routing
(Liao et al., 2019; 2020), circuit design (Zhao & Zhang,
2020), logic synthesis (Hosny et al., 2020; Haaswijk et al.,
2018) and bi-level hardware optimization (Cheng & Yan,
2021). However, these methods have limitations. Firstly,
they rely on online simulators, which are both slow and inaccurate. As a result, learning with offline expert data is
more reliable, but such data is limited. Secondly, hardware
design involves multi-level problems that change depending on the context, making it necessary to have a policy that
can generalize to new problem contexts.

1. Introduction
The development of artificial intelligence (AI) has been
greatly facilitated by advancements in high-performance
computing systems. However, as the need for faster data
processing grows with recent advances in AI architecture
scaling, the complexity of hardware design is increasing.
As a result, human experts are no longer able to design
hardware without the aid of electrical design automation
(EDA) tools; despite their utility, the use of these tools is often hindered by long simulation times and insufficient com-

The Transformer has been recognized as a promising architecture for contextual models, owing to its capability to
process sequential data in parallel, handle long-term dependencies and exhibit high expressivity (Vaswani et al.,
2017). This has led to their widespread adoption in a variety of domains, including natural language processing
(NLP) (Brown et al., 2020), computer vision (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020), graph representation learning (Ying et al.,
2021), combinatorial optimization (Kool et al., 2019) and
reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021). However, deriving an effective offline contextual policy with the Transformer requires a huge amount of offline data covering the
broad context and input data space, which is often infeasible in the semiconductor industry.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). Correspondence to: Jinkyoo Park <jinkyoo.park@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

10

