ChiPFormer: Transferable Chip Placement via Offline Decision Transformer

Yao Lai 1 Jinxin Liu 4 Zhentao Tang 3 Bin Wang 3 Jianye Hao 3 5 Ping Luo 2 1

Abstract

Placement Quality

Placement is a critical step in modern chip design,
aiming to determine the positions of circuit modules on the chip canvas. Recent works have shown
that reinforcement learning (RL) can improve human performance in chip placement. However,
such an RL-based approach suffers from long
training time and low transfer ability in unseen
chip circuits. To resolve these challenges, we cast
the chip placement as an offline RL formulation
and present ChiPFormer that enables learning a
transferable placement policy from fixed offline
data. ChiPFormer has several advantages that
prior arts do not have. First, ChiPFormer can
exploit offline placement designs to learn transferable policies more efficiently in a multi-task setting. Second, ChiPFormer can promote effective
finetuning for unseen chip circuits, reducing the
placement runtime from hours to minutes. Third,
extensive experiments on 32 chip circuits demonstrate that ChiPFormer achieves significantly better placement quality while reducing the runtime
by 10× compared to recent state-of-the-art approaches in both public benchmarks and realistic
industrial tasks. The deliverables are released at
sites.google.com/view/chipformer/home.

1.1
ChiPFormer(300) ChiPFormer(2k)
1.0 ChiPFormer(1)
MaskPlace
0.9
RePlAce
0.8
0.7
GraphPlace
optimization
0.6
online RL
DeepPR
0.5
offline RL
0.4
0.01
0.1
1
10

Average Runtime (h)

Figure 1: Comparing the placement quality and the runtime between ChiPFormer (ours) and the recent advanced
RL-based methods such as GraphPlace (Mirhoseini et al.,
2021), MaskPlace (Lai et al., 2022), and DeepPR (Cheng
& Yan, 2021) and optimization method RePlAce (Cheng
et al., 2018). All methods are evaluated in the ISPD05
benchmark. The placement quality (higher is better) is normalized by 1.25(1−HPWL/ min HPWL) ∈ [0, 1], where HPWL
represents Half Perimeter Wire Length. The number inside
“ChiPFormer(·)” means the maximum few-shot number for
placement in the finetuning stage (i.e., rollout times). We
see that ChiPFormer is the first offline RL approach for chip
placement so far, and ChiPFormer(300) outperforms the
other baselines in terms of quality and efficiency.

1. Introduction
large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuits can have 100 to 1k
macros (e.g., SRAMs, IOs, and packaged computing units)
and 10k to 100k standard cells (e.g., logical gates), making
the placement problem computationally expensive.

In modern chip design, placement is a crucial and challenging problem, which places circuit modules (e.g., macros and
standard cells) with varying sizes on a chip canvas. The
placement result can determine a chip’s performance, such
as the speed and energy cost, especially when the scale of
integrated circuits grows continuously. For example, very

Recent advanced approaches (Mirhoseini et al., 2021; Cheng
& Yan, 2021; Lai et al., 2022) have shown that reinforcement
learning (RL) can produce chip layouts that are superior
or comparable to those designed by humans in many key
evaluation metrics such as wirelength and congestion while
spending less placement time than humans. Specifically,
these approaches typically treat the placement problem as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and place one circuit
module at each step. All of them learn the placement policy
in an online manner by iteratively collecting data through
interactions with the environment, as shown in Fig.2 (a).

1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, China 3 Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab, China 4 Zhejiang University, China 5 Tianjin University, China . Correspondence to: Ping Luo <pluo@cs.hku.hk>,
Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

