Task-Specific Skill Localization in Fine-tuned Language Models

Abhishek Panigrahi * 1 Nikunj Saunshi * 1 Haoyu Zhao 1 Sanjeev Arora 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Pre-trained language models (Liu et al., 2019b; Devlin
et al., 2019) have shown huge success after fine-tuning
(FT) on many downstream tasks. With as few as 32 training
examples, fine-tuning these giant models beats head tuning
(Gao et al., 2021b). Thus fine-tuning is quick to acquire new
“skills” like sentiment identification, but locating where
these skills reside in the net is an open question. A priori,
one expects them to be diffused and not be “localized” in a
meaningful way. Better understanding of the skill’s location
could improve fine-tuned models – say, with respect to
accuracy, calibration, or out-of-domain generalization— or
help mitigate catastrophic forgetting in multi-task settings.
Existing methods for parameter-efficient fine-tuning (e.g.,
using lottery tickets (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Chen et al.,
2020)) suggest the existence of more compact descriptions
of the fine-tuned model, but they involve re-training the net
and do not give insight into where the skills existed after
vanilla fine-tuning. (Section 6 discusses past works.).

Pre-trained language models can be fine-tuned
to solve diverse NLP tasks, including in few-shot
settings. Thus fine-tuning allows the model to
quickly pick up task-specific “skills,” but there
has been limited study of where these newlylearnt skills reside inside the massive model. This
paper introduces the term skill localization for
this problem and proposes a solution. Given the
downstream task and a model fine-tuned on that
task, a simple optimization is used to identify
a very small subset of parameters (∼ 0.01% of
model parameters) responsible for (> 95%) of the
model’s performance, in the sense that grafting
the fine-tuned values for just this tiny subset onto
the pre-trained model gives a performance almost
as well as the fine-tuned model. While reminiscent of recent works on parameter-efficient
fine-tuning, the novel aspects here are that: (i)
No further re-training is needed on the subset
(unlike, say, with lottery tickets). (ii) Notable improvements are seen over vanilla fine-tuning with
respect to calibration of predictions in-distribution
(40-90% error reduction) as well as the quality of
predictions out-of-distribution (OOD). In models
trained on multiple tasks, a stronger notion of
skill localization is observed, where the sparse regions corresponding to different tasks are almost
disjoint, and their overlap (when it happens) is
a proxy for task similarity. Experiments suggest
that localization via grafting can assist certain
forms of continual learning. Our code is available
at Skill-Localization-by-grafting1 .

This paper gives a simple way to pinpoint tiny regions in the
pre-trained model where the skills acquired via fine-tuning
can be localized. In particular, although fine-tuning could
have updated hundreds of millions of parameters, we
can identify (Section 2) a tiny subset of (a few thousand)
parameters whose values are sufficient to solve the task,
in the following sense: “grafting” the values of this tiny
subset of parameters onto the pre-trained model without
changing any of the other parameters, almost recovers the
performance of the original fine-tuned model. We call
this tiny subset of parameters a “grafting region.” Note
that finding sparse grafting regions allows for compact
storage of the fine-tuned model, which could be important
in settings where the model is being fine-tuned for a large
number of tasks or users. Crucially we find that grafted
models have other desirable properties like calibration and
OOD generalization. Our main contributions are as follows.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Abhishek Panigrahi <ap34@princeton.edu>, Nikunj Saunshi <nsaunshi@google.com>.

• Section 2 formalizes skill localization via grafting, and
gives a simple optimization procedure to find them.
Section 3 shows that in a RoBERTa (GPT-2 resp.) model
fine-tuned on GLUE tasks, regions with just 0.01%
(0.05% resp.) of parameters can recover 95% accuracy
of the fine-tuned models, without further re-training.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/abhishekpanigrahi1996/SkillLocalization-by-grafting

• Section 4 shows that our grafted models have much better
1

