Using Large Language Models to Simulate Multiple Humans
and Replicate Human Subject Studies

Gati Aher 1 Rosa I. Arriaga 2 Adam Tauman Kalai 3

Abstract

trolled experiments, and we thus avoid philosophical debates around the meaning of “understanding” (Bender &
Koller, 2020). Now, simulating human behavior can be
hard, even for humans, especially in complex real-world
situations fraught with ambiguity. After all, if simulating
human behavior were easy, there would be no need to run
human subject experiments as one could simply simulate
the outcomes. A further obstacle to accurate simulation is
that behavior differs across individuals and populations, and
perfect simulation would require capturing these differences
for all groups including minority groups.

We introduce a new type of test, called a Turing
Experiment (TE), for evaluating to what extent
a given language model, such as GPT models,
can simulate different aspects of human behavior.
A TE can also reveal consistent distortions in a
language model’s simulation of a specific human
behavior. Unlike the Turing Test, which involves
simulating a single arbitrary individual, a TE requires simulating a representative sample of participants in human subject research. We carry out
TEs that attempt to replicate well-established findings from prior studies. We design a methodology
for simulating TEs and illustrate its use to compare how well different language models are able
to reproduce classic economic, psycholinguistic,
and social psychology experiments: Ultimatum
Game, Garden Path Sentences, Milgram Shock
Experiment, and Wisdom of Crowds. In the first
three TEs, the existing findings were replicated
using recent models, while the last TE reveals a
“hyper-accuracy distortion” present in some language models (including ChatGPT and GPT-4),
which could affect downstream applications in
education and the arts.

In Turing’s Imitation Game (IG), an AI system has to simulate an individual well enough to fool a human judge. Language Models (LMs) may come close to “winning” this
game in the near future, especially if they only have to simulate a single human—one oddly successful early attempt
simulated a 13 year old troublemaker (Warwick & Shah,
2016). However, the IG is of limited diagnostic value as it
says little about which humans and behaviors an LM can
faithfully simulate. We thus move on to the more specific
challenge of identifying which aspects of human behavior a
given AI system can and cannot simulate.
A Turing Experiment evaluates an AI system1 in terms of
its use in simulating human2 behavior in the context of a
specific experiment, like a human subject study. A TE uses
an AI model to simulate the behavior of multiple subjects
in an experiment. TEs may be used in any discipline which
involves human participants in studies, including Social
Psychology, Linguistics, and Behavioral Economics.

1. Introduction
We introduce a methodology for systematically evaluating
which aspects of human behavior a language model, such
as a GPT model (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
OpenAI, 2023), can faithfully simulate and which aspects
it systematically distorts. This understanding can inform
downstream applications that require language models to
have accurate models of humans, including various applications in education and the arts. The question of faithful
simulation of a specific behavior is studied through con-

Formally, there are two types of inputs to each TE which
parameterize the experimental setting. First are participant
details which might include names, occupational information, or other demographic details. The second type of input is optional experimental conditions which may include
relevant setting details and stimuli. The TE’s output is a
synthetic record describing a simulated human experiment
and any outcomes of interest. The TE must be a procedure
run on a computer (aka a Turing machine, hence the TE

1
Olin College of Engineering 2 Georgia Tech 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Gati Aher <gativaher@gmail.com>.

1

While we focus on LMs, the AI system need not be text based
(e.g., it could generate videos).
2
While we focus on research involving human behavior, AI
systems may simulate animal (or purely physical) experiments.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

