A Theory of Continuous Generative Flow Networks

Salem Lahlou 1 2 Tristan Deleu 1 2 Pablo Lemos 1 3 2 Dinghuai Zhang 1 2 Alexandra Volokhova 1 2
Alex Hernández-Garcı́a 1 2 Léna Néhale Ezzine 1 2 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 4 Nikolay Malkin 1 2

Abstract

policy learning and the ability to capture many modes of the
target distribution, extend to general spaces. For example,
molecule design implies specifying relative spatial positions
of atoms and benefits from modeling continuous variables,
such as torsion angles (Jing et al., 2022), and Bayesian
structure learning requires the discovery of not only the
structure of the graphical model, but also its parameters.

Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) are amortized variational inference algorithms that are
trained to sample from unnormalized target distributions over compositional objects. A key limitation of GFlowNets until this time has been that
they are restricted to discrete spaces. We present a
theory for generalized GFlowNets, which encompasses both existing discrete GFlowNets and ones
with continuous or hybrid state spaces, and perform experiments with two goals in mind. First,
we illustrate critical points of the theory and the
importance of various assumptions. Second, we
empirically demonstrate how observations about
discrete GFlowNets transfer to the continuous
case and show strong results compared to nonGFlowNet baselines on several previously studied
tasks. This work greatly widens the perspectives
for the application of GFlowNets in probabilistic
inference and various modeling settings.

As a first attempt at using GFlowNet losses to train an
amortized sampler of a unnormalized continuous density,
Malkin et al. (2023) showed that the off-policy benefits
of GFlowNets extend to a toy stochastic control problem.
However, a theory justifying the soundness GFlowNet losses
in domains with continuous actions has been still lacking.
More recently, Li et al. (2023) presented an extension of the
flow-matching conditions (Bengio et al., 2021a) to continuous domains; however, this extension relies upon several
invalid assumptions, as we expand on in §3.1.
This paper presents a theory extending all known GFlowNet
training objectives to arbitrary spaces. It relies on measurable pointed graphs, a generalization of directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) to measurable spaces, based on Markov kernels. Our main theoretical contributions are an extension
of the flow-matching (FM; Bengio et al., 2021a), detailed
balance (DB; Bengio et al., 2021b), and trajectory balance
(TB; Malkin et al., 2022) conditions and a theorem proving
that the learned forward kernel samples from the target distribution when any of these conditions is satisfied. These
conditions lead to training losses involving density functions
and allowing gradient-based learning. Existing losses for
discrete GFlowNets are special cases of the ones we state.

1. Introduction
Generative flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021a)
are an increasingly popular class of methods that amortize
sampling from intractable distributions over spaces with a
compositional structure by learning a sequential sampling
policy. Their applications include the design of biological
structures such as molecules (Bengio et al., 2021a; Jain
et al., 2022), Bayesian structure learning (Deleu et al., 2022;
Nishikawa-Toomey et al., 2022), and robust combinatorial
optimization (Zhang et al., 2023b). Naturally, their development and theoretical foundations (Bengio et al., 2021b;
Malkin et al., 2023; Zimmermann et al., 2022) have been
geared towards environments with discrete structures.

Additionally, we provide experimental results in multiple
domains with different structures, some of which include
action spaces with both discrete and continuous components. These experiments serve both to validate the theoretical claims and to inform practitioners of caveats that
are specific to continuous domains. Our comparative experiments confirm that the already-proven advantages of
discrete GFlowNets transfer to more general state spaces.

As many probabilistic inference and modeling problems
involve continuous variables, it is natural to ask whether
the advantages of GFlowNets, which include stable off1 Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 Ciela Institute 4 CIFAR. Correspondence to: Salem Lahlou <lahlosal@mila.quebec>.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows:
§2 reviews GFlowNets and work on stochastic sampling;

Proceedings of the 40 𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

§3 presents the theoretical results and a practical summary;
1

