SGD with Large Step Sizes Learns Sparse Features

Maksym Andriushchenko 1 Aditya Varre 1 Loucas Pillaud-Vivien 1 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract

the training loss (He et al., 2016). From a generalization perspective, overparametrized deep nets generalize well while
fitting perfectly the data and without any explicit regularizers (Zhang et al., 2017). This suggests that optimization and
generalization are tightly intertwined: neural networks find
solutions that generalize well thanks to the optimization procedure used to train them. This property, known as implicit
bias or algorithmic regularization, has been studied both
for regression (Li et al., 2018; Woodworth et al., 2020) and
classification (Soudry et al., 2018; Lyu & Li, 2020; Chizat &
Bach, 2020). However, for these theoretical results, it is also
shown that typical timescales needed to enter the beneficial
feature learning regimes are prohibitively long (Woodworth
et al., 2020; Moroshko et al., 2020).

We showcase important features of the dynamics
of the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) in the
training of neural networks. We present empirical observations that commonly used large step
sizes (i) may lead the iterates to jump from one
side of a valley to the other causing loss stabilization, and (ii) this stabilization induces a hidden
stochastic dynamics that biases it implicitly toward simple predictors. Furthermore, we show
empirically that the longer large step sizes keep
SGD high in the loss landscape valleys, the better the implicit regularization can operate and
find sparse representations. Notably, no explicit
regularization is used: the regularization effect
comes solely from the SGD dynamics influenced
by the large step sizes schedule. Therefore, these
observations unveil how, through the step size
schedules, both gradient and noise drive together
the SGD dynamics through the loss landscape of
neural networks. We justify these findings theoretically through the study of simple neural network models as well as qualitative arguments inspired from stochastic processes. This analysis
allows us to shed new light on some common practices and observed phenomena when training deep
networks. The code of our experiments is available at https://github.com/tml-epfl/
sgd-sparse-features.

In this paper, we aim at staying closer to the experimental
practice and consider the SGD schedules from the ResNet
paper (He et al., 2016) where the large step size is first
kept constant and then decayed, potentially multiple times.
We illustrate this behavior in Fig. 1 where we reproduce a
minimal setting without data augmentation or momentum,
and with only one step size decrease. We draw attention
to two key observations regarding the large step size phase:
(a) quickly after the start of training, the loss remains approximately constant on average and (b) despite no progress
on the training loss, running this phase for longer leads to
better generalization. We refer to such large step size phase
as loss stabilization. The better generalization hints at some
hidden dynamics in the parameter space not captured by the
loss curves in Fig. 1. Our main contribution is to unveil
the hidden dynamics behind this phase: loss stabilization
helps to amplify the noise of SGD that drives the network
towards a solution with sparser features, meaning that for a
feature vector ψ(x), only a few unique features are active
for a given input x.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have accomplished remarkable
achievements on a wide variety of tasks. Yet, the understanding of their remarkable effectiveness remains incomplete.
From an optimization perspective, stochastic training procedures challenge many insights drawn from convex models.
Notably, large step size schedules used in practice lead to
unexpected patterns of stabilizations and sudden drops in

1.1. Our Contributions
The effective dynamics behind loss stabilization. We
characterize two main components of the SGD dynamics
with large step sizes: (i) a fast movement determined by the
bouncing directions causing loss stabilization, (ii) a slow
dynamics driven by the combination of the gradient and the
multiplicative noise—which is non-vanishing due to the loss
stabilization.

1
EPFL. Correspondence to: Maksym Andriushchenko
<maksym.andriushchenko@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

