Understanding and Generalizing Contrastive Learning from the Inverse Optimal
Transport Perspective

Liangliang Shi 1 Gu Zhang 1 Haoyu Zhen 1 Jintao Fan 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

pirical, and popular contrastive losses like InfoNCE (Oord
et al., 2018) have some inconsistencies in interpreting the
lower bound of mutual information (Tschannen et al., 2019).
Maximizing a tighter bound can also lead to worse performance for downstream tasks, leaving the full understanding
of CL still open.

Previous research on contrastive learning (CL)
has primarily focused on pairwise views to learn
representations by attracting positive samples and
repelling negative ones. In this work, we aim to
understand and generalize CL from a point set
matching perspective, instead of the comparison
between two points. Specifically, we formulate
CL as a form of inverse optimal transport (IOT),
which involves a bilevel optimization procedure
for learning where the outter minimization aims
to learn the representations and the inner is to
learn the coupling (i.e. the probability of matching matrix) between the point sets. Specifically,
by adjusting the relaxation degree of constraints
in the inner minimization, we obtain three contrastive losses and show that the dominant contrastive loss in literature InfoNCE falls into one of
these losses. This reveals a new and more general
algorithmic framework for CL. Additionally, the
soft matching scheme in IOT induces a uniformity
penalty to enhance representation learning which
is akin to the CL’s uniformity. Results on vision
benchmarks show the effectiveness of our derived
loss family and the new uniformity term.

In this paper, we aim to understand CL with a collective
point set matching perspective, which differs from mainstream pairwise contrasting practices. As shown in Fig. 1,
traditional methods (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020) focus
on improving the similarity for positive pairs and decreasing it for negative pairs, by considering only one anchor
at a time to form positive/negative pairs in isolation. This
approach can easily ignore the relationships and influences
among different anchors.
In contrast to this pairwise view, we consider the set of minibatch samples as a whole and learn the representations by
matching between two point sets, where each sample feature
is regarded as a point as shown in Fig. 1(b). With this point
set matching view, we propose to learn the representations
with Inverse Optimal Transport (IOT) (Li et al., 2019; Stuart
& Wolfram, 2020), which aims to learn the cost matrix
instead of the coupling (i.e. the probability of matching
matrix) in OT. In this paper, for solving the IOT problem,
we view it with a bilevel optimization problem, where the
inner minimization aims to learn the coupling matrix by
varying the constraint relaxation and the outer minimization
is to learn the representations by supervising the coupling
calculated in inner minimization. Under this formulation,
we can get some findings such as the equivalence between
temperature coefficient in InfoCNE and the coefficient of
entropic regularization in OT.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised/self-supervised learning of representation (Hu
et al., 2021; Grill et al., 2020) has garnered increasing attention. With contrastive learning (CL) (Chen et al., 2020;
Gao et al., 2021), representation is learned by selecting an
anchor and then identifying its positive/negative samples.
The contrastive loss based on feature similarity is then used
to distinguish between positive and negative pairs. However,
the comparison of positive and negative pairs is often em-

Furthermore, we propose a new penalty term based on the
coupling matrix within our IOT framework, which encourages uniform matching probabilities among negative pairs.
This is consistent with previous works (Wang & Isola, 2020;
Wang & Liu, 2021) that have shown the importance of uniformity in contrastive learning. The contribution of the
paper can be summarized as follows:

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and MoE
Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

1) We propose a novel set matching view for contrastive
learning, which jointly involves a collection matching of

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

