Differentially Private Stochastic Convex Optimization under a Quantile Loss
Function
Du Chen 1 Geoffrey A. Chua 1

Abstract

asymmetric weights on positive and negative values of u,
providing insights into distributional relationships between
feature x and dependent variable y.

We study (ε, δ)-differentially private (DP)
stochastic convex optimization under an r-th
quantile loss function taking the form c(u) =
ru+ + (1 − r)(−u)+ . The function is nonsmooth, and we propose to approximate it with a
smooth function obtained by convolution smoothing, which enjoys both structure and bandwidth
flexibility and can address outliers. This leads
to a better approximation than those obtained
from existing methods such as Moreau Envelope. We then design private algorithms based
on DP stochastic gradient descent and objective perturbation, and show that both algorithms
achieve (near)√optimal excess generalization risk
O(max{ √1n ,

In practice, SCO is closely related to the Empirical
b
Risk
PnMinimization (ERM) problem, minθ∈Rd L(θ; nD) :=
1
i=1 ℓ(θ; xi , yi ) on a dataset D := {(xi , yi )}i=1 of
n
n i.i.d. data points drawn from unknown P. The goal
is to output a high-quality estimator b
θ, from solving an
ERM, of θ ∗ := arg minθ∈Rd L(θ; P). An estimator’s
quality is usually measured by excess generalization
risk
h
i
∗
∗
b
b
L(θ; P) − L(θ ; P) or mean absolute error E θ − θ
.
2
The former measure plays an important role in optimization,
while the latter is more relevant to statistical inference.
Given a private dataset, estimators may reveal critical information and are at risk of being exploited by attackers. We
study the problem under the constraint of differential privacy, a mathematically rigorous measure of privacy, which
guarantees that the distribution over an algorithm’s output
is insensitive to a slight change in the dataset. In the private
setting, extensive studies have been done to investigate the
impact of privacy (Kifer et al. 2012, Bassily et al. 2014,
Wang et al. 2017, Bassily et al. 2019, Bassily et al. 2020,
Feldman et al. 2020, Bassily et al. 2021b, Bassily et al.
2021a, Asi et al. 2021, Kulkarni et al. 2021, Han et al.
2022).

d ln(1/δ)
}).
nε

Through objective
perturbation,
q further derive an upper bound
q we

O(max{ nd , d ln(1/δ)
}) on the parameter estinε
mation error under mild assumptions on data generating processes. Some applications in private
quantile regression and private inventory control
will be discussed.

1. Introduction

However, the body of work mentioned above mostly assumes that the loss function ℓ(θ; x, y) is differentiable and
smooth for all θ, which is not the case for a quantile loss
function. The quantile loss function is essentially a piecewise linear function with a knot at the origin, at which
the curvature is infinite, implying non-differentiability and
nonsmoothness. The nonsmoothness will lead to an unstable estimator, prevent gradient-based optimization methods from being efficient, and invalidate uniform stability
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David 2014), a crucial property for
theoretical analysis.

Stochastic convex optimization (SCO) under a linear quantile loss function, minθ∈Rd L(θ; P)
:=
E(x,y)∼P [ℓ(θ; x, y)] where ℓ(θ; x, y) := c(y − θ ⊤ x)
and c(u) := ru+ + (1 − r)(−u)+ , is a fundamental
problem in machine learning, and has many applications,
such as support vector machine (Suthaharan & Suthaharan
2016), quantile regression (Koenker et al. 2017) and
inventory control (Ban & Rudin 2019). Compared to
symmetric loss functions (for example, squared function
c(u) = u2 ), the r-th quantile loss function allows imposing
1

Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore. Correspondence to: Du Chen
<chen1443@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Some recent works endeavour to address nonsmooth loss
functions in DP-SCO. For example, Bassily et al. (2019) and
Bassily et al. (2020) proposed to adopt the Noisy Gradient
Descent framework, i.e. use a noisy gradient instead of
a true gradient to update the estimator in each iteration.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

