Settling the Reward Hypothesis

Michael Bowling * 1 John D. Martin * 1 2 David Abel 3 Will Dabney 3

Abstract

Sutton’s original hypothesis provides an informal starting
point from which to question the expressivity of reward. In
this vein, Abel et al. (2021) grounded the notion of “goals
and purposes” as an ordering over policies and explored
whether a Markov reward2 function could express these
orderings. They provided examples showing that a Markov
reward is unable to express every such ordering. Their
analysis also reveals how using a behavioral definition of
goals can sometimes lead to unsatisfying conclusions. In
one example (“steady-state type” failures), an agent needs
to experience unrealizable outcomes to achieve their goal.
When viewed through the lens of McCarthy’s definition
of intelligence, it seems that a behavioral conception of
goals deflates the role that computation performs—to one of
simply executing a goal’s defining policy, or re-expressing
the policy in a different form. Surely intelligence involves
more meaningful computation than this?

The reward hypothesis posits that, “all of what we
mean by goals and purposes can be well thought
of as maximization of the expected value of the
cumulative sum of a received scalar signal (reward).” We aim to fully settle this hypothesis.
This will not conclude with a simple affirmation
or refutation, but rather specify completely the implicit requirements on goals and purposes under
which the hypothesis holds.

1. Introduction
The reward hypothesis posited by Sutton states that, “all of
what we mean by goals and purposes can be well thought
of as maximization of the expected value of the cumulative
sum of a received scalar signal (reward).” (Sutton, 2004;
Sutton & Barto, 2018; Littman, 2017). This statement takes
on considerable import if one also accepts McCarthy’s claim
that “Intelligence is the computational part of the ability to
achieve goals in the world.” (McCarthy, 1998). Together
these two statements offer a sort of sufficiency to the study of
reinforcement learning (RL), whose agents learn to achieve
goals through the maximization of expected future rewards.
They imply that to succeed at building AI, it is sufficient to
succeed at solving RL.1

Shakerinava & Ravanbakhsh (2022) take a different approach. They ground goals and purposes in preference
relations over (distributions of) state-trajectories in a controlled Markov process. In the same spirit of von NeumannMorgenstern (vNM) utility axioms (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1953), they propose axioms on the preference
relation (including the vNM rationality axioms) which are
necessary and sufficient for the preference to be expressed
with a Markov reward. Indeed, Shakerinava & Ravanbakhsh
(2022) build on work by Pitis (2019) that first analyzed
standard objectives of RL from the perspective of decision
theory. The work of Pitis can be viewed from two complementary perspectives. First, Pitis provides a normative
account for why we should embrace a state-action dependent discount factor, as developed by White (2017): A fixed
discount cannot capture all preferences we might consider
rational. Second, Pitis presents three axioms on top of the
vNM axioms that characterize the conditions under which
a state-action dependent discount factor can be viewed as
rational.

Silver et al. (2021) propose the related, reward-is-enough
hypothesis, which posits that “intelligence, and all of its
associated abilities, can be understood as subserving the
maximization of reward.” While the two hypotheses are of
course deeply connected, we emphasize that our focus is on
Sutton’s earlier reward hypothesis.
*

Equal contribution 1 Amii, University of Alberta 2 Intel
Labs 3 DeepMind.
Correspondence to: John D. Martin
<john.martin@intel.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Furthermore, it is possible these two claims show that RL is
necessary as well as sufficient. If some artificial system were to be
able to achieve all that we mean by goals and purposes, then such
a system would have to—at least implicitly—maximize expected
cumulative reward. In other words, there must be a reduction
between the RL problem and the problem the system solves.

Our work builds off this pair of insightful approaches by
starting with preferences over histories. We abandon strictly
Markov processes to consider general stochastic environments and policies in line with recent work by Dong et al.
2

They take a Markov reward function to be one that only depends on the most recent experience of the agent.

1

