Men Also Do Laundry: Multi-Attribute Bias Amplification

Dora Zhao 1 Jerone T. A. Andrews 2 Alice Xiang 1

Abstract
The phenomenon of bias amplification occurs
when models amplify training set biases at test
time. Existing metrics measure bias amplification
with respect to single annotated attributes (e.g.,
computer). However, large-scale datasets typically consist of instances with multiple attribute
annotations (e.g., {computer, keyboard}).
We demonstrate models can learn to exploit correlations with respect to multiple attributes, which
are not accounted for by current metrics. Moreover, we show that current metrics can give the
erroneous impression that little to no bias amplification has occurred as they aggregate positive and
negative bias scores. Further, these metrics lack
an ideal value, making them difficult to interpret.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a new
metric: Multi-Attribute Bias Amplification. We
validate our metric’s utility through a bias amplification analysis on the COCO, imSitu, and CelebA
datasets. Finally, we benchmark bias mitigation
methods using our proposed metric, suggesting
possible avenues for future bias mitigation efforts.

Figure 1. Bias scores (i.e., gender ratios) of the verbs pouring
and unloading as well as location indoors in imSitu. While
imSitu is skewed male (M) for the single attributes, the multiattributes (e.g., {pouring, indoors}) are skewed female (F).
Face pixelization is employed for privacy purposes.

icantly, these associations risk not only perpetuating harmful
social biases but also amplifying them (Zhao et al., 2017).
The phenomenon of bias amplification refers to when a
model compounds the inherent biases of its training set at
test time (Zhao et al., 2017). Bias amplification has been
studied across many tasks (Zhao et al., 2017; Ramaswamy
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020b; Choi et al., 2020; Jia et al.,
2020; Leino et al., 2019; Wang & Russakovsky, 2021; Hirota et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2019; Renduchintala et al.,
2021). Following Zhao et al. (2017), we focus on multilabel classification. While there are metrics (Zhao et al.,
2017; Wang & Russakovsky, 2021; Wang et al., 2019) that
measure bias amplification in multi-label classification, they
only consider the amplification between a single annotated
attribute (e.g., computer) and a group (e.g., female).
However, existing large-scale visual datasets often have multiple attributes per image (e.g., {computer, keyboard}).
For example, 78.8% of images in the Common Objects with
Context (COCO) (Lin et al., 2014) dataset contain more
than one annotated attribute.

1. Introduction
Despite their intent to faithfully depict the world, visual
datasets are undeniably subject to historical and representational biases (Suresh & Guttag, 2021; Jo & Gebru, 2020).
Left unchecked, dataset biases are invariably learned by
models, especially when they are sources of efficient features for supervised learning on a given dataset (Gebru et al.,
2021). For example, an image captioning model can learn
to generate gendered captions by exploiting contextual cues
without ever “looking” at the person in the image (Hendricks et al., 2018). Reliance on spurious correlations is
undesirable since these learned associations do not always
hold (Sagawa et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020). More signif-

More importantly, considering multiple attributes can reveal
additional nuances not present when considering only single attributes. In imSitu (Yatskar et al., 2016), individually
the verb unloading and location indoors are skewed
male (Fig. 1). However, when considering {unloading,
indoors} in conjunction, imSitu is skewed female. Sig-

1

Sony AI, New York 2 Sony AI, Tokyo. Correspondence to:
Dora Zhao <dora.zhao@sony.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

