Equivariant Polynomials for Graph Neural Networks

Omri Puny * 1 Derek Lim * 2 Bobak T. Kiani * 2 Haggai Maron 3 Yaron Lipman 1 4

Abstract

4

Graph Neural Networks (GNN) are inherently
limited in their expressive power. Recent seminal
works (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019b) introduced the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) hierarchy as a
measure of expressive power. Although this hierarchy has propelled significant advances in GNN
analysis and architecture developments, it suffers
from several significant limitations. These include
a complex definition that lacks direct guidance for
model improvement and a WL hierarchy that is
too coarse to study current GNNs. This paper
introduces an alternative expressive power hierarchy based on the ability of GNNs to calculate
equivariant polynomials of a certain degree. As a
first step, we provide a full characterization of all
equivariant graph polynomials by introducing a
concrete basis, significantly generalizing previous
results. Each basis element corresponds to a specific multi-graph, and its computation over some
graph data input corresponds to a tensor contraction problem. Second, we propose algorithmic
tools for evaluating the expressiveness of GNNs
using tensor contraction sequences, and calculate
the expressive power of popular GNNs. Finally,
we enhance the expressivity of common GNN
architectures by adding polynomial features or additional operations / aggregations inspired by our
theory. These enhanced GNNs demonstrate stateof-the-art results in experiments across multiple
graph learning benchmarks.

3
4

PH (X)j2 j2 =
Pn
j1 ,j3 ,j4 =1 Xj1 j4 Xj1 j3 Xj1 j2 Xj3 j2 =

1
2

PH (X)j1 j2 =
Pn
j3 ,j4 =1 Xj1 ,j2 Xj1 ,j3 Xj1 ,j4 Xj3 ,j2 =

1
3

einsum(12, 13, 14, 32 → 22, X, X, X, X)j2 j2

2

einsum(12, 13, 14, 32 → 12, X, X, X, X)j1 j2

Figure 1. Example of two basis elements of equivariant graph polynomials: node-valued (top), and edge-valued (bottom). Basis
elements PH can be described by tensor contraction networks H
(left), corresponding to a matching einsum expression.

machine learning models for processing graph-structured
data. However, one of the most significant limitations of
these architectures is their limited expressive power. In recent years, the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) hierarchy has been
used to measure the expressive power of GNNs (Morris
et al., 2019b; Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2021). The
introduction of the WL hierarchy marked an extremely significant step in the graph learning field, as researchers were
able to evaluate and compare the expressive power of their
architectures, and used higher-order WL tests to motivate
the development of new, more powerful architectures.
The WL hierarchy, however, is not an optimal choice for
either purpose. First, its definition is rather complex and
not intuitive, particularly for k ≥ 3. One implication is
that it is often difficult to analyze WL expressiveness of a
particular architecture class. As a result, many models lack
a theoretical understanding of their expressive power. A
second implication is that WL does not provide practical
guidance in the search for more expressive architecture.
Lastly, as was noted in recent works (Morris et al., 2022;
2019a), the WL test appears to be too coarse to be used to
evaluate the expressive power of current graph models. As
an example, many architectures (e.g., (Frasca et al., 2022))
are strictly more powerful than 2-WL and bounded by 3-WL,
and there is no clear way to compare them.

1. Introduction
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become
one of the most popular and extensively studied classes of
*
Equal contribution 1 Weizmann Institute of Science 2 MIT
CSAIL 3 NVIDIA Research 4 Meta AI Research Centre for
Artificial Intelligence.
Correspondence to: Omri Puny
<omri.puny@weizmann.ac.il>.

The goal of this paper is to offer an alternative expressive
power hierarchy, which we call polynomial expressiveness
that mitigates the limitations of the WL hierarchy. Our proposed hierarchy relies on the concept of graph polynomials,
which are, for graphs with n nodes, polynomial functions
2
2
P : Rn → Rn that are also permutation equivariant —

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

