When is Realizability Sufficient for Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning?

Andrea Zanette 1

Abstract

decision making under uncertainty. Modern RL algorithms
typically solve sequences of sub-problems that require estimating the value of a policy different from the one that
generated the dataset, a task broadly called off-policy reinforcement learning. Moreover, function approximations are
typically implemented to deal with large state-action spaces.

Understanding when reinforcement learning
algorithms can make successful off-policy
predictions—and when the may fail to do so–
remains an open problem. Typically, model-free
algorithms for reinforcement learning are analyzed under a condition called Bellman completeness when they operate off-policy with function
approximation, unless additional conditions are
met. However, Bellman completeness is a requirement that is much stronger than realizability
and that is deemed to be too strong to hold in
practice. In this work, we relax this structural
assumption and analyze the statistical complexity
of off-policy reinforcement learning when only realizability holds for the prescribed function class.

Various off-policy methods have been proposed, such as
importance sampling (Precup, 2000; Thomas & Brunskill,
2016; Jiang & Li, 2016) and weight learning (Uehara et al.,
2020; Jiang & Huang, 2020; Zanette & Wainwright, 2022).
Nonetheless, methods based on controlling the temporal
difference error, such as fitted Q iteration (Ernst et al., 2005;
Munos & Szepesvári, 2008), TD (Sutton, 1988), and their
variants such as Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), remain widely used especially with deep function approximation (Tesauro et al., 1995; Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; 2016;
Fujimoto et al., 2018). We collectively refer to these algorithms as temporal difference (TD) methods.

We establish finite-sample guarantees for offpolicy reinforcement learning that are free of the
approximation error term known as inherent Bellman error, and that depend on the interplay of
three factors. The first two are well known: they
are the metric entropy of the function class and
the concentrability coefficient that represents the
cost of learning off-policy. The third factor is
new, and it measures the violation of Bellman
completeness, namely the mis-alignment between
the chosen function class and its image through
the Bellman operator. Our analysis directly applies to the solution found by temporal difference
algorithms when they converge.

Bellman completeness: a fundamental RL notion
When the state-action space is large, TD methods are implemented with a function approximation class for the action value function. Their existing analyses (Munos &
Szepesvári, 2008; Chen & Jiang, 2019; Duan & Wang, 2020;
Fan et al., 2020) rely on a fundamental reinforcement learning notion known as Bellman completeness, which must
hold for these algorithms to succeed. Completeness requires
the chosen approximation space to fully capture each Bellman backup, see Figure 1a. However, such requirement is
deemed too strict to hold in practice. What is more, even
related algorithms that are theoretically more robust than
TD and fitted Q, such as the minimax variant (Antos et al.,
2008), also rely on Bellman completeness to properly function without approximation error.

1. Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDP) (Puterman, 1994; Bertsekas, 1995b;a) provide a general framework for reinforcement learning (RL) (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton &
Barto, 2018), which is a general paradigm for prediction and

This led researchers to investigate fundamental limits (Chen
& Jiang, 2019; Zanette, 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Weisz
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2021). Recently,
(Foster et al., 2021) discovered that completeness is crucial
in an information-theoretic sense: even with seemingly benign distribution shifts, exponential lower bounds quickly
arise in the absence of Bellman completeness.

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, United States of America. Correspondence to: Andrea Zanette <zanette@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Unfortunately, completeness is a very hard condition to
meet. For example, when realizability is violated, the
1

