Anchor Sampling for Federated Learning with Partial Client Participation

Feijie Wu 1 Song Guo 2 Zhihao Qu 3 Shiqi He 4 Ziming Liu 2 Jing Gao 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (Konečnỳ et al., 2015; 2016; McMahan et al., 2017) has attained an increasing interest over the
past few years. As a distributed training paradigm, it enables a group of clients to collaboratively train a global
model from decentralized data under the orchestration of a
central server. By this means, sensitive privacy is basically
protected because the raw data are not shared across the
clients. Due to the unreliable network connection and the
rapid proliferation of FL clients, it is infeasible to require
all clients to be simultaneously involved in the training. To
address the issue, recent works (Li et al., 2019; Philippenko
& Dieuleveut, 2020; Gorbunov et al., 2021; Karimireddy
et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Eichner et al.,
2019; Yan et al., 2020; Ruan et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2021; Lai
et al., 2021) introduce a practical setting where merely a portion of clients participates in the training. The partial-client
scenario effectively avoids the network congestion at the FL
server and significantly shortens the idle time as compared
to traditional large-scale machine learning (Zinkevich et al.,
2010; Bottou, 2010; Dean et al., 2012; Bottou et al., 2018).

Compared with full client participation, partial
client participation is a more practical scenario
in federated learning, but it may amplify some
challenges in federated learning, such as data heterogeneity. The lack of inactive clients’ updates in
partial client participation makes it more likely for
the model aggregation to deviate from the aggregation based on full client participation. Training
with large batches on individual clients is proposed to address data heterogeneity in general,
but their effectiveness under partial client participation is not clear. Motivated by these challenges,
we propose to develop a novel federated learning
framework, referred to as FedAMD, for partial
client participation. The core idea is anchor sampling, which separates partial participants into
anchor and miner groups. Each client in the anchor group aims at the local bullseye with the
gradient computation using a large batch. Guided
by the bullseyes, clients in the miner group steer
multiple near-optimal local updates using small
batches and update the global model. By integrating the results of the two groups, FedAMD
is able to accelerate the training process and improve the model performance. Measured by ϵapproximation and compared to the state-of-theart methods, FedAMD achieves the convergence
by up to O(1/ϵ) fewer communication rounds under non-convex objectives. Empirical studies on
real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of
FedAMD and demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed algorithm: Not only does it considerably save computation and communication costs,
but also the test accuracy significantly improves.

However, the performance of a model trained with partial
client participation is much worse than the one trained with
full client participation (Yang et al., 2020). A well-known
challenge in federated learning is data heterogeneity, i.e.,
different clients have non-i.i.d. data. When only a portion of
the clients participate in the learning, there are inevitably updates missing from inactive clients. With data heterogeneity
and partial client participation, the optimal model is subject
to the local data distribution, and therefore, the local updates
on the clients’ models greatly deviate from the update towards optimal global parameters (Karimireddy et al., 2020b;
Malinovskiy et al., 2020; Pathak & Wainwright, 2020; Wang
et al., 2020; 2021; Mitra et al., 2021; Rothchild et al., 2020;
Zhao et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2021). FedAvg (McMahan
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019a;b; Stich, 2018),
for example, is less likely to follow a correct update towards
the global minimizer because the model aggregation on the
active clients critically deviates from the aggregation on the
full clients, an expected direction towards global minimizer
(Yang et al., 2020).

1
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 2 The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong 3 Hohai University, Nanjing, China 4 The University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada. Correspondence to: Feijie Wu <wu1977@purdue.edu>,
Song Guo <song.guo@polyu.edu.hk>, Zhihao Qu <quzhihao@hhu.edu.cn>, Jing Gao <jinggao@purdue.edu>.

There are efforts toward addressing the data heterogeneity
challenge in the general federated learning setting. One
promising solution is to train the model using large batches.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

