Multiple Thinking Achieving Meta-Ability Decoupling for Object Navigation

Ronghao Dang 1 Lu Chen 1 Liuyi Wang 1 Zongtao He 1 Chengju Liu 1 Qijun Chen 1

Abstract

Inductive Bias

Meta-Ability

...

We propose a meta-ability decoupling (MAD)
paradigm, which brings together various object
navigation methods in an architecture system, allowing them to mutually enhance each other and
evolve together. Based on the MAD paradigm, we
design a multiple thinking (MT) model that leverages distinct thinking to abstract various metaabilities. Our method decouples meta-abilities
from three aspects: input, encoding, and reward
while employing the multiple thinking collaboration (MTC) module to promote mutual cooperation between thinking. MAD introduces a novel
qualitative and quantitative interpretability system for object navigation. Through extensive
experiments on AI2-Thor and RoboTHOR, we
demonstrate that our method outperforms stateof-the-art (SOTA) methods on both typical and
zero-shot object navigation tasks.

Reward

Black Box

...

(ⅱ)
Input

(ⅴ)

(ⅲ)
Encoder
(ⅳ)

Object Navigation Ability

(ⅰ)

(a) Existing Methods

(b) Meta-Ability Decoupling (MAD)

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods directly improve the overall object
navigation ability by introducing various inductive biases into
the black box model. (b) Our proposed meta-ability decoupling
(MAD) paradigm decomposes the overall object navigation ability
into multiple meta-abilities, and designs specific inputs, thinking
encoders, and rewards for each meta-ability.

This paper involves two important new concepts: metaability and thinking. Meta-ability refers to every essential
ability needed to complete a complex task. For instance,
solving a mathematical problem requires the integration
of various meta-abilities such as text comprehension, logical reasoning, and conceptual abstraction. Without these
meta-abilities, relying solely on intuition is insufficient to
complete complex tasks. Thinking refers to the information
abstraction for a certain ability. Typically, this abstraction is
modeled end-to-end using neural networks.

1. Introduction
Object navigation (Zheng et al., 2022; Moghaddam et al.,
2022; Du et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022) is a challenging
task that requires an agent to find a target object in an unknown environment with first-person visual observations.
Numerous techniques have been developed to advance this
field by incorporating different inductive biases (Figure 1
(a)) due to the task’s complexity. However, regrettably, the
object navigation field does not form a unified inductive
bias paradigm similar to the CV (Cao & Wu, 2022; d’Ascoli
et al., 2021) or NLP (Levine et al., 2022; Kharitonov &
Chaabouni, 2021) fields. Inspired by the flaw, through the
induction and sublimation of the current mainstream methods, we propose a meta-ability decoupling (MAD) paradigm,
hoping to unify and connect various object navigation methods.

According to the definition of meta-ability and thinking,
we summarize the current mainstream object navigation
methods and identify their limitations. As shown in Figure 2, object navigation methods are divided into four categories: association methods (Dang et al., 2022a; Zhang et al.,
2021), memory methods (Chen et al., 2022; Fukushima
et al., 2022), deadlock-specialized methods (Du et al., 2020;
Lin et al., 2021) and SLAM methods (Ravichandran et al.,
2022; Liang et al., 2021). The different inductive biases
introduced by these four types of methods determine which
meta-abilities are emphasized and which are overlooked.
Therefore, the existing methods all attempt to use biased
thinking to abstract the ultimate ability for object navigation
(Figure 1 (a)). Nevertheless, due to the sparsity and ambiguity of the reward signal, it is challenging for biased thinking

1

Department of Control Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China. Correspondence to: Chengju Liu
<liuchengju@tongji.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

