Naive imputation implicitly regularizes high-dimensional linear models.

Alexis Ayme 1 Claire Boyer 1 Aymeric Dieuleveut 2 Erwan Scornet 2

Abstract

Most of them are dedicated to model estimation, aiming at
inferring the underlying model parameters despite missing
values (see, e.g., Rubin, 1976). In this paper, we take a
different route and consider a supervised machine learning
(ML) problem with missing values in the training and test
inputs, for which our aim is to build a prediction function
(and not to estimate accurately the true model parameters).

Two different approaches exist to handle missing values for prediction: either imputation, prior
to fitting any predictive algorithms, or dedicated
methods able to natively incorporate missing values. While imputation is widely (and easily) used,
it is unfortunately biased when low-capacity predictors (such as linear models) are applied afterward. However, in practice, naive imputation exhibits good predictive performance. In this paper, we study the impact of imputation in a highdimensional linear model with MCAR missing
data. We prove that zero imputation performs an
implicit regularization closely related to the ridge
method, often used in high-dimensional problems.
Leveraging on this connection, we establish that
the imputation bias is controlled by a ridge bias,
which vanishes in high dimension. As a predictor,
we argue in favor of the averaged SGD strategy,
applied to zero-imputed data. We establish an upper bound on its generalization error, highlighting
√
that imputation is benign in the d ≫ n regime.
Experiments illustrate our findings.

Prediction with NA A common practice to perform supervised learning with missing data is to simply impute
the data set first, and then train any predictor on the completed/imputed data set. The imputation technique can be
simple (e.g., using mean imputation) or more elaborate
(Van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011; Yoon et al.,
2018; Muzellec et al., 2020; Ipsen et al., 2022). While such
widely-used two-step strategies lack deep theoretical foundations, they have been shown to be consistent, provided
that the approximation capacity of the chosen predictor is
large enough (see Josse et al., 2019; Le Morvan et al., 2021).
When considering low-capacity predictors, such as linear
models, other theoretically sound strategies consist of decomposing the prediction task with respect to all possible
missing patterns (see Le Morvan et al., 2020b; Ayme et al.,
2022) or by automatically detecting relevant patterns to
predict, thus breaking the combinatorics of such patternby-pattern predictors (see the specific NeuMiss architecture
in Le Morvan et al., 2020a). Proved to be nearly optimal
(Ayme et al., 2022), such approaches are likely to be robust
to very pessimistic missing data scenarios. Inherently, they
do not scale with high-dimensional data sets, as the variety
of missing patterns explodes. Another direction is advocated
in Agarwal et al. (2019) relying on principal component regression (PCR) in order to train linear models with missing
inputs. However, out-of-sample prediction in such a case
requires to retrain the predictor on the training and test sets
(to perform a global PC analysis), which strongly departs
from classical ML algorithms massively used in practice.

1. Introduction
Missing data has become an inherent problem in modern
data science. Indeed, most real-world data sets contain missing entries due to a variety of reasons: merging different
data sources, sensor failures, difficulty to collect/access data
in sensitive fields (e.g., health), just to name a few. The
simple, yet quite extreme, solution of throwing partial observations away can drastically reduce the data set size and
thereby hinder further statistical analysis. Specific methods should be therefore developed to handle missing values.
1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire de Probabilités,
Statistique et Modélisation (LPSM), F-75005 Paris, France
2
CMAP, UMR7641, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris, 91128
Palaiseau, France.
Correspondence to: Alexis Ayme
<alexis.ayme@sorbonne-universite.fr>.

In this paper, we focus on the high-dimensional regime of
linear predictors, which will appear to be more favorable to
handling missing values via simple and cheap imputation
methods, in particular in the missing completely at random
(MCAR) case.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

