Exploring the Limits of Model-Targeted Indiscriminate Data Poisoning Attacks

Yiwei Lu 1 2 Gautam Kamath 1 2 Yaoliang Yu 1 2

Abstract

place poisoned samples on the web for scraping (Gao et al.
2020; Lyu et al. 2020; Shejwalkar et al. 2022; Wakefield
2016), has caused serious concerns in the ML community
and inspired a number of interesting works to expose and
address this threat (Goldblum et al. 2023).

Indiscriminate data poisoning attacks aim to decrease a model’s test accuracy by injecting a
small amount of corrupted training data. Despite
significant interest, existing attacks remain relatively ineffective against modern machine learning (ML) architectures. In this work, we introduce the notion of model poisoning reachability
as a technical tool to explore the intrinsic limits of data poisoning attacks towards target parameters (i.e., model-targeted attacks). We derive an easily computable threshold to establish
and quantify a surprising phase transition phenomenon among popular ML models: data poisoning attacks can achieve certain target parameters only when the poisoning ratio exceeds our
threshold. Building on existing parameter corruption attacks and refining the Gradient Canceling
attack, we perform extensive experiments to confirm our theoretical findings, test the predictability of our transition threshold, and significantly
improve existing indiscriminate data poisoning
baselines over a range of datasets and models.
Our work highlights the critical role played by
the poisoning ratio, and sheds new insights on
existing empirical results, attacks and mitigation
strategies in data poisoning. Our code is available
at https://github.com/watml/plim.

By now many data poisoning algorithms have been proposed; see Section 2 for some pointers. However, in the
setting of indiscriminate data poisoning, where an attacker
aims to decrease the overall test accuracy by adding a small
fraction of corrupted data, the effectiveness of existing attacks remains underwhelming. For example, the recent
work of Lu et al. (2022) achieved 1.11% accuracy drop for a
three-layer CNN on MNIST and a 5.54% accuracy drop for
ResNet-18 on CIFAR-10, after adding εd = 3% poisoned
data and retraining. Part of the difficulty lies in the computational challenge: the attacker has to anticipate what would
happen after retraining the model on the mixed data (clean
in-house data plus poisoned data). Other empirical works
seem to suggest there might also be some intrinsic barrier
to data poisoning; see Section 2 for a detailed discussion.
In this work we focus on model-targeted attacks (e.g., Koh
et al. 2022; Suya et al. 2021) and introduce the notion of
model poisoning reachability, i.e., given (arbitrary) clean
training data, what model, represented by its parameter w,
can be achieved through data poisoning, and what is the minimum (relative) percentage εd of poisoned data that one has
to introduce, with what algorithm? While model poisoning
reachability intuitively depends on the clean training data,
the loss and the target model we aim to achieve, we show
that under mild conditions, it can be largely characterized by
a simple threshold τ that is readily computable and involves
no training at all. In particular, when the poisoning percentage εd falls under τ , no algorithm could achieve the target
model by retraining on a mixed dataset (however crafted).
On the flip side, if εd > τ , we show that Gradient Canceling
(GC), a refinement of the KKT attack of Koh et al. (2022),
can achieve a given target model surprisingly efficiently. We
further demonstrate that most ML classifiers exhibit a phase
transition: they become poisoning reachable only when εd
crosses the threshold τ . In contrast, regression methods can
be poisoning reachable even when εd approaches 0. Thus,
our results expose the critical role played by the poisoning
percentage εd , and clarify the somewhat disparate empirical
results in the literature (with varying εd ).

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning (ML) models require a large
amount of training data to perform well on various tasks.
Such hunger for data not only increases the training cost
but also introduces potential risks during the data collection
process (Kumar et al. 2020; Nelson et al. 2008; Szegedy et
al. 2014). Data poisoning, where an adversary can actively
inject corrupted data into dataset aggregators or passively
Authors GK and YY are listed in alphabetical order. 1 School of
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada 2 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Yiwei Lu <yiwei.lu@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

