Importance Weighted Expectation-Maximization for Protein Sequence Design

Zhenqiao Song 1 Lei Li 1

Abstract
Designing protein sequences with desired biological function is crucial in biology and chemistry.
Recent machine learning methods use a surrogate
sequence-function model to replace the expensive
wet-lab validation. How can we efficiently generate diverse and novel protein sequences with high
fitness? In this paper, we propose IsEM-Pro, an
approach to generate protein sequences towards a
given fitness criterion. At its core, IsEM-Pro is a
latent generative model, augmented by combinatorial structure features from a separately learned
Markov random fields (MRFs). We develop an
Monte Carlo Expectation-Maximization method
(MCEM) to learn the model. During inference,
sampling from its latent space enhances diversity
while its MRFs features guide the exploration in
high fitness regions. Experiments on eight protein
sequence design tasks show that our IsEM-Pro
outperforms the previous best methods by at least
55% on average fitness score and generates more
diverse and novel protein sequences.

(a) Fujiyama landscape.

(b) Badlands landscape.

Figure 1. Protein Fitness Landscape (distribution of any specific
functional property for proteins). Protein may exhibit singlepeaked fitness landscape (Fujiyama landscape (a)) or multi-peaked
landscape (Badlands landscape (b)) (Kauffman & Weinberger,
1989). In Fujiyama landscape, any method could perform well.
However, for the rougher Badlands landscape, previous methods
get trapped in a worse local optima while our proposed IsEM-Pro
can climb much closer to the global optima through the iterative
sampling in the latent space.

tein with desired fitness objective involve obtaining protein
variants by random mutagenesis (Labrou, 2010) or recombination in laboratory experiments (Ma et al., 2003). These
variants are screened and selected in wet-lab experiments
(Arnold, 1998) as illustrated in Figure 2.

1. Introduction
Protein engineering aims to discover protein variants with
desired biological function, such as fluorescence intensity
(Biswas et al., 2021), enzyme activity (Fox et al., 2007),
and therapeutic efficacy (Lagassé et al., 2017). Protein sequences embody their function through spontaneous folding
of amino-acid sequences into three dimensional structures
(Go, 1983; Chothia, 1984; Starr & Thornton, 2017). The
mapping from protein sequence to functional property forms
a protein fitness landscape that characterizes the protein
functional levels, such as the capability to catalyze reaction
or bind a specific ligand (Romero & Arnold, 2009; Ren
et al., 2022). Traditional approaches to design a specific pro-

However, these approaches requires iterative cycles of random mutagenesis and wet-lab validation, which are both
money-consuming and time-intensive. Recent machine
learning methods attempt to build a surrogate model of
protein fitness landscape to accelerate expensive wet-lab
screening (Luo et al., 2021; Meier et al., 2021). How can we
efficiently discover satisfactory proteins over the exponentially large discrete space? Ideal protein molecules should
be novel, diverse and exhibit high fitness. On one hand,
designing novel and diverse protein sequences can uncover
new functions and also lead to functional diversification
(Singh et al., 2016). On the other hand, in addition to the
evolutionary pressure for a protein to conserve specific positions of its sequence for function, the diversification of
protein sequences can avoid undesired inter-domain association such as misfolding (Wright et al., 2005).

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, the United States. Correspondence to: Zhenqiao Song <zhenqiao@ucsb.edu>, Lei Li
<leili@cs.ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose an Importance sampling based
Expectation-Maximization (EM) method to efficiently de1

