Anti-Exploration by Random Network Distillation

Alexander Nikulin 1 Vladislav Kurenkov 1 Denis Tarasov 1 Sergey Kolesnikov 1

Abstract
average normalized score

Despite the success of Random Network Distillation (RND) in various domains, it was shown as
not discriminative enough to be used as an uncertainty estimator for penalizing out-of-distribution
actions in offline reinforcement learning. In this
paper, we revisit these results and show that, with
a naive choice of conditioning for the RND prior,
it becomes infeasible for the actor to effectively
minimize the anti-exploration bonus and discriminativity is not an issue. We show that this limitation can be avoided with conditioning based
on Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM), resulting in a simple and efficient ensemble-free
algorithm based on Soft Actor-Critic. We evaluate it on the D4RL benchmark, showing that it
is capable of achieving performance comparable
to ensemble-based methods and outperforming
ensemble-free approaches by a wide margin.

100
80
60
40

CQL (ensemble-free)
SAC-N (ensemble-based)
SAC-RND (Naive)
SAC-RND (Ours)

20
0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

training steps

2.5

3.0
1e6

Figure 1. Mean performance of SAC-RND variants on walker and
hopper medium-* datasets, each averaged over 3 seeds. We plot
performance for the naive version, which uses concatenation conditioning, and our final version, which is described in Section 5.
We also plot the final scores for the ensemble-free CQL (Kumar
et al., 2020) and the ensemble-based SAC-N (An et al., 2021). It
can be seen that our version is a significant improvement over the
naive version, achieving performance comparable to ensembles.

1. Introduction
(An et al., 2021), and MSG (Ghasemipour et al., 2022)
currently achieve state-of-the-art results on most D4RL (Fu
et al., 2020) datasets, outperforming ensemble-free methods
by a wide margin. Unfortunately, in order to achieve the best
performance, these algorithms may require tens or hundreds
of ensemble members, leading to significant computational
and memory overhead, as well as extended training duration
(Nikulin et al., 2022).

In recent years, significant success has been achieved in applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to challenging and
large-scale tasks such as Atari (Badia et al., 2020), Go
(Schrittwieser et al., 2020), Dota 2 (Berner et al., 2019),
and Minecraft (Baker et al., 2022). However, the online nature of such RL algorithms makes it difficult to apply them
in the real world, where online collection of large amounts
of exploratory data may not be feasible for safety or financial reasons. Offline Reinforcement Learning (Levine
et al., 2020) promises a more controllable and data-driven
approach, focusing on algorithms that can learn from a fixed,
pre-recorded dataset without requiring additional environment interactions.

Recent research (Yang et al., 2022) has successfully reduced
the ensemble size to tens of Q-networks in the worst-case
scenarios. However, given the general trend for model scaling in offline RL (Kumar et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022; Lee
et al., 2022), efficiently training even ten Q-networks with
80 million parameters each is not feasible. Furthermore,
Ghasemipour et al. (2022) showed that methods for efficient
ensemble training found in supervised learning literature
do not deliver performance comparable to naive ensembles
and can even worsen the results. Thus, further research
on efficient uncertainty estimation for offline RL is needed,
with the goal of reducing the size of the ensemble as much
as possible or even fully removing it.

The use of ensembles for uncertainty-based penalization has
proven to be one of the most effective approaches for offline
RL. Ensemble-based algorithms, such as SAC-N, EDAC
1
Tinkoff, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Alexander
Nikulin <a.p.nikulin@tinkoff.ai>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we move away from ensembles and take an
1

