The Dormant Neuron Phenomenon in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Ghada Sokar 1 2 Rishabh Agarwal 3 4 Pablo Samuel Castro 3 * Utku Evci 3 *

IQM Normalized Score

Abstract
In this work we identify the dormant neuron phenomenon in deep reinforcement learning, where
an agent’s network suffers from an increasing
number of inactive neurons, thereby affecting
network expressivity. We demonstrate the presence of this phenomenon across a variety of algorithms and environments, and highlight its effect
on learning. To address this issue, we propose a
simple and effective method (ReDo) that Recycles
Dormant neurons throughout training. Our experiments demonstrate that ReDo maintains the
expressive power of networks by reducing the
number of dormant neurons and results in improved performance.

0.6
0.4

DQN
DQN + ReDo
DQN + Reset
DQN + WD

0.2
0.0

2

4

6

8

Number of Frames (in millions)

10

Figure 1. Sample efficiency curves for DQN, with a replay ratio
of 1, when using network resets (Nikishin et al., 2022), weight decay (WD), and our proposed ReDo. Shaded regions show 95% CIs.
The figure shows interquartile mean (IQM) human-normalized
scores over the course of training, aggregated across 17 Atari
games and 5 runs per game. Among all algorithms, DQN+ReDo
performs the best.

1. Introduction
The use of deep neural networks as function approximators
for value-based reinforcement learning (RL) has been one
of the core elements that has enabled scaling RL to complex
decision-making problems (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
2016; Bellemare et al., 2020). However, their use can lead
to training difficulties that are not present in traditional RL
settings. Numerous improvements have been integrated with
RL methods to address training instability, such as the use
of target networks, prioritized experience replay, multi-step
targets, among others (Hessel et al., 2018). In parallel, there
have been recent efforts devoted to better understanding
the behavior of deep neural networks under the learning
dynamics of RL (van Hasselt et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2019;
Kumar et al., 2021a; Bengio et al., 2020; Lyle et al., 2021;
Araújo et al., 2021).

itive correlation between performance and the number of
parameters (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020; Zhai
et al., 2022). In RL, however, there is evidence that the
networks lose their expressivity and ability to fit new targets
over time, despite being over-parameterized (Kumar et al.,
2021a; Lyle et al., 2021); this issue has been partly mitigated
by perturbing the learned parameters. Igl et al. (2020) and
Nikishin et al. (2022) periodically reset some, or all, of the
layers of an agent’s neural networks, leading to improved
performance. These approaches, however, are somewhat
drastic: reinitializing the weights can cause the network
to “forget” previously learned knowledge and require many
gradient updates to recover.

Recent work in so-called “scaling laws” for supervised learning problems suggest that, in these settings, there is a pos-

In this work, we seek to understand the underlying reasons
behind the loss of expressivity during the training of RL
agents. The observed decrease in the learning ability over
time raises the following question: Do RL agents use neural
network parameters to their full potential? To answer this,
we analyze neuron activity throughout training and track dormant neurons: neurons that have become practically inactive
through low activations. Our analyses reveal that the number of dormant neurons increases as training progresses, an
effect we coin the “dormant neuron phenomenon”. Specifically, we find that while agents start the training with a

*
Equal advising 1 Eindhoven University of Technology, The
Netherlands 2 Work done while the author was intern at Google
DeepMind 3 Google DeepMind 4 Mila. Correspondence to: Ghada
Sokar <g.a.z.n.sokar@tue.nl>, Rishabh Agarwal < rishabhagarwal@google.com>, Pablo Samuel Castro <psc@google.com>,
Utku Evci <evci@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

