Towards Stable and Efficient Adversarial Training
against l1 Bounded Adversarial Attacks

Yulun Jiang * 1 Chen Liu * 2 Zhichao Huang 3 Mathieu Salzmann 1 Sabine Süsstrunk 1

Abstract

adversarial training lies the idea of generating adversarial
examples by perturbing the training inputs and using these
examples to update the model parameters.

We address the problem of stably and efficiently
training a deep neural network robust to adversarial perturbations bounded by an l1 norm. We
demonstrate that achieving robustness against l1 bounded perturbations is more challenging than
in the l2 or l∞ cases, because adversarial training
against l1 -bounded perturbations is more likely
to suffer from catastrophic overfitting and yield
training instabilities. Our analysis links these
issues to the coordinate descent strategy used
in existing methods. We address this by introducing Fast-EG-l1 , an efficient adversarial training algorithm based on Euclidean geometry and
free of coordinate descent. Fast-EG-l1 comes
with no additional memory costs and no extra
hyper-parameters to tune. Our experimental results on various datasets demonstrate that FastEG-l1 yields the best and most stable robustness
against l1 -bounded adversarial attacks among the
methods of comparable computational complexity. Code and the checkpoints are available at
https://github.com/IVRL/FastAdvL1.

While effective, adversarial training is typically not efficient. For example, the pioneering work (Madry et al.,
2018) generates adversarial examples by projected gradient
descent (PGD), which requires several forward and backward passes, thus significantly increasing the computational
cost. Several works (Shafahi et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2019a; Wong et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022) have aimed
to improve the efficiency of adversarial training by using
weaker but computationally-cheaper adversarial examples,
such as the ones generated by one-step attacks. However,
such efficient adversarial training methods tend to suffer
from catastrophic overfitting: The models overfit to the
weaker attacks used during training and lose true robustness,
resulting in trivial performance under stronger attacks.
Note that the above-mentioned works focus on the scenario where the perturbations applied to the model input
are bounded by either an l2 or an l∞ adversarial budget.
While such budgets have been well studied and benchmarked (Croce et al., 2021), robustness against l1 -bounded
adversarial attacks remains comparatively underexplored.
In this work, we show that true robustness and efficiency
can jointly be achieved under l1 adversarial budgets. To the
best of our knowledge, our work constitutes the first method
designed for efficient adversarial training given l1 bounded
attacks. It is a challenging task because achieving the optimal robust accuracy under an l1 adversarial budget (Croce
& Hein, 2021) is computationally even more expensive than
under the l2 and l∞ ones (Gowal et al., 2020). Furthermore,
we evidence that adversarial training against l1 bounded
perturbations is less stable. Specifically, our empirical observations indicate that catastrophic overfitting occurs more
frequently under l1 adversarial budgets than in the l2 and l∞
cases, and that, in contrast with the l2 and l∞ cases, it occurs
even when using multi-step attacks for adversarial training.
In addition, we demonstrate that directly applying the existing efficient adversarial training methods to l1 adversarial
budgets yields poor performance because of instability.

1. Introduction
Comprehensive evaluations (Athalye et al., 2018; Croce
& Hein, 2020b; 2021) have shown that adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) and its variants (Alayrac et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2019b; Carmon et al., 2019; Wu et al.,
2020; Rebuffi et al., 2021) are the most effective approaches
to counteract the vulnerability of deep neural networks to
adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017). At the heart of
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Department of
Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China 3 ByteDance. Correspondence to: Yulun Jiang <yulun.jiang@epfl.ch>, Chen Liu <cliu644@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To address these drawbacks, we first investigate why catas-

1

