Accelerated Primal-Dual Methods for
Convex-Strongly-Concave Saddle Point Problems

Mohammad Khalafi 1 Digvijay Boob 1

Abstract

In this paper, we are interested in the following SPP
L(x, y) := min max f (x) + ϕ(x, y) − g(y),
x∈X y∈Y

We investigate a primal-dual (PD) method for
the saddle point problem (SPP) that uses a linear approximation of the primal function instead
of the standard proximal step, resulting in a linearized PD (LPD) method. For convex-strongly
concave SPP, we observe that the LPD method
has a suboptimal dependence on the Lipschitz
constant of the primal function. To fix this issue, we combine features of Accelerated Gradient Descent with the LPD method resulting in a
single-loop Accelerated Linearized Primal-Dual
(ALPD) method. ALPD method achieves the optimal gradient complexity when the SPP has a
semi-linear coupling function. We also present
an inexact ALPD method for SPPs with a general
nonlinear coupling function that maintains the
optimal gradient evaluations of the primal parts
and significantly improves the gradient evaluations of the coupling term compared to the ALPD
method. We verify our findings with numerical
experiments.

(1)

where we refer to f , g and ϕ as the primal, dual and coupling
functions, respectively.
The broad applicability of the SPP model has resulted in
various algorithmic complexity studies in the literature. The
major focus was on the computationally tractable convexconcave case, i.e., L(·, y) is convex in x for all y ∈ Y
and L(x, ·) is concave in y for all x ∈ X. In this setting,
maxy∈Y L(x, y) is a nonsmooth function in x. According to Nemirovski & Yudin (1983), subgradient descent
for a black-box nonsmooth convex function achieves an ϵ
optimality error in O( ϵ12 ) subgradient evaluations. In a seminal work, Nesterov (2005) exploited the max-form of the
problem to obtain a significantly improved gradient complexity of O( 1ϵ ). This result broke the earlier established
complexity lower bounds and is popularly known as Nesterov’s smoothing technique. Nemirovski (2004) presented
an Extragradient method that performs one extra gradient
descent-ascent step in each iteration. This method can obtain
an ϵ error on the stronger gap function criterion (c.f. Definition 2.1) using O( 1ϵ ) gradient evaluations. Subsequently,
(Chambolle & Pock, 2011; 2016; Chen et al., 2014) showed
primal-dual (PD) type methods which remove the additional
gradient descent-ascent step and maintain an O( 1ϵ ) complexity when ϕ is a bilinear coupling. Later, (Hamedani
& Aybat, 2021) extended it to the general convex-concave
coupling functions.

1. Introduction
As a class of optimization problems, the min-max saddle
point problem (SPP) has attracted much attention in the
optimization and machine learning literature. The SPPs
contain many classical problems as a special case. E.g., we
can transform convex optimization problems with smooth
or nonsmooth objective functions into a min-max saddle
point form. One can extend this observation to nonsmooth
nonconvex problems relatively easily. Given their strong
modeling power, SPPs have extensive applications in (distributionally) robust optimization and adversarial learning.

The PD methods in (Chambolle & Pock, 2011; Hamedani
& Aybat, 2021) assume that the proximal operators of f
and g are easy to evaluate. For the bilinear coupling term,
i.e., ϕ(x, y) = y ⊤ Ax, Condat (2013); Vu (2011) introduced
LPD method where they used the linear approximation of f
in a PD method and proved the convergence of its iterates
to saddle point. Chambolle & Pock (2016) considered the
same design and showed LPD method has the convergence
L +∥A∥
complexity of O( f ϵ ), where Lf is the Lipschitz constant of ∇f and ∥A∥ is the operator norm of A. Observing
that this dependence is not optimal in Lf , Chen et al. (2014)
proposed
an accelerated PD method whose complexity is of
q

1

Department of Operations Research and Engineering Management, Southern Methodist University, Dallas TX, USA. Correspondence to: Mohammad Khalafi <mohamadk@smu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

O(

1

Lf
∥A∥
ϵ + ϵ ) which significantly reduces the impact of

