Information-Theoretic State Space Model for
Multi-View Reinforcement Learning

HyeongJoo Hwang 1 Seokin Seo 1 Youngsoo Jang 2 Sungyoon Kim 1 Geon-Hyeong Kim 2
Seunghoon Hong 3 Kee-Eung Kim 1 3

Abstract

view observations. Although one could naively train an RL
agent directly taking the stack of entire observations, it is
unclear to handle incomplete observations from views that
are intermittently missing, e.g. sensors operating at different
frequencies or being occluded. Furthermore, it would be
very sample-inefficient especially when observations are of
high dimensions (Lake et al., 2017; Tassa et al., 2018; Kaiser
et al., 2019). Consequently, it is necessary to adopt representation learning from multiple observations, i.e. Multi-View
Learning (MVL), so that the agent learns to act based on
a low-dimensional latent representation of the state, which
retains robustness to missing views and provides sufficient
information about the true state relevant to decision making.

Multi-View Reinforcement Learning (MVRL)
seeks to find an optimal control for an agent given
multi-view observations from various sources.
Despite recent advances in multi-view learning
that aim to extract the latent representation from
multi-view data, it is not straightforward to apply them to control tasks, especially when the
observations are temporally dependent on one another. The problem can be even more challenging
if the observations are intermittently missing for
a subset of views. In this paper, we introduce
Fuse2Control (F2C), an information-theoretic approach to capturing the underlying state space
model from the sequences of multi-view observations. We conduct an extensive set of experiments
in various control tasks showing that our method
is highly effective in aggregating task-relevant
information across many views, that scales linearly with the number of views while retaining
robustness to arbitrary missing view scenarios.

Leveraging the power of deep generative models, MVL has
made remarkable progress in recent years. Notably, multiview generative models (Wu & Goodman, 2018; Shi et al.,
2019; Sutter et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Hwang et al., 2021)
jointly train per-view Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) and
obtain the latent representation by combining each representation from all views via weighted averaging strategies,
such as Product of Experts (Wu & Goodman, 2018; Hwang
et al., 2021), Mixture of Experts (Shi et al., 2019), or some
more complex strategies (Sutter et al., 2020; 2021). These
methods naturally extend to the partial-view scenario where
an arbitrary subset of views could be missing per observation instance, while some of them are not computationally
scalable for a large number of views. Recently, Hwang et al.
(2021) showed that these approaches can be interpreted as
optimizing the Total Correlation (TC) (Watanabe, 1960).

1. Introduction
In real-world decision-making problems, the observation from the environment is often complex and highdimensional. This is because the agent is usually equipped
with multiple sensors to obtain a better sense of what’s
going on in the environment. For example, it is a standard practice to employ an array of sensors (e.g. lidars,
cameras, sonars, etc.) in an autonomous vehicle. Treating
each of these sensors as a view, Multi-View Reinforcement
Learning (Li et al., 2019) (MVRL) aims to learn an optimal
control policy in a complex control task based on multi-

However, the direct application of these multi-view generative models to control tasks is not straightforward since we
need to consider the sequential nature of the problem that
arises from the dynamics of the environment. For example,
it would be desirable to learn the latent state representation
that exhibits Markov property for the sake of simplicity in
the RL training loop. Furthermore, when some of the views
are missing at a particular timestep, we should still be able to
harness the available observation from previous time steps
to infer the latent state.

1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea 2 LG AI Research, Seoul, South Korea 3 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to:
HyeongJoo Hwang <hjhwang@ai.kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose Fuse2Control (F2C), a principled
MVRL framework that discovers the underlying dynamics
1

