Online Mechanism Design for Information Acquisition

Federico Cacciamani 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

routing (Bhaskar et al., 2016; Castiglioni et al., 2021a),
and security (Rabinovich et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2016).
Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica & Gentzkow, 2011) studies
how an informed agent (sender) can exploit an information advantage to influence the behavior of an uninformed
agent (receiver). In particular, the sender can commit to an
information-disclosure policy (signaling scheme) in order to
persuade the receiver to play an action that is desirable for
the sender. In this work we study the inverse problem faced
by a receiver that wants to incentivize multiple senders to
share their private information about a common state of
nature. Surprisingly, while many real-world scenarios are
affected by an increasing decentralization of information,
the problem of strategically acquiring such information has
received little attention from the scientific community. In
particular, we pose the question:

We study the problem of designing mechanisms
for information acquisition scenarios. This setting models strategic interactions between an uninformed receiver and a set of informed senders. In
our model the senders receive information about
the underlying state of nature and communicate
their observation (either truthfully or not) to the
receiver, which, based on this information, selects
an action. Our goal is to design mechanisms maximizing the receiver’s utility while incentivizing
the senders to report truthfully their information.
First, we provide an algorithm that efficiently
computes an optimal incentive compatible (IC)
mechanism. Then, we focus on the online problem in which the receiver sequentially interacts
in an unknown game, with the objective of minimizing the cumulative regret w.r.t. the optimal IC
mechanism, and the cumulative violation of the incentive compatibility constraints. We investigate
two different online scenarios, i.e., the full and
bandit feedback settings. For the full feedback
problem, we propose an algorithm that guarantees
√
Õ( T ) regret and violation, while for the bandit
feedback setting we present an algorithm that attains Õ(T α ) regret and Õ(T 1−α/2 ) violation for
any α ∈ [1/2, 1]. Finally, we complement our
results providing a tight lower bound.

Can a receiver with commitment power induce
senders to reveal their information truthfully?
In our model, there are multiple senders that receive noisy
information (signals) about a common state of nature. Then,
each sender strategically reports a signal to the receiver,
which chooses an action that depends on the signals reported
by the senders. This action is drawn from a randomized
mechanism to which the receiver commits and depends on
the signals reported by the senders. Finally, the senders and
the receiver receive an utility that depends on the state of
nature and the action played by the receiver. In this work, we
study the problem of designing an (approximately) incentive
compatible mechanism that maximizes the sender’s utility.
Moreover, we consider an online scenario in which the
receiver has partial or no information about the parameters
of the game. Our goal is to design algorithms that repeatedly
interact with the senders guaranteeing sublinear regret and
violations of the incentive compatibility constraints.

1. Introduction
Information plays a crucial role in every decision-making
process. The study of how to exploit information to shape
the behavior of other self-interested agents has received a terrific attention in recent years under the Bayesian persuasion
framework, with application to online advertising (Bro Miltersen & Sheffet, 2012), voting (Alonso & Câmara, 2016;
Castiglioni et al., 2020a; Castiglioni & Gatti, 2021), traffic

1.1. Original Contribution
We study the design of Incentive Compatible (IC) mechanisms for the information acquisition problem, focusing on
the case in which the senders are symmetric, i.e., they receive signals sampled by a common signaling scheme. First,
we show that, under a mild assumption, the optimal mechanism can be computed efficiently. In doing so, we provide

1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Federico Cacciamani <federico.cacciamani@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

