Masked Trajectory Models for Prediction, Representation, and Control

Philipp Wu 1 2 Arjun Majumdar † 3 Kevin Stone † 1 Yixin Lin † 1 Igor Mordatch 4
Pieter Abbeel 2 Aravind Rajeswaran 1

Abstract

can significantly accelerate the learning speed
of traditional RL algorithms. Finally, in offline
RL benchmarks, we find that MTM is competitive with specialized offline RL algorithms, despite MTM being a generic self-supervised learning method without any explicit RL components.
Code is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/mtm.

We introduce Masked Trajectory Models (MTM)
as a generic abstraction for sequential decision
making. MTM takes a trajectory, such as a stateaction sequence, and aims to reconstruct the trajectory conditioned on random subsets of the
same trajectory. By training with a highly randomized masking pattern, MTM learns versatile
networks that can take on different roles or capabilities, by simply choosing appropriate masks at
inference time. For example, the same MTM network can be used as a forward dynamics model,
inverse dynamics model, or even an offline RL
agent. Through extensive experiments in several
continuous control tasks, we show that the same
MTM network – i.e. same weights – can match
or outperform specialized networks trained for
the aforementioned capabilities. Additionally, we
find that state representations learned by MTM

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making is a field with a long and illustrious history, spanning various disciplines such as reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998), control theory (Bertsekas, 1995; Åström & Murray, 2008), and operations research (Powell, 2007). Throughout this history,
several paradigms have emerged for training agents that
can achieve long-term success in unknown environments.
However, many of these paradigms necessitate the learning and integration of multiple component pieces to obtain
decision-making policies. For example, model-based RL
methods require the learning of world models and actorcritic methods require the learning of critics. This leads to
complex and unstable multi-loop training procedures and
often requires various ad-hoc stabilization techniques. In
parallel, the emergence of self-supervised learning (Devlin

†
Equal contribution 1 Meta AI 2 UC Berkeley 3 Georgia
Tech 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Philipp <philippwu@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Inference

Masked Trajectory Modeling

Tasks ⇔ Masking Patterns

Train with random autoregressive mask
Reconstructed
Trajectory
(Output)

s1

R1

a1

s2

R2

a2

s3

R3

a3

s4

Future
Prediction

R4

a4

Imitation
Learning

Bi-Directional Transformer
State
Representation
Masked
Trajectory
(Input)

s1

R1

a1

s2

R2

a2

s3

R3

a3

s4

R4

a4

Inverse
Dynamics

Figure 1. Masked Trajectory Modeling (MTM) Framework. (Left) The training process involves reconstructing trajectory segments
from a randomly masked view of the same. (Right) After training, MTM can enable several downstream use-cases by simply changing the
masking pattern at inference time. See Section 3 for discussion on training and inference masking patterns.

1

