Improving Adversarial Robustness Through the
Contrastive-Guided Diffusion Process
Yidong Ouyang 1 Liyan Xie 1 Guang Cheng 2

Abstract

diagnosis (Das et al., 2022), the number of rare scenes is
usually very limited in the training dataset. Moreover, the
number of labeled data for supervised learning could also
be limited in some applications since it may be expensive
to label the data. These challenges call for methods that
can produce additional data that are easy to generate and
can help improve downstream task performance. Synthetic
data generation based on deep generative models has shown
promising performance recently to tackle these challenges
(Sehwag et al., 2022; Gowal et al., 2021; Das et al., 2022).

Synthetic data generation has become an emerging tool to help improve the adversarial robustness in classification tasks, since robust learning
requires a significantly larger amount of training samples compared with standard classification. Among various deep generative models,
the diffusion model has been shown to produce
high-quality synthetic images and has achieved
good performance in improving the adversarial
robustness. However, diffusion-type methods are
generally slower in data generation as compared
with other generative models. Although different acceleration techniques have been proposed
recently, it is also of great importance to study
how to improve the sample efficiency of synthetic
data for the downstream task. In this paper, we
first analyze the optimality condition of synthetic
distribution for achieving improved robust accuracy. We show that enhancing the distinguishability among the generated data is critical for improving adversarial robustness. Thus, we propose the Contrastive-Guided Diffusion Process
(Contrastive-DP), which incorporates the contrastive loss to guide the diffusion model in data
generation. We validate our theoretical results
using simulations and demonstrate the good performance of Contrastive-DP on image datasets.

In synthetic data generation, one aims to learn a synthetic
distribution (from which we generate synthetic data) that
is close to the true date-generating distribution and, most
importantly, can help improve the downstream task performance. Synthetic data generation is highly related to
generative models. Among various kinds of generative models, the score-based model and diffusion type models have
gained much success in image generation recently (Song
& Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021b; 2020; Song & Ermon,
2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021;
Bao et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Nie et al., 2022; Sun
et al., 2022). As validated in image datasets, the prototype
of diffusion models, the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020), and many variants can
generate high-quality images as compared with classical
generative models such as generative adversarial networks
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).
This paper mainly focuses on the adversarial robust classification of image data, which typically requires more training
data than standard classification tasks (Carmon et al., 2019).
In (Gowal et al., 2021), 100M high-quality synthetic images
are generated by DDPM and achieve the state-of-the-art
performance on adversarial robustness on the CIFAR-10
dataset, which demonstrates the effectiveness of diffusion
models in improving adversarial robustness. However, a
major drawback of diffusion-type methods is the slow computational speed. More specifically, DDPM is usually 1000
times slower than GAN (Song et al., 2021a), and this drawback is more serious when generating a large number of
samples, e.g., it takes more than 99 GPU days 1 for generating 100M image data according to (Gowal et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The success of most deep learning methods relies heavily
on a massive amount of training data, which can be expensive to acquire in practice. For example, in applications
like autonomous driving (O’Kelly et al., 2018) and medical
1
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen, China 2 Department of Statistics, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Liyan Xie
<xieliyan@cuhk.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Running on a RTX 4x2080Ti GPU cluster.

