The Test of Tests: A Framework for Differentially Private Hypothesis Testing

Zeki Kazan 1 Kaiyan Shi 2 Adam Groce 3 Andrew Bray 4

Abstract

Differentially private versions of many popular hypothesis
tests have been created, including private analogues of χ2
tests (Fienberg et al., 2011; Gaboardi et al., 2016; Johnson
& Shmatikov, 2013; Rogers & Kifer, 2017; Uhlerop et al.,
2013; Vu & Slavkovic, 2009; Wang et al., 2015), ANOVA
tests (Campbell et al., 2018; Swanberg et al., 2019), and
many others (Alabi & Vadhan, 2022; Barrientos et al., 2019;
Canonne et al., 2020; Couch et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2018;
D’Orazio et al., 2015; Narayanan, 2022; Nguyên & Hui,
2017; Solea, 2014; Sheffet, 2017). However, this is work
that privacy researchers must carefully repeat for each possible hypothesis test. While this is feasible for the most
frequently used tests like χ2 and ANOVA, it is not plausible to expect this work to be repeated for the wide range
of hypothesis tests that exist, many of which are highly
specific to particular situations. For example, economists
(e.g. (Gatignon & Xuereb, 1997; Jaworski & Kohli, 1993))
use the Chow test to test for a structural break in a regression line; researchers studying ordinal data (e.g. (Kramer,
1996; Uddin & Huynh, 2018)) use ordered logistic regression. Conducting these sorts of analyses privately currently
requires collaboration with privacy experts and prohibitive
time and effort spent on the study of private statistics before
the applied question can even be considered.

We present a generic framework for creating differentially private versions of any hypothesis test
in a black-box way. We analyze the resulting
tests analytically and experimentally. Most crucially, we show good practical performance for
small data sets, showing that at ϵ = 1 we only
need 5-6 times as much data as in the fully public setting. We compare our work to the one existing framework of this type, as well as to several individually-designed private hypothesis tests.
Our framework is higher power than other generic
solutions and at least competitive with (and often
better than) individually-designed tests.

1. Introduction
Hypothesis tests are one of the most basic and common
statistical analyses that analysts perform on data. The goal
of a hypothesis test is to see whether some “effect” in the
data (e.g., men are taller than women) is plausibly the result
of random variation in the sample, rather than a true fact
about the population. Hypothesis tests are the bedrock of
statistical analysis in the social sciences, medicine, and other
fields, and a variety of hypothesis tests are used, depending
on the type of data and the sort of effect one is considering.

In this paper we present a general framework that can automatically create a private version of any existing hypothesis
test and demonstrate its practicality. For example, at ϵ = 1
our method generally requires no more than 5 or 6 times
as much data to detect a given effect as would be required
in the non-private setting. This makes our off-the-shelf
tool competitive with (and occasionally superior to) some
individually tailored private hypothesis tests.

However, data in these fields often consists of private information about individuals. Researchers are under moral
and legal obligations to protect the privacy of that data and
can often only access that data if they can guarantee their
analysis will not violate the privacy of those individuals.
Differential privacy has emerged as the most convincing
formal definition of privacy protection in this setting.

1.1. Our Contributions
The framework we present can be viewed as an instantiation
of a method mentioned in the literature. Its origins are
not clear, and we think it is best viewed as folklore. It is
mentioned in (Canonne et al., 2019) and a similar technique
is used in (Cai et al., 2017). Perhaps the clearest description
of the method is in (Canonne et al., 2020):

1

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, Reed College, Portland, OR, USA 4 Department of
Statistics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Adam Groce <agroce@reed.edu>, Andrew Bray <andrewbray@berkeley.edu>.

“There exists a black-box method for obtaining a
differentially private tester from any non-private
tester A using the sample-and-aggregate frame-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

