Improving Adversarial Robustness of Deep Equilibrium Models
with Explicit Regulations Along the Neural Dynamics

Zonghan Yang 1 Peng Li 2 3 Tianyu Pang 4 Yang Liu 1 2 3

Abstract

AT baselines

Deep equilibrium (DEQ) models replace the
multiple-layer stacking of conventional deep
networks with a fixed-point iteration of a singlelayer transformation. Having been demonstrated
to be competitive in a variety of real-world
scenarios, the adversarial robustness of general
DEQs becomes increasingly crucial for their
reliable deployment. Existing works improve
the robustness of general DEQ models with the
widely-used adversarial training (AT) framework,
but they fail to exploit the structural uniquenesses
of DEQ models. To this end, we interpret DEQs
through the lens of neural dynamics and find that
AT under-regulates intermediate states. Besides,
the intermediate states typically provide predictions with a high prediction entropy. Informed by
the correlation between the entropy of dynamical
systems and their stability properties, we propose
reducing prediction entropy by progressively
updating inputs along the neural dynamics.
During AT, we also utilize random intermediate
states to compute the loss function. Our methods
regulate the neural dynamics of DEQ models in
this manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our methods substantially increase the
robustness of DEQ models and even outperform
the strong deep network baselines.

Our work

Figure 1. A conceptual illustration of the neural dynamics in DEQ
models and their regulations. Given input x, the neural dynamics are composed of intermediate states {z[t] } at each forward
fixed-point iteration in DEQ models. With input perturbation ∆x,
the neural dynamics are shifted to {z̃[t] } accordingly. Yang et al.
(2022) train robust general DEQs with adversarial training (AT),
which imposes regulation only on the equilibrium state by enforcing z̃⋆ to give similar predictions as z⋆ (the shaded arrow), leaving
other intermediate states (e.g., z̃[t] ) along the neural dynamics
under-regulated (the hollow arrows). In this work, we propose to
impose explicit regulations along the entire DEQ neural dynamics.

models explicitly cast the forward propagation as a fixedpoint iteration process with a single-layer transformation:
z⋆ = fθ (z⋆ ; x),

(1)

where fθ is the transformation parameterized with θ, x is
the input, and z⋆ is the equilibrium solved by fixed-point
solvers. While taking O(1) memory cost because of the
single layer, DEQ models are validated to attain competitive
performance compared with state-of-the-art traditional deep
networks in different applications (Li et al., 2021; Lu et al.,
2021; Huang et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022; Pokle et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Deep equilibrium (DEQ) models (Bai et al., 2019; 2020)
are a type of novel neural architecture. Different from traditional deep networks with multiple stacked layers, DEQ

Promising in real-world practice, DEQ models necessitate
adversarial robustness for their reliable deployment, which
however remains underexplored. Most existing works that
study robust DEQ models are dedicated to certifying the
robustness (Revay et al., 2020; Jafarpour et al., 2021; Müller
et al., 2021; Pabbaraju et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Wei &
Kolter, 2022) of monotone DEQ. Monotone DEQ (Winston
& Kolter, 2020) is a type of DEQ model that enjoys equilibrium convergence guarantees but requires sophisticated
layer and weight parameterization. In addition, the scalabil-

1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Institute for AI Industry Research
(AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China 4 Sea AI Lab, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Peng Li <lipeng@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yang
Liu <liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

