Lookahead When It Matters: Adaptive Non-causal Transformers
for Streaming Neural Transducers

Grant P. Strimel * 1 Yi Xie * 1 Brian King * 1 Martin Radfar 1 Ariya Rastrow 1 Athanasios Mouchtaris 1

Abstract

hanced user experiences. For example, these architectures
allow popular virtual assistants such as Amazon Alexa,
Google Assistant, and Apple Siri to rely on robust, far-field
speech recognition as their primary medium of real-time
interaction. Similarly, offline services such as recorded
call transcription and video caption generation apply these
architectures as well. The dominant techniques like NeuralTransducers, Listen-Attend-Spell, and Transformers are all
principally sequence-to-sequence models consisting of an
audio encoder mapping acoustic input to high-level representations for autoregressive decoding (Graves, 2012; Chan
et al., 2016; Mohamed et al., 2019; Chorowski et al., 2015;
Han et al., 2020). And while each neural ASR architecture
has its individual design elements, generally speaking, each
is categorized or implemented as a causal or non-causal
model.

Streaming speech recognition architectures are
employed for low-latency, real-time applications.
Such architectures are often characterized by their
causality. Causal architectures emit tokens at each
frame, relying only on current and past signal,
while non-causal models are exposed to a window
of future frames at each step to increase predictive accuracy. This dichotomy amounts to a tradeoff for real-time Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) system design: profit from the low-latency
benefit of strictly-causal architectures while accepting predictive performance limitations, or realize the modeling benefits of future-context models accompanied by their higher latency penalty.
In this work, we relax the constraints of this
choice and present the Adaptive Non-Causal Attention Transducer (ANCAT). Our architecture is
non-causal in the traditional sense, but executes
in a low-latency, streaming manner by dynamically choosing when to rely on future context and
to what degree within the audio stream. The resulting mechanism, when coupled with our novel
regularization algorithms, delivers comparable accuracy to non-causal configurations while improving significantly upon latency, closing the gap
with their causal counterparts. We showcase our
design experimentally by reporting comparative
ASR task results with measures of accuracy and latency on both publicly accessible and productionscale, voice-assistant datasets.

Causal ASR models are streamable designs which emit predictions for each frame as they arrive from the audio signal,
without access to future frames (He & al., 2019; Yu et al.,
2021a; Radfar et al., 2022). These models are referred to
as causal in the sense that each frame prediction is only
dependent on its left (past) context. Causal configurations
are particularly attractive for real-time processing applications where fast response times are essential for the user
experience, such as virtual assistants or live stream caption
generation. Non-causal models, on the other hand, have access to information from future frames. Non-causal models
can be either streaming with a bounded number of lookahead frames or full-context with access to the entirety of the
audio signal, before beginning to decode (Zhang et al., 2020;
Moritz et al., 2020; Yeh et al., 2019; Tripathi et al., 2020).
Naturally, these models can deliver significantly improved
accuracy over their causal counterparts by leveraging future
information to disambiguate predictions holistically. The
accuracy gains of non-causal processing typically are accompanied by a steep price of higher latency in real-time
applications however, which can hinder these models for
production deployment.

1. Introduction
Modern speech recognition applications have leveraged the
benefits afforded by fully-neural architectures to drive en*

Equal contribution 1 Amazon Alexa, USA. Correspondence
to: Grant P. Strimel <gsstrime@amazon.com>, Yi Xie <yixiey@amazon.com>.

In this paper, we introduce the Adaptive Non-Causal Attention Transducer (ANCAT), a neural ASR architecture which
has the accuracy improvements witnessed by non-causal
models, while yielding a latency that is more comparable

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

