Near-Optimal Quantum Coreset Construction Algorithms for Clustering

Yecheng Xue * 1 Xiaoyu Chen * 2 Tongyang Li 1 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 1

Abstract

NP-hard (Megiddo & Supowit, 1984) even in the planar case
(i.e., Euclidean R2 ), and polynomial time approximation
algorithms were the focus of study. Furthermore, even allowing O(1)-approximation, a fundamental barrier is still that
the algorithm must make Ω(nk) accesses to the distances
between the n input points (Mettu & Plaxton, 2004).

d

k-Clustering in R (e.g., k-median and k-means)
is a fundamental machine learning problem.
While near-linear time approximation algorithms
were known in the classical setting for a dataset
with cardinality n, it remains open to find
sublinear-time quantum algorithms. We give
quantum algorithms that√find coresets for kclustering in Rd with Õ( nkd3/2 ) query complexity. Our coreset reduces the input size from n
to poly(kε−1 d), so that existing α-approximation
algorithms for clustering can run on top of it
and yield (1 + ε)α-approximation. This eventually yields a quadratic speedup for various kclustering approximation algorithms. We complement our algorithm with a nearly matching
lower bound,
√ that any quantum algorithm must
make Ω( nk) queries in order to achieve even
O(1)-approximation for k-clustering.

In this paper, we study quantum algorithm and complexity for k-median clustering (and more generally, (k, z)clustering as in Definition 2.1). This is motivated by quantum algorithms for various related data analysis problems,
such as classification (Kapoor et al., 2016; Li et al., 2019;
2021), nearest neighbor search (Wiebe et al., 2015), support
vector machine (Rebentrost et al., 2014), etc. Many of these
quantum algorithms are originated from the Grover algorithm (Grover, 1996), which
√ can find an item in a data set of
cardinality n in time O( n), a quadratic quantum speedup
compared to the classical counterpart. Hence, a natural question is whether quantum algorithms can break the aforementioned classical Ω(nk) lower bound for k-median cluster√
ing, with a practical goal of achieving complexity O( nk),
while still achieving O(1) or even (1 + ε)-approximation.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental machine learning task that has
been extensively studied in areas including computer science
and operations research. A typical clustering problem is kmedian clustering in Rd . In k-median clustering, we are
given a set of data points D ⊆ Rd and an integer parameter
k, and the goal is to find a set C ⊂ Rd of k points, called the
center set, such that the following objective is minimized:
X
cost(D, C) :=
dist(x, C),
(1)

Coresets To this end, we consider constructing coresets (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004; Feldman & Langberg,
2011) by quantum algorithms. The coreset is a powerful
technique for dealing with clustering problems. Roughly
speaking, an ε-coreset is a tiny proxy of the potentially
huge data set, such that the clustering cost on any center
set is preserved within ε relative error. For k-median, an
ε-coreset of size poly(kε−1 ) has been known to exist (see
e.g., Sohler & Woodruff, 2018; Huang & Vishnoi, 2020;
Braverman et al., 2021; Cohen-Addad et al., 2021; CohenAddad et al., 2022; Schwiegelshohn et al., 2022), which is
independent of both the dimension d and size n of the data
set. Once such a coreset is constructed, one can approximate
k-means efficiently by plugging in existing approximation
algorithms (so that the input size is reduced to the size of
the coreset which is only poly(kε−1 )). In addition, coresets
can also be applied to clustering algorithms in sublinear
settings such as streaming (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004),
distributed computing (Balcan et al., 2013), and dynamic
algorithms (Henzinger & Kale, 2020).

x∈D

here dist(x, y) := ∥x − y∥2 , dist(x, C) := min dist(x, c).
c∈C

In the classical setting, k-median clustering is shown to be
*
Equal contribution 1 Center on Frontiers of Computing
Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Shaofeng H.-C.
Jiang <shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn>, Tongyang Li <tongyangli@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

