Optimistic Planning by Regularized Dynamic Programming

Antoine Moulin 1 Gergely Neu 1

Abstract

whose UCRL2 algorithm was shown to achieve near-optimal
regret guarantees in a broad class of tabular MDPs. In subsequent years, their work inspired an impressive amount of
follow-up work, leading to a variety of extensions, improvements, and other mutations.

We propose a new method for optimistic planning
in infinite-horizon discounted Markov decision
processes based on the idea of adding regularization to the updates of an otherwise standard
approximate value iteration procedure. This technique allows us to avoid contraction and monotonicity arguments typically required by existing
analyses of approximate dynamic programming
methods, and in particular to use approximate
transition functions estimated via least-squares
procedures in MDPs with linear function approximation. We use our method to recover known
guarantees in tabular MDPs and to provide a
computationally efficient algorithm for learning
near-optimal policies in discounted linear mixture
MDPs from a single stream of experience, and
show it achieves near-optimal statistical guarantees.

The computational efficiency of such optimistic methods
crucially hinges on the implementation of the optimistic
planning subroutine. In the work of Jaksch et al. (2010),
this was addressed by a procedure called extended value iteration (EVI), which performs dynamic programming (DP)
in an auxiliary MDP where the confidence set of models is
projected to the space of actions, allowing the realization
of arbitrary transitions that are statistically plausible given
all past experience. After mild adjustments, the EVI procedure can be shown to give near-optimal solutions to the
optimistic planning problem in a computationally efficient
manner (cf. Fruit et al., 2018 and Section 38.5.2 in Lattimore
& Szepesvári, 2020). Other, even more effective optimistic
dynamic programming procedures have been proposed and
analyzed (Fruit et al., 2018; Qian et al., 2018). However,
these computational developments have been largely restricted to the relatively simple tabular setting.

1. Introduction
The idea of constructing a confidence set of statistically
plausible models and picking a policy that maximizes the
expected return in the best of these models can be traced
back to the pioneering work of Lai & Robbins (1985) in the
context of multi-armed bandit problems, and has been successfully extended to address the exploration-exploitation
dilemma in reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto,
2018). This popular design principle came to be known
as optimism in the face of uncertainty, and the associated
optimization task as the problem of optimistic planning.
The optimistic principle has driven the development of statistically efficient RL algorithms for a variety of problem
settings. Following the work of Brafman & Tennenholtz
(2002); Strehl et al. (2009) on optimistic exploration methods for RL in Markov decision processes (MDPs), a breakthrough was achieved by Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer (2010),

In recent years, the RL theory literature has seen a massive revival largely due to the breakthrough achieved by
Jin, Yang, Wang, and Jordan (2020), who successfully extended the idea of optimistic exploration to a class of largescale MDPs using linear function approximation. While
extremely influential, their approach (and virtually all of its
numerous follow-ups) are limited to the relatively simple
setting of finite-horizon MDPs. The reason for this limitation is inherent in their algorithm design that crucially uses
the fact that optimistic planning in finite-horizon MDPs can
be solved via a simple backward recursion over the time indices within each episode (Neu & Pike-Burke, 2020). This
idea completely fails for infinite-horizon problems where
dynamic programming methods should aim to approximate
the solution of a fixed-point equation. Solving such fixedpoint equations is possible in the tabular case but no known
efficient method exists for linear function approximation,
the short reason being that the least-squares transition estimator used in the construction of Jin et al. (2020) cannot
be straightforwardly used to build an approximate Bellman
operator that satisfies the necessary contraction properties.

1

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence
to: Antoine Moulin <antoine.moulin@upf.edu>, Gergely Neu
<gergely.neu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

