Variational Autoencoding Neural Operators

Jacob H. Seidman 1 2 Georgios Kissas 2 George J. Pappas 1 Paris Perdikaris 2

Abstract

a dictionary (Vaswani et al., 2017). Architectures that act
on such data are built with this structure in mind; they aim
to learn maps between finite dimensional spaces of data.

Unsupervised learning with functional data is an
emerging paradigm of machine learning research
with applications to computer vision, climate modeling and physical systems. A natural way of
modeling functional data is by learning operators
between infinite dimensional spaces, leading to
discretization invariant representations that scale
independently of the sample grid resolution. Here
we present Variational Autoencoding Neural Operators (VANO), a general strategy for making
a large class of operator learning architectures
act as variational autoencoders. For this purpose,
we provide a novel rigorous mathematical formulation of the variational objective in function
spaces for training. VANO first maps an input
function to a distribution over a latent space using
a parametric encoder and then decodes a sample
from the latent distribution to reconstruct the input, as in classic variational autoencoders. We
test VANO with different model set-ups and architecture choices for a variety of benchmarks. We
start from a simple Gaussian random field where
we can analytically track what the model learns
and progressively transition to more challenging
benchmarks including modeling phase separation
in Cahn-Hilliard systems and real world satellite
data for measuring Earth surface deformation.

On the other hand, physics often models signals of interest
in the natural world in terms of continuous fields, e.g. velocity in fluid dynamics or temperature in heat transfer. These
fields are typically functions over a continuous domain,
and therefore correspond to vectors in infinite-dimensional
vector spaces, also known as functional data. To use machine learning tools for continuous signals in these physical
applications, models must be able to act on and return representations of functional data.
The most straightforward way to do this is known as the
discretize-first approach. Here, functional data is mapped
into a finite dimensional vector space via measurements
along a predefined collection of locations. At this point,
standard machine learning tools for finite dimensional data
can be used to generate measurements of a desired output
function, also evaluated along a predefined set of locations.
The drawback of these methods is their rigidity with respect
to the underlying discretization scheme; they will not be
able to evaluate the output function at any location outside
of the original discretization.
As an alternative, operator learning methods aim to design models which give well defined operators between
the function spaces themselves instead of their discretizations. These methods often take a discretization agnostic
approach and are able to produce outputs that can be queried
at arbitrary points in their target domain. The Graph Neural
Operator (Anandkumar et al., 2020) proposed a compositional architecture built from parameterized integral transformations of the input combined with point-wise linear and
nonlinear maps. This approach was modified to leverage
fast Fourier transforms in computing the integral transform
component, leading to the Fourier Neural Operator (Li et al.,
2020), U-net variants (Wen et al., 2022), as well as guarantees of universal approximation (Kovachki et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Much of machine learning research focuses on data residing
in finite dimensional vector spaces. For example, images are
commonly seen as vectors in a space with dimension equal
to the number of pixels (Santhanam et al., 2017) and words
are represented by one-hot encodings in a space representing
1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA 2 Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Applied Mechanics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Jacob H. Seidman
<seidj@sas.upenn.edu>.

Inspired from one of the first operator architectures in (Chen
& Chen, 1995), the DeepONet (Lu et al., 2021) uses finite
dimensional representations of input functions to derive coefficients along a learned basis of output functions. While
this approach has been shown to have universal approximation properties as well (Lanthaler et al., 2022), the required

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

