Normalizing Flows for Interventional Density Estimation

Valentyn Melnychuk 1 Dennis Frauen 1 Stefan Feuerriegel 1

Abstract

ence from observational data promises great value, especially when experiments for determining treatment effects
are costly or even unethical.

Existing machine learning methods for causal inference usually estimate quantities expressed via
the mean of potential outcomes (e.g., average
treatment effect). However, such quantities do
not capture the full information about the distribution of potential outcomes. In this work, we
estimate the density of potential outcomes after interventions from observational data. For this, we
propose a novel, fully-parametric deep learning
method called Interventional Normalizing Flows.
Specifically, we combine two normalizing flows,
namely (i) a nuisance flow for estimating nuisance
parameters and (ii) a target flow for parametric estimation of the density of potential outcomes. We
further develop a tractable optimization objective
based on a one-step bias correction for efficient
and doubly robust estimation of the target flow parameters. As a result, our Interventional Normalizing Flows offer a properly normalized density
estimator. Across various experiments, we demonstrate that our Interventional Normalizing Flows
are expressive and highly effective, and scale well
with both sample size and high-dimensional confounding. To the best of our knowledge, our Interventional Normalizing Flows are the first proper
fully-parametric, deep learning method for density estimation of potential outcomes.

The vast majority of the machine learning methods for
causal inference estimate averaged quantities expressed by
the (conditional) mean of potential outcomes. Examples
of such quantities are the average treatment effect (ATE)
(e.g., Shi et al., 2019; Hatt & Feuerriegel, 2021), the conditional average treatment effect (CATE) (e.g., Shalit et al.,
2017; Hassanpour & Greiner, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), and
treatment-response curves (e.g., Bica et al., 2020; Nie et al.,
2021). Importantly, these estimates only describe averages
without distributional properties.
However, making decisions based on averaged causal quantities can be misleading and, in some applications, even
dangerous (Spiegelhalter, 2017; van der Bles et al., 2019).
On the one hand, if potential outcomes have different variances or number of modes, relying on the average quantities
provides incomplete information about potential outcomes,
and may inadvertently lead to local – and not global – optima
during decision-making. On the other hand, distributional
knowledge is needed to account for uncertainty in potential
outcomes and thus informs how likely a certain outcome
is. For example, in medicine, knowing the distribution of
potential outcomes is highly important (Gische & Voelkle,
2021): it gives the probability that the potential outcome
lies in a desired range, and thus defines the probability of
treatment success or failure.1 Motivated by this, we aim to
estimate the density of potential outcomes.

1. Introduction

An example highlighting the need for estimating the density
of potential outcomes is shown in Fig. 1. Here, we simulated outcomes according to a given structural causal model
(SCM). The potential outcomes Y [a] can be sampled by setting the binary treatment to a specific value in the equation

Causal inference increasingly makes use of machine learning methods to estimate treatment effects from observational
data (e.g., van der Laan et al., 2011; Künzel et al., 2019;
Curth & van der Schaar, 2021; Kennedy, 2022). This is
relevant for various fields including medicine (e.g., Bica
et al., 2021), marketing (e.g., Yang et al., 2020), and policymaking (e.g., Hünermund et al., 2021). Here, causal infer-

1
For example, patients with prediabetes are oftentimes treated
with metformin monotherapy, which reduces blood glucose sugar
(HbA1c) by an average of 1.1% (95% confidence interval: 0.9 to
1.3%) (Hirst et al., 2012). Yet, there is often large skewness in
the potential outcome. While metformin monotherapy is highly
effective for some individuals, it fails to achieve glycemic targets
for 50% of the patients (Shin, 2019). Here, it is indicated that a
second-line anti-diabetes drug is prescribed. Crucially, standard
confidence intervals cannot disclose that metformin is harmful to
some patients while densities can.

1

LMU Munich & Munich Center for Machine Learning
(MCML), Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Valentyn Melnychuk <melnychuk@lmu.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

