On the Expressive Power of Geometric Graph Neural Networks

Chaitanya K. Joshi * 1 Cristian Bodnar * 1 Simon V. Mathis 1 Taco Cohen 2 Pietro Liò 1
Body Order of Layer

Abstract

MACE - Multi
Atomic Cluster
Expansion

Many-body

The expressive power of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) has been studied extensively through the
Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) graph isomorphism test.
However, standard GNNs and the WL framework
are inapplicable for geometric graphs embedded
in Euclidean space, such as biomolecules, materials, and other physical systems. In this work,
we propose a geometric version of the WL test
(GWL) for discriminating geometric graphs while
respecting the underlying physical symmetries:
permutations, rotation, reflection, and translation. We use GWL to characterise the expressive power of geometric GNNs that are invariant
or equivariant to physical symmetries in terms
of distinguishing geometric graphs. GWL unpacks how key design choices influence geometric GNN expressivity: (1) Invariant layers have
limited expressivity as they cannot distinguish
one-hop identical geometric graphs; (2) Equivariant layers distinguish a larger class of graphs
by propagating geometric information beyond local neighbourhoods; (3) Higher order tensors and
scalarisation enable maximally powerful geometric GNNs; and (4) GWL’s discrimination-based
perspective is equivalent to universal approximation. Synthetic experiments supplementing our results are available at https://github.com/
chaitjo/geometric-gnn-dojo

SphereNet
DimeNet, GVP-GNN,
GemNet-T PaiNN

(Distances)

SchNet

Tensor Order
of Features

he
ri
ca
Sp

sia
C

ar

te

ar
al
Sc

Depth

l

TFN, SEGNN,
SE(3)-Transformer

s

E(n)-GNN

n

(Distances,
Angles)

Figure 1: Axes of geometric GNN expressivity: (1) Body
order: increasing scalarisation body order builds expressive
local descriptors; (2) Tensor order: higher order tensors
determine the relative orientation of neighbourhoods; and
(3) Depth: deep equivariant layers propagate geometric
information beyond local neighbourhoods.

Such systems can be modelled via geometric graphs embedded in Euclidean space. For example, molecules are represented as a set of nodes which contain information about
each atom and its 3D spatial coordinates as well as other geometric quantities such as velocity or acceleration. Notably,
the geometric attributes transform along with Euclidean
transformations of the system, i.e. they are equivariant to
symmetry groups of rotations, reflections, and translation.
Standard Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) which do not
take spatial symmetries into account are ill-suited for geometric graphs, as the geometric attributes would no longer
retain their physical meaning and transformation behaviour
(Bogatskiy et al., 2022; Bronstein et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Systems in biochemistry (Jamasb et al., 2022), material
science (Chanussot et al., 2021), physical simulations
(Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), and multiagent robotics (Li
et al., 2020) contain both geometry and relational structure.

GNNs specialised for geometric graphs follow the message
passing paradigm (Gilmer et al., 2017) where node features
are updated in a permutation equivariant manner by aggregating features from local neighbourhoods. Crucially, in
addition to permutations, the updated geometric features of
the nodes retain the transformation behaviour of the initial
attributes, i.e. they are also equivariant to the Lie group of
rotations (SO(d)) or rotations and reflections (O(d)). We
use G as a generic symbol for these Lie groups. We consider
two classes of geometric GNNs: (1) G-equivariant models,

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, UK 2 Qualcomm
AI Research, The Netherlands. Qualcomm AI Research is an
initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. Correspondence to:
Chaitanya K. Joshi <chaitanya.joshi@cl.cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

