Provably and Practically Efficient Neural Contextual Bandits

Sudeep Salgia 1

Abstract

context-action pairs belongs to the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) determined by a known kernel.
Recently, a variation of the problem has been proposed
where the expected reward function associated with the
context-action pairs is modeled using a neural net (Zhou
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2021; Kassraie
& Krause, 2022). The three contextual bandit settings
mentioned above are increasingly more complex in the
following order: Linear → Kernel-based → Neural.

We consider the neural contextual bandit problem.
In contrast to the existing work which primarily
focuses on ReLU neural nets, we consider a general set of smooth activation functions. Under this
more general setting, (i) we derive non-asymptotic
error bounds on the difference between an overparameterized neural net and its corresponding
neural tangent kernel, (ii) we propose an algorithm with a provable sublinear regret bound that
is also efficient in the finite regime as demonstrated by empirical studies. The non-asymptotic
error bounds may be of broader interests as a tool
to establish the relation between the smoothness
of the activation functions in neural contextual
bandits and the smoothness of the kernels in kernel bandits.

Contextual bandits find application in recommender systems, information retrieval, healthcare and finance (see a
survey on applications in Bouneffouf & Rish (2019)). The
problem can also be seen as a middle step from classic
stochastic bandits (Auer et al., 2002) and (non-contextual)
linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) towards a reinforcement learning (RL) problem on a Markov decision
process (MDP), where the contexts resemble the states of
the MDP. One of the first formulations of linear contextual
bandits was referred to as associative RL with linear value
function (Auer, 2002). Nonetheless, contextual bandit is
different from RL in that the contexts are determined arbitrarily (adversarially) rather than following a stochastic
Markovian process.

1. Introduction
The stochastic contextual bandit has been extensively
studied in the literature (see, Langford & Zhang, 2007;
Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020, and references therein). In
this problem, at each discrete sequential step, a context
is revealed by the environment. Then, a bandit agent
chooses one of the K available actions. Choosing each
action yields a random reward, the distribution of which
is determined by the context. The problem was primarily
studied under a linear setting where the expected reward
of each arm is a linear function of the context (Chu et al.,
2011; Li et al., 2019b; Chen et al., 2021). It was later
extended to kernel-based models (Valko et al., 2013),
where the expected reward function associated with the

1.1. Existing Results on Neural Contextual Bandits
With neural nets demonstrating a great representation power
(much more general than linear models), there has been an
increasing interest in modeling bandit and RL problems
based on neural nets. This setting can be implemented using
the typical neural net toolboxes. The neural contextual
bandit has been considered in several works: (Zhou et al.,
2020) and (Zhang et al., 2021), respectively, adopted the
upper confidence bound (UCB) and Thompson sampling
(TS) algorithms to the neural bandit setting. The algorithms
are, respectively, referred to as NeuralUCB and NeuralTS.
(Gu et al., 2021) considered a batch observation setting,
where the reward function can be evaluated only on batches
of data. (Kassraie & Krause, 2022) provided analysis for
a variation of NeuralUCB algorithm with diminishing
instantaneous regret.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. This is a joint work with Sattar
Vakili at MediaTek Research, Cambridge, UK, and Qing Zhao at
Cornell University. Due to an error at the time of submission, their
names were not included in the authorship. The original preprint of
this work with full authorship can be found at http://arxiv.
org/abs/2206.00099. Correspondence to: Sudeep Salgia
<ss3827@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The analysis of neural bandits has been enabled through
1

