FedBR: Improving Federated Learning on Heterogeneous Data
via Local Learning Bias Reduction

Yongxin Guo 1 2 Xiaoying Tang 1 2 3 Tao Lin 4 5

Abstract

back to the server for integration. Clients are not required
to provide local raw data during this procedure, maintaining
their privacy. As the workhorse algorithm in FL, FedAvg
(McMahan et al., 2016) proposes local SGD to improve
communication efficiency. However, the considerable heterogeneity between local client datasets leads to inconsistent
local updates and hinders convergence.
Several studies propose variance reduction methods (Karimireddy et al., 2019; Das et al., 2020), or suggest regularizing
local updates towards global models (Li et al., 2018b; 2021)
to tackle this issue. Almost all these existing works directly
regularize models by utilizing the global model collected
from previous rounds to reduce the variance or minimize
the distance between global and local models (Li et al.,
2018b; 2021). However, it is hard to balance the trade-offs
between optimization and regularization to perform well,
and data heterogeneity remains an open question in the
community, as justified by the limited performance gain,
e.g. in our Table 1 and experiment results in some previous
works (Tang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021; Yoon et al., 2021a;
Chen & Chao, 2021; Luo et al., 2021).
Apart from the existing solutions, we revisit and reinterpret
the fundamental issues in federated deep learning, caused
by data heterogeneity and local updates. As our first
contribution, we identify three pitfalls of FL systematically
and in a unified view, termed local learning bias, from
the perspective of representation learning1 : 1) Biased local
classifiers are unable to effectively classify unseen data
(c.f. Figure 1(a)), due to the shifted decision boundaries
dominated by local class distributions; 2) Local features
(extracted by a local model) differ significantly from global
features (similarly extracted by a centralized global model),
even for the same input data (c.f. Figure 1(b)); and 3) Local
features, even for data from different classes, are too close to
each other to be accurately distinguished (c.f. Figure 1(b)).
To this end, we propose FedBR, a unified method that
leverages (1) a globally shared, label-distribution-agnostic
pseudo-data and (2) two key algorithmic components, to
simultaneously address the three difficulties outlined above.
The first component of FedBR alleviates the first difficulty
by forcing the output distribution of the pseudo-data to

Federated Learning (FL) is a way for machines to
learn from data that is kept locally, in order to protect the privacy of clients. This is typically done
using local SGD, which helps to improve communication efficiency. However, such a scheme is
currently constrained by slow and unstable convergence due to the variety of data on different
clients’ devices. In this work, we identify three
under-explored phenomena of biased local learning that may explain these challenges caused by
local updates in supervised FL. As a remedy, we
propose FedBR, a novel unified algorithm that
reduces the local learning bias on features and
classifiers to tackle these challenges. FedBR has
two components. The first component helps to
reduce bias in local classifiers by balancing the
output of the models. The second component
helps to learn local features that are similar to
global features, but different from those learned
from other data sources. We conducted several experiments to test FedBR and found that it consistently outperforms other SOTA FL methods. Both
of its components also individually show performance gains. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/lins-lab/fedbr.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging privacy-preserving
distributed machine learning paradigm. The model is transmitted to the clients by the server, and when the clients have
completed local training, the parameter updates are sent
1

School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518172, China. 2 The Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks
of Intelligence, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518172, China 4 Research Center for Industries
of the Future, Westlake University 5 School of Engineering, Westlake University. Correspondence to: Xiaoying Tang <tangxiaoying@cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Please refer to section 3 for more justifications about the
existence of our observations.

1

