The Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform Is Even Faster

Ora Nova Fandina * 1 Mikael Møller Høgsgaard * 1 Kasper Green Larsen * 1

Abstract

the points. The most fundamental result in dimensionality
reduction, is the Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984), which for any precision 0 <
ε < 1, gives a mapping f : X → Rk with k = O(ε−2 ln n)
such that

The Johnson-Lindenstaruss lemma (Johnson &
Lindenstrauss, 1984) is a cornerstone result in dimensionality reduction, stating it is possible to
embed a set of n points in d-dimensional Euclidean space into optimal k = O(ε−2 ln n) dimensions, while preserving all pairwise distances
to within a factor (1 ± ε).

∀x, y ∈ X : kf (x) − f (y)k2 ∈ (1 ± ε)kx − yk2 .

(1)

That is, the pairwise Euclidean distance between the embeddings of any two points x, y ∈ X is within a factor
(1 ± ε) of the original distance. The target dimensionality of k = O(ε−2 ln n) is known to be optimal (Larsen
& Nelson, 2017; Alon & Klartag, 2017). For algorithmic
applications where one can tolerate a small loss of precision, one can apply a Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform as
a preprocessing step to reduce the dimensionality of the input. Since the running time of most algorithms depend on
the dimensionality of the input, this typically speeds up the
analysis while also reducing memory consumption.

The seminal Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss
(Fast JL) transform by Ailon and Chazelle
(SICOMP’09) supports computing the embedding of a data point in O(d ln d + k ln2 n) time,
where the d ln d term comes from multiplication
with a d × d Hadamard matrix and the k ln2 n
term comes from multiplication with a sparse
k × d matrix. Despite the Fast JL transform
being more than a decade old, it is one of the
fastest dimensionality reduction techniques for
many tradeoffs between ε, d and n.

A simple construction of a mapping f satisfying Equation (1) is to let f (x) = k −1/2 Ax, where A is a random k × d matrix, having each entry i.i.d. N (0, 1) distributed (Indyk & Motwani, 1998). This results in an embedding time of O(kd) to compute the matrix-vector product Ax. For some applications, this embedding time may
dominate the running time of the algorithms applied to the
embedded data, hence dimensionality reducing maps with
a faster embedding time has been the focus of much research. The line of research on faster dimensionality reducing maps splits roughly into two categories: 1) maps
based on sparse matrices, and 2), maps based on structured
matrices with fast matrix-vector multiplication algorithms.

In this work, we give a surprising new analysis of the Fast JL transform, showing that
the k ln2 n term in the embedding time can
be improved to (k ln2 n)/α for an α =
Ω(min{ε−1 ln(1/ε), ln n}). The improvement
follows by using an even sparser matrix. We
complement our improved analysis with a lower
bound showing that our new analysis is in fact
tight.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction is a central technique for speeding up algorithms and reducing the memory footprint of
large data sets. The basic idea is to map a set X ⊂ Rd of n
high-dimensional points to a lower dimensional representation, while approximately preserving similarities between

Sparse JL. A sparse JL transform is obtained by replacing the dense matrix A above with a matrix having only t
non-zero entries per column. Computing the product Ax
now takes only O(td) time instead of O(kd). Perhaps even
more importantly, if the input vectors x ∈ X are themselves sparse vectors, then the embedding time is further
reduced to O(tkxk0 ), where kxk0 denotes the number of
non-zero entries in x. This is particularly useful when applying JL on e.g. bag-of-words, n-gram or tf-idf representations of text documents (Manning & Schütze, 1999),
which are often very sparse. The fastest (sparsest) known
construction, due to Kane and Nelson (Kane & Nelson,

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. Correspondence to:
Ora Nova Fandina <fandina@gmail.com>, Mikael Møller
Høgsgaard <hogsgaard@cs.au.dk>, Kasper Green Larsen
<larsen@cs.au.dk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

