BiRT: Bio-inspired Replay in Vision Transformers for Continual Learning

Kishaan Jeeveswaran 1 Prashant Bhat 1 2 Bahram Zonooz * 1 2 Elahe Arani * 1 2

Abstract
DyTox

The ability of deep neural networks to continually learn and adapt to a sequence of tasks has
remained challenging due to catastrophic forgetting of previously learned tasks. Humans, on the
other hand, have a remarkable ability to acquire,
assimilate, and transfer knowledge across tasks
throughout their lifetime without catastrophic forgetting. The versatility of the brain can be attributed to the rehearsal of abstract experiences
through a complementary learning system. However, representation rehearsal in vision transformers lacks diversity, resulting in overfitting and consequently, performance drops significantly compared to raw image rehearsal. Therefore, we propose BiRT, a novel representation rehearsal-based
continual learning approach using vision transformers. Specifically, we introduce constructive
noises at various stages of the vision transformer
and enforce consistency in predictions with respect to an exponential moving average of the
working model. Our method provides consistent
performance gain over raw image and vanilla representation rehearsal on several challenging CL
benchmarks, while being memory efficient and
robust to natural and adversarial corruptions. 1

BiRT
20 Tasks
10 Tasks

Trade-off

5 Tasks
0 10 20 30 40 50 60

PGD Attack

Nat Robustness
FWT

Figure 1. Overall performance of our proposed method, BiRT, vs.
DyTox trained continually on CIFAR-100 with 500 buffer size on
different metrics; Top-1 accuracy is reported for all metrics. Therefore, a CL method with full coverage of the octagon has all the
ideal features: highest accuracy (on varying task sequences), natural/adversarial robustness, forward transfer, and stability-plasticity
trade-off.

(DNNs) are inherently designed for training on stationary,
independent, and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. The
sequential nature of continual learning (CL) violates this
strong assumption, leading to catastrophic forgetting of
older tasks. Catastrophic forgetting often leads to a rapid decline in the performance of old tasks and, in the worst case,
the previously acquired information is completely overwritten by the new one (Parisi et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Computational systems operating in the real world are normally exposed to a sequence of multiple tasks with nonstationary data streams. Similar to biological organisms, it
is desirable for these artificial systems to be able to learn
on a continual basis to successfully act and adapt to new
scenarios in the real world. However, deep neural networks

Rehearsal-based approaches, which store and replay previous task samples, have been fairly successful in mitigating
catastrophic forgetting in CL. Recent evidence suggests that
replay might even be unavoidable in certain CL scenarios
(Farquhar and Gal, 2018). However, replaying raw pixels
from past experiences is not consistent with neurophysiological mechanisms in the brain (Kudithipudi et al., 2022;
Hayes et al., 2019). Furthermore, the replay of raw pixels
is memory inefficient and raises data privacy and security
concerns (Mai et al., 2022). Juxtaposing biological and
artificial experience rehearsal, representation rehearsal is a
lucrative alternative to address the problems associated with
raw image rehearsal in CL. Representation rehearsal, either
generative (van de Ven et al., 2020; Lao et al., 2020) or by

*
Equal contribution 1 Advanced Research Lab, NavInfo Europe,
Netherlands 2 Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands. Correspondence to:
<kishaan96@gmail.com>, <p.s.bhat@tue.nl, b.zonooz@tue.nl,
e.arani@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code available at github.com/NeurAI-Lab/BiRT.

1

