SE(3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation

Jason Yim * 1 Brian L. Trippe * 2 Valentin De Bortoli * 3 Emile Mathieu * 4 Arnaud Doucet 5 Regina Barzilay 1
Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract

neer proteins have required substantial domain knowledge
and laborious experimental testing. To this end, protein engineering has benefited from advancements in deep learning
by automating knowledge acquisition from data and improving efficiency in designing proteins (Ding et al., 2022).

The design of novel protein structures remains a
challenge in protein engineering for applications
across biomedicine and chemistry. In this line
of work, a diffusion model over rigid bodies in
3D (referred to as frames) has shown success in
generating novel, functional protein backbones
that have not been observed in nature. However,
there exists no principled methodological framework for diffusion on SE(3), the space of orientation preserving rigid motions in R3 , that operates
on frames and confers the group invariance. We
address these shortcomings by developing theoretical foundations of SE(3) invariant diffusion
models on multiple frames followed by a novel
framework, FrameDiff, for learning the SE(3)
equivariant score over multiple frames. We apply
FrameDiff on monomer backbone generation and
find it can generate designable monomers up to
500 amino acids without relying on a pretrained
protein structure prediction network that has been
integral to previous methods. We find our samples
are capable of generalizing beyond any known
protein structure. Code: https://github.
com/jasonkyuyim/se3_diffusion

Generating a novel protein satisfying specified structural or
functional properties is the task of de novo protein design
(Huang et al., 2016). In this work, we focus on generating protein backbones. A protein backbone consists of N
residues, each with four heavy atoms rigidly connected via
covalent bonds, N − Cα − C − O. Computationally designing
novel backbones is technically challenging due to the coupling of structure and sequence: atoms that comprise protein
structure must adhere to physical and chemical constraints
while being “designable” in the sense that there exists a
sequence of amino acids which folds to that structure. We
approach this problem with diffusion generative modeling
which has shown promise in recent work (see Sec. 6).
A main technical challenge is to combine expressive geometric deep learning methods that operate on protein structures
with diffusion generative modeling. Because the N − Cα − C
atoms for each residue may be described accurately as a
frame (Fig. 1A), many successful computational methods
for both protein structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021)
and design (Watson et al., 2022) represent backbone structures by an element of the Lie group SE(3)N . Moreover,
since the biochemical function of proteins is imparted by
the relative geometries of the atoms (and so is invariant to
rigid transformations) these methods typically utilize SE(3)
equivariant neural networks.1 While De Bortoli et al. (2022);
Huang et al. (2022) have extended diffusion modeling to
Riemannian manifolds (such as SE(3)), these works do not
readily provide tractable training procedures or accommodate inclusion of geometric invariances.

1. Introduction
The ability to engineer novel proteins holds promise in developing bio-therapeutics towards global health challenges
such as SARS-COV-2 (Arunachalam et al., 2021) and cancer
(Quijano-Rubio et al., 2020). Unfortunately, efforts to engi*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, USA 2 Department of Statistics, Columbia University,
New York, USA 3 Center for Sciences of Data, French National
Centre for Scientific Research, Paris, France 4 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
5
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jason Yim <jyim@csail.mit.edu>.

Modeling SE(3)N poses theoretical challenges and current
deep learning methods have outpaced theoretical foundations. Watson et al. (2022) demonstrated a diffusion model
(RFdiffusion) to generate novel protein-binders with high,
experimental-verified affinities, but relied on a heuristic denoising loss and required pretraining on protein structure

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
SE(3)N is the manifold of N frames while SE(3) equivariance refers to the equivariance on global rotations and translations.

1

