Efficient List-Decodable Regression using Batches

Abhimanyu Das 1 Ayush Jain 2 Weihao Kong 1 Rajat Sen 1

Abstract

a small number of corrupt samples in the data can cause
the least-squares estimator to fail catastrophically. Classical
robust estimators have been proposed in (Huber, 2011;
Rousseeuw, 1991) but they suffer from exponential
runtime. Recent works (Lai et al., 2016; Diakonikolas et al.,
2019a; 2017) have derived efficient algorithms for robust
mean estimation with provable guarantees even when a
small fraction of the data can be corrupt or adversarial.
These works have inspired the efficient algorithms for
robust regression (Prasad et al., 2018; Diakonikolas et al.,
2019b;c; Pensia et al., 2020) under the same corruption
model. (Cherapanamjeri et al., 2020a; Jambulapati et al.,
2021) have obtained robust regression algorithms with
near-optimal run time and sample complexity.

We demonstrate the use of batches in studying
list-decodable linear regression, in which only
α ∈ (0, 1] fraction of batches contain genuine
samples from a common distribution and the rest
can contain arbitrary or even adversarial samples.
When genuine batches have ≥ Ω̃(1/α) samples
each, our algorithm can efficiently find a small
list of potential regression parameters, with a
high probability that one of them is close to the
true parameter. This is the first polynomial time
algorithm for list-decodable linear regression, and
its sample complexity scales nearly linearly with
the dimension of the covariates. The polynomial
time algorithm is made possible by the batch
structure and may not be feasible without it, as
suggested by a recent Statistical Query lower
bound (Diakonikolas et al., 2021b).

In this paper, we are interested in the setting where a small
fraction α, potentially even less than half, of the data is
considered inlier, and the majority of the data may be
influenced by factors such as adversarial manipulation,
corruption, bias, or being drawn from a diverse distribution.
This setting also encompasses the problem of learning a
mixture of regressions (Jordan & Jacobs, 1994; Zhong
et al., 2016; Kong et al., 2020b; Pal et al., 2022) because
any solution of the former immediately yields a solution to
the latter by setting α to be the proportion of the data from
the smallest mixture component.

1. Introduction
Linear regression is one of the most fundamental tasks in
supervised learning with applications in various sciences
and industries (McDonald, 2009; Dielman, 2001). In the
standard linear regression setup, one is given m samples
(xi , yi ) such that yi = hw∗ , xi i + ni where ni is the observation noise with bounded variance and the covariates
xi ∈ Rd are drawn i.i.d from some fixed distribution. For
this setup, the commonly used
P least-squares estimator that
minimizes the square loss i (yi − hw, xi i)2 , provides a
good estimate of the unknown regression vector w∗ .

However, it is information-theoretically impossible to output
a single accurate estimate of regression parameter when
α < 1/2. Instead, it may be possible to generate a short
list of estimates such that at least one of them is accurate.
This relaxed notion of learning is known as list-decodable
learning and is useful since a learner can identify a single
accurate estimate from the list given a small number of
reliable samples.

In many applications, some samples are inadvertently or
maliciously corrupted, for example, due to mislabeling or
measurement errors, or data poisoning attacks. For instance,
such corruptions are commonplace in biology (Rosenberg
et al., 2002; Paschou et al., 2010) and machine learning
security (Barreno et al., 2010; Biggio et al., 2012). Even

For high dimensional mean estimation, Charikar et al.
(2017) derived the first polynomial time algorithm for list
decodable setting. List-decodable linear regression has
been studied in (Karmalkar et al., 2019; Raghavendra &
Yau, 2020) yielding algorithms with runtime and sample
complexity of O(dpoly(1/α) ). In contrast to list-decodable
mean estimation, recent work (Diakonikolas et al., 2021b)
has shown that a sub-exponential runtime and sample
complexity might be impossible for linear regression.
These prior results may lead to a pessimistic conclusion for

1

Google Research 2 UC San Diego. The majority of this work
was completed while Ayush Jain was an intern at Google Research.
Correspondence to: Ayush Jain <ayjain@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

