Structural Re-weighting Improves Graph Domain Adaptation

Shikun Liu 1 Tianchun Li 2 Yongbin Feng 3 Nhan Tran 3 Han Zhao 4 Qiu Qiang 2 Pan Li 1

Abstract
In many real-world applications, graph-structured
data used for training and testing have differences
in distribution, such as in high energy physics
(HEP) where simulation data used for training
may not match real experiments. Graph domain
adaptation (GDA) is a method used to address
these differences. However, current GDA primarily works by aligning the distributions of node representations output by a single graph neural network encoder shared across the training and testing domains, which may often yield sub-optimal
solutions. This work examines different impacts
of distribution shifts caused by either graph structure or node attributes and identifies a new type
of shift, named conditional structure shift (CSS),
which current GDA approaches are provably suboptimal to deal with. A novel approach, called
structural reweighting (StruRW), is proposed to
address this issue and is tested on synthetic graphs,
four benchmark datasets, and a new application in
HEP. StruRW has shown significant performance
improvement over the baselines in the settings
with large graph structure shifts, and reasonable
performance improvement when node attribute
shift dominates. 1

Figure 1: Examples of pileup events in two different PU levels:
PU30 (Left) and PU10 (Right). Charged particles can be labeled
as LC or OC, as highlighted by red or blue dots, while the labels
of neutral particles are often unknown. Graph methods are often
used here (Bertolini et al., 2014; Li et al., 2022c), where KNN
graphs can be built and one can leverage nearby particle features
and labels to make inference, highlighted by e.g. the two circles
in the figure. In either of the two circles, there are two 2 labeled
OC’s and 1 labeled LC, while the ground-truth label of the neutral
particle in the center may be different from each other.

spite their exceptional performance on benchmarks (Hu
et al., 2020a; 2021), GNNs have been found to struggle in
high-stakes real-world applications where there is a datadistribution shift between the training and test phases (Li
et al., 2022b; Hu et al., 2020b; Gaudelet et al., 2021).
This study is motivated by applications in high energy
physics (HEP) (Shlomi et al., 2020), where GNNs are often
trained on simulated data with an abundance of labels and
then applied to real experiments with limited labels (Nachman & Shimmin, 2019). However, real experiments have
complex, time-varying environments that may differ from
simulated setups. One such example is the change in pileup (PU) levels in Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiments (Highfield, 2008). PU level refers to the number of
collisions around the main collision of interest, which can
change over time and differ from the levels used to generate simulation data. Modeling the data using graphs, the
connection patterns between particles in different PU levels will significantly change, as depicted in Fig. 1. This
poses a major challenge for GNNs to distinguish particles
from the leading collision (class LC) from those from other
collisions (class OC), which is a crucial task in HEP data
analysis (Perloff et al., 2012; Li et al., 2022c). Similar shifts
also occur in social and biological networks, where the interaction patterns between nodes with different labels can
change over time (Wang et al., 2021a) or across different
species (Cho et al., 2016), as listed in Table 1.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently become the
de facto tool to learn the representations of graph-structured
data (Scarselli et al., 2008; Kipf & Welling, 2017). De1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Georgia, U.S.A 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
U.S.A 3 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, U.S.A
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign, Champaign, U.S.A. Correspondence to: Shikun Liu
<shikun.liu@gatech.edu>, Pan Li <panli@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at: https://github.com/
Graph-COM/StruRW

1

