Fast Combinatorial Algorithms for Min Max Correlation Clustering

Sami Davies * 1 Benjamin Moseley * 2 Heather Newman * 3

Abstract

The goal in correlation clustering is to find a partition of
the vertices into clusters (the number of which is not specified) that minimizes an objective capturing the edges’ disagreements. The most widely considered objective is to
minimize the ℓp -norm of the disagreements over the vertices. Here, each vertex u has some number, y(u), of
disagreements
adjacent to it and the goal is to minimize
p
P
p
p
u∈V y(u) . The most well-studied objective is when
p = 1, which minimizes the total number of disagreements;
the Pivot algorithm is a popular, combinatorial algorithm
in this setting (Ailon et al., 2008). The case where p = ∞
minimizes the maximum number of disagreements at any
vertex, which captures a nice notion of fairness in the clustering.

We introduce fast algorithms for correlation clustering with respect to the Min Max objective that
provide constant factor approximations on complete graphs. Our algorithms are the first purely
combinatorial approximation algorithms for this
problem. We construct a novel semi-metric on
the set of vertices, which we call the correlation
metric, that indicates to our clustering algorithms
whether pairs of nodes should be in the same
cluster. The paper demonstrates empirically that,
compared to prior work, our algorithms sacrifice
little in the objective quality to obtain significantly better run-time. Moreover, our algorithms
scale to larger networks that are effectively intractable for known algorithms.

Our results focus on the ℓ∞ -norm objective, which we
will refer to as the Min Max objective1 . Min Max correlation clustering was first motivated by applications in
community detection that are antagonist free, i.e., there are
no members that are largely inconsistent in their community (Puleo & Milenkovic, 2016). Such problems arise in
recommender systems, bioinformatics, and social sciences
(Cheng & Church, 2000; Kriegel et al., 2009; Symeonidis
et al., 2008; Puleo & Milenkovic, 2016).

1. Introduction
In correlation clustering, a graph G = (V, E) is given as input, where each edge is labeled either positive (+) or negative (−). If two vertices are connected by a positive edge,
this indicates they are similar and want to being clustered
together. Alternatively, a negative edge indicates vertices
that are dissimilar and want to be in different clusters. We
make the common assumption that G is complete; that is,
there is a labelled edge between each pair of vertices.

Milenkovic and Puleo (2016) initiated the study of Min
Max correlation clustering, as well as other ℓp -norms. For
all p ≥ 1, they give a 48-approximation. Charikar, Gupta,
and Schwartz (2017) improved this to a 7-approximation,
and Kalhan, Makarychev, and Zhou (2019) further improved this to the best known approximation2 of 5.
Milenkovic and Puleo (2016) observed that Pivot fails for
the ℓ∞ norm, even though it gives a 3-approximation in
expectation for the ℓ1 norm.

An edge is in disagreement with respect to a clustering if it
is a negative edge and connects two vertices contained inside the same cluster, or if it is a positive edge and connects
two vertices in different clusters. Note that among three
or more vertices, the positive and negative labels may be
such that any clustering has some edges in disagreement,
e.g. three vertices where the three labels between them are
two positives and one negative.

Previous algorithms on Min Max correlation clustering
rounded SDP or LP solutions (Puleo & Milenkovic, 2016;
Charikar et al., 2017; Ahmadi et al., 2019; Kalhan et al.,
2019). The relaxations are large, requiring at least |V |3
constraints and |V |2 variables. Thus solving them is not
practical on even modest sized graphs (e.g. 300-500 vertices). The question looms: does there exist a fast algorithm
for Min Max correlation clustering with strong theoretical
guarantees? Moreover, an intriguing direction both towards

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Northwestern University, Evanston IL, USA 2 Tepper School
of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA. Correspondence to: Heather Newman
<hanewman@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
2

1

Other names for this are the minimax or ℓ∞ objective.
Note all of these results are still only for complete graphs.

