Learning Regions of Interest for Bayesian Optimization
with Adaptive Level-Set Estimation

Fengxue Zhang 1 Jialin Song 2 James Bowden 3 Alexander Ladd 4
Yisong Yue 3 Thomas A. Desautels 4 Yuxin Chen 1

Abstract

The common practice in BO is to employ Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) as a statistic
surrogate model for the unknown objective function due to
its mathematical simplicity as well as the promising capability in terms of learning and inference, which allows for
defining effective acquisition functions.

We study Bayesian optimization (BO) in highdimensional and non-stationary scenarios. Existing algorithms for such scenarios typically require
extensive hyperparameter tuning, which limits
their practical effectiveness. We propose a framework, called BALLET, which adaptively filters
for a high-confidence region of interest (ROI) as
a superlevel-set of a nonparametric probabilistic
model such as a Gaussian process (GP). Our approach is easy to tune, and is able to focus on
local region of the optimization space that can be
tackled by existing BO methods. The key idea is
to use two probabilistic models: a coarse GP to
identify the ROI, and a localized GP for optimization within the ROI. We show theoretically that
BALLET can efficiently shrink the search space,
and can exhibit a tighter regret bound than standard BO without ROI filtering. We demonstrate
empirically the effectiveness of BALLET on both
synthetic and real-world optimization tasks.

Despite strong empirical and theoretical results under certain
assumptions (e.g., smoothness) (Srinivas et al., 2009; Wang
& Jegelka, 2017; Wang et al., 2016b), BO has struggled
in many real-world settings due to the high-dimensional,
large-scale, and heterogeneous nature of optimization tasks.
Besides the well-known curse of dimensionality (Bengio
et al., 2005), the heterogeneity and scarcity of training data
in real-world tasks make it challenging to fit a single (global)
GP for data acquisition (Eriksson et al., 2019). Meanwhile,
purely relying on local characteristics has been proven to be
ineffective for global optimization, due to the ignorance of
the correlations on observations that are normally captured
by the GP. The trade-off between exploiting data locality
and exploring uncertainty at a global scale emerges as a
critical problem in real-world BO settings, especially when
the global smoothness assumption no longer holds.
Historically, various partitioning-based BO methods have
been proposed to tackle this challenge. These methods, often based on certain clustering heuristics, learn the regions of
interest (ROI) to better reflect the data locality. A common
issue for existing heuristics is the added layer of complexity
for model fine-tuning, which involves optimizing extra hyperparameters such as the number of ROIs (Eriksson et al.,
2019), maximum leaf size in the tree-structured partitioning
methods, and methods to generalize the partition learned
on the accumulated observations to the whole search space
(Munos, 2014).

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular statistic-modelbased sequential optimization method in various fields of
science and engineering, including scientific experimental
design (Yang et al., 2019), robotics planning (Berkenkamp
et al., 2016; Sui et al., 2018), self-tuning systems (Zhang
et al., 2022) and hyperparameter optimization (Snoek et al.,
2012). These applications often involve optimizing a
black-box function that is expensive to evaluate, where the
statistics-guided efficient optimization algorithm is desired.

We propose a novel nonparametric approach for partitioningbased BO that demonstrates strong empirical performance
in real-world tasks, while having few hyperparameters to
maintain. The proposed algorithm is inspired by the levelset estimation (LSE) problem, where a level-set corresponds
to a set of points for which the black-box objective function
takes value above (or below) some given threshold. Given a
threshold, Gotovos et al. (2013) show that one can leverage

1

Departmet of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Illinois, U.S. 2 Nvidia, California, U.S. 3 California Institute of
Technology, California, U.S. 4 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, California, U.S.. Correspondence to: Yuxin Chen
<chenyuxin@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

