Live in the Moment: Learning Dynamics Model Adapted to Evolving Policy

Xiyao Wang 1 Wichayaporn Wongkamjan 1 Ruonan Jia 2 Furong Huang 1

Abstract

Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al.,
2018; Hu et al., 2021) have shown promising performance.
However, model-free methods can be impractical for realworld scenarios (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021) since massive
samples from the real environment are required for policy
training, resulting in low sample efficiency.

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) often
achieves higher sample efficiency in practice than
model-free RL by learning a dynamics model to
generate samples for policy learning. Previous
works learn a dynamics model that fits under the
empirical state-action visitation distribution for all
historical policies, i.e., the sample replay buffer.
However, in this paper, we observe that fitting the
dynamics model under the distribution for all historical policies does not necessarily benefit model
prediction for the current policy since the policy
in use is constantly evolving over time. The evolving policy during training will cause state-action
visitation distribution shifts. We theoretically analyze how this distribution shift over historical
policies affects the model learning and model rollouts. We then propose a novel dynamics model
learning method, named Policy-adapted Dynamics Model Learning (PDML). PDML dynamically
adjusts the historical policy mixture distribution
to ensure the learned model can continually adapt
to the state-action visitation distribution of the
evolving policy. Experiments on a range of continuous control environments in MuJoCo show that
PDML achieves significant improvement in sample efficiency and higher asymptotic performance
combined with the state-of-the-art model-based
RL methods.

Model-based RL is considered one of the solutions to improve sample efficiency. Most of the model-based RL algorithms first use supervised learning techniques to learn
a dynamics model based on the samples obtained from the
real environment, and then use this learned dynamics model
to generate massive samples to derive a policy (Luo et al.,
2018; Janner et al., 2019). Therefore, it is crucial to learn
a dynamics model which can accurately simulate the underlying transition dynamics of the real environment since
the policy is trained based on the model-generated samples. If the learned dynamics has a high prediction error,
the model-generated samples will be biased, and the policy
induced by these samples will be sub-optimal. To reduce
the model prediction error and learn an accurate dynamics
model, some advanced architectures such as model ensemble (Kurutach et al., 2018; Chua et al., 2018) and multi-step
model (Asadi et al., 2019) have been proposed to improve
the multi-step prediction accuracy of the learned dynamics
model. Besides, the idea of a generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is used to design the
training process of a dynamics model (Shen et al., 2020;
Eysenbach et al., 2021) to reduce the distribution mismatch
between model-generated samples and real samples. Those
previous works mentioned above aim to learn a dynamics
model that can fit all historical policies. To be precise, when
training the dynamics model, they randomly select the training data from the real samples obtained by all historical
policies in the replay buffer. This learned dynamics model
needs to adapt to the state-action visitation distribution of all
historical policies to obtain a dynamics model that predicts
transitions accurately under different policies.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great successes of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in many complex decision-making
tasks, such as robotics (Polydoros & Nalpantidis, 2017;
Yang et al., 2022) and chess games (Silver et al., 2016;
Schrittwieser et al., 2020). Among RL methods, a wide
range of works in model-free RL (Schulman et al., 2015;

However, since we only use the current newest policy to interact with the learned model to generate samples for policy
learning during model rollouts, learning such a dynamics
model that fits under (highly likely sub-optimal) historical policies may be unnecessary. Due to the state-action
visitation distribution shift during policy updating, the stateaction pairs visited by historical policies may not appear

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20742, USA 2 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Xiyao Wang <xywang@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

