MANSA: Learning Fast and Slow in Multi-Agent Systems

David Mguni 1 Haojun Chen 2 Taher Jafferjee 1 Jianhong Wang 3 Longfei Yue 2 Xidong Feng 1 4
Stephen McAleer 5 Feifei Tong 1 Jun Wang 1 4 Yaodong Yang† 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has emerged
as a powerful framework that enables autonomous agents to
complete various tasks in areas such as autonomous driving
(Zhou et al., 2021), swarm robotics (Mguni et al., 2018;
2019) and smart grids (Wang et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2021;
2022). Among MARL methods are a class of algorithms
known as independent learners (IL) e.g. independent Q
learning (Tan, 1993). IL decomposes a MARL problem
with N agents into N decentralised single-agent problems.
In this way, each agent treats other agents as part of the environment which provides a straightforward way of training
agents in a decentralised manner. Since the agents ignore
other agents, IL can be trained quickly as each agent’s learning process is contingent on only its local observations and
own actions. This is efficient in scenarios that require only
weak interactions between agents (Kok & Vlassis, 2004).

In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
independent learning (IL) often shows remarkable performance and easily scales with the number of agents. Yet, using IL can be inefficient
and runs the risk of failing to successfully train,
particularly in scenarios that require agents to
coordinate their actions. Using centralised learning (CL) enables MARL agents to quickly learn
how to coordinate their behaviour but employing
CL everywhere is often prohibitively expensive
in real-world applications. Besides, using CL in
value-based methods often needs strong representational constraints (e.g. individual-global-max
condition) that can lead to poor performance if violated. In this paper, we introduce a novel plug &
play IL framework named Multi-Agent Network
Selection Algorithm (MANSA) which selectively
employs CL only at states that require coordination. At its core, MANSA has an additional agent
that uses switching controls to quickly learn the
best states to activate CL during training, using
CL only where necessary and vastly reducing the
computational burden of CL. Our theory proves
MANSA preserves cooperative MARL convergence properties, boosts IL performance and can
optimally make use of a fixed budget on the number CL calls. We show empirically in Level-based
Foraging (LBF) and StarCraft Multi-agent Challenge (SMAC) that MANSA achieves fast, superior and more reliable performance while making
40% fewer CL calls in SMAC and using CL at
only 1% CL calls in LBF.

Despite these apparent benefits, training MARL using IL has
several formidable drawbacks: with no ability to observe the
actions of other agents, random occurrences of successful
coordination among IL agents are improbable, causing IL
methods to sometimes struggle in tasks that require coordination (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2017). Also, ignoring other
agents’ influence on the system means from the agent’s perspective, the environment can appear non-stationary which
precludes convergence guarantees (Yang & Wang, 2020).
On the other hand, MARL learners can be trained in simulated environments in which agents can be provided with
other agents’ observations and other state information. Centralised training and decentralised execution (CT-DE) (Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016; Foerster et al., 2018; McAleer et al.,
2022) is a framework that uses a centralised critic that exploits global information during training while performing
execution in a decentralised fashion. With this added information during training, agents can learn to condition their
policies on other agents’ actions which mitigates the appearance of non-stationarity. The CT-DE framework has become
a central MARL paradigm and is the basis of popular methods such as QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), SPOT-AC (Mguni
et al., 2021) and COMA (Foerster et al., 2018). Various
studies have conjectured that CT-DE can speed up training
by fostering cooperative behaviour and stabilising training.

1
Huawei R&D 2 Institute for AI, Peking University 3 University
of Manchester 4 University College, London 5 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: <davidmguni@hotmail.com>,
<j.wang@ucl.ac.uk>, <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

