Statistical Inference on Multi-armed Bandits with Delayed Feedback

Lei Shi 1 Jingshen Wang 1 Tianhao Wu 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and contribution
In recent years, multi armed bandit (MAB) algorithms have
been frequently used to complement A/B tests and clinical trials in practice, potentially because MAB algorithms
not only aim to identify the best policies but also improve
the overall outcomes for participants enrolled in the experiments. Whenever participant outcomes (or feedback) are not
immediately observed, an increasing number of recent advancements further expand the practicality of classical MAB
algorithms by incorporating such random delays. While carrying out MAB algorithms in real world scenarios can be
time consuming and labor intensive, there is an increased
desire to be able to use those adaptively collected data from
MAB algorithms to assist future decision making by answering the following cause and effect questions: Does one
content recommendation plan lead to more revenue than
others in e-commerce for consumers who are not enrolled
in the experiment? Does one medical treatment plan cause
better clinical outcomes than other plans in clinical trials?

Multi armed bandit (MAB) algorithms have been
increasingly used to complement or integrate with
A/B tests and randomized clinical trials in ecommerce, healthcare, and policymaking. Recent developments incorporate possible delayed
feedback. While existing MAB literature often focuses on maximizing the expected cumulative reward outcomes (or, equivalently, regret minimization), few efforts have been devoted to establish
valid statistical inference approaches to quantify
the uncertainty of learned policies. We attempt to
fill this gap by providing a unified statistical inference framework for policy evaluation where a
target policy is allowed to differ from the data collecting policy, and our framework allows delay to
be associated with the treatment arms. We present
an adaptively weighted estimator that on one hand
incorporates the arm-dependent delaying mechanism to achieve consistency, and on the other
hand mitigates the variance inflation across stages
due to vanishing sampling probability. In particular, our estimator does not critically depend on
the ability to estimate the unknown delay mechanism. Under appropriate conditions, we prove
that our estimator converges to a normal distribution as the number of time points goes to infinity,
which provides guarantees for large-sample statistical inference. We illustrate the finite-sample performance of our approach through Monte Carlo
experiments.

To answer the above questions, following the NeymanRubin causal model (Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 1974), we shall
first formalize the causal parameters of interest and establish
nonparametric identification results with arm-dependent delayed feedback (Section 2), meaning that the unobserved
causal effect can be written as a function of the observed
data. We then build a unified statistical inference framework allowing us to construct consistent point estimates and
valid confidence intervals on the causal parameters in the
presence of delayed outcomes when the number of time
point goes to infinity (Section 3). This inference framework thus enables us to answers those raised questions with
rigorous statistical guarantees. In what follows, we briefly
summarize our contributions:
From a methodological standpoint, on the one hand, we
propose a consistent causal effect estimator that converges
to a normal distribution under a wide range of unknown
delay mechanisms without estimating the arm-delay joint
density (Theorem 4.1). As a result, the proposed estimator
avoids estimating the delay mechanisms and can be more
reliable compared to estimators using estimated arm-delay
joint densities with noisy nonparametric approaches. On the
other hand, our framework alleviates a well-known tension

1
Division of Biostatistics, University of California, Berkeley,
USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence
to: Lei Shi <leishi@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

