Overcoming Simplicity Bias in Deep Networks using a Feature Sieve

Rishabh Tiwari 1 Pradeep Shenoy 1

Abstract
Simplicity bias is the concerning tendency of deep
networks to over-depend on simple, weakly predictive features, to the exclusion of stronger, more
complex features. This is exacerbated in realworld applications by limited training data and
spurious feature-label correlations, leading to biased, incorrect predictions. We propose a direct,
interventional method for addressing simplicity
bias in DNNs, which we call the feature sieve. We
aim to automatically identify and suppress easilycomputable spurious features in lower layers of
the network, thereby allowing the higher network
levels to extract and utilize richer, more meaningful representations. We provide concrete evidence
of this differential suppression & enhancement of
relevant features on both controlled datasets and
real-world images, and report substantial gains on
many real-world debiasing benchmarks (11.4%
relative gain on Imagenet-A; 3.2% on BAR, etc).
Crucially, we do not depend on prior knowledge
of spurious attributes or features, and in fact outperform many baselines that explicitly incorporate such information. We believe that our feature
sieve work opens up exciting new research directions in automated adversarial feature extraction
and representation learning for deep networks.

Figure 1. Simplicity bias and spurious features. a) DNNs focus on
color to the exclusion of shape when both are predictive. b) Image
misclassified as elephant due to overdependence on texture features
(adapted from (Geirhos et al., 2018)). c) Classifiers mislabel blondhaired male faces as female.

that independently manipulate feature complexity and predictive power. Such learning biases have significant realworld consequences too, resulting for instance in biased
decision-making in AI-assisted workflows for face recognition, healthcare, credit rating, etc. Figure 1 illustrates
the idea behind simplicity bias, and some real-world consequences. As a result, much recent work aims to debias
neural network models via a variety of approaches to achieve
more equitable outcomes (Mehrabi et al., 2021; Zafar et al.,
2017; Dwork et al., 2012; Russell et al., 2017).

1. Introduction

Previous approaches towards debiasing DNNs include
data manipulation via augmentation & adversarial training (Duboudin et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2022), data reweighting (Nam et al., 2020), multiple training environments (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022), robust learning (Pezeshki et al., 2021), and fairness objectives (Li et al.,
2022). Other researchers have proposed diversity-enhanced
ensembles (Kim et al., 2022; Teney et al., 2022; Niu et al.,
2022) and architecture optimization (Bai et al., 2021b).

Deep networks are known to be vulnerable to a number of failure modes; in particular, simplicity bias is the
tendency of DNNs to prioritize weak predictive features
over stronger, more difficult-to-extract features (Shah et al.,
2020). This bias has been studied analytically (Pezeshki
et al., 2021) as well as empirically using natural images
(texture bias (Geirhos et al., 2018)) and carefully controlled synthetic datasets (Hermann & Lampinen, 2020)
1
Google Research India. Correspondence to: Pradeep Shenoy
<shenoypradeep@google.com>.

We propose a novel, direct approach towards addressing
simplicity bias in neural networks: an adversarial learning
challenge that forces the network to learn sophisticated feature representations. We refer to this learning challenge as a
feature sieve, and enforce it through the use of an auxiliary

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

