Off-Policy Average Reward Actor-Critic with
Deterministic Policy Search

Naman Saxena 1 Subhojyoti Khastagir 1 Shishir Kolathaya 1 2 Shalabh Bhatnagar 1

Abstract

ment in the context of RL in continuous state-action spaces
has considered the discounted reward criterion (Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al.,
2018). However, there are very few works which focus on
the average reward performance criterion in the continuous
state-action setting (Zhang & Ross, 2021; Ma et al., 2021).

The average reward criterion is relatively less studied as most existing works in the Reinforcement
Learning literature consider the discounted reward
criterion. There are few recent works that present
on-policy average reward actor-critic algorithms,
but average reward off-policy actor-critic is relatively less explored. In this work, we present
both on-policy and off-policy deterministic policy
gradient theorems for the average reward performance criterion. Using these theorems, we also
present an Average Reward Off-Policy Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (ARO-DDPG) Algorithm. We first show asymptotic convergence analysis using the ODE-based method. Subsequently,
we provide a finite time analysis of the resulting
stochastic approximation scheme with linear function approximator and obtain an ϵ-optimal stationary policy with a sample complexity of Ω(ϵ−2.5 ).
We compare the average reward performance of
our proposed ARO-DDPG algorithm and observe
better empirical performance compared to stateof-the-art on-policy average reward actor-critic
algorithms over MuJoCo-based environments.

The average reward criterion has started receiving attention
in recent times and there are papers that discuss the benefits
of using this criterion over the discounted reward (Dewanto
& Gallagher, 2021; Naik et al., 2019). One of the reasons being, average reward criteria only considers recurrent
states and it happens to be the most selective optimization
criterion in recurrent Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
according to n-discount optimality criterion. Please refer
Mahadevan (1996) for more details on n-discount optimality
criterion. Further, optimization in average reward setting
is not dependent on the initial state distribution. Moreover,
the discrepancy between the objective function and the evaluation metric, that exists for discounted reward setting, is
resolved by opting for the average reward criterion. We
encourage the readers to go through Dewanto & Gallagher
(2021); Naik et al. (2019) for better understanding of the
benefits mentioned.
There are very few algorithms in literature that optimize
the average reward and all of them happen to be on-policy
algorithms (Zhang & Ross, 2021; Ma et al., 2021). It has
been demonstrated several times that on-policy algorithms
are less sample efficient than off-policy algorithms (Lillicrap
et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018) for
the discounted reward criterion. In this paper we try to find
whether the same is true for the average reward criterion.
We try to overcome the research gap in development of
off-policy average reward algorithms for continuous state
and action spaces by proposing an Average Reward OffPolicy Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (ARO-DDPG)
Algorithm.

1. Introduction
The reinforcement learning (RL) paradigm has shown significant promise for finding solutions to decision making
problems that rely on a reward-based feedback from the environment. Here one is mostly concerned with the long-term
reward acquired by the algorithm. In the case of infinite horizon problems, the discounted reward criterion has largely
been studied because of its simplicity. Major recent develop1

Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India 2 Robert Bosch Centre
for Cyber-Physical Systems, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. Correspondence to: Naman Saxena <namansaxena@iisc.ac.in>.

Average reward algorithms suffers from few challenges.
The policy evaluation step in the case of the average reward
algorithm is equivalent to finding the solution to the Poisson
equation (i.e., the Bellman equation for a given policy).
Poisson equation, because of its form, does not admit a
unique solution but only solutions that are unique up to a

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

