Improving Visual Prompt Tuning for Self-supervised Vision Transformers

Seungryong Yoo 1 Eunji Kim 1 Dahuin Jung 1 Jungbeom Lee 1 Sungroh Yoon 1 2

Abstract
Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) is an effective tuning
method for adapting pretrained Vision Transformers (ViTs) to downstream tasks. It leverages extra
learnable tokens, known as prompts, which steer
the frozen pretrained ViTs. Although VPT has
demonstrated its applicability with supervised vision transformers, it often underperforms with
self-supervised ones. Through empirical observations, we deduce that the effectiveness of VPT
hinges largely on the ViT blocks with which the
prompt tokens interact. Specifically, VPT shows
improved performance on image classification
tasks for MAE and MoCo v3 when the prompt
tokens are inserted into later blocks rather than
the first block. These observations suggest that
there exists an optimal location of blocks for the
insertion of prompt tokens. Unfortunately, identifying the optimal blocks for prompts within each
self-supervised ViT for diverse future scenarios
is a costly process. To mitigate this problem, we
propose a simple yet effective method that learns
a gate for each ViT block to adjust its intervention
into the prompt tokens. With our method, prompt
tokens are selectively influenced by blocks that
require steering for task adaptation. Our method
outperforms VPT variants in FGVC and VTAB
image classification and ADE20K semantic segmentation. The code is available at https://github.
com/ryongithub/GatedPromptTuning.

Figure 1. Classification accuracy on the CUB and KITTI datasets
with a varying location where prompt tokens are inserted in the
pretrained ViT-B/16. MAE and MoCo v3 significantly improve
their performances when prompt tokens are affected by the blocks
after the 11th and 8th blocks, respectively. The block index denotes
the initial insertion point of the prompt tokens.

train the neural networks without biasing them toward labels
containing very specific information about the corresponding tasks (Zhao et al., 2020). As a result, self-supervised
models demonstrate superior scalability across various vision tasks compared to supervised ones (Chen et al., 2020;
He et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; He et al., 2022; Caron
et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2021). However, the efficacy of selfsupervised models hinges on the chosen transfer learning
strategy. For instance, a large performance gap exists between full fine-tuning and linear probing when employed as
a transfer method for the Masked Autoencoder (MAE) (He
et al., 2022). The performance of SSL ViTs can vary significantly based on the transfer method, underscoring the
importance of research into transfer strategies for SSL ViTs.

1. Introduction
Currently, self-supervised learning (SSL) with Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Bao et al., 2021; He et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2021; Caron et al., 2021) have exhibited remarkable results
across diverse visual recognition tasks such as classification and semantic segmentation. SSL approaches strive to

Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) (Jia et al., 2022) is an effective prompt-based transfer learning technique, drawing its
concept from previous work in the field of natural language
processing (NLP) (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021). In
detail, VPT prepends learnable prompt tokens to the input
sequences, which then act as task-specific instructions by
steering the information from the fixed pretrained encoder.
VPT, when used with supervised ViT backbones, has shown
outstanding performance on numerous downstream tasks.

1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea. Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

