Straightening Out the Straight-Through Estimator:
Overcoming Optimization Challenges in Vector Quantized Networks

Minyoung Huh 1 Brian Cheung 1 2 Pulkit Agrawal 1 Phillip Isola 1
Initial distribution

Abstract

Post distribution shift
Distribution shift

This work examines the challenges of training
neural networks using vector quantization using
straight-through estimation. We find that a primary cause of training instability is the discrepancy between the model embedding and the codevector distribution. We identify the factors that
contribute to this issue, including the codebook
gradient sparsity and the asymmetric nature of the
commitment loss, which leads to misaligned codevector assignments. We propose to address this
issue via affine re-parameterization of the code
vectors. Additionally, we introduce an alternating
optimization to reduce the gradient error introduced by the straight-through estimation. Moreover, we propose an improvement to the commitment loss to ensure better alignment between
the codebook representation and the model embedding. These optimization methods improve
the mathematical approximation of the straightthrough estimation and, ultimately, the model performance. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our methods on several common model architectures, such as AlexNet, ResNet, and ViT, across
various tasks, including image classification and
generative modeling.

(t)

(t)

Pz

Pz
(t)

(t+1)

Pz

(t)

Cz = Qz

(t+1)

Cz

(t+1)

Qz

Figure 1: Illustration of internal codebook covariate shift:
During training, the embedding distribution Pz drifts from initialization. When the model undergoes a distributional shift, the
codebook Cz (blue) is misaligned with Pz . The code-vectors that
have assignments are denoted with Qz (red) and initialized to overlap with Cz . With training, Qz diverge and are misaligned with
Pz . Code-vectors without assignment do not receive gradients and
are no longer trained, which leads to bifurcation in the codebook
distribution and ultimately leads to index collapse.

name a few, VQs have shown impressive results on image
generation (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2021;
Esser et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2023), image representation
learning (Caron et al., 2020), speech generation (Dhariwal
et al., 2020), speech representation learning (Chung et al.,
2020), and even decision-making (Ozair et al., 2021). While
powerful, vector-quantized networks (VQNs) are notoriously difficult to optimize and require esoteric knowledge
to efficiently train them. Hence, constructing algorithms to
improve training stability has been a topic of great interest.

Project page: minyoungg.github.io/vqtorch

First introduced in context of generative models (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017), the vector-quantization layer in
VQNs maps the continuous embedding (or feature representation) Pz into a discrete embedding Qz using the codebook Cz . As the discretization function is not continuously
differentiable, a widely used technique to optimize VQNs
is via straight-through estimation. This bypasses the nondifferentiable discretization function (Bengio et al., 2013),
allowing it to be optimizable by standard deep learning libraries (Paszke et al., 2019). Of course, straight-through
estimating a selection function has negative ramifications on
training. Among many training challenges, the most welldocumented is model collapse or“index collapse” wherein
only a small fraction of codes are used during training.
While the root cause of the collapse is not well understood, there have been abundant efforts to mitigate index

1. Introduction and related works
Vector-quantization (Gray, 1984) enables deep neural networks to learn discrete representations by quantizing features into clusters referred to as “code-vectors” or “codes”.
Vector-Quantization (VQ) is a parametric online K-means
algorithm (Caron et al., 2018) that has an explicit bias for
compression and competition, which serves as a good prior
for learning disentangled features for downstream tasks. To
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL 2 MIT BCS. Correspondence
to: Minyoung Huh <minhuh@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

