N EURAL S LICE: Neural 3D Triangle Mesh Reconstruction
via Slicing 4D Tetrahedral Meshes

Chenbo Jiang 1 2 Jie Yang 1 Shwai He 3 Yu-Kun Lai 4 Lin Gao 1 5

Abstract

than the implicit approaches, and better preserves
thin structures. N EURAL S LICE has the capability of representing various shapes and topologies
using a single 4D tetrahedral mesh. The corresponding code can be found on GitHub at https:
//github.com/IGLICT/NEURALSLICE.

Learning-based high-fidelity reconstruction of 3D
shapes with varying topology is a fundamental problem in computer vision and computer
graphics. Recent advances in learning 3D shapes
using explicit and implicit representations have
achieved impressive results in 3D modeling. However, the template-based explicit representation
is limited by fixed topology, and the implicit
representation, although flexible with arbitrary
topology, requires a large number of sampled
points to regress the surface, which is computationally expensive. In this work, we propose a
novel 3D shape representation named N EURAL S LICE, which represents a 3D shape as the intersection of a 4D tetrahedral mesh and a 4D hyperplane. A novel network is designed to incorporate the proposed representation flexibly, which
learns a deformable 4D template and a parameter for slicing 4D hyperplane to reconstruct the
3D object. To learn the local deformation of
the 4D template, we further propose a spatialaware network to locate the 4D points within
the 3D feature volume of input shape via positional encoding, which leverages the local geometrical feature to guide the 4D deformation. By
addressing the 3D problem in a higher 4D space,
our method supports flexible topology changes
while being highly efficient. Our method is guaranteed to produce manifold meshes. N EURAL S LICE outperforms the state-of-the-art explicitbased approaches in terms of reconstruction quality. Compared with implicit approaches, by avoiding point sampling, our method is 10 times faster

1. Introduction
Learning-based high-fidelity reconstruction of 3D shapes
is a fundamental task for many applications in computer
vision and graphics, e.g., 3D scene modeling, virtual/augmented reality, architecture, gaming, film, etc. To cope with
rich 3D shapes in the real world, 3D shape reconstruction
methods should ideally be able to represent and recover
detailed surface geometry and diverse topologies. The topology describes the intrinsic properties of shapes (Berger &
Gostiaux, 2012; Lee, 2010). However, it is non-trivial to efficiently reconstruct meshes with correct, flexible topology,
while recovering fine geometry details.
Shape reconstruction methods are inherently related to the
underlying geometry representations. Existing methods
can be broadly categorized as implicit and explicit approaches. However, neither explicit representations (e.g.,
voxels (Wu et al., 2015; 2016; Choy et al., 2016), point
clouds (Fan et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017; Prokudin et al.,
2019), meshes (Groueix et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Bednarik et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2020b; Low & Lee, 2022))
nor implicit representations (e.g., signed distance functions
(SDF) (Park et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019; Mescheder
et al., 2019), unsigned distance functions (UDF) (Guillard
et al., 2022; Chibane et al., 2020)) can satisfy the above
two important properties simultaneously in an efficient fashion. For explicit representations, voxel-based methods have
struggled between efficient computation/storage and highresolution surfaces, and point clouds are free of structure,
which are ambiguous for complex shape and structures. On
the contrary, a 3D mesh is capable of representing a 3D surface efficiently and compactly with a collection of vertices,
edges and faces, but the predefined edges and faces limit its
representation capability of flexible topology change since
it is homeomorphic to the explicit template. On the other

1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive
Device, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology Zijin
College 3 University of Maryland, College Park 4 Cardiff University
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to:
Lin Gao <gaolin@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

