DRew: Dynamically Rewired Message Passing with Delay

Benjamin Gutteridge 1 Xiaowen Dong 1 Michael Bronstein 2 Francesco Di Giovanni 3 4

Abstract

for nodes that are distant from one another to share information, that information must ‘flow’ through the graph at
a rate of one edge per layer, necessitating appropriately
deep networks when such ‘long-range interactions’ are required for solving the task at hand (Barceló et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, this often leads to poor model performance,
as deep MPNNs are particularly prone to the phenomena
of over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al.,
2022; Di Giovanni et al., 2023) and over-smoothing (Nt &
Maehara, 2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2020).

Message passing neural networks (MPNNs) have
been shown to suffer from the phenomenon of
over-squashing that causes poor performance for
tasks relying on long-range interactions. This
can be largely attributed to message passing only
occurring locally, over a node’s immediate neighbours. Rewiring approaches attempting to make
graphs ‘more connected’, and supposedly better
suited to long-range tasks, often lose the inductive
bias provided by distance on the graph since they
make distant nodes communicate instantly at every layer. In this paper we propose a framework,
applicable to any MPNN architecture, that performs a layer-dependent rewiring to ensure gradual densification of the graph. We also propose
a delay mechanism that permits skip connections
between nodes depending on the layer and their
mutual distance. We validate our approach on several long-range tasks and show that it outperforms
graph Transformers and multi-hop MPNNs.

In this paper, we introduce Dynamically Rewired Message
Passing (DRew), a novel framework for layer-dependent,
multi-hop message passing that takes a principled approach
to information flow, is robust to over-squashing, and can be
applied to any MPNN for deep learning on graphs.
Contributions. First, we formalize DRew, a new framework of aggregating information over distant nodes that
goes beyond the limitations of classical MPNNs, but respects the inductive bias provided by the graph: nodes that
are closer should interact earlier in the architecture. Second, we introduce the concept of delay for message passing,
controlled by a tunable parameter ν, and generalize DRew
to account for delay in order to alleviate issues such as oversmoothing arising from deep MPNN-architectures; we call
this framework νDRew. 1 Third, we present a theoretical
analysis that proves that our proposed frameworks can mitigate over-squashing. Lastly, we experimentally evaluate our
framework on both synthetic and real-world datasets.2 Our
experiments demonstrate the robustness of DRew and the
effectiveness of delayed propagation when applied to deep
MPNN architectures or long-range tasks.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Sperduti, 1993; Gori et al.,
2005; Scarselli et al., 2008; Bruna et al., 2014), deep learning architectures that operate on graph-structured data, are
significantly represented by the message-passing paradigm
(Gilmer et al., 2017), in which layers consisting of a local
neighbourhood aggregation are stacked to form Message
Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs). The most commonly
used MPNNs (henceforth referred to as ‘classical’), perform
only local aggregation, with information being shared at
each layer only between nodes that are immediate neighbours (i.e., directly connected by an edge). Accordingly,

2. Message Passing Neural Networks
In this section we introduce the class of Message Passing
Neural Networks and discuss some of its main limitations.
We first review some important notions concerning graphs.

1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Cambridge 4 Faculty of Informatics, University of Lugano. Correspondence to: Benjamin Gutteridge <beng@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

2.1. Preliminaries
Let G = (V, E) be a graph consisting of nodes V and edges
E. We assume that G is undirected and connected. The

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
2

1

Pronounced ‘Andrew’.
https://github.com/BenGutteridge/DRew

