Diverse and Faithful Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue Generation via
Sequential Posterior Inference

Yan Xu 1 † Deqian Kong 2 † Dehong Xu 2 Ziwei Ji 1 Bo Pang 3 Pascale Fung 1 ‡ Ying Nian Wu 2 ‡

1. Introduction

Abstract

Open-domain dialogue systems aim at fulfilling humanmachine conversations by producing human-like responses
to utterances from humans (Serban et al., 2016). The emergence of large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs)
has turbocharged the development of open-domain dialogue
systems (Zhang et al., 2020; Roller et al., 2021). By maximizing the token-level likelihood of gold responses given
dialogue history, dialogue systems can generate fluent and
natural responses. However, challenges remain to ensure
that responses are diverse and informative (Ghazvininejad
et al., 2018), yet remain factual and accurate (Shuster et al.,
2021). Prior approaches for improving the diversity of dialogue responses focus on preventing them from being dull
and repetitive (Zhao et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2022), while optimizing for diversity alone tends to encourage the dialogue
system to hallucinate non-factual responses (Ji et al., 2022a).
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023) tries to address this issue using
a reward model trained with human preference. However,
it is very resource-consuming. To address this limitation
in generative dialogue systems, we need to ground system
responses on external knowledge effectively.

The capability to generate responses with diversity and faithfulness using factual knowledge is
paramount for creating a human-like, trustworthy
dialogue system. Common strategies either adopt
a two-step paradigm, which optimizes knowledge
selection and response generation separately, and
may overlook the inherent correlation between
these two tasks, or leverage conditional variational method to jointly optimize knowledge selection and response generation by employing
an inference network. In this paper, we present
an end-to-end learning framework, termed Sequential Posterior Inference (SPI), capable of selecting knowledge and generating dialogues by
approximately sampling from the posterior distribution. Unlike other methods, SPI does not
require the inference network or assume a simple geometry of the posterior distribution. This
straightforward and intuitive inference procedure
of SPI directly queries the response generation
model, allowing for accurate knowledge selection
and generation of faithful responses. In addition
to modeling contributions, our experimental results on two common dialogue datasets (Wizard of
Wikipedia and Holl-E) demonstrate that SPI outperforms previous strong baselines according to
both automatic and human evaluation metrics.The
code and checkpoints are available at https:
//github.com/deqiankong/SPI.

Knowledge-grounded dialogue (KGD) has been investigated
in recent years (Dinan et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Xu
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022). The objective is to enhance dialogue response generation to facilitate engaging
and in-depth conversations, while avoiding the inclusion
of non-factual information. The task can be achieved following a two-step paradigm: (1) knowledge selection; (2)
response generation. Some previous works (Lian et al.; Kim
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020) optimize these two steps individually. They first utilize variational inference (Kingma
& Welling, 2014) for knowledge selection, where the prior
distribution is conditioned on dialogue history, and the posterior distribution depends on both response and dialogue history. Then they optimize the response generation task based
on the selected knowledge. Since knowledge selection in
KGD tasks is a complex one-to-many problem, it is not trivial to generate a factual response with dialogue history and
selected knowledge solely, not to mention that inaccurate
knowledge may be chosen even with a complex knowledge
selection module. Other works (Liu et al., 2021) bypass the

†

Equal contribution ‡ Equal advising 1 Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE), The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong 2 Department of Statistics, UCLA,
CA, USA 3 Salesforce Research. Correspondence to: Yan Xu <yxucb@connect.ust.hk>, Deqian Kong <deqiankong@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

