Deep Generative Symbolic Regression with Monte-Carlo-Tree-Search

Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny 1 2 Guillaume Lample 1 Sylvain Lamprier 3 Marco Virgolin 4

Abstract

algorithms can additionally outperform over-parametrized
models, e.g., decision-tree ensembles or neural networks,
on a set of real-world and synthetic datasets.

Symbolic regression (SR) is the problem of
learning a symbolic expression from numerical
data. Recently, deep neural models trained on
procedurally-generated synthetic datasets showed
competitive performance compared to more classical Genetic Programming (GP) algorithms.
Unlike their GP counterparts, these neural approaches are trained to generate expressions from
datasets given as context. This allows them to produce accurate expressions in a single forward pass
at test time. However, they usually do not benefit from search abilities, which result in low performance compared to GP on out-of-distribution
datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel method
which provides the best of both worlds, based
on a Monte-Carlo Tree Search procedure using
a context-aware neural mutation model, which is
initially pre-trained to learn promising mutations,
and further refined from successful experiences
in an online fashion. The approach demonstrates
state-of-the-art performance on the well-known
SRBench benchmark.

SR is a challenging task, which implies composing inherently discrete objects (operators and variables) to make the
resulting expression fit well the given data. As seeking the
optimal composition is intractable (Virgolin & Pissis, 2022),
typical approaches to SR are based on heuristics. In fact,
the leading algorithms on SRBench are modern versions of
genetic programming (GP) (Koza, 1994), a class of genetic
algorithms where evolving solutions need to be executed
to determine their quality (i.e., SR expressions need to be
evaluated on the data to determine their quality of fit).
Lately, there has been a growing interest in the SR community for neural network-based approaches. For example,
Udrescu & Tegmark (2020) use neural networks (NNs) to explicitly detect data properties (e.g., symmetries in the data)
useful to reduce the search space of SR. Other approaches,
which we group together under the name of Deep Generative Symbolic Regression (DGSR), have used NNs to learn
to generate expressions directly from the data. Similarly
to GP, DSR (Petersen et al., 2019) and (Mundhenk et al.,
2021) faces a tabula rasa setup of the problem for each new
dataset. On the other hand, several DGSR approaches are
inductive: they are pre-trained to predict an expression in
a single forward pass for any new dataset, by feeding the
dataset as input tokens (Biggio et al., 2021; Valipour et al.,
2021; Kamienny et al., 2022). As such, these approaches
have the appeal of generating expressions extremely quickly.
However, their lack of a search component makes them unable to improve for the specific dataset at hand. This aspect
can be particularly problematic when the given data is outof-distribution compared to the synthetic data the NN was
pre-trained upon.

1. Introduction
Symbolic Regression (SR) is the problem of simultaneously
finding the structure (operators, variables) and optimising
the parameters (constants) of an expression that describes
experimental data in an interpretable manner. SR can produce human-readable expressions that are particularly useful in natural sciences, e.g., materials sciences (Wang et al.,
2019; Kabliman et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022) or physics
(Schmidt & Lipson, 2009; Vaddireddy et al., 2020; Sun
et al., 2022; Cranmer et al., 2020; Hernandez et al., 2019;
Udrescu & Tegmark, 2020). The recent benchmarking effort SRBench (La Cava et al., 2021) has shown that SR

A promising direction to cope with the limitations of inductive DGSR is therefore to include a suitable search strategy. The use of neural policies in Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) has led to improved exploration via long-term planning in the context of automated theorem proving with formal systems (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Lample et al., 2022),
algorithm discovery (Fawzi et al., 2022), and also games
(Silver et al., 2016; 2018). In the context SR, search tree
nodes are expressions (e.g., x1 + x2 ), and edges between

1
Meta AI, Paris, France 2 ISIR MLIA, Sorbonne Université,
France 3 LERIA, Université d’Angers, France 4 Centrum Wiskunde
& Informatica, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: PierreAlexandre Kamienny <pakamienny@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

