PAL: Program-aided Language Models

Luyu Gao * 1 Aman Madaan * 1 Shuyan Zhou * 1 Uri Alon 1 Pengfei Liu 1 2
Yiming Yang 1 Jamie Callan 1 Graham Neubig 1 2
{luyug,amadaan,shuyanzh,ualon,pliu3,yiming,callan,gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated an impressive ability to perform arithmetic and symbolic reasoning tasks, when provided with a few examples at test time (“few-shot
prompting”). Much of this success can be attributed to prompting methods such as “chainof-thought”, which employ LLMs for both understanding the problem description by decomposing
it into steps, as well as solving each step of the
problem. While LLMs seem to be adept at this
sort of step-by-step decomposition, LLMs often
make logical and arithmetic mistakes in the solution part, even when the problem is decomposed
correctly. In this paper, we present ProgramAided Language models (PA L): a novel approach
that uses the LLM to read natural language problems and generate programs as the intermediate
reasoning steps, but offloads the solution step to a
runtime such as a Python interpreter. With PA L,
decomposing the natural language problem into
runnable steps remains the only learning task for
the LLM, while solving is delegated to the interpreter. We demonstrate this synergy between a
neural LLM and a symbolic interpreter across 13
mathematical, symbolic, and algorithmic reasoning tasks from BIG-Bench Hard and others. In
all these natural language reasoning tasks, generating code using an LLM and reasoning using a
Python interpreter leads to more accurate results
than much larger models. For example, PA L using
C ODEX achieves state-of-the-art few-shot accuracy on GSM 8 K, surpassing PaLM-540 B which
uses chain-of-thought by absolute 15% top-1. 1

Until as recently as three years ago, reasoning was considered to be one of the most significant challenges that large
language models (LLMs) had not yet overcome (Marcus,
2018; 2020; Garcez & Lamb, 2020). Recently, LLMs have
shown impressive success on a wide range of reasoning
tasks, including commonsense (Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al.,
2021; Madaan et al., 2022), mathematical (Lewkowycz et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2022), and symbolic
reasoning (Yao et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2022), using few-shot
prompting (Brown et al., 2020).
This process has been accelerated by methods that require LLMs to generate their explicit reasoning steps,
such as “chain-of-thought” (Wei et al., 2022), “scratchpads” (Nye et al., 2021a), and “least-to-most” (Zhou et al.,
2022) prompting. In particular, the widely used chain-ofthought (C OT) method presents the model with the explicit
intermediate steps that are required to reach the final answer.
Then, the model is expected to apply a similar decomposition to the actual test example, and consecutively reach an
accurate final answer (Ling et al., 2017; Amini et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, while LLMs can decompose natural language
problems into steps and perform simple arithmetic operations, their performance falls dramatically when dealing
with complex arithmetic (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Madaan &
Yazdanbakhsh, 2022) or large numbers (Geva et al., 2020;
Nogueira et al., 2021; Qian et al., 2022). In fact, even when
fine-tuning a PaLM-based model on 164B tokens of explicit
mathematical content, its two most common failures are
reportedly “incorrect reasoning” and “incorrect calculation”
(Lewkowycz et al., 2022).
In this paper, we propose Program-Aided Language
model (PA L): a novel approach that uses an LLM to read natural language problems and generate programs as reasoning
steps, but offloads the solution step to a Python interpreter,
as illustrated in Figure 1. This offloading leverages an LLM
that can decompose a natural language problem into programmatic steps, which is fortunately available using contemporary state-of-the-art LLMs that are pre-trained on both
natural language and programming languages (Brown et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2021a; Chowdhery et al., 2022). While

*

1
Equal contribution
Language Technologies Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University, USA 2 Inspired Cognition, USA.
Correspondence to: Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou
<{luyug,amadaan,shuyanzh}@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code and data at http://reasonwithpal.com.

1

