Neural Collapse in Deep Linear Networks: From Balanced to Imbalanced Data

Hien Dang * 1 Tho Tran * 1 Stanley Osher 2 Hung Tran-The 3 Nhat Ho ** 4 Tan Nguyen ** 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the impressive performance of deep neural networks
(DNNs) across areas of machine learning and artificial intelligence (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016; He et al., 2016b; Huang
et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020), the highly non-convex
nature of these systems, as well as their massive number of
parameters, ranging from hundreds of millions to hundreds
of billions, impose a significant barrier to having a concrete
theoretical understanding of how they work. Additionally, a
variety of optimization algorithms have been developed for
training DNNs, which makes it more challenging to analyze
the resulting trained networks and learned features (Ruder,
2016). In particular, the modern practice of training DNNs
includes training the models far beyond zero error to achieve
zero loss in the terminal phase of training (TPT) (Ma et al.,
2018; Belkin et al., 2019a;b). A mathematical understanding of this training paradigm is important for studying the
generalization and expressivity properties of DNNs (Papyan
et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022).

Modern deep neural networks have achieved impressive performance on tasks from image classification to natural language processing. Surprisingly, these complex systems with massive
amounts of parameters exhibit the same structural
properties in their last-layer features and classifiers across canonical datasets when training until
convergence. In particular, it has been observed
that the last-layer features collapse to their classmeans, and those class-means are the vertices of
a simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF). This
phenomenon is known as Neural Collapse (N C).
Recent papers have theoretically shown that N C
emerges in the global minimizers of training problems with the simplified “unconstrained feature
model”. In this context, we take a step further
and prove the N C occurrences in deep linear networks for the popular mean squared error (MSE)
and cross entropy (CE) losses, showing that global
solutions exhibit N C properties across the linear
layers. Furthermore, we extend our study to imbalanced data for MSE loss and present the first
geometric analysis of N C under bias-free setting.
Our results demonstrate the convergence of the
last-layer features and classifiers to a geometry
consisting of orthogonal vectors, whose lengths
depend on the amount of data in their corresponding classes. Finally, we empirically validate our
theoretical analyses on synthetic and practical network architectures with both balanced and imbalanced scenarios.

Recently, (Papyan et al., 2020) has empirically discovered
an intriguing phenomenon, named Neural Collapse (N C),
which reveals a common pattern of the learned deep representations across canonical datasets and architectures in
image classification tasks. (Papyan et al., 2020) defined
Neural Collapse as the existence of the following four properties:
(N C1) Variability collapse: features of the same class
converge to a unique vector, as training progresses.
(N C2) Convergence to simplex ETF: the optimal classmeans have the same length and are equally and maximally
pairwise seperated, i.e., they form a simplex Equiangular
Tight Frame (ETF).

*, **
Equal contribution 1 FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 3 Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Victoria, Australia 4 Department of Statistics and Data
Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA 5 Department of
Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Hien Dang <danghoanghien1123@gmail.com>,
Tho Tran <thotranhuu99@gmail.com>.

(N C3) Convergence to self-duality: up to rescaling, the
class-means and classifiers converge on each other.

2

(N C4) Simplification to nearest class-center: given a
feature, the classifier converges to choosing whichever class
has the nearest class-mean to it.
Theoretically, it has been proven that N C emerges in the
last layer of DNNs during TPT when the models belong to
the class of “unconstrained features model” (UFM) (Mixon

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

