Benign Overfitting in Deep Neural Networks under Lazy Training

Zhenyu Zhu 1 Fanghui Liu 1 Grigorios G Chrysos 1 Francesco Locatello 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

Chatterji et al., 2021; Zou et al., 2021), kernel-based estimators (Mei and Montanari, 2022; Liang et al., 2019), and logistic regression (Montanari et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).

This paper focuses on over-parameterized deep
neural networks (DNNs) with ReLU activation
functions and proves that when the data distribution is well-separated, DNNs can achieve Bayesoptimal test error for classification while obtaining (nearly) zero-training error under the lazy
training regime. For this purpose, we unify three
interrelated concepts of overparameterization, benign overfitting, and the Lipschitz constant of
DNNs. Our results indicate that interpolating
with smoother functions leads to better generalization. Furthermore, we investigate the special case
where interpolating smooth ground-truth functions is performed by DNNs under the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) regime for generalization. Our
result demonstrates that the generalization error
converges to a constant order that only depends
on label noise and initialization noise, which theoretically verifies benign overfitting. Our analysis
provides a tight lower bound on the normalized
margin under non-smooth activation functions, as
well as the minimum eigenvalue of NTK under
high-dimensional settings, which has its own interest in learning theory.

To our knowledge, results on neural networks (NNs) are
restricted to two-layer neural networks (Tsigler and Bartlett,
2020; Ju et al., 2021; Frei et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2022) and
three-layer neural networks but only the last layer is trained
(Ju et al., 2022). The extension from shallow NNs to deep
neural networks (DNNs) is non-trivial: under what conditions does benign overfitting occur in deep neural networks?
and what makes them special? are still open problems in
both statistical learning theory and deep learning theory.
In this work, we address this open question in benign overfitting of deep ReLU NNs for binary classification under the
lazy training regime. We assume the network is trained by
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on well-separated data
under adversarially corrupted labels, following the standard problem setting of Frei et al. (2022). We prove that
the ReLU DNN exhibits benign overfitting, i.e., obtaining
Bayes-optimal test error while obtaining zero training error
under the lazy training regime.
Our results establish a rigorous connection between the
Lipschitz constants of DNNs and benign overfitting. We
demonstrate that interpolating with (Lipschitz) smoother
functions leads to a faster convergence rate on the generalization guarantees. Accordingly, for a better understanding
of how the estimator by DNNs interpolates the ground-truth
function, we also consider a regression task for DNNs from
an approximation theory view (Cucker and Zhou, 2007),
interpolating the smooth ground-truth function by DNNs
under the neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Bach, 2017;
Jacot et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Benign overfitting has attracted significant research interest
recently in an effort to understand why predictors with zero
training loss can still achieve counter-intuitively good generalization performance even in the presence of noise (Koehler
et al., 2021; Zou et al., 2021; Chatterji and Long, 2022;
Wang et al., 2022; Mei and Montanari, 2022). Current
efforts on benign overfitting mainly focus on the finite sample behavior under linear regression (Bartlett et al., 2020;

Overall, we expect our results to foster a refined analysis of
the generalization guarantees for large dimensional machine
learning models, especially on DNNs.

1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland 2 Amazon
Web Services (Work done outside of Amazon). Correspondence to: Zhenyu Zhu <zhenyu.zhu@epfl.ch>, Fanghui Liu
<fanghui.liu@epfl.ch>.

1.1. Contributions and technical challenges
In this paper, we consider a finite sample behavior, in which
the input dimension d can be large but fixed, or comparably
large with the number of training data n and model parameters to obtain a dimension-free bound (Bartlett et al., 2020;
Ju et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021). Our main contributions are

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

