Representation-Driven Reinforcement Learning

Ofir Nabati 1 Guy Tennenholtz 2 Shie Mannor 1 3

Abstract

icy locally at specific states and actions. Salimans et al.
(2017) have shown that such optimization methods may
cause high variance updates in long horizon problems, while
Tessler et al. (2019) have shown possible convergence to
suboptimal solutions in continuous regimes. Moreover, policy search methods are commonly sample inefficient, particularly in hard exploration problems, as policy gradient
methods usually converge to areas of high reward, without
sacrificing exploration resources to achieve a far-reaching
sparse reward.

We present a representation-driven framework for
reinforcement learning. By representing policies
as estimates of their expected values, we leverage
techniques from contextual bandits to guide exploration and exploitation. Particularly, embedding
a policy network into a linear feature space allows us to reframe the exploration-exploitation
problem as a representation-exploitation problem, where good policy representations enable
optimal exploration. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this framework through its application to evolutionary and policy gradient-based
approaches, leading to significantly improved performance compared to traditional methods. Our
framework provides a new perspective on reinforcement learning, highlighting the importance
of policy representation in determining optimal
exploration-exploitation strategies.

In this work, we present Representation-Driven Reinforcement Learning (RepRL) – a new framework for policysearch methods, which utilizes theoretically optimal exploration strategies in a learned latent space. Particularly, we
reduce the policy search problem to a contextual bandit
problem, using a mapping from policy space to a linear
feature space. Our approach leverages the learned linear
space to optimally tradeoff exploration and exploitation using well-established algorithms from the contextual bandit
literature (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal & Goyal,
2013). By doing so, we reframe the exploration-exploitation
problem to a representation-exploitation problem, for which
good policy representations enable optimal exploration.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a field in machine learning
in which an agent learns to maximize a reward through interactions with an environment. The agent maps its current
state into action and receives a reward signal. Its goal is
to maximize the cumulative sum of rewards over some predefined (possibly infinite) horizon (Sutton & Barto, 1998).
This setting fits many real-world applications such as recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010), board games (Silver et al., 2017), computer games (Mnih et al., 2015), and
robotics (Polydoros & Nalpantidis, 2017).

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through
its application to both evolutionary and policy gradientbased approaches – demonstrating significantly improved
performance compared to traditional methods. Empirical
experiments on the MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) and
MinAtar (Young & Tian, 2019) show the benefits of our
approach, particularly in sparse reward settings. While our
framework does not make the exploration problem necessarily easier, it provides a new perspective on reinforcement
learning, shifting the focus to policy representation in the
search for optimal exploration-exploitation strategies.

A large amount of contemporary research in RL focuses on
gradient-based policy search methods (Sutton et al., 1999;
Silver et al., 2014; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Haarnoja
et al., 2018). Nevertheless, these methods optimize the pol-

2. Preliminaries
We consider the infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP). An MDP is defined by the tuple
M = (S, A, r, T, β, γ), where S is the state space, A is the
action space, T : S × A → ∆(S) is the transition kernel,
r : S × A → [0, 1] is the reward function, β ∈ ∆(S) is
the initial state distribution, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount
factor. A stationary policy π : S → ∆(A), maps states

1

Department of Electrical-Engineering, Technion Institute
of Technology, Israel 2 Technion (currently at Google Research)
3
Nvidia Research. Correspondence to: Ofir Nabati <ofirnabati@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

