Provably Convergent Schrödinger Bridge with Applications to Probabilistic
Time Series Imputation

Yu Chen * 1 Wei Deng * 1 Shikai Fang * 2 Fengpei Li * 1 Nicole Tianjiao Yang 3
Yikai Zhang 1 Kashif Rasul 1 Shandian Zhe 2 Anderson Schneider 1 Yuriy Nevmyvaka 1

Abstract

ability to devise reliable trading strategies (Christoffersen
et al., 2017). In populations of Intensive Care Units (ICUs),
predicting mortality rates based on time-series observations
of vital signs is essential (Silva et al., 2012). However, the
presence of missing data has greatly limited the efficacy of
medications and surgical treatments.

The Schrödinger bridge problem (SBP) is gaining
increasing attention in generative modeling and
showing promising potential even in comparison
with the score-based generative models (SGMs).
SBP can be interpreted as an entropy-regularized
optimal transport problem, which conducts projections onto every other marginal alternatingly.
However, in practice, only approximated projections are accessible and their convergence is not
well understood. To fill this gap, we present a first
convergence analysis of the Schrödinger bridge
algorithm based on approximated projections. As
for its practical applications, we apply SBP to
probabilistic time series imputation by generating missing values conditioned on observed data.
We show that optimizing the transport cost improves the performance and the proposed algorithm achieves the state-of-the-art result in healthcare and environmental data while exhibiting the
advantage of exploring both temporal and feature
patterns in probabilistic time series imputation.

One standard approach to tackle such a problem is to leverage score-based generative models (SGMs) (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a;b), which
propose to recover the data distribution through a backward
process that estimates the scores of posterior distributions
conditioned on the observed data. This conditional nature
directly motivates the study of Conditional Score-based Diffusion models for Imputation (CSDI) (Tashiro et al., 2021).
CSDI is able to learn the temporal-feature patterns well and
achieves state-of-the-art performance in probabilistic time
series imputation. However, transporting between terminal
distributions is often quite expensive for SGMs and CSDI,
which requires extensive computations and hyperparameter
tuning. As such, a more efficient algorithm is needed to
reduce the transport cost.
The Schrödinger bridge problem (SBP) was initially proposed to solve problems in quantum mechanics and can be
transformed into the entropy-regularized optimal transport
(EOT) (De Bortoli et al., 2021; Léonard, 2014a; Chen et al.,
2021b; Nutz & Wiesel, 2022). Solving the EOT formulation gives rise to the iterative proportional fitting (IPF)
algorithm (Kullback, 1968; Ruschendorf, 1995), which provides a principled paradigm to minimize the transport cost
and facilitates the estimation of score functions to generate
samples of higher quality; SBP further enables the generalization of linear Gaussian priors to non-linear families with
more acceleration potential (Chen et al., 2021a; Bunne et al.,
2023; Pavon et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2020; 2022).

1. Introduction
Time series data is extensively studied in various fields
such as finance (Xiong & Pelger, 2023), healthcare (Silva
et al., 2012), and meteorology. However, incomplete or
partial observations, equipment failures, and human errors
may inevitably lead to the missing value problem, severely
limiting the interpretation of the time series. For instance,
the inherent illiquidity of certain assets can result in the
occurrence of missing values, which in turn impacts our
*

Equal contribution (Alphabetical order) 1 Machine Learning
Research, Morgan Stanley, NY 2 School of Computing, University of Utah (Fang completed part of the work while interning at
Morgan Stanley) 3 Department of Mathematics, Emory University.
Correspondence to: Wei Deng <weideng056@gmail.com>.

Despite the theoretical potential, the existing SBP-based
generative models assume we can obtain the exact projections for the IPF algorithm, but in practice, it is often only
approximated by deep neural networks (De Bortoli et al.,
2021) or Gaussian processes (Vargas et al., 2021). In order
to fill the gap, we extend the IPF algorithm by allowing for
the approximated projections and refer to it as the approxi-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

