On Provable Copyright Protection for Generative Models

Nikhil Vyas 1 Sham Kakade 2 Boaz Barak 1

Abstract

are original and, hence, copyrightable.” — U.S. Supreme
Court Opinion, Feist Pubs. v. Rural Tel. Svc. Co, 1991.

There is a growing concern that learned conditional generative models may output samples that
are substantially similar to some copyrighted data
C that was in their training set. We give a formal definition of near access-freeness (NAF) and
prove bounds on the probability that a model satisfying this definition outputs a sample similar to C,
even if C is included in its training set. Roughly
speaking, a generative model p is k-NAF if for
every potentially copyrighted data C, the output
of p diverges by at most k-bits from the output
of a model q that did not access C at all. We
also give generative model learning algorithms,
which efficiently modify the original generative
model learning algorithm in a black box manner,
that output generative models with strong bounds
on the probability of sampling protected content.
Furthermore, we provide promising experiments
for both language (transformers) and image (diffusion) generative models, showing minimal degradation in output quality while ensuring strong
protections against sampling protected content.

1. Introduction
Generative models for images, text, code, and other domains
pose new challenges for ensuring their outputs are protected
from copyright infringement. Such models are trained on
a large corpus of data, where it is often impractical to ensure the training set is 100% free of copyrighted material.
Furthermore, removing copyrighted material from training
may also be undesirable. For example, a human author is
free to read and use copyrighted material as inspiration for
their work, as long as they do not copy it. Similarly, it may
be beneficial to use copyrighted material when training in
order to have more effective generative models.
Copyright infringement by generative models can potentially arise in (at least) two manners. First, in the training
phase, the algorithm could directly access copyrighted material, and the learned model itself could implicitly contain
(e.g. coded in its weights) verbatim copies of some of this
material. The copyright issues arising during training share
many similarities with other settings in which algorithms
scrape significant amounts of data, including search-engine
indexing and digitizing books. Here, the question of what
constitutes a copyright infringement is largely a question of
“fair use.” This work does not examine these fair use issues
that arise in the training phase, and we refer the reader to
the several legal precedents in this area (Samuelson, 2021).

“To constitute an infringement under the Act there must be substantial similarity between the infringing work and the work
copyrighted; and that similarity must have been caused by
the defendant’s having copied the copyright holder’s creation.” — U.S. 9th Circuit Opinion, Roth Greeting Cards v.
United Card Co., 1970.

*
1
Equal contribution
Harvard School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences 2 Harvard School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences and Kempner Institute for the Study
of Natural and Artificial Intelligence.
Correspondence
to: Nikhil Vyas <nikhil@g.harvard.edu>, Sham Kakade
<sham@seas.harvard.edu>, Boaz Barak <b@boazbarak.org>.

The second notable source of potential infringement is in
the deployment phase, where a user provides a prompt x to
the model to obtain some output y. Apriori, we cannot rule
out the possibility that y is either a verbatim copy or substantially similar to some copyrighted training data. Moreover,
unlike search engines, generative models do not keep track
of the provenance of their outputs. Hence, a user of such
an output y (e.g., a software company using generated code,
or a designer using a generated image) has no easy way to
verify that it does not infringe upon any copyrighted material. It is this issue of preventing deployment-time copyright
infringement that is the focus of this work.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our contributions. We give a formal definition — “nearaccess freeness” — bounding the extent to which a learned

“Originality does not signify novelty; a work may be original
even though it closely resembles other works, so long as
the similarity is fortuitous, not the result of copying. To
illustrate, assume that two poets, each ignorant of the other,
compose identical poems. Neither work is novel, yet both

1

