Discovering Object-Centric Generalized Value Functions From Pixels

Somjit Nath 1 2 Gopeshh Raaj Subbaraj 2 3 Khimya Khetarpal † 2 4 Samira Ebrahimi Kahou 1 2 5

Abstract

works (DNN). A significant challenge faced during learning
from pixels is the inability to learn a good control policy
from high dimensional visual inputs and limited information in a single scalar reward signal. To address this issue,
recent works have shown that the agent performance can
be improved by using auxiliary tasks alongside the main
RL objective. The corresponding auxiliary losses can be
trained using different objectives from supervised (Jaderberg et al., 2016; Schwarzer et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020),
self-supervised (Oord et al., 2018; Laskin et al., 2020), or
RL domains (Veeriah et al., 2019).

Deep Reinforcement Learning has shown significant progress in extracting useful representations
from high-dimensional inputs albeit using handcrafted auxiliary tasks and pseudo rewards. Automatically learning such representations in an
object-centric manner geared towards control and
fast adaptation remains an open research problem. In this paper, we introduce a method that
tries to discover meaningful features from objects,
translating them to temporally coherent ‘question’
functions and leveraging the subsequent learned
general value functions for control. We compare our approach with state-of-the-art techniques
alongside other ablations and show competitive
performance in both stationary and non-stationary
settings. Finally, we also investigate the discovered general value functions and through qualitative analysis show that the learned representations are not only interpretable but also, centered
around objects that are invariant to changes across
tasks facilitating fast adaptation.

Designing meaningful auxiliary tasks poses many challenges; most previous works considered them in order to
learn visual features entirely without rewards. For example, Schwarzer et al. (2021) learns visual features entirely
without considering rewards. In contrast, our focus here is
to discover auxiliary tasks that are reward-driven and help
learn useful representations which in turn can facilitate learning better policies. It is generally easier to define predictive
knowledge of the environment through value functions, thus
learning auxiliary tasks that are driven by such learned reward functions can help to learn many, different, potentially
invariant, properties of the environment in order to be robust
to any non-stationarity. Thus, these reward-driven auxiliary
objectives could specifically serve an important purpose to
learn and retain representations when learning in presence of
non-stationarity. For instance, in Atari, fundamental objects
and corresponding characteristics remain consistent when
an agent transitions to a new unseen level. Discovering
these objects (features) and learning associated properties
(cumulants) could drive generalization and adaptation in
realistic continual learning or multi-task settings.

1. Introduction
Learning control from high-dimensional input such as images is a complex problem relevant to many real world
applications. While researchers have made huge strides in
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL), decision making from
images remains a challenge due to the difficulty of discovering meaningful features that are invariant across tasks.
Levine et al. (2016); Kalashnikov et al. (2018) demonstrate
how agents can learn a policy from pixels to be used in
real-life applications. One of the standard practices in RL
is to learn a control policy from pixels in an end-to-end
fashion. The end-to-end learning paradigm presents certain
downsides due to the black-box nature of Deep Neural Net-

This idea finds its origins in the Horde architecture (Sutton
et al., 2011) where auxiliary objective constitutes learning
value functions for a multitude of pseudo-rewards termed as
General Value Functions (GVFs). GVFs provide a mechanism to learn value functions by choosing any scalar reward
signal as a cumulant. These value functions can be used
to extract useful predictions based on interactions with the
environment thereby learning a rich representation. These
estimates of environmental knowledge could potentially
act as useful representations for an RL agent in different
settings. In this work, we tackle the problem of learning
General Value Functions in the pixel space, in an end-to-

1
École de technologie supérieure 2 Mila-Quebec AI Institute 3 Université de Montréal 4 McGill University 5 CIFAR AI
Chair †now at DeepMind. Correspondence to: Somjit Nath
<somjit.nath.1@ens.etsmtl.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

