What Makes Entities Similar? A Similarity Flooding Perspective for
Multi-sourced Knowledge Graph Embeddings

Zequn Sun 1 Jiacheng Huang 1 Xiaozhou Xu 2 Qijin Chen 2 Weijun Ren 2 Wei Hu 1 3
KG 1

Abstract
entityrepresentation
relation
Joint
learning over multi-sourced
entity alignment
knowledge
graphs (KGs) yields transferable and
expressive embeddings that improve downstream
tasks. Entity alignment (EA) is a critical step in
this process. Despite recent considerable research
progress in embedding-based EA, how it works
remains to be explored. In this paper, we provide a similarity flooding perspective to explain
existing
translation-based and aggregation-based
unified
entity embedding space
EA models. We prove that the embedding learning process of these models actually seeks a fixpoint of pairwise similarities between entities. We
also provide experimental evidence to support our
theoretical analysis. We propose two simple but
effective methods inspired by the fixpoint computation in similarity flooding, and demonstrate their
effectiveness on benchmark datasets. Our work
bridges the gap between recent embedding-based
models and the conventional similarity flooding
algorithm. It would improve our understanding of
and increase our faith in embedding-based EA.

KG 2

entity
relation
entity alignment

unified entity embedding space

Figure 1. Illustration of representing two KGs in a unified space.

in promoting knowledge fusion and transfer (Trivedi et al.,
2018). It uses entity alignment (EA) between different KGs
to jump-start joint and transferable representation learning.
EA refers to the match of identical entities from different
KGs, such as “ICML” and “International Conference on Machine Learning”. The goal of multi-sourced KG embedding
is learning to distinguish between identical and dissimilar
entities in different KGs while capturing their respective
graph structures. By aligning the embeddings of identical
entities, an entity in one KG can indirectly capture the graph
structures of its counterpart in another KG, resulting in more
informative representations to benefit downstream tasks.

1. Introduction

1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China 2 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Wei Hu <whu@nju.edu.cn>.

Therefore, as a fundamental task, embedding-based EA has
drawn increasing attention (Chen et al., 2017; Guo et al.,
2019; Sun et al., 2020b; Zhao et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2021a;
Zhang et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2022). The key of embeddingbased EA lies in how to generate entity embeddings for
alignment learning. Existing techniques fall into two groups,
translation-based (Chen et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2017; 2019)
and aggregation-based models. A translation-based model
adopts TransE (Bordes et al., 2013) or its variants for embedding learning. Given a triplet (s, r, o), TransE interprets
a relation embedding as the translation vector from the subject entity embedding to the object entity. Another group
of EA models uses graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
(Kipf & Welling, 2017) to generate an entity representation
by aggregating its neighbor embeddings.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Despite the considerable technical progress in embeddingbased EA, a critical question remains unanswered, i.e., what
makes entity embeddings similar in an EA model? This

A knowledge graph (KG) is a set of relational triplets. Each
triplet is in the form of (subject entity, relation, object entity),
denoted by (s, r, o) for short. A relational triplet indicates a
relation between two entities, such as (ICML 2023, hosted
in, Hawaii). Different KGs are created by harvesting various
webs of data. They could cover complementary knowledge
from different sources and thus aid in resolving the incompleteness issue of each single KG. In recent years, representing multi-sourced KGs in a unified embedding space,
as illustrated in Figure 1, has shown promising potential

1

