Estimating Possible Causal Effects with Latent Variables via Adjustment

Tian-Zuo Wang 1 Tian Qin 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract

2021). A practical method to estimate causal effect is via
(covariate) adjustment, i.e., estimating it by adjusting for
some observed variables called adjustment set (van der Zander et al., 2014; Maathuis et al., 2015; Perkovic et al., 2017;
van der Zander et al., 2019).

Causal effect identification is a fundamental task
in artificial intelligence. A most ideal scenario
for causal effect identification is that there is a directed acyclic graph as a prior causal graph encoding the causal relations of all relevant variables.
In real tasks, however, the prior causal graph is
usually not available, and some relevant variables
may be latent as well. With observational data,
we can only learn a partial ancestral graph (PAG),
which contains some indeterminate causal relations. Since many causal graphs can correspond
to one PAG, they are possibly associated with different causal effects. The aim of this paper is to
estimate these possible causal effects via covariate
adjustment given a PAG. This task is challenging
because the number of causal graphs corresponding to a PAG grows super-exponentially with the
number of variables. We propose a new graphical characterization for possible adjustment sets,
and based on this, we develop the first method
to determine the set of possible causal effects
that are consistent with the given PAG without
enumerating any causal graphs. Our method can
output the same set as the enumeration method
with super-exponentially less complexity. Experiments validate the effectiveness and tremendous
efficiency improvement of the proposed method.

A most ideal scenario for causal effect identification is that
there is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) as a prior causal
graph which encodes the causal relations among all the
relevant variables. In real tasks, however, such knowledge is
often not available. Moreover, some relevant variables in the
DAGs may be latent as well. For example, macroeconomic
policy influences many factors in business, but it is hard to
quantify. When there is not a prior causal graph, a common
practice is to learn the causal graph at first.
In the presence of latent variables, a partial ancestral graph
(PAG) can be learned with observational data (Spirtes et al.,
2000; Ali et al., 2005; Zhang, 2008a). A PAG represents
a Markov equivalence class (MEC) of maximal ancestral
graphs (MAG) which encode the causal relations among the
observed variables. Roughly speaking, a MAG is a “projection graph” of an underlying DAG containing all relevant
variables1 . Notably, many DAGs, even infinite ones, can be
projected to the same MAG. Henceforth, any DAG that can
be projected to a MAG in the MEC represented by a given
PAG is considered a DAG corresponding to the PAG. An
example of the three types of graphs is given in Fig. 1.
There are some studies (Entner et al., 2013; Hyttinen et al.,
2015; Jaber et al., 2022) on the causal effect identifiability
in a PAG, i.e., whether all the DAGs corresponding to the
PAG are associated with the same causal effect and can be
estimated with observational data. Generally, due to the limited information of PAG, the causal effect is unidentifiable,
in which case there can be many possible causal effects.

1. Introduction
Decision is a fundamental task throughout artificial intelligence, economics, and social sciences. Causal effect identification is inherently linked to decision-making, as it answers
‘what will happen to outcome Y if X is set to x’. There
exists a growing literature studying causal effect identification given a causal graph (Tian & Pearl, 2002; Shpitser &
Pearl, 2006; Pearl, 2009; Shpitser et al., 2010; Jung et al.,

In light of the fact that the causal effect of some variable
X on variable Y is not always identifiable in a PAG, this
paper aims to determine the set of possible causal effects
of X on Y obtainable via covariate adjustment, i.e., the set
includes the causal effects that can be identified via covariate
adjustment in any DAGs corresponding to the PAG. When
the causal effect is not identifiable, the set can provide some
valuable information as well. Moreover, it requires neither

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Zhi-Hua Zhou <zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

The “projection” is elaborated in Appendix A.2

