RSC: Accelerate Graph Neural Networks Training
via Randomized Sparse Computations

Zirui Liu 1 Shengyuan Chen 2 Kaixiong Zhou 1 Daochen Zha 1 Xiao Huang 2 Xia Hu 1

1. Introductions

Abstract

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success across different graph-related tasks (Hamilton et al.,
2017; Hu et al., 2020; Ying et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2022; 2023). However, despite its effectiveness, the training of GNNs is very time-consuming. Specifically, GNNs are characterized by an interleaved execution
that switches between the aggregation and update phases.
Namely, in the aggregation phase, every node aggregates
messages from its neighborhoods at each layer, which is
implemented based on sparse matrix-based operations (Fey
& Lenssen, 2019; Wang et al., 2019). In the update phase,
each node will update its embedding based on the aggregated messages, where the update function is implemented
with dense matrix-based operations (Fey & Lenssen, 2019;
Wang et al., 2019). In Figure 1, SpMM and MatMul are the
sparse and dense operations in the aggregation and update
phases, respectively. Through profiling, we found that the
aggregation phase may take more than 90% running time
for GNN training. This is because the sparse matrix operations in the aggregation phase have many random memory
accesses and limited data reuse, which is hard to be accelerated by community hardwares (e.g., CPUs and GPUs) (Duan
et al., 2022b; Han et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2022a). Thus,
training GNNs with large graphs is often time-inefficient.
Percentage of Time Consumption

Training graph neural networks (GNNs) is extremely time-consuming because sparse graphbased operations are hard to be accelerated by
community hardware. Prior art successfully
reduces the computation cost of dense matrix
based operations (e.g., convolution and linear) via
sampling-based approximation. However, unlike
dense matrices, sparse matrices are stored in an
irregular data format such that each row/column
may have a different number of non-zero entries.
Thus, compared to the dense counterpart, approximating sparse operations has two unique challenges (1) we cannot directly control the efficiency of approximated sparse operation since the
computation is only executed on non-zero entries;
(2) sampling sparse matrices is much more inefficient due to the irregular data format. To address
the issues, our key idea is to control the accuracyefficiency trade-off by optimizing computation resource allocation layer-wisely and epoch-wisely.
For the first challenge, we customize the computation resource to different sparse operations,
while limiting the total used resource below a certain budget. For the second challenge, we cache
previously sampled sparse matrices to reduce the
epoch-wise sampling overhead. To this end, we
propose Randomized Sparse Computation. In
practice, RSC can achieve up to 11.6× speedup
for a single sparse operation and 1.6× end-toend wall-clock time speedup with almost no accuracy drop. Codes are available at https://
github.com/warai-0toko/RSC-ICML.

100

Other
MatMul(forward)
MatMul(backward)
SpMM(forward)
SpMM(backward)

80
60
40
20
0ognb-proteins

Reddit

ogbn-product

Figure 1: The time profiling of a two-layer GCNs on different datasets. SpMM may take 70% ∼ 90% of the total
time. We measure the time on a single NVIDIA RTX3090
(24GB). The detailed software and hardware information
can be found in Appendix D.

1
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston,
TX, USA 2 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to: Xia
Hu <xia.hu@rice.edu>.

Existing works towards this problem can be roughly divided
into three categories. First, some works propose distributed
GNNs training systems, which focus on minimizing the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

