Robust Situational Reinforcement Learning
in Face of Context Disturbances
Jinpeng Zhang * 1 Yufeng Zheng 2 Chuheng Zhang 3 Li Zhao 3 Lei Song 3 Yuan Zhou 4 Jiang Bian 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications, there are dynamic environmental factors, which cannot be influenced by agents’
actions, but is vital for agents’ decision-making, e.g., the
speed of lead cars in autonomous driving, customer demand in inventory control, stock price in optimized trade
execution, etc. We refer to such environmental factors as
contexts for simplicity (also called exogenous states (Dietterich et al., 2018; Efroni et al., 2021), inputs (Mao et al.,
2018), noncontrollable states (Pan et al., 2022)). The works
in reinforcement learning that deal with the presence of such
dynamic contexts are referred to as situational RL (Chen
et al., 2022) in this paper.

In many real-world tasks, the presence of dynamic
and uncontrollable environmental factors, commonly referred to as context, plays a crucial role
in the decision-making process. Examples of such
factors include customer demand in inventory control and the speed of the lead car in autonomous
driving. One of the challenges of reinforcement
learning in these applications is that the true context transitions can be easily exposed to some unknown source of contamination, leading to a shift
of context transitions between source domains
and target domains, which could cause performance degradation for RL algorithms. To tackle
this problem, we propose the robust situational
Markov decision process (RS-MDP) framework
which captures the possible deviations of context
transitions explicitly. To scale to large context
space, we introduce the softmin smoothed robust
Bellman operator to learn the robust Q-value approximately, and extend existing RL algorithm
SAC to learn the desired robust policies under our
RS-MDP framework. We conduct experiments
on several locomotion tasks with dynamic contexts and inventory control tasks to demonstrate
that our algorithm can generalize better and be
more robust against context disturbances, and outperform existing basic RL algorithms that do not
consider robustness and robust RL algorithms that
consider robustness over the whole state transitions.

Existing works in situational RL have focused on the challenges of efficient learning and planning with the factorized dynamics induced by context transitions, e.g., variance
reduction (Mao et al., 2018), separating contexts and endogenous states from observations (Dietterich et al., 2018;
Chitnis & Lozano-Perez, 2019; Efroni et al., 2021; Pan et al.,
2022) to learn more efficiently, detecting the abrupt changes
of latent contexts (Chen et al., 2022). However, robustness against context disturbances is overlooked by existing
works.
Robustness is critical for real-world tasks since RL policies
are often brittle when faced with even slight variations in
their environments (Meng & Khushi, 2019; Lu et al., 2020).
We emphasize that we are considering robustness against
deviations of context transitions, which is of particular interest in many real-world scenarios. For example, in Adaptive
Cruise Control (ACC), an autonomous driving scenario, the
speed of lead car can be viewed as context whose transition
can be influenced by numerous factors but out of the control
of the ego car. However, after making a decision, the state of
the ego car is clear. Here a factorized structure is revealed,
where deviations of context transitions are dominant while
state transitions of the ego car contain almost no uncertainty.
A robust and relatively conservative decision of the ego car
is important to avoid crashing.

∗
This work is conducted at Microsoft. 1 Department of
Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Rotman business
school, University of Toronto 3 Microsoft Research Asia 4 Yau
Mathematical Sciences Center and Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Li Zhao
<lizo@microsoft.com>.

This is in contrast with existing works in robust RL, which
tackle the discrepancy of the entire transitions between
source and target domain, via various different approaches,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

