Dynamics-inspired Neuromorphic Visual Representation Learning

Zhengqi Pei 1 2 Shuhui Wang 1 3

Abstract

ered structure as the fully connected neural network (Hinton
et al., 2006), CNN (Krizhevsky et al., 2017) and Transformers (Liu et al., 2021). In real applications such as image
categorization, different neural structures lead to varying
performance on widely-used datasets (Golubeva et al., 2020)
such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Despite the great
success, ANNs have several intrinsic drawbacks, e.g., the
requirement of a massive number of parameters, gradient
vanishing or explosion (Pascanu et al., 2013), and redundant computations (RoyChowdhury et al., 2018). The fixed
structure of ANNs is considered suboptimal to approximate
the brain precisely and efficiently (Han et al., 2021).

This paper investigates the dynamics-inspired neuromorphic architecture for visual representation
learning following Hamilton’s principle. Our
method converts weight-based neural structure
to its dynamics-based form that consists of finite
sub-models, whose mutual relations measured by
computing path integrals amongst their dynamical
states are equivalent to the typical neural weights.
Based on the entropy reduction process derived
from the Euler-Lagrange equations, the feedback
signals interpreted as stress forces amongst submodels push them to move. We first train a
dynamics-based neural model from scratch and
observe that this model outperforms traditional
neural models on MNIST. We then convert several
pre-trained neural structures into dynamics-based
forms, followed by fine-tuning via entropy reduction to obtain the stabilized dynamical states. We
observe consistent improvements in these transformed models over their weight-based counterparts on ImageNet and WebVision in terms of
computational complexity, parameter size, testing accuracy, and robustness. Besides, we show
the correlation between model performance and
structural entropy, providing deeper insight into
weight-free neuromorphic learning.

It has been proved that evolving neural mechanisms, such as
NeuroEvolution (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002) and neural
architecture search (NAS) (Elsken et al., 2019) that alter the
layers and parameters, can significantly outperform their
counterparts with fixed structures (Assunção et al., 2018).
Nonetheless, these mechanisms established as dynamic neural networks (Han et al., 2021) require a large amount of
expensive fitness evaluations that are inefficient for real-time
learning (Stork et al., 2019) and appear unstable. As another
direction of research endeavors, some attempts, e.g., weight
agnostic neural network (Gaier & Ha, 2019), Spiking neural networks (Basegmez, 2014) and weight mirror (Akrout
et al., 2019), reconsider the importance of neural weight and
structure. They either rely on explicit neural weight computation or have yet to develop an efficient learning mechanism
to, for example, overcome the difficulties of training a spiking neural network via supervised learning (Huynh et al.,
2022), which are still inefficient due to the enormous search
space of model structure (Ren et al., 2021). In general, the
weight-based ANNs can hardly achieve unified structural
and numerical evolutions.

1. Introduction
A biological brain learns by both the structural evolution
via rewiring neural pathways (Chklovskii et al., 2004) and
the numerical evolution via strengthening/weakening neural
connections (Cho et al., 2015). Following the rule of biological neurons, the artificial neural networks (ANNs) mimic
the biological brain with neurons organized in a fixed lay-

In this study, we consider the structure and numerical learning from the neuromorphic dynamics aspect, inspired by
Hebb’s learning rule (Cooper, 2005), which states that neural connections between neurons with similar dynamic behaviors tend to be stronger. Rather than explicitly implementing Hebb’s rule of the neural connections as weights,
we represent the dynamic behaviors of neurons (neuronal
dynamics) as their spatial coordinates. Neurons with similar
dynamic behaviors have closer spatial coordinates, leading
to naturally stronger connections. To formalize the whole
mechanism, we first reinterpret the universal approximation

1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory. Zhengqi Pei
<peizhengqi22@mails.ucas.ac.cn>. Correspondence to: Shuhui
Wang <wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

