Projected Tensor Power Method for Hypergraph Community Recovery

Jinxin Wang 1 Yuen-Man Pun 2 Xiaolu Wang 1 Peng Wang 3 Anthony Man-Cho So 1

Abstract

in communities and fewer edge connections across communities. Over the past decades, SBM has served as an
important benchmark for validating and comparing various
statistical theories and computational methods for community detection under different settings; see Abbe (2017) for
a recent comprehensive survey of SBM. Despite the great
success of SBM achieved on graph data, pairwise interactions represented by SBM are inadequate for modeling
complex relational information in many real-world applications. For example, in social/academic networks, many
cooperative relations like chat groups and co-author lists
may consist of more than two people. Other applications
involving such kind of high-order relations include congress
voting networks (Lee et al., 2017), molecular interaction
networks (Michoel & Nachtergaele, 2012), as well as highorder graph matching (Duchenne et al., 2011). Hence, it is
natural and of keen interest to study an analogous model of
SBM for capturing the aforementioned high-order relations.

This paper investigates the problem of exact community recovery in the symmetric d-uniform (d ≥
2) hypergraph stochastic block model (d-HSBM).
In this model, a d-uniform hypergraph with n
nodes is generated by first partitioning the n nodes
into K ≥ 2 equal-sized disjoint communities
and then generating hyperedges with a probability
that depends on the community memberships of
d nodes. Despite the non-convex and discrete nature of the maximum likelihood estimation problem, we develop a simple yet efficient iterative
method, called the projected tensor power method,
to tackle it. As long as the initialization satisfies a
partial recovery condition in the logarithmic degree regime of the problem, we show that our
proposed method can exactly recover the hidden
community structure down to the informationtheoretic limit with high probability. Moreover,
our proposed method exhibits a competitive time
complexity of O(n log2 n/ log log n) when the
aforementioned initialization condition is met.
We also conduct numerical experiments to validate our theoretical findings.

In this work, to capture high-order interactions among multiple objects, we focus on the symmetric d-uniform hypergraph stochastic block model (d-HSBM) (Ghoshdastidar
& Dukkipati, 2014; 2017; Kim et al., 2018; Chien et al.,
2018; Ahn et al., 2018; Ke et al., 2019; Cole & Zhu, 2020;
Zhang & Tan, 2022)—a natural extension of the SBM—and
study the problem of exact community recovery. Specifically, in the d-HSBM, n nodes are partitioned into K ≥ 2
unknown equal-sized non-overlapping communities, and
each subset of nodes with cardinality d independently forms
an order-d hyperedge with probability p if these d nodes
are in the same community and with probability q otherwise. The goal is to identify the underlying community
structure exactly based on a realization of such a random hypergraph. In the logarithmic degree regime of the d-HSBM,
i.e., p = α log n/nd−1 and q = β log n/nd−1 for some
α > β > 0, it has been recently established in Kim et al.
(2017; 2018); Zhang & Tan (2022) that there exists a sharp
phase transition around a threshold: It is possible to exactly
identify
the underlying communities with high probability if
√
√
( α− β)2
> 1 and is impossible to recover the communiK d−1 (d−1)!

1. Introduction
Community detection (also known as graph clustering) is
a fundamental task in various scientific and engineering
fields ranging from data mining (Cabreros et al., 2016; Shi
& Malik, 2000) to network analysis (Girvan & Newman,
2002). One celebrated and perhaps the simplest probabilistic model for generating random graphs with community
structure is the stochastic block model (SBM) (Holland
et al., 1983), which tends to exhibit more edge connections
1
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
CIICADA Lab, School of Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra 3 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Correspondence to: Anthony Man-Cho So <manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.

√

√

2

α− β)
ties with non-vanishing probability if K( d−1
< 1. On
(d−1)!
top of this breakthrough, a natural question arises: Can we
design a computationally tractable algorithm that achieves
exact recovery down to the aforementioned informationtheoretic limit? In the past few decades, many computa-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

