Fair and Robust Estimation of Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
for Policy Learning

Kwangho Kim 1 2 José R. Zubizarreta 2 3

Abstract

1.1. Related Work
Understanding of treatment-effect heterogeneity and identifying subgroups that respond in a similar way to a given
treatment is of great importance across scientific domains.
The most common target estimand to study heterogeneity of
treatment effects is the conditional average treatment effect
(CATE). Various methods have been proposed to obtain accurate estimates of and valid inferences for the CATE, with
a special emphasis in recent years on incorporating flexible
machine learning tools (e.g., Imai et al., 2013; van der Laan
& Luedtke, 2014; Athey & Imbens, 2016; Wager & Athey,
2018; Künzel et al., 2017; Nie & Wager, 2017; Kennedy,
2020). See Jacob (2021) for a review.

We propose a simple and general framework for
nonparametric estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects under fairness constraints. Under
standard regularity conditions, we show that the
resulting estimators possess the double robustness
property. We use this framework to characterize
the trade-off between fairness and the maximum
welfare achievable by the optimal policy. We
evaluate the methods in a simulation study and
illustrate them in a real-world case study.

Although CATE estimation and inference are of independent importance, these tasks are central also to better target
interventions, for example by learning subgroup structures
or optimal policies. Much of the earlier attempts on these
areas involve postulating a parametric model for the CATE
to find the subgroups that would benefit from the given treatment (e.g., Murphy, 2003; Brinkley et al., 2010; Henderson
et al., 2010; Orellana et al., 2010). Optimal policies or treatment rules are often designed to identify subgroups with
CATEs larger than a certain threshold of interest, so that
investigators can select the most promising subgroups with
certain efficacy or safety (e.g., Zhao et al., 2013; Schnell
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017; Ballarini et al., 2018; Wang &
Rudin, 2022). More robust approaches to find optimal policies based on the property of doubly robustness have been
proposed in subsequent research (e.g., Zhang et al., 2012;
2013). In recent studies (Kallus, 2018; Kitagawa & Tetenov,
2018; Athey & Wager, 2021), flexible nonparametric approaches are discussed where an optimal policy is deployed
from a pre-specified class that encodes problem-specific
constraints (e.g., a budget or a capacity constraint).

1. Introduction
In today’s data-centric world, an increasing number of decisions that affect people’s lives are automatically made by
machine learning models. Such decision-making systems
are implemented in various domains, ranging from finance
to healthcare. Considering the multifaceted implications of
such decisions both at the individual and societal levels, it
is crucial to ensure that the underlying models are not only
accurate but fair. In this work, by fairness we mean that
the model estimates are not biased so that they do not systematically benefit or harm a specific group of people. The
need to address such algorithmic biases has given rise to a
plethora of works on algorithmic fairness (e.g., see Barocas
et al. (2019) for a review). However, despite the abundance
of studies in this general area, comparatively little attention
has been given to fairness in causal inference. In this work,
we propose a novel framework for estimating heterogeneous
treatment effects in a fair and robust manner, leveraging
recent developments in counterfactual optimization (Kim
et al., 2022a;b).

However, this type of data-driven policy-making processes
may result in discriminatory treatment of groups defined
by sensitive features, such as gender or race. In order to
mitigate these algorithmic biases, a wide array of fair estimation criteria have been developed by placing restrictions on the joint distribution of outcome variables and
sensitive features (e.g., Barocas et al., 2019; Hardt et al.,
2016). In some cases, such as risk assessment, counterfac-

1

Department of Statistics, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School,
MA, USA 3 Departments of Biostatistics and Statistics, Harvard
University, MA, USA. Correspondence to: José R. Zubizarreta
<zubizarreta@hcp.med.harvard.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

