Sparse Learning of Dynamical Systems in RKHS:
An Operator-Theoretic Approach

Boya Hou 1 Sina Sanjari 1 Nathan Dahlin 1 Subhonmesh Bose 1 Umesh Vaidya 2

Abstract

reduction, propagate uncertainties and analyze global stability of the dynamics among other application uses. Taking a
biological context, for instance, protein folding conformations can be understood in terms of metastable sets, which in
turn may be estimated using the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of transfer operators describing underlying molecular
dynamics (Klus et al., 2020a).

Transfer operators provide a rich framework for
representing the dynamics of very general, nonlinear dynamical systems. When interacting with
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS), descriptions of dynamics often incur prohibitive data
storage requirements, motivating dataset sparsification as a precursory step to computation. Further, in practice, data is available in the form
of trajectories, introducing correlation between
samples. In this work, we present a method
for sparse learning of transfer operators from βmixing stochastic processes, in both discrete and
continuous time, and provide sample complexity analysis extending existing theoretical guarantees for learning from non-sparse, i.i.d. data. In
addressing continuous-time settings, we develop
precise descriptions using covariance-type operators for the infinitesimal generator that aids in
the sample complexity analysis. We empirically
illustrate the efficacy of our sparse embedding approach through deterministic and stochastic nonlinear system examples.

Practically speaking, approximations to transfer operators
can be computed from data. Of the existing parametric
methods available, extended dynamic mode decomposition
(EDMD) (Williams et al., 2015), and its continuous-time
analog Mauroy & Goncalves (2019); Klus et al. (2020b);
Nüske et al. (2023) are perhaps the most frequently used.
Given the difficulty of selecting a proper set of basis functions in such techniques, non-parametric approximation
methods employing operator embeddings within RKHS
were proposed in (Williams et al., 2014) and (Klus et al.,
2020a) for discrete and continuous time systems, respectively. While such methods typically enjoy sample complexity bounds independent of the underlying system state
dimension, they suffer from other drawbacks. In particular,
as kernel-based methods automatically produce a set of basis functions from data, the resulting system descriptions
grow with input dataset size, making scalability a key hurdle
to their usage (Lever et al., 2016).

1. Introduction

Sparsification, the process of discarding selected input data
found to be redundant in some sense, is a common approach to improving scalability of kernel methods (Engel
et al., 2002; Wu et al., 2006; Richard et al., 2008; Koppel
et al., 2017). In this paper, we study the sample complexity
impacts of coherency-based (Richard et al., 2008) sparse
learning on transfer operators interacting with RKHS. To
the best of our knowledge, for discrete-time settings such
as Markov chains, existing analyses in this vein have been
limited to the following cases: (i) embeddings are estimated
from sparsified i.i.d. input/output data (Hou et al., 2021),
and thus are not applicable to the case where only a collection of trajectories is available (ii) the process is mixing but
stationary (Mollenhauer et al., 2020; Kostic et al., 2022), and
no sparsification is considered. Here, under the assumption
that system dynamics can be described by a non-stationary,
β-mixing process which converges to a unique stationary

Transfer operators such as the Koopman and the PerronFrobenius (PF) operators are central to global analysis of
complex dynamical systems across a variety of fields, including biology, engineering, finance, and physics. In contrast
to direct finite-dimensional, nonlinear state-space descriptions, operator approaches offer infinite-dimensional, but
linear system models. The spectra of such operators can be
utilized to characterize basins of attraction, perform model
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801,
USA 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Clemson University, Clemson SC, 29634, USA. Correspondence to: Boya Hou
<boyahou2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

