The Statistical Scope of Multicalibration

Georgy Noarov 1 Aaron Roth 1

Abstract

that there is a structured subset of examples G ⊂ X such
that f systematically under-estimates label means for examples x ∈ G — such a predictor can still be calibrated if it
compensates by over-estimating the mean labels for x ̸∈ G.

We make a connection between multicalibration
and property elicitation and show that (under mild
technical conditions) it is possible to produce a
multicalibrated predictor for a continuous scalar
property Γ if and only if Γ is elicitable. On the
negative side, we show that for non-elicitable
continuous properties there exist simple data distributions on which even the true distributional
predictor is not calibrated. On the positive side,
for elicitable Γ, we give simple canonical algorithms for the batch and the online adversarial setting, that learn a Γ-multicalibrated predictor. This
generalizes past work on multicalibrated means
and quantiles, and in fact strengthens existing online quantile multicalibration results. To further
counter-weigh our negative result, we show that
if a property Γ1 is not elicitable by itself, but is
elicitable conditionally on another elicitable property Γ0 , then there is a canonical algorithm that
jointly multicalibrates Γ1 and Γ0 ; this generalizes
past work on mean-moment multicalibration. Finally, as applications of our theory, we provide
novel algorithmic and impossibility results for fair
(multicalibrated) risk assessment.

Multicalibration was introduced by Hébert-Johnson et al.
(2018) to strengthen the notion of calibration. A multicalibrated predictor is parameterized by a collection of groups
G ⊆ 2X , and is calibrated not just overall, but also conditional on membership in G for all groups G ∈ G. That is, for
all v, G, we must have: E(x,y)∼D [y|f (x) = v, x ∈ G] = v.
Multicalibration was generalized from means to moments
by Jung et al. (2021). By way of an explicit counterexample, Jung et al. (2021) showed that the variance (and other
higher moments) cannot be multicalibrated by themselves
but can be multicalibrated jointly with the mean, i.e., as part
of a (mean, moment) pair. Later, Gupta et al. (2022) and
Jung et al. (2023) showed how to obtain a quantile analogue
of multicalibration, which requires that for any target coverage level τ ∈ [0, 1], for any v in the range of a predictor f
and for any G ∈ G: E[1[y ≤ f (x)]|f (x) = v, x ∈ G] = τ.
Thus, by now we have efficient batch (Hébert-Johnson
et al., 2018; Jung et al., 2021; 2023) and online (Gupta
et al., 2022; Bastani et al., 2022) multicalibration algorithms for several natural distributional properties (means
and quantiles), an impossibility result for the variance and
higher moments, and a result showing how to multicalibrate means and moments together despite moments not
being multicalibratable on their own (Jung et al., 2021).
But are these one-off results, or is there a more general
theory of multicalibration for distributional properties —
i.e., arbitrary functionals Γ : P → R mapping any distribution P ∈ P to a scalar statistic Γ(P )? To study this
question, it is natural to define (cf. Dwork et al. (2022))
that a predictor f is (G, Γ)-multicalibrated for property
Γ if for all groups G ∈ G and values γ in f ’s range,
it holds that: Γ(D|(f (x) = γ, x ∈ G)) = γ, where
D|(f (x) = γ, x ∈ G) is the data distribution conditioned
on the event {x : f (x) = γ, x ∈ G}. (When G = {X }, we
would simply say that f is Γ-calibrated.)

1. Introduction
Consider a distribution D over a labeled data domain
Z = X × R of examples with observable features x ∈ X
and labels y ∈ R. A predictor f : X → R is (mean)
calibrated if, informally, it correctly estimates the mean
label value even conditional on its own predictions: i.e.,
E(x,y)∼D [y|f (x) = v] = v for all predictions v. Calibration is a desirable property, but a weak one, since it only
refers to the average value of the label, averaged over all
examples such that f (x) = v; it might be, for example,
1
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: Georgy Noarov <gnoarov@seas.upenn.edu>, Aaron Roth
<aaroth@cis.upenn.edu>.

Our motivation In developing our theory of property multicalibration, we are guided by trying to answer several
questions of special significance:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

