Why do Nearest Neighbor Language Models Work?

Frank F. Xu 1 Uri Alon 1 Graham Neubig 1

Abstract

𝑃𝑘𝑁𝑁 non-parametric component

𝑃𝐿𝑀 parametric component

Language models (LMs) compute the probability of a text by sequentially computing a representation of an already-seen context and using this representation to predict the next word.
Currently, most LMs calculate these representations through a neural network consuming the
immediate previous context. However recently,
retrieval-augmented LMs have shown to improve
over standard neural LMs, by accessing information retrieved from a large datastore, in addition to their standard, parametric, next-word
prediction. In this paper, we set out to understand why retrieval-augmented language models,
and specifically why k-nearest neighbor language
models (kNN-LMs) perform better than standard
parametric LMs, even when the k-nearest neighbor component retrieves examples from the same
training set that the LM was originally trained
on. To this end, we perform analysis of various dimensions over which kNN-LM diverges
from standard LMs, and investigate these dimensions one by one. Empirically, we identify three
main reasons why kNN-LM performs better than
standard LMs: using a different input representation for predicting the next tokens, approximate
kNN search, and the importance of softmax temperature for the kNN distribution. Further, we
incorporate some insights into the standard parametric LM, improving performance without the
need for an explicit retrieval component. The
code is available at https://github.com/
frankxu2004/knnlm-why.

softmax()

𝐷

𝐷
ℎ𝑠𝑚

𝑊𝑠𝑚

softmax()
𝑉

𝐷
ℎ𝑑𝑠

+

Feed Forward
Network

FFN

Layer Norm

ATT

Multi Headed
Attention

𝐷

𝑊𝑑𝑠

𝑁𝑑𝑠

mask-to-k()
In 𝑘NN-LM:
top-𝑘()

In 𝑘NN-LM:
𝑁𝑑𝑠 : up to 5000𝑉

Figure 1: An illustration of the generalized formulation of
kNN-LM in Equation 2.

1. Introduction
Language modeling is the task of predicting the probability
of a text (often conditioned on context), with broad-spanning
applications across natural language processing (Bengio
et al., 2003; Merity et al., 2018; Baevski & Auli, 2018;
Brown et al., 2020). It is usually done by sequentially encoding a context ct using a trained neural network function
f , and computing the probability of the next word wt according to f (ct ) and a vector representation of wt .
Recently, retrieval-augmented LMs have shown a series of
impressive results (Grave et al., 2017; Guu et al., 2018; He
et al., 2020; Khandelwal et al., 2020b; Borgeaud et al., 2022;
Alon et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022). Retrieval-augmented
LMs compute next token distribution based not only on the
immediately preceding context ct and the model parameters,
but also on an external datastore, from which examples are
retrieved and incorporated into the base LM’s prediction.
One such model that is notable for both its simplicity and efficacy is the k-nearest neighbor language model (kNN-LM;
Khandelwal et al., 2020b). kNN-LM extends a trained base
LM by linearly interpolating the output distribution with a
kNN model. The nearest neighbors are retrieved according
to the distances between the current context embedding of
the base LM and all the context embeddings in the datastore.
The datastore is created by encoding all contexts from any
text, including the original LM training data.

1
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States. Correspondence to:
Frank F. Xu <fangzhex@cs.cmu.edu>, Graham Neubig <gneubig@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

One of the most surprising results from Khandelwal et al.
1

