Diffusion Based Representation Learning

Sarthak Mittal * 1 2 Korbinian Abstreiter * 3 Stefan Bauer 4 5 Bernhard Schölkopf 6 Arash Mehrjou † 3 6

Abstract

shapes (Cai et al., 2020), and audio (Chen et al., 2020b;
Kong et al., 2021). Two promising approaches apply stepwise perturbations to samples of the data distribution until
the perturbed distribution matches a known prior (Song &
Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020). A model is then trained to estimate the reverse process, which transforms samples of the
prior to samples of the data distribution (Saremi et al., 2018).
Diffusion models were further refined (Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021; Luhman & Luhman, 2021) and even achieved better image sample quality than GANs (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Ho et al., 2021; Mehrjou et al., 2017). Further, Song
et al. showed that these frameworks are discrete versions of
continuous-time perturbations modeled by stochastic differential equations and proposed a diffusion-based generative
modeling framework on continuous time. Unlike generative
models such as GANs and various forms of autoencoders,
the original form of diffusion models does not come with a
fixed architectural module that captures the representations
of the data samples.

Diffusion-based methods, represented as stochastic differential equations on a continuous-time
domain, have recently proven successful as nonadversarial generative models. Training such
models relies on denoising score matching, which
can be seen as multi-scale denoising autoencoders.
Here, we augment the denoising score matching framework to enable representation learning
without any supervised signal. GANs and VAEs
learn representations by directly transforming latent codes to data samples. In contrast, the introduced diffusion-based representation learning
relies on a new formulation of the denoising score
matching objective and thus encodes the information needed for denoising. We illustrate how
this difference allows for manual control of the
level of details encoded in the representation. Using the same approach, we propose to learn an
infinite-dimensional latent code that achieves improvements on state-of-the-art models on semisupervised image classification. We also compare
the quality of learned representations of diffusion
score matching with other methods like autoencoder and contrastively trained systems through
their performances on downstream tasks. Finally,
we also ablate with a different SDE formulation
for diffusion models and show that the benefits
on downstream tasks are still present on changing
the underlying differential equation.

Learning desirable representations has been an integral component of generative models such as GANs and VAEs (Bengio et al., 2013; Radford et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016;
van den Oord et al., 2017; Donahue & Simonyan, 2019;
Chen et al., 2020a; Schölkopf et al., 2021). Recent works
on visual representation learning achieve impressive performance on the downstream task of classification by applying
contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020d; Grill et al., 2020;
Chen & He, 2020; Caron et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020c).
However, contrastive learning requires additional supervision of augmentations that preserve the content of the data,
and hence these approaches are not directly comparable to
representations learned through generative systems like Variational Autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014) and the current work which are considered
fully unsupervised. Moreover, training the encoder to output
similar representation for different views of the same image
removes information about the applied augmentations, thus
the performance benefits are limited to downstream tasks
that do not depend on the augmentation, which has to be
known beforehand. Hence our proposed algorithm does
not restrict the learned representations to specific downstream tasks and solves a more general problem instead. We
provide a summary of contrastive learning approaches in
Appendix A. Similar to our approach, Denoising Autoen-

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based models have recently proven successful
for generating images (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song &
Ermon, 2020; Song et al., 2020), graphs (Niu et al., 2020),
∗

Equal contribution, † Senior authorship, 1 Mila 2 Université de
Montréal 3 ETH Zürich 4 Helmholtz AI 5 Technical University of
Munich 6 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems. Correspondence to: Sarthak Mittal <sarthmit@gmail.com>, Arash Mehrjou
<arash@distantvantagepoint.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

