Representation Learning with Multi-Step Inverse Kinematics:
An Efficient and Optimal Approach to Rich-Observation RL

Zakaria Mhammedi 1 Dylan J. Foster 2 Alexander Rakhlin 1

Abstract

context, a major challenge—in theory and practice—is to
develop algorithms that are practical and sample-efficient,
yet require minimal prior knowledge.

We study the design of sample-efficient algorithms for reinforcement learning in the presence
of rich, high-dimensional observations, formalized via the Block MDP problem. Existing algorithms suffer from either 1) computational intractability, 2) strong statistical assumptions that
are not necessarily satisfied in practice, or 3) suboptimal sample complexity. We address these
issues by providing the first computationally efficient algorithm that attains rate-optimal sample complexity with respect to the desired accuracy level, with minimal statistical assumptions.
Our algorithm, MusIK, combines systematic exploration with representation learning based on
multi-step inverse kinematics, a learning objective
in which the aim is to predict the learner’s own action from the current observation and observations
in the (potentially distant) future. MusIK is simple
and flexible, and can efficiently take advantage
of general-purpose function approximation. Our
analysis leverages several new techniques tailored
to non-optimistic exploration algorithms, which
we anticipate will find broader use.

We study the design of sample-efficient algorithms for richobservation reinforcement learning through a canonical
model known as the Block MDP (Jiang et al., 2017; Du
et al., 2019a). The Block MDP is a setting in which the observed state space X is high-dimensional (e.g., pixels from
a camera), but the dynamics are governed by a small, finite
latent state space (e.g., a robot’s actuator configuration).
The key structural property of the Block MDP model, which
makes the problem tractable statistically, is that the latent
states can be uniquely decoded from observations (avoiding issues of partial observability). However, the mapping
from observations to latent states is not known in advance,
necessitating the use of representation learning in tandem
with exploration. As such, the Block MDP is appealing as a
stylized testbed in which to study design of sample-efficient
algorithms based on representation learning.
Algorithm design for the Block MDP is particularly challenging because representation learning and exploration are
not only required, but must be interleaved: learning a good
representation is necessary to effectively control the agent
and explore, but it is difficult to learn such a representation
without exploring and gathering diverse feedback. In spite
of extensive research into the design of algorithms with provable guarantees (Jiang et al., 2017; Du et al., 2019a; Misra
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b; Uehara et al., 2022), all
existing algorithms suffer from one or more of the following
drawbacks:

1. Introduction
Many of the most promising application domains for reinforcement learning entail navigating unknown environments
in the presence of complex, high-dimensional sensory inputs. For example, a challenging task in robotic control is
to navigate to a goal state in a new, unmapped environment
using only raw pixels from a camera as feedback (Baker
et al., 2022; Bharadhwaj et al., 2022). Such tasks demand
reinforcement learning agents capable of both 1) deliberate
exploration, and 2) representation learning, as a means to
learn from high-dimensional (“rich”) observations. In this

1. Computational intractability.
2. Strong statistical assumptions that are not necessarily
satisfied in practice.
3. Suboptimal sample complexity.

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to: Zakaria Mhammedi <mhammedi@mit.edu>.

In more detail, computationally efficient algorithms can be
split into two families. The first achieves rate-optimal sample complexity with respect to the desired accuracy level
(Misra et al., 2020; Modi et al., 2021), but their guarantees scale inversely proportional to a reachability parameter

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

