Stratified Adversarial Robustness with Rejection

Jiefeng Chen * 1 Jayaram Raghuram * 1 Jihye Choi 1 Xi Wu 2 Yingyu Liang 1 Somesh Jha 1

Abstract

reject or abstain from predicting on adversarial examples.
This can be especially crucial when it comes to real-world,
safety-critical systems such as self-driving cars, where abstaining from prediction is often a much safer alternative
than making an incorrect decision. Along this line of adversarial robustness with rejection, several recent studies (Laidlaw & Feizi, 2019; Stutz et al., 2020; Sheikholeslami et al.,
2021; Pang et al., 2022; Tramèr, 2022; Kato et al., 2020)
have extended the standard definition of robust error to the
setting where the classifier can also reject inputs, and they
consider rejecting any perturbed input to be a valid decision
that does not count towards the robust error.

Recently, there is an emerging interest in adversarially training a classifier with a rejection option
(also known as a selective classifier) for boosting adversarial robustness. While rejection can
incur a cost in many applications, existing studies
typically associate zero cost with rejecting perturbed inputs, which can result in the rejection
of numerous slightly-perturbed inputs that could
be correctly classified. In this work, we study
adversarially-robust classification with rejection
in the stratified rejection setting, where the rejection cost is modeled by rejection loss functions
monotonically non-increasing in the perturbation
magnitude. We theoretically analyze the stratified rejection setting and propose a novel defense
method – Adversarial Training with Consistent
Prediction-based Rejection (CPR) – for building a
robust selective classifier. Experiments on image
datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
significantly outperforms existing methods under
strong adaptive attacks. For instance, on CIFAR10, CPR reduces the total robust loss (for different
rejection losses) by at least 7.3% under both seen
and unseen attacks.

A key limitation with these studies is that they associate
zero cost with the rejection decision on perturbed inputs 1 ,
whereas rejection can often have a high cost in many practical applications. For example, consider a selective classifier
for traffic signs in a self-driving system. If it rejects an input
(e.g., a perturbed “speed limit 60” sign), then the system
may not know how to react and thus need human intervention (e.g., adjust the speed). In such cases, rejection has
the cost of service-denial and manual intervention (Markoff,
2016; Cunningham & Regan, 2015; Mozannar & Sontag,
2020). In contrast to the practical consideration, existing
studies on adversarial robustness with rejection typically
do not explicitly consider a cost for rejecting perturbed inputs. The learned models thus may not satisfy the need
of these applications. Indeed, the models from existing
methods may end up rejecting too many slightly-perturbed
inputs that could be correctly classified. As a concrete example, on MNIST with ℓ∞ -perturbation magnitude 0.4, the
method CCAT (Stutz et al., 2020) achieves very good performance on the existing metrics such as 1.82% rejection
rate on clean test inputs and 75.50% robust accuracy with
detection (a metric introduced in (Tramèr, 2022); see Eq. 2).
However, for 99.30% of the test points, CCAT will reject
some small perturbations within magnitude as small as 0.02.
More results can be found in our experiments in Section 5.
In summary, while rejecting such small perturbations has
a cost, existing studies have not adequately measured the
quality of the selective classifiers, and the training methods
may not learn desired models for such applications.

1. Introduction
Building robust models against adversarial attacks is critical for designing secure and reliable machine learning systems (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2014; Biggio &
Roli, 2018; Madry et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). However,
the robust error of existing methods on complex datasets
is still not satisfactory (e.g., (Croce et al., 2020)). Also,
the robust models usually have poor generalization to threat
models that are not utilized during training (Stutz et al.,
2020; Laidlaw et al., 2021). Given these limitations, it is
important to design selective classifiers that know when to
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin at Madison 2 Google. Correspondence to:
Jiefeng Chen <jiefeng@cs.wisc.edu>.

To address this limitation, we revisit adversarially-robust

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Note that the rejection of clean inputs does incur a cost.

