MetaModulation: Learning Variational Feature Hierarchies
for Few-Shot Learning with Fewer Tasks

Wenfang Sun * 1 2 Yingjun Du * 3 Xiantong Zhen 4 Fan Wang 1 Ling Wang 1 Cees G.M. Snoek 3

Abstract

learning (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017; Finn et al., 2017). The crux for few-shot metalearning is to accrue prior meta-knowledge from a set of
meta-training tasks, which enables fast adaptation to a new
task with limited data. Despite remarkable achievements
of existing meta-learning algorithms for few-shot learning (Finn et al., 2017; Snell et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2022; Hu
et al., 2022; He et al., 2022) these works depend on a large
number of meta-training tasks during training. However,
an extensive collection of meta-training tasks is unlikely to
be available for many real-world applications. For example, in medical image diagnosis, a shortage of data samples
and tasks arises due to the need for specialist labeling by
physicians and patient privacy concerns. Additionally, rare
disease types (Wang et al., 2017) present challenges for
few-shot learning. In this paper, we focus on few-task metalearning, where the number of available tasks at training
time is limited.

Meta-learning algorithms are able to learn a new
task using previously learned knowledge, but they
often require a large number of meta-training
tasks which may not be readily available. To
address this issue, we propose a method for fewshot learning with fewer tasks, which we call
MetaModulation. The key idea is to use a neural network to increase the density of the metatraining tasks by modulating batch normalization
parameters during meta-training. Additionally,
we modify parameters at various network levels,
rather than just a single layer, to increase task
diversity. To account for the uncertainty caused
by the limited training tasks, we propose a variational MetaModulation where the modulation
parameters are treated as latent variables. We also
introduce learning variational feature hierarchies
by the variational MetaModulation, which modulates features at all layers and can consider task
uncertainty and generate more diverse tasks. The
ablation studies illustrate the advantages of utilizing a learnable task modulation at different levels
and demonstrate the benefit of incorporating probabilistic variants in few-task meta-learning. Our
MetaModulation and its variational variants consistently outperform state-of-the-art alternatives
on four few-task meta-learning benchmarks.

To tackle the few-task meta-learning problem, a variety
of task augmentation (Ni et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2021a)
and task interpolation (Lee et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2021b)
methods have been proposed. The key idea of task augmentation (Ni et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2021a) is to increase the
number of tasks from the support set and query set during
meta-training. The weakness of these approaches is that
they are only able to capture the global task distribution
within the distribution of the provided tasks. Task interpolation (Lee et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2021b) generates a
new task by interpolating the support and query sets of different tasks by Mixup (Verma et al., 2019) or a neural set
function (Lee et al., 2019). Here, a key question is how
to combine tasks and at what feature level. For example,
the state-of-the-art MLTI by (Yao et al., 2021b) randomly
selects the features of a single layer from two known tasks
for a linear mixup but ignores all other feature layers for
new task generation. It leads to a sub-optimal interpolated
task diversity. To address this limitation, we propose a new
task modulation strategy that captures the knowledge from
one known task at different levels.

1. Introduction
Learning to learn or meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987;
Thrun & Pratt, 1998), offers a powerful tool for few-shot
*

Equal contribution 1 Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China/P. R. China.
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026,
China/P. R. China. 3 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. 4 United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd., China. Correspondence to: Wenfang Sun <swf@mail.ustc.edu.cn>, Yingjun
Du <y.du@uva.nl>.

One key aspect of task modulation is the ability to leverage the representation of a single task at different levels of
abstraction. This allows the model to modulate representa-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

