Coupled Variational Autoencoder

Xiaoran Hao 1 Patrick Shafto 1 2

Abstract

isotropic multivariate Gaussian is often employed for both
prior distribution and variational posterior. A too simplistic
prior could lead to over-regularization and a too simplistic family of variational posterior distributions leaves a big
gap between true posterior and variational posterior, which
limits performance on complex data (Burda et al., 2016;
Kingma et al., 2016; Dai & Wipf, 2019). Although people
have proposed many methods to solve these problems. i.e enriching the variational family (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Kingma et al., 2016), using a more flexible (Tomczak &
Welling, 2018; Takahashi et al., 2019; Casale et al., 2018) or
non gaussian prior (Davidson et al., 2018; Joo et al., 2019),
these approaches remain restricted to parametric distributions. A second limitation is the “prior hole problem” which
refers to the mismatch between prior and aggregate posterior
that reduces the quality of ancestral samples (Rezende &
Viola, 2018; Aneja et al., 2021). The problem arises due to
the variational approximation and density estimation, which
when imperfect allows “holes”—areas where the aggregate
posterior has low density compared to the prior—where the
decoder has not been trained but has a high probability of
being generated under the prior.

Variational auto-encoders are powerful probabilistic models in generative tasks but suffer from generating low-quality samples which are caused by
the holes in the prior. We propose the Coupled
Variational Auto-Encoder (C-VAE), which formulates the VAE problem as one of Optimal Transport (OT) between the prior and data distributions.
The C-VAE allows greater flexibility in priors
and natural resolution of the prior hole problem
by enforcing coupling between the prior and the
data distribution and enables flexible optimization
through the primal, dual, and semi-dual formulations of entropic OT. Simulations on synthetic
and real data show that the C-VAE outperforms
alternatives including VAE, WAE, and InfoVAE
in fidelity to the data, quality of the latent representation, and in quality of generated samples.

1. Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2008; Kantorovich, 1942;
Cuturi, 2013) provides a cogent solution to both the restriction to parametric posterior distributions and the mismatch
between the prior and aggregate posterior distributions. Kantorovich OT computes optimal couplings between marginal
distributions, and entropic OT allows efficient computation.
Computational methods for solving EOT problems do not
require parametric distributions, which in principle allows
greater flexibility. Moreover, coupling the marginals—here
the prior and the empirical distribution of the data—can
resolve the prior hole problem.

The combination of variational Bayesian inference and deep
latent variable models resulted in one of the most powerful generative models, Variational autoencoders (VAEs)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). Scaleable
inference and simple, flexible latent representations have enabled VAEs to make substantial progress in fields including
image and video generation (Razavi et al., 2019; Yan et al.,
2021), audio and music synthesis (Dhariwal et al., 2020;
Kim et al., 2021), molecular processes (Lim et al., 2018),
semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al., 2014; Izmailov
et al., 2020), and unsupervised representation learning (Fortuin et al., 2018; van den Oord et al., 2017).

We propose the Coupled VAE (C-VAE), which generalizes
previous VAEs and addresses their limitations. We derive an
EOT-based algorithm for training the decoder and encoder.
We use the dual and semi-dual OT formulation solving
for the approximate posterior in the continuous prior case
and the Sinkhorn algorithm in the discrete prior case. We
can therefore work with an enriched family of approximate
posterior distributions, and any distribution as prior without
extra cost. The prior hole problem is resolved naturally via
marginal constraints of EOT. We illustrate the flexibility in
both prior and posterior, and the resolution of the prior hole

VAEs assume a latent prior over a generic space, and a
variational approximate posterior, which in principle allow
flexibility in modeling domains. However, for simplicity, an
1
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Rutgers
University-Newark, New Jersey, USA 2 School of Mathematics,
Institute for Advanced Study, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence
to: Xiaoran Hao <xh197@rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

