Towards Understanding and Improving GFlowNet Training

Max W. Shen 1 2 Emmanuel Bengio 3 Ehsan Hajiramezanali 1 Andreas Loukas 1 2
Kyunghyun Cho 1 2 4 Tommaso Biancalani 1

Abstract

alternative to local exploration methods (e.g., MCMC) that
can learn from data to potentially discover new, distant x
with high R(x). They have been applied to active learning, biological sequence design, and various probabilistic
learning tasks (Bengio et al., 2021a; Jain et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2022; Deleu et al., 2022).

Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) are a family of algorithms that learn a generative policy
to sample discrete objects x with non-negative
reward R(x). Learning objectives guarantee the
GFlowNet samples x from the target distribution
p∗ (x) ∝ R(x) when loss is globally minimized
over all states or trajectories, but it is unclear how
well they perform with practical limits on training
resources. We introduce an efficient evaluation
strategy to compare the learned sampling distribution to the target reward distribution. As flows
can be underdetermined given training data, we
clarify the importance of learned flows to generalization and matching p∗ (x) in practice. We
investigate how to learn better flows, and propose
(i) prioritized replay training of high-reward x,
(ii) relative edge flow policy parametrization, and
(iii) a novel guided trajectory balance objective,
and show how it can solve a substructure credit
assignment problem. We substantially improve
sample efficiency on biochemical design tasks.

1

GFlowNets aim to solve a challenging unnormalized density
estimation problem. Standard learning objectives guarantee
that the GFlowNet’s learned distribution over x matches
the target distribution p∗ (x) ∝ R(x) when training loss is
globally minimized over all states or trajectories, but many
practical domains of interest can have exponentially many
x and exponentially many trajectories per x, making this
infeasible with a practical amount of data and training time.
To gain insight into GFlowNet learning behavior under practical constraints, we design an efficient GFlowNet evaluation
scheme that precisely compares the learned sampling distribution to the target reward distribution. We discover that a
primary challenge during GFlowNet training is learning to
reduce the probability assigned to low-reward x, and that
GFlowNets can continue to oversample low-reward x even
after extensive training time.
When the space of x is large, not all MDP states are seen
during training, and a GFlowNet’s ability to match the target
distribution depends on how it generalizes from the flow
it learned during training. GFlowNets were originally designed for the setting where any given R(x) is compatible
with multiple flows (Bengio et al., 2021a) - that is, flows are
underdetermined. Despite this, learned flows have remained
understudied, with little to no sense of which learned flows
may be more desirable than others. Our analyses ground a
clear notion of optimality for learned flows: a flow is better
if it improves generalization to unseen states and helps a
GFlowNet match the target distribution better.

Introduction

A Generative Flow Network (GFlowNet) learns a policy
for generating discrete objects x, such as graphs, strings,
or sets, by iteratively taking actions that add simple building blocks to partial objects (substructures) (Bengio et al.,
2021a;b). GFlowNets view the data-generating Markov decision process (MDP) as a flow network, where “water”,
“unnormalized probability”, or non-negative reward R(x)
flows through the MDP, from the source node (a “null” object), to intermediate nodes (partial objects), to sink nodes
(complete objects). GFlowNets can be seen as an amortized

We analyze how existing training objectives learn flows, and
identify a credit assignment problem where the substructures of x most responsible for reward R(x) can be off the
sampling trajectory used to reach x, and under-credited by
popular training objectives. This is important for compositional reward functions, where the value of R(x) is partially
determined by the substructures of x. We propose guided
trajectory balance, a novel learning objective that is the first

1

Genentech, South San Francisco, USA 2 Prescient Design,
Genentech, South San Francisco, USA 3 Recursion Pharmaceuticals, Salt Lake City, Utah 4 Department of Computer Science, New
York University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Max W.
Shen <shen.max@gene.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

