Multi-Task Structural Learning using Local Task Similarity induced Neuron
Creation and Removal
Naresh Kumar Gurulingan 1 Bahram Zonooz * 1 2 Elahe Arani * 1 2

Abstract

Despite these improvements, using single task networks for
the multiple tasks required for scene understanding comes
with notable problems such as a linear increase in computational cost and a lack of inter-task communication.

Multi-task learning has the potential to improve
generalization by maximizing positive transfer
between tasks while reducing task interference.
Fully achieving this potential is hindered by manually designed architectures that remain static
throughout training. On the contrary, learning
in the brain occurs through structural changes that
are in tandem with changes in synaptic strength.
Thus, we propose Multi-Task Structural Learning
(MTSL) that simultaneously learns the multi-task
architecture and its parameters. MTSL begins
with an identical single-task network for each
task and alternates between a task-learning phase
and a structural-learning phase. In the task learning phase, each network specializes in the corresponding task. In each of the structural learning
phases, starting from the earliest layer, locally
similar task layers first transfer their knowledge
to a newly created group layer before being removed. MTSL then uses the group layer in place
of the corresponding removed task layers and
moves on to the next layers. Our empirical results show that MTSL achieves competitive generalization with various baselines and improves
robustness to out-of-distribution data. Code available at https://github.com/NeurAI-Lab/MTSL.

Multi-Task Learning (MTL), on the other hand, with the
aid of shared layers provides favorable benefits over STL
such as improved inference efficiency and positive information transfer between tasks. However, a notable drawback
of sharing layers is task interference. Existing works have
attempted to alleviate task interference by modifying the
architecture (Kanakis et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019), determining which tasks to group together using a similarity notion
(Standley et al., 2020; Fifty et al., 2021; Vandenhende et al.,
2020; Gurulingan et al., 2022), balancing task loss functions (Kendall et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020;
Lin et al., 2019), or learning the architecture (Guo et al.,
2020; Lu et al., 2017). Although these methods have shown
promise, progress can be made by drawing inspiration from
the brain, which is the only known intelligent system that
excels in multi-task learning. The inner mechanisms of the
brain, although not fully understood, can guide research
in ANNs through simplified notions. Neuron creation and
neuron removal (Maile et al., 2022) are simplified notions
that can aid in the automated design of Multi-Task Networks
(MTNs).
Neuron removal presents the opportunity to start from
a dense set of neurons and move toward a sparse set of
neurons. In the early stages of brain development, neural
circuits consist of excess neurons and connections that provide a rich information pipeline (Maile et al., 2022). This
pipeline allows neural circuits to learn specialized functions
while undergoing neuron removal and synaptic pruning (Riccomagno & Kolodkin, 2015). Thereby, moving from a dense
architecture consisting of multiple single-task networks to a
sparse multi-task architecture could be beneficial.

1. Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have exhibited strong
performance in various tasks essential for scene understanding. Single-Task Learning (STL) (Yu et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2020b; Orsic et al., 2019) has been largely at the center
of this exhibit driven by custom task-specific improvements.

Neuron creation is an open-ended operation due to the
difficulty involved in deciding where, how, and when to
create neurons (Evci et al., 2022). In the brain, local communication between neurons is an important part of learning.
Learning rules that modulate synaptic strength are local in
nature (Kudithipudi et al., 2022) and local neural activity
could be responsible for the creation of neurons (Luhmann

*

Equal contribution 1 Advanced Research Lab, NavInfo Europe,
Netherlands 2 Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands. Correspondence to:
Naresh Gurulingan <gurulingan.nareshkumar@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

