Symmetry-Aware Robot Design with Structured Subgroups

Heng Dong 1 Junyu Zhang 2 Tonghan Wang 3 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract
Robot design aims at learning to create robots
that can be easily controlled and perform tasks
efficiently. Previous works on robot design have
proven its ability to generate robots for various
tasks. However, these works searched the robots
directly from the vast design space and ignored
common structures, resulting in abnormal robots
and poor performance. To tackle this problem,
we propose a Symmetry-Aware Robot Design
(SARD) framework that exploits the structure
of the design space by incorporating symmetry
searching into the robot design process. Specifically, we represent symmetries with the subgroups
of dihedral group and search for the optimal symmetry in structured subgroups. Then robots are
designed under the searched symmetry. In this
way, SARD can design efficient symmetric robots
while covering the original design space, which
is theoretically analyzed. We further empirically
evaluate SARD on various tasks, and the results
show its superior efficiency and generalizability.

(𝑎)

(𝑏)

(𝑐)

(𝑑)

Figure 1. Time-lapse images of robots with different symmetries
performing various tasks: (a, c) running forward; (b, d) reaching
random goals. Robots designed by prior work (Yuan et al., 2021)
do not satisfy any non-trivial symmetry and might be hard to
control: (a) the robot deviated from the right direction; (b) the robot
missed the goal. Different tasks may require different symmetries:
(c) bilateral symmetry is suitable for tasks involving only running
forward; (d) radial symmetry for reaching random goals.

ponent, the design of robots has attracted scant attention
and achieved limited success in the literature. The field of
automatic robot design aims at searching for optimal robot
morphologies that can be easily controlled and perform various tasks efficiently. This problem has been a long-lasting
challenge, mainly for two reasons: 1) the design space, including skeletal structures and attributes of joints and limbs,
is large and combinatorial, and 2) the evaluation of each design requires training and testing an optimal control policy
which is often computationally expensive.

1. Introduction
Humans have been dreaming of creating creatures with morphological intelligence for decades (Sims, 1994a;b; Yuan
et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021b). A promising solution
for this challenging problem is to generate robots with various functionalities in simulated environments (Wang et al.,
2019; Yuan et al., 2021), in which robots’ functionalities
are largely determined by their designs and control policies. Learning control policies for handcrafted robots with
fixed designs has been extensively studied in previous works
(Schulman et al., 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2020; Dong et al., 2022). However, as the other critical com-

For automatic robot design, prior works (Gupta et al., 2021b;
Wang et al., 2019) typically adopt evolutionary search (ES)
algorithms, where robots are sampled from a large population and learn to perform tasks independently during an
iteration. At the end of each iteration, robots with the worst
performance are eliminated, and the surviving robots will
produce child robots by random mutations to maintain the
population. Recently, Yuan et al. (2021) discussed the low
sample efficiency problem in ES-based methods, e.g., robots
in the population do not share their training experiences and
zeroth-order optimization methods such as ES are sampleinefficient for high-dimensional search space (Vemula et al.,
2019). They used reinforcement learning (RL) to sample
and optimize robot designs by incorporating the design process into the control process and sharing the design and
control policies across all robots.

1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Huazhong University of Science and
Technology 3 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Heng
Dong <drdhxi@gmail.com>, Chongjie Zhang <zhangchongjie@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Despite the progress, robots designed by these approaches
are intuitively abnormal, empirically hard to control, and
1

