Neural Wave Machines: Learning Spatiotemporally Structured Representations
with Locally Coupled Oscillatory Recurrent Neural Networks

T. Anderson Keller 1 Max Welling 1

Abstract
Traveling waves have been measured at a diversity
of regions and scales in the brain, however a consensus as to their computational purpose has yet to
be reached. An intriguing hypothesis is that traveling waves serve to structure neural representations
both in space and time, thereby acting as an inductive bias towards natural data. In this work,
we investigate this hypothesis by introducing the
Neural Wave Machine (NWM) – a locally coupled
oscillatory recurrent neural network capable of exhibiting traveling waves in its hidden state. After
training on simple dynamic sequences, we show
that this model indeed learns static spatial structure such as topographic organization, and further
uses complex spatiotemporal structure such as
traveling waves to encode observed transformations. To measure the computational implications
of this structure, we use a suite of sequence classification and physical dynamics modeling tasks
to show that the NWM is both more parameter
efficient, and is able to forecast future trajectories
of simple physical dynamical systems more accurately than existing state of the art counterparts.
We conclude with a discussion of how this model
may allow for novel investigations of the computational hypotheses surrounding traveling waves
which were previously challenging or impossible.

Figure 1: Overview of the Neural Wave Machine. The input
sequence u is encoded with fθ to act as a driving term in
the hidden state x which is modeled temporally (ẍ) as a
network of locally coupled oscillators. The network is then
trained to reconstruct the input sequence: û = gθ (x). The
yellow arrows track a traveling wavefront over time.
impossible (Wolpert, 1996). Modern machine learning researchers have adopted many task-specific inductive biases
almost by default, such as convolution for spatially structured data. Similarly, natural intelligence as implemented by
biological systems also has many inductive biases by virtue
of the diversity of constraints that it must simultaneously satisfy such as metabolic efficiency. The fields of psychology,
cognitive science, and neuroscience have all studied these
biases and their observed signatures, often hypothesizing
about their computational implications.
One such observation which has recently gained increasing
interest in the neuroscience community is that of traveling
waves of neural activity. Such waves have been measured
at both local (Davis et al., 2020) and global (Muller et al.,
2016b) scales, and have been shown to be strongly related to
alpha, theta, and gamma oscillations in a variety of brain regions (Zhang et al., 2018; Besserve et al., 2015). Prompted
by these observations, a large number of theoretical hypotheses have been developed which attempt to explain the
computational purposes of traveling waves (Muller et al.,
2018), and the inductive biases which they may mediate.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, inductive biases can be understood as
limiting the search space of possible hypotheses a priori, and
indeed, it is known that without any inductive bias, learning generalizations beyond the training data is theoretically
1

UvA Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: T. Anderson Keller
<t.anderson.keller@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Of particular relevance to the machine learning community, one hypothesis is that traveling waves serve to bene1

