Does Sparsity Help in Learning Misspecified Linear Bandits?

Jialin Dong 1 Lin F. Yang 1

Abstract

tion approximation framework has been introduced, which
first extracts feature vectors for state/action space and then
approximates the value functions of all policies in RL (or
the reward functions of all actions in bandit problems) with
feature representations. In some real-world applications,
feature representations may not have vanilla linear mapping. In these scenarios, a linear feature representation can
approximate the value functions (or the reward functions)
with a small uniform error known as misspecification. Unfortunately, Du et al. (2020) shows that searching for an
O(ε)-optimal action in these scenarios requires pulling at
least Ω(exp(d)) queries. However, if we relax the goal of
finding O(ε)-optimal action, there is still a chance. Instead,
Lattimore et al. (2020) find√an action that is suboptimal
with an error of at most O(ε d) within poly(d/ε) queries,
where d is the dimension of the feature vectors.

Recently, the study of linear misspecified bandits has generated intriguing implications of the
hardness of learning in bandits and reinforcement learning (RL). In particular, Du et al. (2020)
shows that even if a learner is given linear features in Rd that approximate the rewards in a bandit or RL with a uniform error of ε, searching for
an O(ε)-optimal action requires pulling at least
Ω(exp(d)) queries. Furthermore,√Lattimore et al.
(2020) show that a degraded O(ε d)-optimal solution can be learned within poly(d/ε) queries.
Yet it is unknown whether a structural assumption on the ground-truth
√ parameter, such as sparsity, could break ε d barrier. In this paper, we
address this question by showing that algorithms
can obtain O(ε)-optimal actions by querying
Õ(exp(mε)) actions, where m is the sparsity parameter, removing the exp(d)-dependence. We
further show (with an information-theoretical
lower bound) that this is the best possible if one
demands an error mδ ε for 0 < δ < 1. We further
show that poly(m/ε) bounds are possible when
the linear features are “good”. These results provide a nearly complete picture of how sparsity
can help in misspecified bandit learning and provide a deeper understanding of when linear features are “useful” for bandit and reinforcement
learning with misspecification.

By scrutinizing the novel result√proposed by Lattimore
et al. (2020), the dependence on d raises concern regarding the potential blowup of the approximation error. We
are modestly optimistic that some structural patterns, such
as sparsity, in√feature representation schemes are beneficial
to break the ε d barrier. This idea comes from a vast literature that studies high-dimensional statistics in sparse linear
regression (Bühlmann & Van De Geer, 2011; Wainwright,
2019) and successfully applies it to sparse linear bandits
(Sivakumar et al., 2020; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012; Bastani & Bayati, 2020; Wang et al., 2018; Su et al., 2020;
Lattimore et al., 2015). Moreover, the sparsity-structure
in linear bandits are meaningful and crucial to many practical applications where there are many potential features
but no apparent evidence on which are relevant, such as
personalized health care and online advertising (Carpentier
& Munos, 2012; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012). The essential difference in sparse linear bandits between our paper
and state-of-the-art is the study of the possible model misspecification; i.e., the ground truth reward means might be
an ε error away from a sparse linear representation for any
action.

1. Introduction
Bandit and reinforcement learning problems in real-world
applications, e.g., autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021),
healthcare (Esteva et al., 2019), recommendation system (Bouneffouf et al., 2012), marketing and advertising
(Schwartz et al., 2017), are challenging due to the magnificent state/action space. To address this challenge, a func-

Model misspecification is widely seen in practice and has
been widely studied only in the dense model (also known as
misspecified linear bandits) (Bogunovic & Krause, 2021;
Takemura et al., 2021; Zanette et al., 2020a; Wang et al.,
2020a), where
√ the best polynomial-sample algorithm suffers a O(ε d) estimation error, which can be prominent

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Jialin
Dong, Lin F. Yang <jialind@g.ucla.edu, linyang@ee.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

