When do Minimax-fair Learning and Empirical Risk Minimization Coincide?

Harvineet Singh* 1 Matthäus Kleindessner 2 Volkan Cevher 3 2 Rumi Chunara 1 Chris Russell 2

Abstract

ing groups (Zietlow et al., 2022). Thus, minimax-fairness
can be a preferable notion to enforce when performance
improvements for any group is more desirable than parity.

Minimax-fair machine learning minimizes the error for the worst-off group. However, empirical
evidence suggests that when sophisticated models are trained with standard empirical risk minimization (ERM), they often have the same performance on the worst-off group as a minimaxtrained model. Our work makes this counterintuitive observation concrete. We prove that if
the hypothesis class is sufficiently expressive and
the group information is recoverable from the features, ERM and minimax-fairness learning formulations indeed have the same performance on the
worst-off group. We provide additional empirical
evidence of how this observation holds on a wide
range of datasets and hypothesis classes. Since
ERM is fundamentally easier than minimax optimization, our findings have implications on the
practice of fair machine learning.

A wide range of algorithms have been proposed for learning minimax-fair predictors (Martinez et al., 2020; Diana
et al., 2021b; Abernethy et al., 2022; Pethick et al., 2023;
Shekhar et al., 2021). In principle, these algorithms support
learning from arbitrarily complex hypothesis classes ranging from linear models to neural networks. However, they
are typically evaluated on linear models. When using neural
networks, for example, empirical evidence suggests that
minimax predictors do not consistently improve upon ERM
predictors in terms of the maximum group error (Gardner
et al., 2022; Pfohl et al., 2022). This can be explained in retrospect that highly flexible models can fit each group’s data
well even under the ERM objective. In this work, we seek
to formalize this observation and study the question how do
minimax-fair learning and ERM relate to each other?
We bridge this gap in the understanding of the minimax
predictors both theoretically and empirically. We show that
ERM is minimax-fair when trained under a flexible hypothesis class and given access to the group information. We show
that this observation holds empirically for different hypothesis classes like decision trees. The results have implications
for the practice of learning minimax-fair predictors.

1. Introduction
There have been many proposals to address systematic differences in model performance among protected groups.
While the majority of proposals in algorithmic fairness aim
to equalize the performance across groups (Mitchell et al.,
2021), more recent work in fairness aims to improve performance on the worst-affected group(s) without needlessly decreasing performance in the other groups. Such approaches
are referred to as minimax-fairness (Martinez et al., 2020).

Indeed, simple training paradigms like ERM should be comprehensively tested before going to more involved, and often harder, optimization solutions. Minimax optimization
is hard for even convex problems where standard versions
of gradient descent solvers might not converge. For nonconvex non-concave problems, such as minimax-fair learning with non-convex loss functions, the challenges persist
(Hsieh et al., 2021). In contrast, ERM with gradient descent
based solvers can avoid saddle points (Lee et al., 2019).

Minimax refers to minimizing the maximum error across
groups. This framing of the fairness objective avoids unintended consequences of the equal-error proposal – achieving
equality in all groups may end up increasing error on the
well-performing groups without any gains for the remain-

Assuming that the hypothesis class is sufficiently expressive,
we claim for a range of minimax-related notions of fairness
(see Figure 1):

*

Work done during an internship at Amazon Web Services.
New York University, New York, USA 2 Amazon Web Services,
Tübingen, Germany 3 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Harvineet Singh
<hs3673@nyu.edu>.

1

1. ERM is minimax-fair given perfect group information.
ERM has the same worst-case risk as the minimax
predictor trained on the known group information.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

2. ERM is group-optimal given approximate group information. If the predictor of group information is
1

