LoSparse: Structured Compression of Large Language Models based on
Low-Rank and Sparse Approximation

Yixiao Li * 1 Yifan Yu * 1 Qingru Zhang 1 Chen Liang 1 Pengcheng He 2 Weizhu Chen 2 Tuo Zhao 1

Abstract

lion parameters, and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) comprises
up to 175 billion parameters. Their extreme sizes bring
challenges in deploying the models to practical applications
due to memory and computational requirements.

Transformer models have achieved remarkable
results in various natural language tasks, but they
are often prohibitively large, requiring massive
memories and computational resources. To reduce the size and complexity of these models,
we propose LoSparse (Low-Rank and Sparse approximation), a novel model compression technique that approximates a weight matrix by the
sum of a low-rank matrix and a sparse matrix.
Our method combines the advantages of both lowrank approximations and pruning, while avoiding their limitations. Low-rank approximation
compresses the coherent and expressive parts in
neurons, while pruning removes the incoherent
and non-expressive parts in neurons. Pruning
enhances the diversity of low-rank approximations, and low-rank approximation prevents pruning from losing too many expressive neurons. We
evaluate our method on natural language understanding, question answering, and natural language generation tasks. We show that it significantly outperforms existing compression methods. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/yxli2123/LoSparse

To circumvent aforementioned challenges, model compression methods are widely applied to reduce model size at
only a small expense of model performance. One common compression technique is pruning (Zhu & Gupta, 2017;
Louizos et al., 2017), which removes parameters according
to their importance scores (Han et al., 2015; Molchanov
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2022). Pruning methods can be divided into two categories: structured and unstructured pruning. In structured pruning (McCarley et al., 2019; Fan et al.,
2019; Lagunas et al., 2021), weight matrices are pruned
neuron/column-wise. This enables us to store pruned models by directly deleting neurons/columns in memory. As for
unstructured pruning (Han et al., 2015; Sanh et al., 2020),
however, weight matrices are pruned entry-wise, which
makes it challenging to store and manipulate. For this reason, we focus on structured pruning. One popular structured
pruning method is iterative pruning (ITP), which conducts
training and pruning simultaneously. That is, after parameters are updated every iteration, it evaluates the importance
score of each neuron. Neurons that have low importance
scores are considered non-expressive and should be pruned.
Beside the ITP, Movement pruning (Sanh et al., 2020) and
CoFi (Xia et al., 2022) are also popular pruning methods.

1. Introduction

Unfortunately, pruning is not necessarily effective. It will
inevitably remove expressive neurons given a high sparsity
level. Liang et al. (2021) found heavy pruning hurts the
performance severely, although light pruning can enhance
the generalization of pre-trained language models. As an
example, Figure 1 illustrates this phenomenon. Ideally (Figure 1b), most of the neurons should be redundant and have
low importance scores so that we can remove these neurons
without hurting the performance too much. However, in reality (Figure 1a), even if a significant portion of neurons are
non-expressive, the majority of neurons are still expressive
and are likely to be pruned if the sparsity level is high.

Large transformer models have exhibited superior performance in various natural language tasks, such as natural
language understanding, question answering, and natural
language generation (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019;
He et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020).
However, these models contain billions of parameters. For
example, T5 (Radford et al., 2019) consists of up to 11 bil*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 Microsoft Azure AI, Bellevue, USA. Correspondence to: Yixiao Li <yixiaoli@gatech.edu>, Yifan Yu
<yyu429@gatech.edu>, Tuo Zhao <tourzhao@gatech.edu>.

Another popular compression technique is low-rank approximation (Hsu et al., 2022a; Hajimolahoseini et al.; Tahaei
et al., 2021), which is designed to compress the expressive

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

