Retrosynthetic Planning with Dual Value Networks

Guoqing Liu * 1 Di Xue * 2 Shufang Xie 3 Yingce Xia 1 Austin Tripp 4
Krzysztof Maziarz 1 Marwin Segler 1 Tao Qin 1 Zongzhang Zhang 2 Tie-Yan Liu 1
Reactants

Product

Abstract

Backward

Retrosynthesis, which aims to find a route to synthesize a target molecule from commercially available starting materials, is a critical task in drug discovery and materials design. Recently, the combination of ML-based single-step reaction predictors with multi-step planners has led to promising
results. However, the single-step predictors are
mostly trained offline to optimize the single-step
accuracy, without considering complete routes.
Here, we leverage reinforcement learning (RL) to
improve the single-step predictor, by using a treeshaped MDP to optimize complete routes. Specifically, we propose a novel online training algorithm, called Planning with Dual Value Networks
(PDVN), which alternates between the planning
phase and updating phase. In PDVN, we construct
two separate value networks to predict the synthesizability and cost of molecules, respectively.
To maintain the single-step accuracy, we design a
two-branch network structure for the single-step
predictor. On the widely-used USPTO dataset,
our PDVN algorithm improves the search success
rate of existing multi-step planners (e.g., increasing the success rate from 85.79% to 98.95% for
Retro*, and reducing the number of model calls
by half while solving 99.47% molecules for RetroGraph). Additionally, PDVN helps find shorter
synthesis routes (e.g., reducing the average route
length from 5.76 to 4.83 for Retro*, and from
5.63 to 4.78 for RetroGraph).

(a) Single-step reaction prediction
Intermediate molecule

Building blocks

Target molecule

(b) Multi-step retrosynthetic planning

Figure 1. a) The single-step reaction predictor, which predicts
potential ways to break a molecule into reactants at each step. b)
The multi-step planner, which searches for a complete route by
iteratively calling the predictor. The goal of retrosynthesis is to
find a synthesis route ending up in the building block molecules
for a target molecule.

as drug discovery and materials design. Given a target
molecule, the goal of retrosynthesis is to identify a series of chemically valid reactions starting from the target
molecule until reaching commercially available building
block molecules in a backward and recursive manner. There
are many theoretically-possible transformations that can be
applied at each step. In addition, each intermediate molecule
could be broken into several reactants in one reaction. As
a result, the search space of retrosynthesis is enormous
and makes the problem challenging even for experienced
chemists.
Retrosynthesis has drawn much attention in the machine
learning (ML) community in recent years (Segler et al.,
2018; Dong et al., 2021). As shown in Fig. 1, current
ML-based retrosynthesis consists of 1) a single-step reaction predictor to predict a set of potential reactions given a
molecule; 2) a multi-step planner to search for a complete
synthesis route by iteratively calling the predictor. Many
algorithms have been proposed for the single-step predictor
through supervised learning (SL) based on existing realworld reaction datasets (Lowe, 2012), such as templatebased methods (Segler & Waller, 2017; Coley et al., 2017;
Dai et al., 2019) and template-free methods (Liu et al., 2017;

1. Introduction
Retrosynthesis is one of the fundamental problems in organic chemistry, widely used in important applications such
*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research AI4Science 2 National
Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 3 Renmin University of China 4 University of Cambridge.
Correspondence to: Tao Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

