Make-An-Audio: Text-To-Audio Generation with Prompt-Enhanced Diffusion
Models
Rongjie Huang * 1 Jiawei Huang * 1 Dongchao Yang * 2 Yi Ren 3 Luping liu 1 Mingze Li 1 Zhenhui Ye 1
Jinglin Liu 1 Xiang Yin 3 Zhou Zhao 1

Abstract

Text-to-audio

Large-scale multimodal generative modeling has
created milestones in text-to-image and text-tovideo generation. Its application to audio still
lags behind for two main reasons: the lack of
large-scale datasets with high-quality text-audio
pairs, and the complexity of modeling long continuous audio data. In this work, we propose
Make-An-Audio with a prompt-enhanced diffusion model that addresses these gaps by 1) introducing pseudo prompt enhancement with a
distill-then-reprogram approach, it alleviates data
scarcity with orders of magnitude concept compositions by using language-free audios; 2) leveraging spectrogram autoencoder to predict the selfsupervised audio representation instead of waveforms. Together with robust contrastive languageaudio pretraining (CLAP) representations, MakeAn-Audio achieves state-of-the-art results in both
objective and subjective benchmark evaluation.
Moreover, we present its controllability and generalization for X-to-Audio with “No Modality
Left Behind”, for the first time unlocking the
ability to generate high-definition, high-fidelity
audios given a user-defined modality input.1

Rain falls softly in the distance

Audio-to-audio (Inpainting)

Image-to-audio

Video-to-audio

Figure 1. No Modality Left Behind: Make-An-Audio generalizes
well to X-to-Audio with multiple user-defined inputs (text, audio,
image and video), it empowers humans to create rich and diverse
audio content, opening up to a various applications with personalized transfer and fine-grained control.

et al., 2021) and text-to-video (Singer et al., 2022; Hong
et al., 2022) models are now able to vividly depict the visual
scene described by a text prompt, and empower humans to
create rich and diverse visual content with unprecedented
ease. However, replicating this success for audios is limited
for the lack of large-scale datasets with high-quality textaudio pairs, and the extreme complexity of modeling long
continuous signal data.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2020; Kingma
& Dhariwal, 2018; Ho et al., 2020) have recently exhibited
high-quality samples in various data modalities. With largescale training data and powerful models, kinds of text-toimage (Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2021; Nichol

In this work, we propose Make-An-Audio, with a promptenhanced diffusion model for text-to-audio (T2A) generation. To alleviate the issue of data scarcity, we introduce a
pseudo prompt enhancement approach to construct natural
languages that align well with audio, opening up the usage
of orders of magnitude unsupervised language-free data. To
tackle the challenge of modeling complex audio signals in
T2A generation, we introduce a spectrogram autoencoder to
predict the self-supervised representations instead of waveforms, which guarantees efficient compression and highlevel semantic understanding. Together with the power of
contrastive language-audio pretraining (CLAP) (Radford
et al., 2021; Elizalde et al., 2022) and high-fidelity diffusion

*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University 2 Peking University
Speech & Audio Team, ByteDance AI Lab. Correspondence to:
Zhou Zhao <ZhaoZhou@zju.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Audio
samples
are
available
at
https://
Make-An-Audio.github.io

1

