Gibbsian Polar Slice Sampling

Philip Schär 1 Michael Habeck 1 Daniel Rudolf 2

Abstract

Since exact sampling is generally infeasible, we aim to
produce approximate samples from ν, i.e. realizations of
random variables whose distributions are, in some sense,
close to ν.

Polar slice sampling (Roberts & Rosenthal, 2002)
is a Markov chain approach for approximate sampling of distributions that is difficult, if not impossible, to implement efficiently, but behaves
provably well with respect to the dimension. By
updating the directional and radial components
of chain iterates separately, we obtain a family
of samplers that mimic polar slice sampling, and
yet can be implemented efficiently. Numerical
experiments in a variety of settings indicate that
our proposed algorithm outperforms the two most
closely related approaches, elliptical slice sampling (Murray et al., 2010) and hit-and-run uniform slice sampling (MacKay, 2003). We prove
the well-definedness and convergence of our methods under suitable assumptions on the target distribution.

To pursue this goal, we rely on Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC), which implements an irreducible and aperiodic
Markov kernel P that leaves ν invariant. For such a kernel, well-established theory shows that the distribution of
iterates Xn of a Markov chain (Xn )n∈N0 with transition
kernel P converges to ν as n → ∞. An MCMC method
generates a realization (xn )1≤n≤N ⊂ Rd of X1 , . . . , XN
from (Xn )n∈N0 and uses some or all of the realized chain
iterates xn as approximate samples of ν. Here, we focus on
slice sampling MCMC methods, that use auxiliary “slice”
or threshold random variables (Tn )n∈N0 . In general, Tn
given Xn−1 follows a uniform distribution over an interval that depends on Xn−1 . Specifically, we consider polar
slice sampling (PSS), which was proposed by Roberts &
Rosenthal (2002). PSS factorizes the target density ϱν into
(1)
ϱν (x) = ϱ(0)
ν (x)ϱν (x),

1. Introduction

ϱ(0)
ν (x) = ∥x∥

Bayesian inference heavily relies on efficient sampling
schemes of posterior distributions that are defined on highdimensional spaces with probability density functions that
can only be evaluated up to their normalizing constants.
We develop a Markov chain method that can be used to
approximately sample a large variety of target distributions.
For convenience we frame the problem in a black-box setting. We assume that the distribution of interest ν is defined
on (Rd , B(Rd )) and given by a density, i.e. a measurable
function ϱν : Rd → R+ := [0, ∞), such that
R
ϱν (x)dx
ν(A) = R A
,
A ∈ B(Rd ).
ϱ
(x)dx
ν
d
R

1−d

,

(1)

d−1
ϱ(1)
ϱν (x)
ν (x) = ∥x∥

for x ̸= 0, where ∥·∥ is the Euclidean norm on Rd . Given
an initial value x0 ∈ Rd with x0 ̸= 0 and ϱν (x0 ) > 0,
PSS recursively realizes the n-th chain iterate xn from the
(n − 1)-th iterate xn−1 as follows: An auxiliary variable tn
is chosen as a realization of1
Tn ∼ U((0, ϱ(1)
ν (xn−1 ))).
Given tn , the next chain iterate is generated using polar
coordinates Xn = Rn Θn where the radius Rn is a random
variable on R+ and the direction Θn is a random variable
on the (d − 1)-sphere

In the following, knowledge of the normalization constant
of ϱν , i.e. the denominator of the above ratio, is not required.

Sd−1 := {θ ∈ Rd | ∥θ∥ = 1} ⊂ Rd .

1

Microscopic Image Analysis Group, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany 2 Faculty of Computer Science and
Mathematics, University of Passau, Passau, Germany. Correspondence to: Daniel Rudolf <daniel.rudolf@uni-passau.de>.

To conform with the general slice sampling principle of
Besag & Green (1993), the variables (Rn , Θn ) need to be
1
With U(G) we denote the uniform distribution on a set G
w.r.t. some reference measure that is clear from the context, as it is
always either the Lebesgue measure, the surface measure on the
(d − 1)-sphere or a product measure of the two.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

