Reinforcement Learning from Passive Data via Latent Intentions

Dibya Ghosh 1 Chethan Bhateja 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract

diverse and abundant, and might offer a path for RL agents
to learn more efficiently and generalize more broadly.

Passive observational data, such as human videos,
is abundant and rich in information, yet remains
largely untapped by current RL methods. Perhaps
surprisingly, we show that passive data, despite
not having reward or action labels, can still be
used to learn features that accelerate downstream
RL. Our approach learns from passive data by
modeling intentions: measuring how the likelihood of future outcomes change when the agent
acts to achieve a particular task. We propose a
temporal difference learning objective to learn
about intentions, resulting in an algorithm similar
to conventional RL, but which learns entirely from
passive data. When optimizing this objective, our
agent simultaneously learns representations of
states, of policies, and of possible outcomes in
an environment, all from raw observational data.
Both theoretically and empirically, this scheme
learns features amenable for value prediction for
downstream tasks, and our experiments demonstrate the ability to learn from many forms of
passive data, including cross-embodiment video
data and YouTube videos.

How can an RL agent learn from passive observational experience, such as videos of humans? When learning from
active data, the learning signal for most RL methods comes
from modeling the value function, which measures how the
expected cumulative reward changes when a counterfactual
action is taken. With the absence of actions and rewards in
passive data, it is neither clear what quantity should be estimated (in lieu of future rewards) nor what counterfactuals
should be estimated (in lieu of actions).
In this work, we propose to replace both of these missing components with a learned representation of intentions,
where intentions correspond to different outcomes a policy
may seek to achieve. Rather than estimating the counterfactual effect of taking an action, we can model the effect
of following a counterfactual intention from a given state;
in lieu of predicting future rewards, we can estimate the
likelihood of achieving any given outcome. By leveraging passive data to learn the effects of a diverse range of
intentions, we can learn state representations useful for modeling the value function for any task an agent may seek to
optimize downstream using active data.
To instantiate this idea, we train an intention-conditioned
value function V (s, s+ , z), which models the likelihood of
achieving some future outcome s+ , when we start at state
s and act according to some latent intention z. This mimics the conventional value function in RL, and we show
how it may similarly be trained using temporal-difference
objectives on passive data. We estimate this value using a
multi-linear model that is linear in a representation of state
ϕ(s), a representation of future outcome ψ(s+ ), and representation of intention. We prove that if perfectly optimized,
the learned state representations can represent optimal value
functions for any reward function.

1. Introduction
In many reinforcement learning (RL) domains, there is a
sea of data untapped by our current algorithms. For humanassistive robots, there are thousands of hours of videos of humans doing chores; for dialogue agents, expansive web corpora of humans conversing with each other; for self-driving
cars, countless hours of logs of human drivers. Unfortunately, this data cannot directly be ingested by conventional
RL methods, as it often depicts agents with different embodiments, with different goals, and in different scenarios from
the agent we wish to control. Nonetheless, such datasets are

The primary contribution of this paper is a pre-training
scheme for RL from passive data, which models the effect
Accompanying code at https://github.com/dibyaghosh/icvf release. of agents that act with various intentions or seek to realize
1
various objectives. Our approach learns from passive data
UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
Dibya Ghosh
<dibya@berkeley.edu>.
via RL-like temporal difference backups utilizing two main
ideas, prediction of possible outcomes (future states) as the
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
learning objective in lieu of rewards, and the use of learned
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
latent representations of intentions in lieu of actions. We
2023 by the author(s).
1

