Controllability-Aware Unsupervised Skill Discovery

Seohong Park 1 Kimin Lee 2 Youngwoon Lee 1 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
Gripper 𝑥𝑦𝑧

One of the key capabilities of intelligent agents
is the ability to discover useful skills without external supervision. However, the current unsupervised skill discovery methods are often limited
to acquiring simple, easy-to-learn skills due to
the lack of incentives to discover more complex,
challenging behaviors. We introduce a novel unsupervised skill discovery method, Controllabilityaware Skill Discovery (CSD), which actively
seeks complex, hard-to-control skills without supervision. The key component of CSD is a
controllability-aware distance function, which assigns larger values to state transitions that are
harder to achieve with the current skills. Combined with distance-maximizing skill discovery,
CSD progressively learns more challenging skills
over the course of training as our jointly trained
distance function reduces rewards for easy-toachieve skills. Our experimental results in six
robotic manipulation and locomotion environments demonstrate that CSD can discover diverse
complex skills including object manipulation and
locomotion skills with no supervision, significantly outperforming prior unsupervised skill discovery methods. Videos and code are available at
https://seohong.me/projects/csd/

Object 𝑥𝑦
CSD (ours)

(a) FetchPush

LSD

DIAYN

(b) Skill trajectories

Figure 1. Object trajectories and gripper trajectories of 2-D continuous skills discovered by three unsupervised skill discovery
methods, CSD (ours), LSD (Park et al., 2022), and DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019), in the FetchPush environment. Trajectories
with different colors represent different skills. While previous
methods focus only on maneuvering the gripper, CSD discovers
object manipulation skills in the absence of supervision.

et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2022). These methods have also
demonstrated efficient downstream reinforcement learning
(RL) either by fine-tuning (Laskin et al., 2021; 2022) or
sequentially combining (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma
et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022) the discovered skills.
However, in complex environments, current unsupervised
skill discovery methods are often limited to discovering
only simple, easy-to-learn skills. For example, as illustrated
in Figure 1, previous approaches (LSD and DIAYN) only
learn to gain control of the agent’s own ‘body’ (i.e., the
gripper and joint angles), completely ignoring the object in
the Fetch environment. This is because learning difficult
skills, such as interacting with the object, has no incentive
for them compared to learning easy skills. In other words,
their objectives can be fully optimized with simple skills.

1. Introduction
Humans are capable of autonomously learning skills, ranging from basic muscle control to complex acrobatic behaviors, which can be later combined to achieve highly complex
tasks. Can machines similarly discover useful skills without any external supervision? Recently, many unsupervised
skill discovery methods have been proposed to discover diverse behaviors in the absence of extrinsic rewards (Gregor
et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020;
Achiam et al., 2018; Campos Camúñez et al., 2020; Hansen
et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021a; Park

To mitigate this issue, prior approaches incorporate human
supervision, such as limiting the agent’s focus to specific
dimensions of the state space of interest (Eysenbach et al.,
2019; Sharma et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022; Adeniji et al.,
2022). However, this not only requires manual feature engineering but also significantly limits the diversity of skills.
On the other hand, we humans consistently challenge ourselves to learn more complex skills after mastering simple
skills in an autonomous manner.

1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Seohong Park <seohong@berkeley.edu>.

Inspired by this, we propose a novel unsupervised skill
discovery method, Controllability-aware Skill Discovery
(CSD), which explicitly seeks complex, hard-to-learn behaviors that are potentially more useful for solving down-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

