Improved Online Conformal Prediction via Strongly Adaptive Online Learning

Aadyot Bhatnagar 1 Huan Wang 1 Caiming Xiong 1 Yu Bai 1

Abstract

achieve valid coverage, i.e. they should cover the true label
with at least 1 − α (such as 90%) probability.

We study the problem of uncertainty quantification via prediction sets, in an online setting where
the data distribution may vary arbitrarily over
time. Recent work develops online conformal
prediction techniques that leverage regret minimization algorithms from the online learning literature to learn prediction sets with approximately
valid coverage and small regret. However, standard regret minimization could be insufficient for
handling changing environments, where performance guarantees may be desired not only over
the full time horizon but also in all (sub-)intervals
of time. We develop new online conformal prediction methods that minimize the strongly adaptive
regret, which measures the worst-case regret over
all intervals of a fixed length. We prove that our
methods achieve near-optimal strongly adaptive
regret for all interval lengths simultaneously, and
approximately valid coverage. Experiments show
that our methods consistently obtain better coverage and smaller prediction sets than existing
methods on real-world tasks, such as time series
forecasting and image classification under distribution shift.

Conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005) is a powerful
framework for augmenting any base predictor (such as a
pretrained model) into prediction sets with valid coverage
guarantees (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021). These guarantees require almost no assumptions on the data distribution,
except exchangeability (i.i.d. data is a sufficient condition).
However, exchangeability fails to hold in many real-world
settings such as time series data (Chernozhukov et al., 2018)
or data corruption (Hendrycks et al., 2018), where the data
may exhibit distribution shift. Various approaches have
been proposed to handle such distribution shift, such as
reweighting (Tibshirani et al., 2019; Barber et al., 2022) or
distributionally robust optimization (Cauchois et al., 2022).
A recent line of work develops online conformal prediction
methods for the setting where the data arrives in a sequential
order (Gibbs & Candès, 2021; 2022; Zaffran et al., 2022;
Feldman et al., 2022). At each step, their methods output
a prediction set parameterized by a single radius parameter that controls the size of the set. After receiving the
true label, they adjust this parameter adaptively via regret
minimization techniques—such as Online Gradient Descent
(OGD) (Zinkevich, 2003)—on a certain quantile loss over
the radius. These methods are shown to achieve empirical
coverage frequency close to 1 − α, regardless of the data distribution (Gibbs & Candès, 2021). In addition to coverage,
importantly, these methods achieve sublinear regret with
respect to the quantile loss (Gibbs & Candès, 2022). Such
regret guarantees ensure that the size of the prediction set
is reasonable, and rule out “trivial” algorithms that achieve
valid coverage by alternating between predicting the empty
set and full set (cf. Section 2 for a discussion).

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning models make highly accurate predictions in many settings. In high stakes decision-making
tasks, it is just as important to estimate the model’s uncertainty by quantifying how much the true label may deviate
from the model’s prediction. A common approach for uncertainty quantification is to learn prediction sets that associate
each input with a set of candidate labels, such as prediction
intervals for regression, and label sets for classification. The
most important requirement for learned prediction sets is to

While regret minimization techniques achieve coverage and
regret guarantees, they may fall short in more dynamic environments where we desire a strong performance not just
over the entire time horizon (as captured by the regret), but
also within every sub-interval of time. For example, if the
data distribution shifts abruptly for a few times, we rather
desire strong performance within each contiguous interval
between two consecutive shifts, in addition to the entire

1

Salesforce AI Research, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Aadyot Bhatnagar <aadyotb@gmail.com>, Yu Bai
<yu.bai@salesforce.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The code for our experiments can be found at https://
github.com/salesforce/online_conformal.

1

