Cocktail Party Attack: Breaking Aggregation-Based Privacy in Federated
Learning Using Independent Component Analysis

Sanjay Kariyappa † 1 Chuan Guo 2 Kiwan Maeng † 3 Wenjie Xiong † 4 G. Edward Suh 5 2
Moinuddin K Qureshi 1 Hsien-Hsin S. Lee † 6

Abstract

Inputs
𝑋

Federated learning (FL) aims to perform privacypreserving machine learning on distributed data
held by multiple data owners. To this end, FL
requires the data owners to perform training locally and share the gradients or weight updates (instead of the private inputs) with the central server,
which are then securely aggregated over multiple
data owners. Although aggregation by itself does
not offer provable privacy protection, prior work
suggested that if the batch size is sufficiently large
the aggregation may be secure enough. In this paper, we propose the Cocktail Party Attack (CPA)
that, contrary to prior belief, is able to recover
the private inputs from gradients/weight updates
aggregated over as many as 1024 samples. CPA
leverages the crucial insight that aggregate gradients from a fully connected (FC) layer is a linear combination of its inputs, which allows us to
frame gradient inversion as a blind source separation (BSS) problem. We adapt independent component analysis (ICA)—a classic solution to the
BSS problem—to recover private inputs for FC
and convolutional networks, and show that CPA
significantly outperforms prior attacks, efficiently
scales to ImageNet-sized inputs, and works on
large batch sizes of up to 1024.

a Mixing (Gradient aggregation)
Gradients
𝐺 = 𝐴𝑋
b Unmixing (CPA)
Recovered
𝑋" = 𝑈𝐺

Figure 1. (a) Aggregate gradients from an FC layer are linear combinations of its inputs, as shown by the visualization of the gradients in the second row. (b) Cocktail party attack uses this observation to frame gradient inversion as a blind source separation
problem and recovers the inputs from the gradients by optimizing
an unmixing matrix U using independent component analysis.

ing data. The protocol involves the server distributing the
model parameters θ to the clients, and then the clients using
this model to compute gradients ∇θ L using their private
data as shown in Fig. 2a. The gradients are aggregated and
shared with the server who then uses it to update the model
parameters, and this process is repeated until convergence.
While FL avoids the direct sharing of data, this in itself does
not guarantee privacy as the gradient update shared with
the server can contain information about the private training
data. For instance, Zhu et al. (2019) showed that gradients
can be inverted to recover their associated private data in
a process now called gradient inversion. However, a key
drawback of existing gradient inversion attacks is that they
are sensitive to the input size. This limits their efficacy when
recovering high-dimensional inputs (e.g. ImageNet) from
aggregate gradients, especially when aggregation is done
over a large number of inputs (Zhu et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a flexible framework for privacypreserving machine learning (ML) model training on distributed data. The FL framework typically consists of a
central server and multiple clients that hold private train-

We overcome the limitations of prior works by developing
Cocktail Party Attack (CPA)1 , which uses a fundamentally
different approach to gradient inversion that is not adversely
impacted by the input size, making it scalable to ImageNetsize inputs in the large batch size regime. Our attack leverages the novel insight that the aggregated gradient from an
FC layer can be viewed as a linear combination of its inputs, which allows us to frame the recovery of these inputs

†
Work done while authors were at FAIR/Meta AI 1 Georgia
Institute of Technology 2 Meta AI 3 Pennsylvania State University
4
Virginia Tech 5 Cornell University 6 Intel. Correspondence to:
Sanjay Kariyappa <sanjaykariyappa@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
The name of our attack is inspired by the cocktail party problem (Cherry, 1953)– a popular example of the BSS problem.

1

