Probably Anytime-Safe Stochastic Combinatorial Semi-Bandits

Yunlong Hou 1 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 2 3 Zixin Zhong 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Audrey, a burgeoning social media influencer, makes profits
by posting advertisements (ads) under her account. The
advertiser pays her only if an ad is clicked. Having taken
a class in online optimization, Audrey aims to leverage
the theory of bandit algorithms to design an explorationexploitation strategy to ensure that the expected number of
clicks of the ads she has posted is maximized. Since the
platform is space-limited, Audrey can only post no more
than K out of L available ads everyday. Some of these ads,
however, include an innocuous-looking lottery or voucher
that asks the viewer of the social media platform to provide
personal information that may lead to fraud or information
leakage. If a user clicks it and becomes a victim of fraud,
this may damage Audrey’s reputation. Audrey thus has to
be circumspect in which and how many ads she posts.

Motivated by concerns about making online decisions that incur undue amount of risk at each
time step, in this paper, we formulate the probably anytime-safe stochastic combinatorial semibandits problem. In this problem, the agent is
given the option to select a subset of size at most
K from a set of L ground items. Each item is
associated to a certain mean reward as well as a
variance that represents its risk. To mitigate the
risk that the agent incurs, we require that with
probability at least 1 − δ, over the entire horizon of time T , each of the choices that the agent
makes should contain items whose sum of variances does not exceed a certain variance budget.
We call this probably anytime-safe constraint. Under this constraint, we design and analyze an algorithm PASC OMB UCB that minimizes the regret
over the horizon of time T . By developing accompanying information-theoretic lower bounds,
we show that under both the problem-dependent
and problem-independent paradigms, PASC OM B UCB is almost asymptotically optimal. Experiments are conducted to corroborate our theoretical
findings. Our problem setup, the proposed PASC OMB UCB algorithm, and novel analyses are
applicable to domains such as recommendation
systems and transportation in which an agent is
allowed to choose multiple items at a single time
step and wishes to control the risk over the whole
time horizon.

On the one hand, Audrey wants to post as many ads that
she believes to have high click-through rates as possible;
the expected reward she obtains is then the sum of expected
rewards of the individual ads. On the other hand, she should
balance this with the total risk of the ads that are posted over
a period of time; similarly, the risk of a set of ads posted is
modeled as the sum of the risks of the individual ads. How
should Audrey plan the posts of her ads over a period of
time to learn their individual expected rewards and risks to
ensure that her total expected reward is maximized and, at
the same time, with high probability, the risk incurred at
any point in time in her exploration-exploitation strategy is
bounded by some fixed permissible threshold?
In addition to influencers like Audrey, online platforms that
make profits by advertising such as YouTube and TikTok
also encounter similar problems. We are therefore motivated
to formulate the probably anytime-safe stochastic combinatorial semi-bandits (PASSCSB) problem which is a regret
minimization problem with an anytime safety constraint.
More precisely, we aim to design and analyze the performance of an algorithm that, with high probability, ensures
that the risk (as measured by the variance) at any time step
is below a given threshold and whose regret is minimized.

1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Institute
of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 4 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada. Correspondence to: Zixin Zhong
<zzhong10@ualberta.ca>.

Literature review. There is a large body of works that take
risk into account while conducting the exploration and/or exploitation of the unknown reward distributions in the stochastic multi-armed bandits (MABs) literature.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

