Network Effects in Performative Prediction Games
Xiaolu Wang 1 Chung-Yiu Yau 1 Hoi-To Wai 1

Abstract
This paper studies the multi-agent performative
prediction (Multi-PP) games over multiplex networks. We consider a distributed learning setting
where agents partially cooperate on an agent network, while during learning, the data samples
drawn depend on the prediction models of the
agent itself and neighboring agents on a population network. The dynamics of Multi-PP games
is hence affected by the interplay between both
networks. This paper concentrates on this MultiPP game with the following contributions. Firstly,
we analyze sufficient conditions for the existence
of the performative stable equilibrium (PSE) and
Nash equilibrium (NE) of the Multi-PP games.
Secondly, we analyze the changes to the equilibrium induced by perturbed data distributions, and
derive the closed-form solutions where the network topologies are explicit. Our results connect
the existence of PSE/NE with strengths of agents’
cooperation, and the changes of equilibrium solutions across agents with their node centrality,
etc. Lastly, we show that a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) based distributed learning procedure
finds the PSE under the said sufficient condition.
Numerical illustrations on the network effects in
Multi-PP games corroborate our findings.

Figure 1: Overview of the Multi-PP game on a multiplex
network. Each node consists of an agent-population pair.
The agent cooperation network G A and the population influence network G P share the same set of nodes V while
have different edge sets E A and E P , respectively. The agent
i’s risk depends on its own prediction model θi and its incoming neighbors’ models θMi in G A . The agent i’s local
population Di depends on θi and its incoming neighbors’
models θNi in G P . (See Section 2 for a detailed description.)
local data distributions are heterogeneous. Variants of this
scenario have been considered, e.g., personalized learning
with graph regularization (Liu et al., 2017; Vanhaesebrouck
et al., 2017; Bellet et al., 2018; Nassif et al., 2020), distributed learning with consensus (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009;
Lian et al., 2017), etc.

1. Introduction

Meanwhile, a salient challenge in optimizing prediction
models deployed to real world is that the models themselves
may influence the future outcomes/samples observed by
the agent. These outcomes will influence the training of
the future prediction models, creating a feedback dynamics
between the agent who decides the model and the population who decides the outcomes/samples. This paradigm is
known as the performative prediction as studied in Perdomo
et al. (2020). An exemplar setting is when the population
consists of strategic users who optimize their own outcomes
according to a utility function parameterized by the prediction model. Applying standard algorithms such as stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) results in a dynamics between the
agent and the population. This has motivated recent works to
analyze the existence and stability of a fixed point to the dynamics (Perdomo et al., 2020; Drusvyatskiy & Xiao, 2022),

A recent trend in machine learning is to study distributed
learning where prediction models are trained on multiple
agents from local and privacy-sensitive data (Konečnỳ et al.,
2016). In the general setting, the learning process on these
agents are applied locally and can be aided by neighbor
agents on an agent network G A . This is motivated by the
scenario when the agents wish to utilize joint experience to
improve generalization performance, especially when the
1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Hoi-To Wai <htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

