Free-Form Variational Inference for Gaussian Process State-Space Models

Xuhui Fan 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 2 Terence J. O’Kane 3 Scott A. Sisson 4

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on Bayesian SSMs, where the transition function describing the dynamics of the system is given
a prior distribution. A paradigmatic example of Bayesian
SSM s are Gaussian process state-space models ( GPSSM s;
Frigola, 2015), where this prior distribution is a Gaussian
process (GP; Williams & Rasmussen, 2006). Due to their
Bayesian non-parametric nature, GPSSMs represent a principled and flexible approach to Bayesian SSMs.

Gaussian process state-space models (GPSSMs)
provide a principled and flexible approach to modeling the dynamics of a latent state, which is
observed at discrete-time points via a likelihood
model. However, inference in GPSSMs is computationally and statistically challenging due to the
large number of latent variables in the model and
the strong temporal dependencies between them.
In this paper, we propose a new method for inference in Bayesian GPSSMs, which overcomes
the drawbacks of previous approaches, namely
over-simplified assumptions, and high computational requirements. Our method is based on freeform variational inference via stochastic gradient
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo within the inducingvariable formalism. Furthermore, by exploiting
our proposed variational distribution, we provide
a collapsed extension of our method where the
inducing variables are marginalized analytically.
We also showcase results when combining our
framework with particle MCMC methods. We
show that, on six real-world datasets, our approach can learn transition dynamics and latent
states more accurately than competing methods.

However, the flexibility of Gaussian processes (GPs) adds
significant computational and statistical challenges to the
already difficult problem of inference in Bayesian SSMs. Indeed, even for non-Bayesian SSMs, standard problems such
as filtering, smoothing, and prediction are, in general, analytically intractable1 . Having a GP prior over the transition
function in SSMs increases the number of latent variables
significantly; incorporates strong (and potentially long-term)
dependencies across states; and introduces a cubic time complexity as a function of the number of observations.
Within the GP community, significant advances have been
made addressing the computational issues in GP regression
and classification problems, most notably using inducingvariable approximations (Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al.,
2015; Rossi et al., 2021) but also random-feature expansions
(Cutajar et al., 2017; Marmin & Filippone, 2022) and, more
recent innovative approaches such as the Vecchia approximation (Sauer et al., 2022). Although these approximations
are applicable to GP-based dynamic models, the challenges
above remain prevalent within the context of GPSSMs.

1. Introduction
State-space models (SSMs; Murphy, 2023, Ch. 29) characterize the underlying dynamics of a latent state given a set
of observations via a transition function and an observation
model. As a modeling framework, they provide a general approach for understanding time-series data (Kitagawa, 1987)
and for data assimilation problems (Katzfuss et al., 2016).
Applications of SSMs abound and span diverse areas such
as econometrics (Tsay, 2005), control engineering (Ogata
et al., 2010) and neuroscience (Brown et al., 1998).

Nevertheless, previous approaches have developed insightful and practical algorithms for inference in GPSSMs,
mainly based on inducing-variable approximations, which is
also our main underpinning methodology for scalable GPs.
In outlining the most relevant approaches, our main object
of interest is the approximate joint posterior over state trajectories x0:T and inducing variables u, q(x0:T , u), where
T + 1 is the length of the trajectory. We consider two main
aspects of this joint distribution: (i) whether the dependencies between state trajectories and inducing variables are
captured and (ii) whether their corresponding distributions
are unconstrained, i.e., not restricted to a sub-optimal parametric form. The seminal variational Gaussian process state

1
University of Newcastle, Australia 2 CSIRO’s Data61, Australia 3 CSIRO’s Environment, Australia 4 University of New
South Wales, Australia. Correspondence to: Xuhui Fan
<xhfan.ml@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

With the notable exception of the linear-Gaussian case where
the optimal solution is given by the Kalman filter (Kalman, 1960).

1

