Consistency of Multiple Kernel Clustering

Weixuan Liang 1 Xinwang Liu 1 Yong Liu 2 3 Chuan Ma 4 Yunping Zhao 1 Zhe Liu 4 En Zhu 1

Abstract

them, Du et al. (2015) improve the robustness of MKKM
by using ℓ2,1 -norm. Liu et al. (2016) introduce a matrixinduced regularization to increase the diversity of the optimal kernel. Wang et al. (2021) improve the two-stage
strategy into a single step, further reducing redundancy
in kernel fusion. A recently proposed algorithm termed
SimpleMKKM (Liu, 2022) greatly promotes the clustering
performance by a minimization-maximization framework.

Consistency plays an important role in learning
theory. However, in multiple kernel clustering
(MKC), the consistency of kernel weights has not
been sufficiently investigated. In this work, we
fill this gap with a non-asymptotic analysis on the
consistency of kernel weights of a novel method
termed SimpleMKKM. Under the assumptions
of the eigenvalue
√ gap, we give an infinity norm
bound as e
O(k/ n), where k is the number of
clusters and n is the number of samples. On this
basis, we establish an upper bound for the excess
clustering risk. Moreover, we study the difference of the kernel weights learned from n samples and r points sampled withoutpreplacement,
e · 1/r − 1/n).
and derive its upper bound as O(k
Based on the above results, we propose a novel
strategy with Nyström method to enable SimpleMKKM to handle large-scale datasets with a
theoretical learning guarantee. Finally, extensive
experiments are conducted to verify the theoretical results and the effectiveness of the proposed
large-scale strategy.

Although there are various improvements in MKC, some
vital statistical properties of it are not sufficiently studied,
especially the consistency of the kernel weights. We usually say that a learning algorithm is consistent, i.e., the
parameters learned from the training set will converge to the
parameters from the whole sample space when the training
sample number n → ∞. Consistency is an important property in statistical learning, as we can estimate whether the
learned parameters are effective by studying the consistency
of a learning algorithm. In the existing literature, the consistency of clustering centroids of k-means has been studied
in (Pollard, 1981a). Von Luxburg et al. (2008) establish
several important results about the consistency of spectral
clustering. The consistency of kernel weights in MKC is
also a key research problem, as it can be used to derive other
important statistical properties, such as excess risk bound.
In this paper, we attempt to address this issue. We bound the
difference of the weights learned from the training set and
the sample space with a non-asymptotic analysis. Under
some assumptions about the gap of eigenvalues√
of the kernel
e
matrix, we establish an infinity bound as O(k/
n)1 , where
k is the number of clusters and n is the number of samples.
Based on the results of consistency, we derive the excess
risk bound of SimpleMKKM.

1. Introduction
Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) (Zhao et al., 2009) is proposed for better performance by searching for an optimal
kernel from several base kernels. In recent years, researchers
have made great progress in MKC. Huang et al. (2011)
propose the multiple kernel k-means algorithm (MKKM),
which unifies all base kernels into a consensus one based
on a linear combination. Subsequently, several works (Liu
et al., 2016; Du et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021) enhance MKKM from different perspectives. Among

The difference of the kernel weights learned from the training set and its subset is another interesting problem. Utilizing a concentration inequality for sampling without replacement (Bardenet &p
Maillard, 2015), this difference can
be bounded by e
O(k · 1/r − 1/n), where r is the number of points sampled without placement from the training
set with size n. It is illustrated that the kernel weights
learned from the selected subset have a fast convergence
rate to the whole training set. Based on this, we propose a
new algorithm with Nyström method that can enable Sim-

1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 3 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing,
China 4 Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence
to: Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1 e

O(·) hides logarithmic terms.

1

