Better Training of GFlowNets with Local Credit and Incomplete Trajectories

Ling Pan 1 Nikolay Malkin 1 Dinghuai Zhang 1 Yoshua Bengio 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) (Bengio et al.,
2021a;b) are variants of reinforcement learning (RL) methods (Sutton & Barto, 2018) trained to generate an object
x ∈ X through a sequence of steps, by learning a stochastic policy PF with a training objective that would make it
sample x with probability proportional to a reward function
R(x), with sufficient capacity and training iterations.

Generative Flow Networks or GFlowNets are
related to Monte-Carlo Markov chain methods
(as they sample from a distribution specified by
an energy function), reinforcement learning (as
they learn a policy to sample composed objects
through a sequence of steps), generative models
(as they learn to represent and sample from a distribution) and amortized variational methods (as
they can be used to learn to approximate and
sample from an otherwise intractable posterior,
given a prior and a likelihood). They are trained
to generate an object x through a sequence of
steps with probability proportional to some reward function R(x) (or exp(−E(x)) with E(x)
denoting the energy function), given at the end of
the generative trajectory. Like for other RL settings where the reward is only given at the end, the
efficiency of training and credit assignment may
suffer when those trajectories are longer. With previous GFlowNet work, no learning was possible
from incomplete trajectories (lacking a terminal
state and the computation of the associated reward). In this paper, we consider the case where
the energy function can be applied not just to terminal states but also to intermediate states. This is
for example achieved when the energy function is
additive, with terms available along the trajectory.
We show how to reparameterize the GFlowNet
state flow function to take advantage of the partial reward already accrued at each state. This
enables a training objective that can be applied to
update parameters even with incomplete trajectories. Even when complete trajectories are available, being able to obtain more localized credit
and gradients is found to speed up training convergence, as demonstrated across many simulations.

GFlowNets are related to MCMC methods (Metropolis et al.,
1953; Hastings, 1970; Andrieu et al., 2003) that approximately sample from a distribution associated with a given
energy function or unnormalized probability function, but
GFlowNets exploit the ability of machine learning (ML)
to generalize and to amortize the cost of sampling (which
becomes quick), at the expense of training time. Unlike
MCMC methods, they do not suffer from the mixing problem (Salakhutdinov, 2009; Bengio et al., 2013; 2021a), because they do not rely on a Markov chain that makes small
local steps1 , and instead GFlowNets generate each sample
independently. On the other hand, like RL methods, they
rely on exploration and the generalization power of ML to
guess and discover new modes of the reward function (or
regions of low energy), thanks to underlying regularities in
the given energy function.
They are also related to generative models (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; 2016; Ho et al.,
2020) as they learn to represent and sample from a distribution, although they can either learn from a dataset (Zhang
et al., 2022c;a), like typical deep generative models, or from
an energy or reward function, like amortized variational
methods (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
as they can be used to learn to approximate and sample
from an otherwise intractable posterior, given a prior and a
likelihood. As shown by Malkin et al. (2022b), GFlowNets
can be seen as variants of amortized variational inference
methods, using training objectives that are different from
the usual KL objectives and enable off-policy learning and
exploration methods that can avoid the factorization assumptions, importance reweighting, mode-seeking behavior and

1

Mila – Québec AI Institute and Université de
Montréal 2 CIFAR. Correspondence to:
Ling Pan
<penny.ling.pan@gmail.com>.

1
To mix between two modes, a Markov chain has to make
the right sequences of moves to encounter a new far away and
concentrated mode, and this can be very unlikely since it would
require many low-probability moves.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

