Leveraging Demonstrations to Improve Online Learning: Quality Matters

Botao Hao 1 Rahul Jain 2 Tor Lattimore 1 Benjamin Van Roy 1 Zheng Wen 1

Abstract

It is natural to expect the offline demonstration data to improve performance of the online learning agent. However,
the degree of improvement must depend on the quality of
the demonstration data. If the data is produced by a competent expert, it ought to improve the agent’s performance
more so than if not. We study using the demonstration data
to enhance the performance of an online learning agent in
terms of regret minimization, formulating a notion of competence and an approach to learning from the demonstration
data in a manner that accounts for this.

We investigate the extent to which offline demonstration data can improve online learning. It is
natural to expect some improvement, but the question is how, and by how much? We show that
the degree of improvement must depend on the
quality of the demonstration data. To generate
portable insights, we focus on Thompson sampling (TS) applied to a multi-armed bandit as a
prototypical online learning algorithm and model.
The demonstration data is generated by an expert
with a given competence level, a notion we introduce. We propose an informed TS algorithm
that utilizes the demonstration data in a coherent way through Bayes’ rule and derive a priordependent Bayesian regret bound. This offers
insight into how pretraining can greatly improve
online performance and how the degree of improvement increases with the expert’s competence
level. We also develop a practical, approximate
informed TS algorithm through Bayesian bootstrapping and show substantial empirical regret
reduction through experiments.

As a prototypical model for online learning, we consider
multi-armed bandits that offer a simple context for understanding the role of offline data. We focus on Thompson
sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933) which is a popular online
learning algorithm, owing to its effectiveness across a wide
range of environments and its scalability through the use of
approximation methods such as epistemic neural networks
(Osband et al., 2021). Moreover, TS offers a coherent way
to use the demonstration data by simply following Bayes’
rule. In our setting, pretraining amounts to conditioning
the distribution used by TS as it initiates online learning.
Note that a goal of this paper is to yield insights on how to
leverage the demonstration data to improve online learning,
and what the potential gains may be. Thus, we use the prototypical setting of a multi-armed bandit and a simple model
for the data generation that is mathematically convenient
and widely-used in machine learning.

1. Introduction
A modern paradigm for developing intelligent agents involves pretraining on large quantities of existing data followed by learning from real-time interactions. For instance,
to produce a chatbot, one can pretrain a large language
model on text gathered from the internet and subsequently
improve behavior through learning from interactions with
humans (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022). With
such an approach, the preexisting text is treated as offline
demonstration data that conditions a reinforcement learning
agent before it engages in online learning.

Contributions

Our contribution is three-fold:

(i) We study how the quality of offline demonstration data
can improve online learning and propose an informed TS algorithm that naturally makes use of the offline data through
an informative prior. We show that the algorithm’s online
learning performance improves significantly with the quality
of demonstrations as measured by a notion of the expert’s
competence level that we introduce.
(ii) We establish a prior-dependent Bayesian regret bound
that offers insight into how pretraining reduces regret and
how this reduction depends on the expert’s competence level.
Previous works (Russo & Van Roy, 2016; Zhang, 2022; Hao
& Lattimore, 2022) mostly focus on prior-free Bayesian
regret bounds and thus cannot characterize the quality of offline data. Our technique extends the information-theoretic

*
Equal contribution 1 Deepmind 2 University of Southern California, work done by Rahul Jain while at DeepMind. Correspondence to: Botao Hao <haobotao000@gmail.com>, Rahul Jain
<rahuljai@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

