Optimal No-Regret Learning for One-Sided Lipschitz Functions

Paul Dütting * 1 Guru Guruganesh * 2 Jon Schneider * 3 Joshua R. Wang * 2

Abstract

words, the function we wish to optimize is “Lipschitz continuous in one direction” (however, note that decreasing the
price x by a small amount δ might cause the revenue to increase dramatically).

Inspired by applications in pricing and contract design, we study the maximization of onesided Lipschitz functions, which only provide the
(weaker) guarantee that they do not grow too
quickly in one direction. We show that it is possible to learn a maximizer for such a function
while incurring O(log log T ) total regret (with
a universal constant independent of the number
of discontinuities / complexity of the function).
This regret bound is asymptotically optimal in T
due to a lower bound of Kleinberg and Leighton.
By applying this algorithm, we show that one can
sell digital goods to multiple buyers and learn the
optimal linear contract in the principal-agent setting while incurring at most O(log log T ) regret.

Formally, if a function f : [0, 1] → R has the property
that f (x + δ) ≤ f (x) + Lδ for all x ∈ [0, 1] and δ ≥ 0,
we say it is L-right-Lipschitz continuous. In the scenario
above, the revenue function f (x) representing the revenue
at a price x is a particularly simple example of a (1-)rightLipschitz continuous function, being piece-wise linear with
two pieces. More complex one-sided Lipschitz continuous
functions arise in other economics contexts; see Section
1.1 for two motivating examples related to setting prices
for digital goods and learning linear contracts, where the
relevant functions can have arbitrarily many points of discontinuity.
In this paper, we study one of the simplest and most fundamental questions related to (online) optimization of such
functions: how to design low-regret (compared to always
querying the optimal point) algorithms for optimizing a single one-sided Lipschitz continuous function f from determinstic, noise-free feedback. Specfically, we consider the
following game that takes place over T rounds. In each
round t, our algorithm can choose an input x(t) and learns
the value of f (x(t) ). The goal of the algorithm is to maxPT
imize the total sum t=1 f (x(t) ) (with the intent that the
algorithm eventually learns the maximizer of f ). The regret of the algorithm over
these T rounds
P
 is given by the
T
(t)
difference T (max f ) −
f
(x
)
, where (max f )
t=1
is the maximum value of f .

1. Introduction
Traditionally, the fields of online learning and optimization have primarily been concerned with optimizing continuous, well-behaved functions (e.g., Lipschitz continuous
functions, or even bounded convex functions). However,
many practical problems (especially those stemming from
economics) involve optimizing a function with asymmetric
discontinuities.
For example, consider the problem of setting a price x for
selling a single item to a buyer with an (unknown) fixed
value p for the item. The goal of the seller is to maximize
their revenue as a function of x (by setting multiple different prices over time, and observing their revenue in each
case). This function is not continuous in x: as x exceeds
p, their revenue sharply drops from p down to 0. However, this function is not entirely pathological either – we
still have the nice property that increasing the price x by
some amount δ increases our revenue by at most δ. In other

Our primary contribution is the construction of an efficient
algorithm for this problem with an asymptotically optimal
regret bound. In particular, we show it is possible to optimize any L-left(/right)-Lipschitz continuous function from
[0, 1] to [0, L] while incurring at most O(L log log T ) regret:
Theorem 1.1 (Restatement of Corollary 3.2 and Theorem
5.1). There exists a deterministic and efficient online algorithm (Algorithm 2) for maximizing an L-left-Lipschitz
continuous function mapping [0, 1] → [0, L] over T rounds
that incurs at most O(L log log T ) regret. Moreover, any
learning algorithm must incur at least Ω(L log log T ) for
this problem.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Zürich, Switzerland
Google Research, Mountain View, USA 3 Google Research,
New York City, USA. Correspondence to: Joshua R. Wang
<joshuawang@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

