Emergent Asymmetry of Precision and Recall for Measuring Fidelity and
Diversity of Generative Models in High Dimensions

Mahyar Khayatkhoei 1 Wael AbdAlmageed 1 2

Abstract

resolution (Pathak et al., 2018), to data-augmentation (Sandfort et al., 2019), and art creation (Rombach et al., 2022).
To address this challenge, initially qualitative and heuristic measures of difference between generated samples and
real samples were proposed (Arora et al., 2018; Salimans
et al., 2016; Hore & Ziou, 2010), followed by more recent
moment-based distances (Bińkowski et al., 2018; Heusel
et al., 2017) and neural network distances (Karras et al.,
2020b; Ravuri & Vinyals, 2019), which could provide a
more consistent evaluation with human perception (Lucic
et al., 2018). However, these metrics were lacking in one important aspect: separately measuring fidelity and diversity of
generated samples. To address this shortcoming, Precision
and Recall (Sajjadi et al., 2018), and their later improved
versions (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019), were proposed (henceforth Precision and Recall refers to the improved versions).

Precision and Recall are two prominent metrics
of generative performance, which were proposed
to separately measure the fidelity and diversity
of generative models. Given their central role in
comparing and improving generative models, understanding their limitations are crucially important. To that end, in this work, we identify a critical flaw in the common approximation of these
metrics using k-nearest-neighbors, namely, that
the very interpretations of fidelity and diversity
that are assigned to Precision and Recall can fail
in high dimensions, resulting in very misleading
conclusions. Specifically, we empirically and theoretically show that as the number of dimensions
grows, two model distributions with supports at
equal point-wise distance from the support of the
real distribution, can have vastly different Precision and Recall regardless of their respective distributions, hence an emergent asymmetry in high
dimensions. Based on our theoretical insights, we
then provide simple yet effective modifications
to these metrics to construct symmetric metrics
regardless of the number of dimensions. Finally,
we provide experiments on real-world datasets to
illustrate that the identified flaw is not merely a
pathological case, and that our proposed metrics
are effective in alleviating its impact.

Given finite sets of samples Xr and Xg , from a real and
a generated distribution, pr and pg , Precision measures
the fraction of generated samples that fall within the support of the real distribution approximated using K-nearestneighbors (fidelity of generated samples), whereas Recall
measures the fraction of real samples that fall within the support of the approximated generated distribution (meaningful
diversity of generated samples):
h
i
Precision(pr , pg ) = Ppg Sˆr ∩ Sg
(1)
1 X
≈
1(xi ∈ Sˆr )
|Xg |
xi ∈Xg
h
i
Recall(pr , pg ) = Ppr Sr ∩ Sˆg
(2)
1 X
≈
1(xi ∈ Sˆg )
|Xr |

1. Introduction
Accurately measuring the performance of generative models has become a major challenge due to the rapid growth
of their application in downstream tasks – from super-

xi ∈Xr

where 1(.) is the indicator function, Sr and Sg are the supports of pr and pg , and hat denotes approximation of support
by K-nearest-neighbors (details in Section 3).

1

Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA, USA 2 Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Mahyar Khayatkhoei
<mkhayat@isi.edu>.

Given the ubiquitous adoption of Precision and Recall in
practice, recent works have focused on studying the limitations of these metrics (Naeem et al., 2020; Alaa et al., 2022).
In the same spirit, in this work, we identify and formalize
a critical flaw in Precision and Recall, namely, that their
very interpretations as fidelity and diversity could fail in

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

