The Benefits of Model-Based Generalization
in Reinforcement Learning

Kenny Young 1 Aditya Ramesh 2 Louis Kirsch 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 2 3

Abstract

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) refers to the class
of RL algorithms which learn a model of the world as an
intermediate step to policy optimization. One important
way such models can be used, which will be the focus of
this work, is to generate imagined experience for training an
agent’s policy (Werbos, 1987; Munro, 1987; Jordan, 1988;
Sutton, 1990; Schmidhuber, 1990). Experience Replay (ER)
can be seen as a simple, nonparametric, model (Lin, 1992;
van Hasselt et al., 2019) where experienced interactions are
directly stored, and later replayed for learning.

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (RL) is
widely believed to have the potential to improve
sample efficiency by allowing an agent to synthesize large amounts of imagined experience. Experience Replay (ER) can be considered a simple
kind of model, which has proved effective at improving the stability and efficiency of deep RL. In
principle, a learned parametric model could improve on ER by generalizing from real experience
to augment the dataset with additional plausible
experience. However, given that learned value
functions can also generalize, it is not immediately obvious why model generalization should
be better. Here, we provide theoretical and empirical insight into when, and how, we can expect
data generated by a learned model to be useful.
First, we provide a simple theorem motivating
how learning a model as an intermediate step can
narrow down the set of possible value functions
more than learning a value function directly from
data using the Bellman equation. Second, we provide an illustrative example showing empirically
how a similar effect occurs in a more concrete
setting with neural network function approximation. Finally, we provide extensive experiments
showing the benefit of model-based learning for
online RL in environments with combinatorial
complexity, but factored structure that allows a
learned model to generalize. In these experiments,
we take care to control for other factors in order
to isolate, insofar as possible, the benefit of using
experience generated by a learned model relative
to ER alone.

ER already captures many of the benefits associated with
a learned model as compared to model-free incremental
online algorithms (i.e. model-free algorithms which perform a learning update using each transition only at the
time it is experienced). In particular, ER allows value to be
rapidly propagated from states to their predecessors along
previously observed transitions, without the need to actually
revisit a particular transition for each step of value propagation. Propagating value only at the time a transition is
visited can make model-free incremental online algorithms
extremely wasteful of data, particularly in environments
where the reward signal is sparse.
As Lin (1992) and van Hasselt et al. (2019) have discussed,
it is often not obvious why we’d expect experience generated
by a learned model to improve upon ER, as an ER buffer
is essentially a perfect model of the world insofar as the
agent has observed it. This is especially true in the tabular
case, where a model does not generalize from the observed
transitions. It is also true for policy evaluation in the case
where the value function and model are linear (Parr et al.,
2008; Sutton et al., 2012). In this case, learning the leastsquares linear model from the data, and then finding the
TD(0) solution (Sutton, 1988) in the resulting linear MDP
is identical to finding the TD(0) solution for the empirical
MDP induced by the observed data. Hence, if we expect to
obtain a sample efficiency benefit by using data generated
by a learned model compared to ER, we should look beyond
these cases.

1
University of Alberta and the Alberta Machine Intelligence
Institute 2 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI 3 AI Initiative,
KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Kenny Young
<kjyoung@ualberta.ca>.

One may argue that a parametric model that generalizes
can generate a large amount of imagined experience that
does not appear explicitly in the dataset. However, parametric value functions also generalize. Why should model

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

