Adversarial Cheap Talk

Chris Lu 1 Timon Willi 1 Alistair Letcher 2 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract

agent’s observations. For instance, adversaries can alter and
place objects, such as interactive billboards, that will appear
in the background of self-driving car datasets. Similarly,
adversaries may append arbitrary tags to content that will
be used to train recommender systems. In financial markets, adversaries can alter the state of the order-book by
submitting orders far from the mid. While these features
are ‘useless’ from an information-theoretic point of view, it
is common practice in end-to-end deep learning to include
them as part of the input and let the model learn which
features matter. For instance, Vischer et al. (2021) showed
that many features in common RL environments are unnecessary for solving the task. Furthermore, self-driving cars
typically do not omit useless parts of the visual input but
instead learns to ignore them through training. Because they
are unimportant, influencing these features often does not
require highly-privileged access to the environment. Surprisingly, this paper demonstrates that an actor can still heavily
influence the behaviour and performance of learning agents
by controlling information only in these ‘useless’ channels,
without knowledge of the agent’s parameters or training
state.

Adversarial attacks in reinforcement learning
(RL) often assume highly-privileged access to the
victim’s parameters, environment, or data. Instead, this paper proposes a novel adversarial
setting called a Cheap Talk MDP in which an
Adversary can merely append deterministic messages to the Victim’s observation, resulting in a
minimal range of influence. The Adversary cannot occlude ground truth, influence underlying
environment dynamics or reward signals, introduce non-stationarity, add stochasticity, see the
Victim’s actions, or access their parameters. Additionally, we present a simple meta-learning algorithm called Adversarial Cheap Talk (ACT) to
train Adversaries in this setting. We demonstrate
that an Adversary trained with ACT still significantly influences the Victim’s training and testing
performance, despite the highly constrained setting. Affecting train-time performance reveals a
new attack vector and provides insight into the
success and failure modes of existing RL algorithms. More specifically, we show that an ACT
Adversary is capable of harming performance by
interfering with the learner’s function approximation, or instead helping the Victim’s performance
by outputting useful features. Finally, we show
that an ACT Adversary can manipulate messages
during train-time to directly and arbitrarily control
the Victim at test-time. Project video and code are
available at https://sites.google.com/
view/adversarial-cheap-talk.

Most past work in adversarial RL assumes highly-privileged
access to the victim. For example, many attacks assume
the ability to arbitrarily perturb all of the features in the
victim’s observation space (Huang et al., 2017; Kos and
Song, 2017) or access to a pre-trained victim’s parameters
(Gleave et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022). Not only is access
to these features often unrealistic in practical settings, they
also enable trivial attacks. By perturbing observations, an
Adversary can obscure relevant information, such as the
ball in a Pong game, rendering the task unsolvable. By
accessing a pretrained victim’s weights, the Adversary can
unsurprisingly generate out-of-distribution inputs that the
victim has not observed (Gleave et al., 2020). Finally, most
of these attacks only cause the victim’s policy to fail, instead
of allowing the adversary to arbitrarily control the victim’s
behaviour (Gu et al., 2017; Kiourti et al., 2020; Salem et al.,
2020; Ashcraft and Karra, 2021; Zhang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Learning agents are often trained in settings where adversaries are not able to influence underlying environment dynamics or reward signals, but may influence part of the

We show that an Adversary with extremely limited access
can arbitrarily control the performance and behaviour of
learning agents. To do this, we propose a novel minimumviable setting called Cheap Talk MDPs. Adversaries are
only allowed to modify ‘useless’ features that are appended

1
FLAIR, University of Oxford 2 aletcher.github.io. Correspondence to: Chris Lu <christopher.lu@eng.ox.ac.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

