Reinforcement Learning with History-Dependent Dynamic Contexts

Guy Tennenholtz * 1 Nadav Merlis * 2 Lior Shani 1 Martin Mladenov 1 Craig Boutilier 1

Abstract

feedback-gathering interventions (e.g., ratings, comparisons,
annotations) (Chen and Pu, 2012; Zhao et al., 2013); user
ad blindness (i.e., the tendency to gradually ignore ads)
(Hohnhold et al., 2015); and the long-term evolution of user
satisfaction (Wilhelm et al., 2018; Mladenov et al., 2019).
Many aspects of a user’s latent state determine their disposition towards specific actions. For example, a user’s level of
frustration, trust, receptivity, and overall satisfaction, may
affect their tendency toward accepting recommendations,
providing feedback, or abandoning a session. Notably, such
features are cumulatively impacted by the user’s long-term
history, which makes RL especially challenging due to difficult credit assignment, where the impact of any individual
action is usually small and noisy. 1

We introduce Dynamic Contextual Markov Decision Processes (DCMDPs), a novel reinforcement
learning framework for history-dependent environments that generalizes the contextual MDP
framework to handle non-Markov environments,
where contexts change over time. We consider
special cases of the model, with a focus on logistic DCMDPs, which break the exponential dependence on history length by leveraging aggregation functions to determine context transitions.
This special structure allows us to derive an upperconfidence-bound style algorithm for which we
establish regret bounds. Motivated by our theoretical results, we introduce a practical modelbased algorithm for logistic DCMDPs that plans
in a latent space and uses optimism over historydependent features. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach on a recommendation task (using
MovieLens data) where user behavior dynamics
evolve in response to recommendations.

In this paper, we introduce Dynamic Contextual Markov
Decision Processes (DCMDPs) to model such environment dynamics in a history-dependent contextual fashion.
DCMDPs decompose the state space to include dynamic
history-dependent contexts, where each context represents a
different MDP, e.g., preferences of a human interacting with
an agent, being affected by previous interactions. Particularly, we introduce a special class of logistic DCMDPs, in
which context dynamics are determined by the aggregation
of a set of feature vectors—functions of the immediate context, state and action—over time. This model is inspired by
various psychological studies of human learning and conditioning; in particular, the Rescorla-Wagner (RW) model
(Rescorla, 1972), a neuroscience model which describes
the diminishing impact of repeated exposure to a stimulus
due to historical conditioning. Critically, this structure allows us to develop tractable, UCB-style algorithms (Auer
et al., 2008) for logistic DCMDPs that break the exponential
dependence on history length in general DCMDPs.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm in which an
agent learns to act in an environment to maximize long-term
reward. RL has been applied to numerous domains, including recommender systems, robot control, video games, and
autonomous vehicles (Afsar et al., 2022; Tessler et al., 2019;
Mnih et al., 2015; Fayjie et al., 2018). While typical RL
approaches rely on a Markov property of both the reward
process and environment dynamics, many scenarios are inherently history-dependent (Bacchus et al., 1996; Ronca and
Giacomo, 2021), particularly, when humans are involved.
As one example, the behavior of users in recommender
systems often exhibits non-Markovian characteristics reflective of a user’s latent state, including: user preference
elicitation sessions, where users respond to a sequence of

Our contributions are as follows: (1) We introduce
DCMDPs, a model that captures non-Markov context dynamics. (2) We introduce a subclass of DCMDPs for which
state-action-context features are aggregated over time to determine context dynamics. We show how such problems can
1

A similar problem occurs in medical settings, where a patient’s
previous reactions to certain treatments could implicitly affect the
physician’s receptivity for treatment recommendations over long
horizons. Another example includes human driver interventions in
autonomous vehicles, where humans may take control of a vehicle
for short periods of time.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 CREST, ENSAE. Correspondence to: Guy Tennenholtz <guytenn@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

