Provably Invariant Learning without Domain Information

Xiaoyu Tan * 1 Yong Lin * 2 Shengyu Zhu 3 Chao Qu 1 Xihe Qiu 4 Yinghui Xu 5 Peng Cui 6 Yuan Qi 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning based on deep neural networks (DNN),
which has been widely used for computer vision, natural
language processing, speech recognition, and other applications, has experienced exceptional success in recent decades
(LeCun et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2018; He et al., 2016; Chowdhary, 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Arulkumaran et al., 2017). The training and testing sets of data
for machine learning models are often assumed in the same
distribution according to the empirical risk minimization
(ERM) technique and under the independent identically
distributed (IID) assumption. However, the IID assumption can be easily violated in real-world applications. Recent research indicates that the Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
generalization problem might lead ERM-trained models
to fail catastrophically, especially when the testing distribution deviates significantly from the training distribution
(Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016; Liang et al., 2017; Wang and
Deng, 2018). Based on recent literature (Arjovsky et al.,
2019; Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Huang et al., 2020; Duchi and
Namkoong, 2021), there are several cases to indicate this
issue. One concise example is that the ERM-trained model
may rely on background information to perform object classification. However, when the background changes (i.e.,
OOD) but the object remains unchanged, the classifier’s
performance decreases dramatically (Arjovsky et al., 2019).
A popular line of work attempts to extract invariant features
Xv which have a stable correlation with target Y and can
predict Y stably in the novel testing distribution (Ahuja
et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2020; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Lin
et al., 2021).

Typical machine learning applications always assume the data follows independent and identically
distributed (IID) assumptions. In contrast, this
assumption is frequently violated in real-world
circumstances, leading to the Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) generalization problem and a major drop
in model robustness. To mitigate this issue, the
invariance learning technique is leveraged to distinguish between spurious features and invariant
features among all input features and to train the
model purely on the basis of the invariant features.
Numerous invariance learning strategies imply
that the training data should contain domain information. Such information includes the environment index or auxiliary information acquired
from prior knowledge. However, acquiring these
information is typically impossible in practice.
In this study, we present TIVA for environmentindependent invariance learning, which requires
no environment-specific information in training
data. We discover and prove that, in causal graph,
given mild conditions, it is possible to train an environment partitioning policy based on attributes
that are independent of the targets and then conduct invariant risk minimization. We examine
our method in comparison to other baseline methods, which demonstrate superior performance and
excellent robustness under OOD, using multiple
benchmarks.

Recent work in invariance learning follows this idea (Lin
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021; Creager et al., 2021). In general,
invariance learning assumes that there are multiple (mostly
discrete) environments in the training dataset. Among the
environments, the conditional distribution P (Y |Xs ) varies
but P (Y |Xv ) remains the same. From the perspective of
causality, the direct causes of Y are Xv and the other factors are Xs (See Section 2 for more discussion). Invariant
learning techniques attempt to train a feature extractor Φ
that merely learns Xv without the influence of Xs . Existing research indicates that Φ can provably extract Xv
under proper conditions with a sufficient number of distinct
environments. However, it is prevalent for us to lack en-

*

Equal contribution 1 INF Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.
Shanghai, China 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 3 Ubiquant Investment, Beijing, China
4
School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai, China 5 Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation (AI³) Institute, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China 6 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Yong Lin <ylindf@connect.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

