Unsupervised Skill Discovery for Learning
Shared Structures across Changing Environments

Sang-Hyun Lee 1 Seung-Woo Seo 1

Abstract

more data than humans. The most straightforward way to
retain knowledge obtained from previous environments is
to save a dataset or an independent model for each environment. However, these approaches are inappropriate to
transfer knowledge between environments. A promising
alternative approach to transfer knowledge is to learn and
leverage shared structures across environments (Thrun &
O’Sullivan, 1996; Griffiths et al., 2019). The idea of leveraging shared structures to transfer knowledge is inspired
by the observation that humans address a complex task by
decomposing it into simpler sub-tasks and then combining
their solutions (Khetarpal et al., 2022).

Learning shared structures across changing environments enables an agent to efficiently retain
obtained knowledge and transfer it between environments. A skill is a promising concept to
represent shared structures. Several recent works
proposed unsupervised skill discovery algorithms
that can discover useful skills without a reward
function. However, they focused on discovering
skills in stationary environments or assumed that
a skill being trained is fixed within an episode,
which is insufficient to learn and represent shared
structures. In this paper, we introduce a new unsupervised skill discovery algorithm that discovers
a set of skills that can represent shared structures
across changing environments. Our algorithm
trains incremental skills and encourages a new
skill to expand state coverage obtained with compositions of previously learned skills. We also
introduce a skill evaluation process to prevent our
skills from containing redundant skills, a common issue in previous work. Our experimental
results show that our algorithm acquires skills
that represent shared structures across changing
maze navigation and locomotion environments.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that our skills are
more useful than baselines on downstream tasks.

A skill, also known as a temporally extended action, is an
efficient concept to represent shared structures between environments (Thrun & Schwartz, 1994; Tessler et al., 2017;
Schaul et al., 2018). Several recent works proposed unsupervised skill discovery algorithms that discover useful skills
without a reward function (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Sharma
et al., 2019; Campos et al., 2020; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b;a;
Shafiullah & Pinto, 2022). They demonstrated that their
skills represent consistent and distinct behaviors and can be
reused to accelerate learning on downstream tasks. However, their works focused on discovering skills in stationary
environments or kept a skill being trained within an episode,
which is insufficient to learn or represent shared structures.
In this paper, we propose a new unsupervised skill discovery algorithm that discovers skills that can represent
shared structures across changing environments. We represent shared structures as compositions of skills and hypothesize that in order to obtain such skills, we must learn the
skills that retain previously obtained knowledge and that
their compositions maximize state coverage in changing
environments. To implement this idea, our algorithm learns
incremental skills and encourages a new skill to represent
distinct and consistent behaviors that expand the state coverage constructed with the compositions of previously learned
skills. Figure 1 shows the overview of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Most real-world tasks require an agent to handle continuously changing environments. While humans can handle these environments by leveraging previously obtained
knowledge to quickly adapt to new environments, conventional reinforcement learning (RL) agents must learn from
scratch whenever an environment is changed, requiring far
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: SeungWoo Seo <sseo@snu.ac.kr>.

We also introduce a skill evaluation process to prevent our
skills from containing redundant skills, which is a common
degenerate case in previous work. Our evaluation process
decides whether to retain a new skill based on similarities
between previously acquired skills and how much the new

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

