Diversity-enhancing Generative Network for Few-shot Hypothesis Adaptation

Ruijiang Dong 1 * Feng Liu 2 3 * Haoang Chi 4 Tongliang Liu 5 6 3 Mingming Gong 2
Gang Niu 3 Masashi Sugiyama 3 7 Bo Han 1 3

Abstract

study how to leverage knowledge from other similar fields
to help complete tasks in the new fields. To cope with
this challenge, transfer learning methods were proposed
to leverage the knowledge of source domains (e.g., data
in source domains or models trained with data in source
domains) to help complete the tasks in other similar domains
(a.k.a. the target domains) (Zamir et al., 2018; Sun et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2020; Teshima et al., 2020; Jing et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2021a; Zhong et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020; Shui et al.,
2022; Guo et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2022; Chi et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023). Among many transfer learning methods,
hypothesis transfer learning (HTL) methods have received
a lot of attention since it does not require access to the data
in source domains, which prevents the data leakage issue
and protects the data privacy (Du et al., 2017; Yang et al.,
2021a;b). Recently, the few-shot hypothesis adaptation
(FHA) problem has been formulated to make HTL more
realistic, which is suitable to solve many problems (Liu
et al., 2021b;c; Snell et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2020). In FHA, only a well-trained source classifier
(i.e., a source hypothesis) and a few labeled target data are
available (Chi et al., 2021a).

Generating unlabeled data has been recently
shown to help address the few-shot hypothesis
adaptation (FHA) problem, where we aim to
train a classifier for the target domain with a
few labeled target-domain data and a well-trained
source-domain classifier (i.e., a source hypothesis), for the additional information of the highlycompatible unlabeled data. However, the generated data of the existing methods are extremely
similar or even the same. The strong dependency
among the generated data will lead the learning
to fail. In this paper, we propose a diversityenhancing generative network (DEG-Net) for the
FHA problem, which can generate diverse unlabeled data with the help of a kernel independence
measure: the Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC). Specifically, DEG-Net will generate
data via minimizing the HSIC value (i.e., maximizing the independence) among the semantic
features of the generated data. By DEG-Net, the
generated unlabeled data are more diverse and
more effective for addressing the FHA problem.
Experimental results show that the DEG-Net outperforms existing FHA baselines and further verifies that generating diverse data plays a vital role
in addressing the FHA problem.

Similar to HTL, FHA also aims to obtain a good targetdomain classifier with the help of a source hypothesis and
a few target-domain data (Chi et al., 2021a; Motiian et al.,
2017). Recently, generating unlabeled data has been shown
to be an effective strategy to address in the FHA problem
(Chi et al., 2021a). The target-oriented hypothesis adaptation network (TOHAN), a one-step solution to the FHA
problem, constructed an intermediate domain to enrich the
training data. The data in intermediate domain are highly
compatible with data in source domain and target domain
(Balcan & Blum, 2010). By the generated unlabeled data in
the intermediate domain, TOHAN partially overcame the
problems caused by data scarcity in the target domain.

1. Introduction
Data and expert knowledge are always scarce in newlyemerging fields, thus it is very important and challenging to
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong Baptist University 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics,
The University of Melbourne 3 Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, RIKEN 4 Tianjin Artificial Intelligence Innovation Center
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 6 Sydney
AI Centre, The University of Sydney 7 Graduate School of Frontier
Sciences, The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Bo Han
<bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.

However, the existing methods ignore the diversity of the
generated data or the independence among the generated
data, so that the generated data are extremely similar or even
the same. Lack of diversity leads to less effective data for
addressing the FHA problem. Taking the FHA task of digits
datasets as an example, we find that the data generated by
TOHAN has an issue that the generator tends to generate

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

