End-to-End Learning for Stochastic Optimization: A Bayesian Perspective

Yves Rychener 1 Daniel Kuhn 1 Tobias Sutter 2

Abstract

decision theory (Smith & Winkler, 2006). Various regularization techniques have been proposed to combat this effect.
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Delage & Ye,
2010; Wiesemann et al., 2014), for example, seeks decisions
that are worst-case optimal in view of a large family of distributions that could have generated the training samples.
Alternatively, any additional information or beliefs about
PY may be used as a prior that is updated upon observing
training data like in Bayesian estimation. The use of prior
information also has a regularizing effect, and the resulting optimal decision is referred to as the posterior Bayes
action (Berger, 2013). ERM and DRO implicitly assume
that independent samples from PY form the only source of
information available to the decision-maker. However, this
assumptions often fails to hold in practice. Financial asset
returns are not stationary, and their distribution is correlated with slowly varying macroeconomic factors (Li, 2002).
Similarly, the distribution of wind energy production levels
depends on meteorological conditions and is strongly correlated with wind speeds. Contextual stochastic programs
(Bertsimas & Kallus, 2020) exploit contextual information
such as macroeconomic factors or wind speeds to inform
decision-making. Existing approaches to contextual stochastic optimization can be grouped into two categories. Predictthen-optimize approaches (see, e.g., (Mišić & Perakis, 2020)
for a survey) first use some method from statistics or machine learning to learn a parametric or non-parametric model
of the distribution PY . In a second step, the learned distribution model is used in an optimization model to compute
a decision. A key drawback of this approach is that the
machine learning method used for predicting PY (e.g., maximum likelihood estimation) is agnostic of the downstream
optimization model. Some ideas to remedy this shortcoming
are discussed in (Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022). End-to-end
learning approaches, on the other hand, train a decision map
directly from the available data without the detour of first
estimating a model for PY (Donti et al., 2017).

We develop a principled approach to end-to-end
learning in stochastic optimization. First, we show
that the standard end-to-end learning algorithm
admits a Bayesian interpretation and trains a posterior Bayes action map. Building on the insights
of this analysis, we then propose new end-to-end
learning algorithms for training decision maps
that output solutions of empirical risk minimization and distributionally robust optimization problems, two dominant modeling paradigms in optimization under uncertainty. Numerical results for
a synthetic newsvendor problem illustrate the key
differences between alternative training schemes.
We also investigate an economic dispatch problem
based on real data to showcase the impact of the
neural network architecture of the decision maps
on their test performance.

1. Introduction
Most practical decision problems can be framed as stochastic optimization models that minimize the expected value
of a loss function impacted by one’s decisions and by an
exogenous random variable Y . Stochastic optimization techniques are routinely used, for example, in portfolio selection
(Markowitz & Todd, 2000) or economic dispatch and pricing (Cournot, 1897; Wong & Fuller, 2007) among many
other areas. However, the probability distribution PY of the
uncertain problem parameter Y is generically unknown and
needs to be inferred from finitely many training samples
Yb1 , . . . , YbN . In empirical risk minimization (ERM), PY is
simply replaced with the empirical (uniform) distribution
on the given samples. Unfortunately, ERM is susceptible
to overfitting, that is, it leads to decisions that exploit artefacts of the training samples but perform poorly on test data.
This effect is also referred to as the “optimizer’s curse” in

In this work, we investigate the usage of neural networks
in end-to-end learning. The relation between a trained neural network and the corresponding Bayes optimal classifier (Baum & Wilczek, 1987; Wan, 1990; Papoulis & Pillai, 2002; Kline & Berardi, 2005) as well as the universal
approximation capabilities of neural networks (Cybenko,
1989; Lu et al., 2017) are well understood in traditional

1

Risk Analytics and Optimization Chair, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Department of Computer and
Information Science, University of Konstanz, Germany. Correspondence to: Yves Rychener <yves.rychener@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

