Scaling of Class-wise Training Losses for Post-hoc Calibration

Seungjin Jung 1 2 Seungmo Seo 1 Yonghyun Jeong 2 Jongwon Choi 1 3

Abstract
The class-wise training losses often diverge as a
result of the various levels of intra-class and interclass appearance variation, and we find that the diverging class-wise training losses cause the uncalibrated prediction with its reliability. To resolve
the issue, we propose a new calibration method
to synchronize the class-wise training losses. We
design a new training loss to alleviate the variance
of class-wise training losses by using multiple
class-wise scaling factors. Since our framework
can compensate the training losses of overfitted
classes with those of under-fitted classes, the integrated training loss is preserved, preventing the
performance drop even after the model calibration.
Furthermore, our method can be easily employed
in the post-hoc calibration methods, allowing us to
use the pre-trained model as an initial model and
reduce the additional computation for model calibration. We validate the proposed framework by
employing it in the various post-hoc calibration
methods, which generally improves calibration
performance while preserving accuracy, and discover through the investigation that our approach
performs well with unbalanced datasets and untuned hyperparameters.

Figure 1. Correlation between calibration error and each loss.
The more linear the correlation coefficient between expected calibration error and loss, the lower the calibration errors. From the
plots, we confirm that the variance of class-wise losses shows
the highest correlation with the calibration error. Thus, by synchronizing the class-wise losses, we can obtain a well-calibrated
prediction from a model. The parentheses in the captions indicate
the correlation coefficient.

1. Introduction

2018; Yao et al., 2020). To tackle the issue, model calibration is widely studied to calibrate the prediction of deep
learning models to represent the reliability of the prediction (Guo et al., 2017; Müller et al., 2019; Mukhoti et al.,
2020).

With the advancement of deep learning algorithms
(Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Yue et al.; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; Girshick, 2015; Cheng et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2017), many machine learning tasks have accomplished impressive performance improvement. However, the
safety-critical industries, such as medical and autonomous
driving industries, need calibrating prediction beyond high
performance to avoid unpredictable errors (Rao & Frtunikj,

However, the existing studies (Guo et al., 2017; Müller et al.,
2019; Mukhoti et al., 2020) have required large additional
computations to calibrate the predictions during the training of target models, and further, they suffered from the
performance drop to acquire the well-calibrated predictions.
To reduce the additional computation of model calibration,
post-hoc calibration studies have also been studied (Platt
et al., 1999; Guo et al., 2017), which calibrate the prediction by using the weight parameters of pre-trained models.
However, the post-hoc calibration methods suffer from performance drops because the overconfident prediction of a

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul, Korea 2 Naver CLOVA, Seongnam, Korea 3 Department of
Advanced Imaging, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jongwon Choi <choijw@cau.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

