Learning Rate Schedules in the Presence of Distribution Shift

Matthew Fahrbach 1 Adel Javanmard 1 2 Vahab Mirrokni 1 Pratik Worah 1

Abstract

learning systems where (1) the data arrives in a stream, (2)
the model continuously makes predictions and computes the
loss, and (3) it always updates its weights based on the new
data it sees (Anil et al., 2022). The goal of such a system is
to always keep the loss low. In this setting, convergence is
less of a priority since the model needs to be able to adapt
to distribution shifts. Intuitively, if the loss landscape is
consistently changing (either gradually or due to infrequent
sudden spikes), then it is sensible for the model to always
explore its weight space. We formalize this idea in our work.

We design learning rate schedules that minimize
regret for SGD-based online learning in the presence of a changing data distribution. We fully
characterize the optimal learning rate schedule
for online linear regression via a novel analysis
with stochastic differential equations. For general
convex loss functions, we propose new learning
rate schedules that are robust to distribution shift,
and we give upper and lower bounds for the regret
that only differ by constants. For non-convex loss
functions, we define a notion of regret based on
the gradient norm of the estimated models and
propose a learning schedule that minimizes an upper bound on the total expected regret. Intuitively,
one expects changing loss landscapes to require
more exploration, and we confirm that optimal
learning rate schedules typically increase in the
presence of distribution shift. Finally, we provide
experiments for high-dimensional regression models and neural networks to illustrate these learning
rate schedules and their cumulative regret.

Such an investigation naturally leads to the question of how
high the learning rate should be, and what an optimal learning rate schedule is in an online learning scenario? These
questions are critical because while tuning the learning rate
can lead to improved accuracy in many applications, it can
also make the online learner widely inaccurate if the wrong
learning rate is used as the distribution changes.
Formally, we study learning rate schedules in the presence
of distribution shifts by considering dynamic regret, a wellknown notion in online optimization that measures the performance against a dynamic comparator sequence. This
regret framework captures the lifetime performance of an
online learning system that makes predictions on incoming examples as they arrive (possibly from a time-varying
distribution) before using this data to update its weights.

1. Introduction
A fundamental question when training neural networks is
how much of the weight space to explore and when to stop
exploring. For stochastic gradient descent (SGD)-based
training algorithms, this is primarily governed by the learning rate. If the learning rate is high, then we explore more of
the weight space and vice versa. Learning rates are typically
decreased over time in order to converge to a local optimum,
and there is now a substantial literature focused on how fast
learning rates should decay for fixed data distributions (see,
e.g., Tripuraneni et al. (2018) and Fang et al. (2018), and
the references therein).

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

1
Google Research 2 University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Matthew Fahrbach <fahrbach@google.com>.

Linear regression. We consider a linear regression setup
with time-varying coefficients {θt∗ }t≥1 , which are chosen
∗
upfront by an adversary such that kθt∗ − θt+1
k2 ≤ γt for a
sequence of positive numbers {γt }t≥1 . The variation in the
model coefficients results in response shift (while the covariates distribution remains the same across time). We consider
a learner who updates their model estimates via mini-batch
SGD with an adaptive step size sequence {ηt }t≥1 chosen
in an online manner (i.e., only with access to previous data
points). We derive a novel stochastic differential equation
(SDE) that approximates the dynamics of SGD under distribution shift, and by analyzing it, we derive the optimal
learning rate schedule.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Convex loss functions. We generalize our problem formulation along the following directions: (i) We consider

However, what should we do if the data distribution is constantly changing? This is the case in many large-scale online

1

