FeDXL: Provable Federated Learning for Deep X-Risk Optimization

Zhishuai Guo 1 Rong Jin 2 Jiebo Luo 3 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract

studies of FeDXL for deep AUROC and partial
AUROC maximization, and demonstrate their performance compared with several baselines.

In this paper, we tackle a novel federated learning (FL) problem for optimizing a family of Xrisks, to which no existing FL algorithms are
applicable. In particular, the objective has the
form of Ez∼S1 f (Ez′ ∼S2 ℓ(w; z, z′ )), where two
sets of data S1 , S2 are distributed over multiple
machines, ℓ(·; ·, ·) is a pairwise loss that only depends on the prediction outputs of the input data
pairs (z, z′ ). This problem has important applications in machine learning, e.g., AUROC maximization with a pairwise loss, and partial AUROC
maximization with a compositional loss. The challenges for designing an FL algorithm for X-risks
lie in the non-decomposability of the objective
over multiple machines and the interdependency
between different machines. To this end, we
propose an active-passive decomposition framework that decouples the gradient’s components
with two types, namely active parts and passive
parts, where the active parts depend on local data
that are computed with the local model and the
passive parts depend on other machines that are
communicated/computed based on historical models and samples. Under this framework, we design
two FL algorithms (FeDXL) for handling linear
and nonlinear f , respectively, based on federated
averaging and merging and develop a novel theoretical analysis to combat the latency of the passive parts and the interdependency between the
local model parameters and the involved data for
computing local gradient estimators. We establish
both iteration and communication complexities
and show that using the historical samples and
models for computing the passive parts do not
degrade the complexities. We conduct empirical

1. Introduction
This work is motivated by solving the following optimization problem arising in many ML applications in a federated
learning (FL) setting:


1 X
1 X
min
(1)
f
ℓ(w, z, z′ ) ,
|S2 | ′
w∈Rd |S1 |
z∈S1
z ∈S2
{z
}
|
g(w,z,S2 )

where S1 and S2 denote two sets of data points that are
distributed over many machines, w denotes the model of a
prediction function h(w, ·) ∈ Rdo , f (·) is a deterministic
function that could be linear or non-linear (possibly nonconvex), and ℓ(w, z, z′ ) = ℓ(h(w, z), h(w, z′ )) denotes a
pairwise loss that only depends on the prediction outputs of
the input data z, z′ . The above problem belongs to a broader
family of machine learning problems called deep X-risk
optimization (DXO) (Yang, 2022). We provide details of
some X-risk minimization applications in Appendix B.
When f is a linear function, the above problem is the classic
pairwise loss minimization problem, which has applications
in AUROC (AUC) maximization (Gao et al., 2013; Zhao
et al., 2011; Gao & Zhou, 2015; Calders & Jaroszewicz,
2007; Charoenphakdee et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021b;
Yang & Ying, 2022), bipartite ranking (Cohen et al., 1997;
Clémençon et al., 2008; Kotlowski et al., 2011; Dembczynski et al., 2012), and distance metric learning (Radenović
et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2017). When f is a non-linear
function, the above problem is a special case of finitesum coupled compositional optimization problem (Wang &
Yang, 2022), which has found applications in various performance measure optimization such as partial AUC maximization (Zhu et al., 2022), average precision maximization (Qi
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), NDCG maximization (Qiu
et al., 2022), p-norm push optimization (Rudin, 2009; Wang
& Yang, 2022) and contrastive loss optimization (Goldberger et al., 2004; Yuan et al., 2022).

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Texas A&M University 2 Alibaba 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of Rochester.
Correspondence to:
Zhishuai Guo <zhishguo@tamu.edu>, Tianbao Yang <tianbaoyang@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This is in sharp contrast with most existing studies on FL
algorithms (Yang, 2013; Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan
1

