Nonparametric Density Estimation under Distribution Drift

Alessio Mazzetto 1 Eli Upfal 1

Abstract

learning with the assumption of equal bounded drift at each
step (Bartlett, 1992), i.e. there is a constant ∆ > 0, such that
the drift between two distribution i steps apart is bounded by
i∆. In this case, it has been shown that the minimax risk for
learning a family of binary classifiers with VC dimension ν
is Θ((ν∆)1/3 ) (Barve & Long, 1996; Long, 1999), where
the minimax risk characterizes the maximal expected error
of the best algorithm that solves the problem within the
specified drift assumptions. The minimax risk has not been
studied with other drift patterns in this context.

We study nonparametric density estimation in
non-stationary drift settings. Given a sequence
of independent samples taken from a distribution
that gradually changes in time, the goal is to compute the best estimate for the current distribution.
We prove tight minimax risk bounds for both discrete and continuous smooth densities, where the
minimum is over all possible estimates and the
maximum is over all possible distributions that
satisfy the drift constraints. Our technique handles a broad class of drift models and generalizes
previous results on agnostic learning under drift.

In this work, we study the more general problem of density
estimation, under a more detailed family of drift models. In
particular, our results apply to any regular drift sequence,
where the ith element of this sequence provides an upper
bound to the distance of the current distribution and the i
distribution in the sequence, and the regularity assumption
prevents any abrupt change in the drift (Definition 3.1). The
distance used depends on the specific estimation problem,
in particular, we will use the total variation distance in the
case of discrete densities, and the L2 distance in the case of
smooth densities. The bounded drift per step is one possible
model in our setting. However, when more information is
available, we obtain more informative tight bounds.

1. Introduction
Density estimation is a fundamental concept in statistics
with numerous applications in data analysis and machine
learning. Given a set of samples, the goal is to best estimate
the probability distribution that generated these samples,
often subject to some parametric or nonparametric assumptions on the family of candidate distributions. This problem
has been studied extensively, for both discrete and continuous distribution functions, assuming that the samples are
independent and identically distributed according to the distribution that we aim to estimate (Devroye & Lugosi, 2001).

For the problem of estimating a discrete distribution with
support size k using n samplesfrom adrifting distribution,
p
we show a minimax risk of Θ
k/r with respect to the
total variation distance, where r ≤ n is an integer that is
easily derived from the drift sequence. For the special
p case
of no drift, we retrieve the known minimax risk Θ( k/n)
for the estimation of a discrete density with n independent
and identically distributed samples. Since the problem of
estimating a discrete density with support size k with respect to the total variation distance can be reduced to the
problem of agnostic learning a family of binary classifiers
with VC dimension k, we also show that our results imply
a lower bound on the minimax risk for the latter problem.
In particular, our results generalize the previously known
lower bound that only holds for the case of bounded drift at
each step (Barve & Long, 1996).

In many data analysis applications, ranging from customers’
preferences to weather conditions, the assumption that the
samples are identically distributed is unrealistic. The underlying distribution is gradually changing over time, and
estimating the current distribution inevitably relies on past
data from related but not identical distributions. This work
presents the first tight bounds for density estimates of both
discrete and continuous smooth distributions from samples
that are independent but are generated by distributions that
drift in time.
Distribution drift has been studied in the context of agnostic
1
Brown University. Correspondence to: Alessio Mazzetto
<alessio mazzetto@brown.edu>.

The following simple example demonstrates the power of
our approach. Assume a sample space of size k, and a
distribution drift that follows this pattern: a probability mass
of 1 − ∆ is distributed between the k elements and does

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

