Deep Laplacian-based Options for Temporally-Extended Exploration

Martin Klissarov 1 * Marlos C. Machado † 2 3 4

Abstract

portantly, the actions the agent takes do not only impact
the reward it receives but also its stream of experience, that
is, its future observations and affordances. Thus, there are
two types of actions the agent can take: actions that exploit
what it has learned so far and actions, known as exploratory
actions, that are seemingly suboptimal but that can lead to
additional information about the environment. A fundamental challenge in RL resides in selecting exploratory actions
that generate a rich stream of experience for better learning.

Selecting exploratory actions that generate a rich
stream of experience for better learning is a fundamental challenge in reinforcement learning (RL).
An approach to tackle this problem consists in
selecting actions according to specific policies
for an extended period of time, also known as
options. A recent line of work to derive such exploratory options builds upon the eigenfunctions
of the graph Laplacian. Importantly, until now
these methods have been mostly limited to tabular domains where (1) the graph Laplacian matrix was either given or could be fully estimated,
(2) performing eigendecomposition on this matrix was computationally tractable, and (3) value
functions could be learned exactly. Additionally,
these methods required a separate option discovery phase. These assumptions are fundamentally
not scalable. In this paper we address these limitations and show how recent results for directly approximating the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian
can be leveraged to truly scale up options-based
exploration. To do so, we introduce a fully online deep RL algorithm for discovering Laplacianbased options and evaluate our approach on a variety of pixel-based tasks. We compare to several
state-of-the-art exploration methods and show that
our approach is effective, general, and especially
promising in non-stationary settings.

In this paper we build on the idea of promoting exploration
by explicitly considering courses of actions within the
environment. That is, the agent explores by selecting
actions according to a specific (not random) policy for
an extended period of time. This temporally-extended
exploration allows the agent to be purposeful and to ensure
that parts of the environment that are unlikely to be visited
by chance can be visited more often (Machado & Bowling,
2016; Jinnai et al., 2019; Ecoffet et al., 2021). We model
temporally-extended exploration through options (Precup,
2000; Sutton et al., 1999), a well-known formalism for
representing behaviour at different timescales. Methods
based on these ideas have been quite successful: domains of
application include Atari 2600 games (Ecoffet et al., 2021;
Dabney et al., 2021), continuous control on the MuJoCo
simulator (Park et al., 2022), and real-world problems such
as balloon navigation (Bellemare et al., 2020).
A central question around temporally-extended exploration
methods is how one should define such temporal abstractions. Put differently, how should one discover options
for exploration? Solutions often revolve around extremely
simple approaches such as action repetition (e.g., Dabney
et al., 2021) or approaches that exploit domain-specific information (e.g., Bellemare et al., 2020; Ecoffet et al., 2021).
Potentially more general methods for temporally-extended
exploration have not been convincingly shown to truly scale
beyond small domains (e.g., Machado et al., 2017; 2018b;
Jinnai et al., 2019; 2020; Bar et al., 2020); we do so here.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with an
unknown environment in order to maximize the sum of rewards. At each step of this interaction the agent receives
an observation, a reward signal, and it takes an action. ImWork done during an internship at DeepMind.† Work mostly
done while at DeepMind. 1 Mila, McGill University 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 3 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Martin Klissarov <martin.klissarov@mail.mcgill.ca>.
*

Specifically, we consider the line of work that discovers
exploratory options by leveraging a diffusion model that
encodes the flow of information in the environment’s underlying graph (c.f. Machado et al., 2023). The diffusion model
of choice is the graph Laplacian (Chung, 1997) as its eigenfunctions are known to capture the topology of the environ-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

