Geometric Clifford Algebra Networks

David Ruhe 1 Jayesh K. Gupta 2 Steven de Keninck 3 Max Welling 4 Johannes Brandstetter 4

Abstract
We propose Geometric Clifford Algebra Networks (GCANs) for modeling dynamical systems.
GCANs are based on symmetry group transformations using geometric (Clifford) algebras. We first
review the quintessence of modern (plane-based)
geometric algebra, which builds on isometries encoded as elements of the Pin(p, q, r) group. We
then propose the concept of group action layers,
which linearly combine object transformations using pre-specified group actions. Together with a
new activation and normalization scheme, these
layers serve as adjustable geometric templates that
can be refined via gradient descent. Theoretical
advantages are strongly reflected in the modeling
of three-dimensional rigid body transformations
as well as large-scale fluid dynamics simulations,
showing significantly improved performance over
traditional methods.

Figure 1. GCANs: Geometric algebra allows us to express data as
objects which can simultaneously be interpreted as group elements
(top). GCANs parameterize linear combinations of learnable group
actions, ensuring that even randomly initialized models form a composition of geometric transformations. GCANs are thus adjustable
geometric templates. Bottom: geometric transformations can be
constructed from compositions of reflections. Two reflections in
intersecting planes yield a rotation (left), and two reflections in
parallel planes yield a translation (right).

1. Introduction
Equipping neural networks with geometric priors has led
to many recent successes. For instance, in group equivariant deep learning (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Weiler et al.,
2018; Bronstein et al., 2021; Weiler et al., 2021), neural
networks are constructed to be equivariant or invariant to
group actions applied to the input data.

2021; Pathak et al., 2022; Bi et al., 2022; Lam et al., 2022;
Nguyen et al., 2023), molecular dynamics (Mardt et al.,
2018; Zhong et al., 2019; Greydanus et al., 2019; Mattheakis
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a), or astrophysics (Tamayo et al.,
2016; Cranmer et al., 2021). Typically, the objective is to
predict with high precision how a system will evolve based
on various initial conditions. This is a challenging task,
given that the underlying dynamics can be highly unstable
or chaotic.

In this work, we focus on tasks where we expect that the
target function is a geometric transformation of the input
data. Such functions arise ubiquitously in the science of
dynamical systems, which is the core experimental domain
of this work. Neural surrogates for solving these schemes
have been proposed in fluid dynamics (Li et al., 2020b;
Kochkov et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021; Rasp & Thuerey,

We introduce Geometric Clifford Algebra Networks
(GCANs) as a new approach to incorporate geometry-guided
transformations into neural networks using geometric algebra. Geometric algebra (Clifford, 1871; Hestenes, 1966;
Dorst & Mann, 2002; Mann & Dorst, 2002; Dorst et al.,
2009; Artin, 2016) is an algebraic framework based on real
Clifford algebras that is particularly well suited to handle
and model computational geometry. It has several intriguing properties and advantages over other frameworks, such
as classical linear algebra. For example, it naturally and
efficiently encodes the transformations and the invariant

1

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.
Microsoft Autonomous Systems and Robotics Research
3
University of Amsterdam 4 Microsoft Research AI4Science. Correspondence to: David Ruhe <david.ruhe@gmail.com>, Johannes
Brandstetter <johannesb@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

