Byzantine-Robust Learning on Heterogeneous Data via Gradient Splitting

Yuchen Liu 1 * † Chen Chen 2 * Lingjuan Lyu 2 Fangzhao Wu 3 Sai Wu 1 Gang Chen 1

Abstract

tacks (Blanchard et al., 2017; Guerraoui et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2020), in which Byzantine clients can send arbitrary
messages to the central server to bias the global model.
Moreover, it is challenging for the server to identify the
Byzantine clients, since the server can neither access clients’
training data nor monitor their local training process.

Federated learning has exhibited vulnerabilities to
Byzantine attacks, where the Byzantine attackers
can send arbitrary gradients to a central server
to destroy the convergence and performance of
the global model. A wealth of robust AGgregation Rules (AGRs) have been proposed to defend
against Byzantine attacks. However, Byzantine
clients can still circumvent robust AGRs when
data is non-Identically and Independently Distributed (non-IID). In this paper, we first reveal the
root causes of performance degradation of current
robust AGRs in non-IID settings: the curse of dimensionality and gradient heterogeneity. In order
to address this issue, we propose GAS, a GrAdient Splitting approach that can successfully adapt
existing robust AGRs to non-IID settings. We also
provide a detailed convergence analysis when the
existing robust AGRs are combined with GAS.
Experiments on various real-world datasets verify
the efficacy of our proposed GAS. The implementation code is provided in https://github.
com/YuchenLiu-a/byzantine-gas.

In order to defend against Byzantine attacks, the community
has proposed a wealth of defenses (Blanchard et al., 2017;
Guerraoui et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2018). Most defenses
abandon the averaging step adopted by conventional FL
frameworks, e.g., FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017). Instead,
they use robust AGgregation Rules (AGRs) to aggregate local gradients and compute the global gradient. Most existing
robust AGRs assume that the data distribution on different
clients is Identically and Independently Distributed (IID)
(Bernstein et al., 2018; Ghosh et al., 2019). In fact, the data
is usually heterogeneous, i.e., non-IID, in real-world FL
applications (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021;
Lyu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022a). In
this paper, we focus on defending against Byzantine attacks
in the more realistic non-IID setting.
In the non-IID setting, defending against Byzantine attacks becomes more challenging (Karimireddy et al., 2022;
Acharya et al., 2022). Robust AGRs that try to include all
the honest gradients in aggregation (Blanchard et al., 2017;
Shejwalkar & Houmansadr, 2021) fail to handle the curse of
dimensionality (Guerraoui et al., 2018). Byzantine clients
can take advantage of the high dimension of gradients and
participate in aggregation. As a result, the global gradient
is manipulated away from the optimal gradient, i.e., the average of honest gradients. Other robust AGRs (Guerraoui
et al., 2018; Yin et al., 2018) aggregate fewer gradients to
ensure that only honest gradients participate in aggregation.
However, the global gradient is still of limited utility due to
gradient heterogeneity (Li et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al.,
2020) in the non-IID setting. In summary, most existing
AGRs fail to address both the curse of dimensionality (Guerraoui et al., 2018) and gradient heterogeneity (Karimireddy
et al., 2022) at the same time. Consequently, they fail to
achieve satisfactory performance in the non-IID setting.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Lyu et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2020) provides a privacy-aware and distributed machine learning paradigm. It has recently attracted
widespread attention as a result of emerging data silos and
growing privacy awareness. In this paradigm, data owners
(clients) repeatedly use their private data to compute local
gradients and send them to a central server for aggregation.
In this way, clients can collaborate to train a model without exposing their private data. However, the distributed
property of FL also makes it vulnerable to Byzantine at*

Equal contribution † Work partly done during internship at
Sony Al 1 Key Lab of Intelligent Computing Based Big Data
of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Sony AI 3 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Lingjuan Lyu
<lingjuan.lv@sony.com>.

Motivated by the above observations, we propose a GrAdient Splitting based approach called GAS for Byzantine robustness in non-IID settings. In particular, to ad-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

