Cold Analysis of Rao-Blackwellized Straight-Through Gumbel-Softmax
Gradient Estimator
Alexander Shekhovtsov 1

Abstract

competitive accuracy with a better efficiency in various applications (Nie et al., 2022). VAEs and quantized networks
are two diverse examples that motivate our development
and the experimental benchmarks. Other potential applications include conditional computation (Bengio et al., 2013a;
Yang et al., 2019; Bulat et al., 2021) reinforcement learning (Yin et al., 2019), learning task-specific tree structures
for agglomerative neural networks (Choi et al., 2018), neural
architecture search (Chang et al., 2019) and more.

Many problems in machine learning require an
estimate of the gradient of an expectation in discrete random variables with respect to the sampling distribution. This work is motivated by the
development of the Gumbel-Softmax family of
estimators, which use a temperature-controlled
relaxation of discrete variables. The state-of-the
art in this family, the Gumbel-Rao estimator uses
an extra internal sampling to reduce the variance,
which may be costly. We analyze this estimator and show that it possesses a zero temperature
limit with a surprisingly simple closed form. The
limit estimator, called ZGR, has favorable bias
and variance properties, it is easy to implement
and computationally inexpensive. It decomposes
as the average of the straight through (ST) estimator and DARN estimator — two basic but
not very well performing on their own estimators.
We demonstrate that the simple ST–ZGR family
of estimators practically dominates in the biasvariance tradeoffs the whole GR family while also
outperforming SOTA unbiased estimators.

The learning problem in the presence of stochastic discrete
variables is often formulated as minimization of the expected loss. Its gradient-based optimization requires gradient of the expectation in the probabilities of random variables (or parameters of networks inferring these probabilities). Unbiased gradient estimators have been developed (Williams, 1992; Grathwohl et al., 2018; Tucker et al.,
2017; Gu et al., 2016). These estimators work even for
non-differentiable losses, but their high variance is a major
limitation. More recent advances (Yin et al., 2019; Kool
et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2020; 2021; Dimitriev & Zhou,
2021a;b) reduce the variance by using several cleverly coupled samples. However, the hierarchical / deep case has not
been addressed satisfactory. On one hand, due to dependent random variables, the variance of gradient estimators
is typically much higher. On the other hand, extensions of
coupled sampling methods to networks with L layers of
discrete variables (e.g., Dong et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2019)
apply their base method in every layer, which requires in
each layer to evaluate all the remaining layers till the loss.
The computation complexity thus grows quadratically with
the number of dependency layers, making these methods
too costly for e.g. hierarchical VAEs or quantized networks
and practically infeasible for autoregressive models.

1. Introduction
Discrete variables and discrete structures are important in
machine learning. For example, variational autoencoders
(VAEs) with binary latent states are helpful in semantic
hashing (Shen et al., 2018; Dadaneh et al., 2020; Ñanculef
et al., 2020). Vector quantized VAEs (van den Oord et al.,
2017) are employed as low-level representations in deep
vision models (Mao et al., 2022). Another example is neural networks with discrete (binary or quantized) weights
and activations. They allow for a low-latency and energy
efficient inference, particularly important for edge devices.
Recent results indicate that quantized networks can achieve

A different family of methods, fitting practical needs of
deep models better, exploits continuation arguments. It
includes ST variants (Bengio et al., 2013b; Shekhovtsov &
Yanush, 2021; Pervez et al., 2020) and Gumbel-Softmax
variants. These methods assume the loss function to be
differentiable and try to estimate the derivative with respect
to parameters of a discrete distribution from the derivative of
the loss function at a discrete sample. Such estimators can
be easily incorporated into back-propagation by adjusting
the forward and backward passes locally for every discrete

1

Department of Cybernetics, Czech Technical University
in Prague, Czech Republic. Correspondence to: Alexander
Shekhovtsov <shekhole@fel.cvut.cz>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

