Optimizing DDPM Sampling with Shortcut Fine-Tuning

Ying Fan 1 Kangwook Lee 1

Abstract

Closed-loop control

initial state

In this study, we propose Shortcut Fine-Tuning
(SFT), a new approach for addressing the challenge of fast sampling of pretrained Denoising
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs). SFT
advocates for the fine-tuning of DDPM samplers
through the direct minimization of Integral Probability Metrics (IPM), instead of learning the backward diffusion process. This enables samplers
to discover an alternative and more efficient sampling shortcut, deviating from the backward diffusion process. Inspired by a control perspective,
we propose a new algorithm SFT- PG: Shortcut
Fine-Tuning with Policy Gradient, and prove that
under certain assumptions, gradient descent of
diffusion models with respect to IPM is equivalent to performing policy gradient. To our best
knowledge, this is the first attempt to utilize reinforcement learning (RL) methods to train diffusion models. Through empirical evaluation, we
demonstrate that our fine-tuning method can further enhance existing fast DDPM samplers, resulting in sample quality comparable to or even
surpassing that of the full-step model across various datasets.

Controller/
System

nal state

×T

≈

Diffusion models

initial noise

Denoising
Model

nal image

×T

Figure 1. Image denoising is similar to a closed-loop control system: finding paths from pure noise to natural images.

a result, there is a line of work focusing on sampling fewer
T 1 ! T steps to obtain comparable sample quality: Most
works are dedicated to better approximating the backward
process as stochastic differential equations (SDEs) with
fewer steps, generally via better noise estimation or computing better sub-sampling schedules (Kong and Ping, 2021;
San-Roman et al., 2021; Lam et al., 2021; Watson et al.,
2021a; Jolicoeur-Martineau et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2021;
2022). Other works aim at approximating the backward process with fewer steps via more complicated non-gaussian
noise distributions (Xiao et al., 2021).1

fi

To our best knowledge, existing fast samplers of DDPM
stick to imitating the computed backward process with fewer
steps. If we treat data generation as a control task (see
Fig. 1), the backward process can be viewed as a demonstration to generate data from noise (which might not be optimal
in terms of number of steps), and the training dataset could
be an environment that provides feedback on how good the
generated distribution is. From this view, imitating the backward process could be viewed as imitation learning (Hussein et al., 2017) or behavior cloning (Torabi et al., 2018).
Naturally, one may wonder if we can do better than pure
imitation, since learning via imitation is generally useful
but rarely optimal, and we can explore alternative paths for
optimal solutions during online optimization.

1. Introduction
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho
et al., 2020) are parameterized stochastic Markov chains
with Gaussian noises, which are learned by gradually adding
noises to the data as the forward process, computing the posterior as a backward process, and then training the DDPM to
match the backward process. Advances in DDPM (Nichol
and Dhariwal, 2021; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) have
shown the potential to rival GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
in generative tasks. However, one major drawback of
DDPM is that a large number of steps T is needed. As
1
UW Madison. Correspondence to: Ying Fan, Kangwook Lee
<yfan87@wisc.edu, kangwook.lee@wisc.edu>.

Motivated by the above observation, we study the following

th

1

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

There is another line of work focusing on fast sampling of
DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) with deterministic Markov sampling
chains, which we will discuss in Section 5.

1

