Competing for Shareable Arms in Multi-Player Multi-Armed Bandits

Renzhe Xu * 1 Haotian Wang * 1 Xingxuan Zhang 1 Bo Li 2 Peng Cui 1

Abstract

channels to transmit data in cognitive radio networks (Mitola & Maguire, 1999; Haykin, 2005; Meshkati et al., 2007).
Regarding algorithm-curated platforms (such as YouTube
and TikTok), content providers create content with different topics to compete for exposure (Ben-Porat et al., 2020;
Hron et al., 2022; Jagadeesan et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2023). In these applications, resources are often shareable, and each resource has a limited total reward,
such as the quality of each channel in cognitive radio networks and the demand for each content topic in algorithmcurated platforms. As a result, when more agents choose
to acquire the same resource, the reward earned by each
of them will decrease. Meanwhile, agents usually do not
have prior knowledge about the total reward of each resource in reality (Jouini et al., 2009; 2010; Li et al., 2010).
Therefore, these agents need to design policies to maximize
their rewards faced with unknown resource rewards and
competition from other agents.

Competitions for shareable and limited resources
have long been studied with strategic agents. In
reality, agents often have to learn and maximize
the rewards of the resources at the same time. To
design an individualized competing policy, we
model the competition between agents in a novel
multi-player multi-armed bandit (MPMAB) setting where players are selfish and aim to maximize their own rewards. In addition, when several players pull the same arm, we assume that
these players averagely share the arms’ rewards
by expectation. Under this setting, we first analyze the Nash equilibrium when arms’ rewards are
known. Subsequently, we propose a novel Selfish
MPMAB with Averaging Allocation (SMAA) approach based on the equilibrium. We theoretically demonstrate that SMAA could achieve a
good regret guarantee for each player when all
players follow the algorithm. Additionally, we
establish that no single selfish player can significantly increase their rewards through deviation,
nor can they detrimentally affect other players’
rewards without incurring substantial losses for
themselves. We finally validate the effectiveness
of the method in extensive synthetic experiments.

It is a common practice to adopt the multi-player multiarmed bandit (MPMAB) framework (Anantharam et al.,
1987; Liu & Zhao, 2010; Anandkumar et al., 2011; Boursier & Perchet, 2022) to model the behaviors of multiple
agents with unknown rewards of different resources. In
this framework, players pull arms simultaneously at various
rounds. Since several players may choose the same arm,
different collision models (Bande & Veeravalli, 2019; Liu
et al., 2020; Shi & Shen, 2021; Boyarski et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022a;b) are proposed to allocate the arm’s reward to
collided players. However, these works mainly focus on the
cooperative player setting where players are non-strategic
and cooperate to maximize the total reward of all players.
This does not agree with the real scenarios since players
are always selfish and target to maximize their own reward.
Several works (Boursier & Perchet, 2020; Liu et al., 2020;
2021; Jagadeesan et al., 2021) consider the selfish behaviors of players while they assume that the resource is not
shareable, as at most one player can get the reward when a
collision occurs.

1. Introduction
Agents compete with each other to maximize their own rewards in various applications with shareable and limited
resources, ranging from cognitive radio networks (Mitola
& Maguire, 1999) to algorithm-curated platforms (Hron
et al., 2022). For example, secondary users compete for
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 School of
Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. Emails: xrz199721@gmail.com, accwht@hotmail.com,
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com,
libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn,
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Correspondence to:
Peng Cui
<cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose a novel MPMAB setting to characterize the strategic behaviors of agents in applications
with limited and shareable resources. We assume that the
players are selfish, and they could strategically alter their
policies to achieve better rewards. In addition, when several
players pull the same arm, we suppose that these players

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

