Pre-computed memory or on-the-fly encoding? A hybrid approach to retrieval
augmentation makes the most of your compute

Michiel de Jong * 1 Yury Zemlyanskiy * 2 Nicholas FitzGerald 2 Joshua Ainslie 2
Sumit Sanghai 2 Fei Sha 2 William W. Cohen 2

Abstract

55
Exact Match

Retrieval-augmented language models such as
Fusion-in-Decoder are powerful, setting the state
of the art on a variety of knowledge-intensive
tasks. However, they are also expensive, due to
the need to encode a large number of retrieved
passages. Some work avoids this cost by preencoding a text corpus into a memory and retrieving dense representations directly. However, preencoding memory incurs a severe quality penalty
as the memory representations are not conditioned
on the current input. We propose LUMEN, a hybrid between these two extremes, pre-computing
the majority of the retrieval representation and
completing the encoding on the fly using a live
encoder that is conditioned on the question and
fine-tuned for the task. We show that LUMEN
significantly outperforms pure memory on multiple question-answering tasks while being much
cheaper than FiD, and outperforms both for any
given compute budget. Moreover, the advantage
of LUMEN over FiD increases with model size.

Memory

50

LUMEN

FiD
45
0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Proportion of live encoder layers

1

Figure 1. Exact match on Natural Questions dev set for LUMENXXL as a function of proportion of live (fine-tuned and conditioned
on question) vs memory (pre-computed) encoder layers. LUMEN
closes the gap between pure memory and FiD approaches with a
fraction of live layers and therefore compute.

for finetuning and inference.
An increasingly common approach to reduce this encoding
cost is to retrieve and extract information from a memory
of pre-computed representations rather than raw text, amortizing the encoding of a passage over every sample that
retrieves the passage entry from memory (Li et al., 2022;
de Jong et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2022a; Zhong et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b).1

1. Introduction
Retrieval-augmented language models such as Fusion-inDecoder (Izacard & Grave, 2021) achieve strong performance on knowledge intensive tasks, often outperforming
much larger models (Izacard et al., 2022). They retrieve
related text passages and process the passages along with
the input to extract relevant context information. However,
encoding retrieved passages can be computationally expensive. Recent work has found that with an optimized decoder
(Shazeer, 2019; de Jong et al., 2022a; Pope et al., 2022)
encoding retrieved passages makes up the bulk of total cost

However, memory approaches incur a large quality penalty
relative to retrieval-augmented models (Li et al., 2022), because the pre-encoded memory is not conditioned on the
task or on the particular input or question. Thus, the preencoded representation must be sufficiently comprehensive
to answer any question, a challenging undertaking. The
human analogue is the difference between memorizing an
entire book and being quizzed afterwards compared to looking up the answer to a question on the fly.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Southern California 2 Google
Research.
Correspondence to: Michiel de Jong <msdejong@usc.edu>, Yury Zemlyanskiy <urikz@google.com>.

Memory-based approaches therefore need to massively scale
1
Here we do not refer to pre-computing representations used
to select passages for retrieval (as is common practice for dense
retrieval methods), but rather pre-computing the actual representations to be retrieved and incorporated into the language model.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

