Revisiting Over-smoothing and Over-squashing Using Ollivier-Ricci Curvature

Khang Nguyen 1 2 Hieu Nong 1 Vinh Nguyen 1 Nhat Ho 3 Stanley Osher 4 Tan Nguyen 5

Abstract

2017; Ying et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019),
generative models (Li et al., 2018b; Bojchevski et al., 2018;
Shi et al., 2020), financial prediction (Chen et al., 2018b;
Matsunaga et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019), and knowledge
graphs (Shang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) had been demonstrated to be inherently susceptible to the problems of over-smoothing and over-squashing.
These issues prohibit the ability of GNNs to
model complex graph interactions by limiting
their effectiveness in taking into account distant
information. Our study reveals the key connection between the local graph geometry and the
occurrence of both of these issues, thereby providing a unified framework for studying them
at a local scale using the Ollivier-Ricci curvature. Specifically, we demonstrate that oversmoothing is linked to positive graph curvature
while over-squashing is linked to negative graph
curvature. Based on our theory, we propose the
Batch Ollivier-Ricci Flow, a novel rewiring algorithm capable of simultaneously addressing both
over-smoothing and over-squashing.

Despite their success, popular GNN designs suffer from two
notable setbacks that hamper their performance in practical
applications that require long-range interactions. The first
common problem encountered by GNNs is known as oversmoothing (Li et al., 2018a). Over-smoothing occurs when
node features quickly converge to each other and become indistinguishable as the number of layers increases. This issue
puts a limit on the depth of a GNN, prohibiting the model’s
capability of capturing complex relationships in the data.
Another plight plaguing GNNs is known as over-squashing
(Alon & Yahav, 2021). This phenomenon happens when the
number of nodes within the receptive field of a particular
node grows exponentially with the number of layers, leading
to the squashing of exponentially-growing amount of information into fixed-size node features. Such over-squashing
hinders the ability of GNNs to effectively process distant
information and capture long-range dependencies between
nodes in the graph, especially in the case of deep GNNs that
require many layers.

1. Introduction
A collection of entities with a set of relations between them
is among the simplest, and yet most general, types of structure. It came as no surprise that numerous real world data
are naturally represented by graphs (Harary, 1967; Hsu &
Lin, 2008; Estrada & Bonchev, 2013), motivating many recent advancements in the study of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs). This has lead to a wide range of successful applications, including physical modeling (Battaglia et al., 2016;
Kipf et al., 2018; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018), chemical
and biological inference (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer
et al., 2017), recommender systems (van den Berg et al.,

Together, over-smoothing and over-squashing impair the
performance of modern GNNs, impeding their application
to many important settings that involve very large graphs.
(Cai & Wang, 2020; Alon & Yahav, 2021). Understanding
and alleviating either of these problems has been the main
focus in many recent studies of GNNs (Oono & Suzuki,
2020; Cai & Wang, 2020; Zhao & Akoglu, 2020; Karhadkar
et al., 2023). Notably, using a notion of graph curvature,
Topping et al. (2022) suggested that over-squashing behaviors could arise from local graph structures. This pioneering
idea implies that local graph properties can be used to study
and improve GNN performance. It has been recently noted
that over-smoothing and over-squashing are somewhat related problems (Karhadkar et al., 2023). Nevertheless, to
the best of our knowledge, there has been no work in the literature that offers a common framework to understand these
problems. Such a unified approach presents a potentially
crucial theoretical contribution to our understanding of the
over-smoothing and over-squashing issues. It enables the
development of novel architectures and methods that can

1

FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Science, Vietnam National University Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam 3 Department of
Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA
4
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 5 Department of Mathematics, National University
of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Khang Nguyen
<khang.nguyenhoang.vn@gmail.com>, Tan Nguyen <tanmnguyen89@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

