Reliable Measures of Spread in High Dimensional Latent Spaces

Anna C. Marbut 1 Katy McKinney-Bock 2 Travis J. Wheeler 3

Abstract

evenly the data is distributed in its latent representation. It
has been shown that many common neural network architectures produce highly anisotropic latent spaces (Ethayarajh,
2019; Liu et al., 2018; Mimno & Thompson, 2017), and
recent research has demonstrated improved performance on
benchmarking tasks using various methods for enforcing
more complete use of a model’s latent space (Bihani & Rayz,
2021; Kaneko & Bollegala, 2020; Liang et al., 2021; Mu
et al., 2017).

Understanding geometric properties of the latent
spaces of natural language processing models allows the manipulation of these properties for improved performance on downstream tasks. One
such property is the amount of data spread in a
model’s latent space, or how fully the available
latent space is being used. We demonstrate that
the commonly used measures of data spread, average cosine similarity and a partition function
min/max ratio I(V), do not provide reliable metrics to compare the use of latent space across data
distributions. We propose and examine six alternative measures of data spread, all of which
improve over these current metrics when applied
to seven synthetic data distributions. Of our proposed measures, we recommend one principal
component-based measure and one entropy-based
measure that provide reliable, relative measures
of spread and can be used to compare models of
different sizes and dimensionalities.

The majority of existing work quantifies the spread of data
in a latent space with two measures of isotropy, average
cosine similarity and a measure introduced by Mu et al.
(2017) based on a ratio of principal component loadings.
We present seven synthetic data distributions and show that
these two measures do not behave as would be expected of
a reliable measure of relative data spread.
We examine six alternative ways to quantify data spread and
compare the performance of these measures on the same example distributions. We consider two principal component
measures, two ratios of differential entropy approximations,
and two measures of relative entropy (Kullback-Leibler Divergence). We show that all proposed measures behave
more intuitively on our evaluation distributions than the
two commonly used measures. In particular, we find that
our proposed Eigenvalue Early Enrichment score and Vasicek Ratio MSE score most closely mirror our expectations
across these example distributions and various numbers of
dimensions. Finally, we investigate the behavior of the
best-performing of the alternative data spread metrics on
real (not simulated) latent spaces produced by a pre-trained
Word2Vec model.

1. Introduction
The product of many neural network models is a representation of the data input in a high dimensional latent space.
The distribution of data in this latent space is often used in
the application of the learned model through data clustering
for classification, measuring distance between data points
to quantify similarity, sampling to generate synthetic data
elements, or any number of other downstream tasks. For
this reason, understanding and manipulating the geometric properties of models’ latent spaces is an area of active
research.

2. Related Work
In a natural language processing (NLP) context, the expressiveness of a model can be directly tied to the dimensionality
of its trained word embeddings, with model expressiveness
increasing with the number of available dimensions up to
the point of severe overfitting (Yin & Shen, 2018). However,
this increased expressiveness as a function of latent space
dimensionality depends on the model effectively using the
space across all of these dimensions.

One such geometric property is a quantification of how
1
Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, University of
Montana, Missoula, MT, USA 2 Appling LLC, Portland, OR,
USA 3 Department of Pharmacy Practice Science, University
of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Anna
C. Marbut <anna.marbut@umontana.edu>, Travis J. Wheeler
<twheeler@arizona.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This assumption of an evenly used latent space is not guar-

1

