Interactive Object Placement with Reinforcement Learning

Shengping Zhang 1 Quanling Meng 1 Qinglin Liu 1 Liqiang Nie 2
Bineng Zhong 3 Xiaopeng Fan 4 Rongrong Ji 5

Abstract
Object placement aims to insert a foreground
object into a background image with a suitable
location and size to create a natural composition. To predict a diverse distribution of placements, existing methods usually establish a oneto-one mapping from random vectors to the placements. However, these random vectors are not
interpretable, which prevents users from interacting with the object placement process. To address
this problem, we propose an Interactive Object
Placement method with Reinforcement Learning,
dubbed IOPRE, to make sequential decisions for
producing a reasonable placement given an initial location and size of the foreground. We first
design a novel action space to flexibly and stably adjust the location and size of the foreground
while preserving its aspect ratio. Then, we propose a multi-factor state representation learning
method, which integrates composition image features and sinusoidal positional embeddings of the
foreground to make decisions for selecting actions.
Finally, we design a hybrid reward function that
combines placement assessment and the number
of steps to ensure that the agent learns to place
objects in the most visually pleasing and semantically appropriate location. Experimental results
on the OPA dataset demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of plausibility and diversity.

Step 0: Initialization

Step 1: Down

Step 2: Enlarge

Step 3: Down

Step 4: Enlarge

Step 5: Termination

Figure 1. Illustration of the decision-making process. We first give
an initial location and size of the foreground object (depicted as a
boat in a green rectangle). Then, the agent continuously adjusts
the location and size (indicated by red arrows) of the boat until
the termination action is selected. Red (resp., Orange) rectangles
indicate the current (resp., last) location and size of the boat.

1. Introduction
Image composition (Niu et al., 2021) aims to paste a foreground object from one image on another background image
to produce a realistic composite image, which has broad
application prospects in the realm of art, entertainment, commerce (Chen & Kae, 2019; Weng et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020b), and data augmentation (Dwibedi et al., 2017; Remez et al., 2018; Ouyang et al., 2018). Object placement is a
crucial aspect of image composition that focuses on estimating the location and size of the foreground object to make
the composition image natural. Learning object placement
is a very challenging task, as it requires taking into account
various factors such as location, size, and occlusion within
the background image (Niu et al., 2021).

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
of Technology, Weihai, China 2 School of Computer Science and
Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Multi-Source Information Mining
and Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China 4 School of
Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, China 5 Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Correspondence
to: Liqiang Nie <nieliqiang@gmail.com>.

Early methods (Georgakis et al., 2017; Remez et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b) attempt to find reasonable locations and scales for foreground
objects by designing explicit rules. However, these methods struggle to cope with diverse and complex scenarios.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

