Learning to Design Analog Circuits to Meet Threshold Specifications

Dmitrii Krylov 1 Pooya Khajeh 1 Junhan Ouyang 1 Thomas Reeves 1 Tongkai Liu 1 Hiba Ajmal 1
Hamidreza Aghasi 1 Roy Fox 1

Abstract

systems (Kamal, 2022). Despite the economic and technological importance of these types of circuits, contemporary
design in research and industry is still predominantly manual, using advanced electronic design automation tools such
as the Cadence Virtuoso (Martin, 2002) and the Keysight
ADS (Kouhalvandi et al., 2018) circuit simulators. This
heavy reliance on human design slows down and raises the
costs of the development of future generations of electronic
systems and should inevitably shift toward a more interactive design approach where humans and machines co-design
analog circuits substantially faster.

Automated design of analog and radio-frequency
circuits using supervised or reinforcement learning from simulation data has recently been studied as an alternative to manual expert design. It
is straightforward for a design agent to learn an
inverse function from desired performance metrics to circuit parameters. However, it is more
common for a user to have threshold performance
criteria rather than an exact target vector of feasible performance measures. In this work, we
propose a method for generating from simulation data a dataset on which a system can be
trained via supervised learning to design circuits
to meet threshold specifications. We moreover
perform the to-date most extensive evaluation of
automated analog circuit design, including experimenting in a significantly more diverse set of
circuits than in prior work, covering linear, nonlinear, and autonomous circuit configurations, and
show that our method consistently reaches success
rate better than 90% at 5% error margin, while
also improving data efficiency by upward of an
order of magnitude. A demo of this system is
available at circuits.streamlit.app

A recent growing literature on automated circuit design has
considered the problem of finding the parameters of components in a given circuit that would induce a desired set
of performance metrics (Mina et al., 2022). Learning to
output such circuit parameters is typically framed in the
supervised learning setting, where a model in a given model
class — often a neural network — is trained on a dataset
of simulated parameter–metrics pairs to solve the inverse
problem of mapping target performance metrics to circuit
parameters that meet these requirements. A limiting factor
in this approach is the large number of times that the circuit
needs to be simulated to collect enough data for accurate
learning. As we aim to support larger and more intricate circuits, precise simulation becomes slow, and data efficiency
requisite.
We address two inverse problems. For the simpler one, described above and formalized in Section 2.1, a dataset is
created by simulating a circuit with parameter values on a
grid that covers a user-specified range. A neural network is
then trained on this data to predict circuit parameters that
would induce a desired performance vector. We evaluate
this approach on a much larger variety of useful circuit
topologies than has previously been done, and show that
this inverse function is smooth and regular enough to be
approximated from a much smaller number of examples
than achieved before, namely around 600–4000 points, depending on circuit complexity, compared with 10,000 to
40,000 points in prior work (Fukuda et al., 2017b; Wang
et al., 2018b; Lourenço et al., 2018; M.V. & Harish, 2020b).

1. Introduction
Owing to the immense growth of consumer electronics over
the last few decades, integrated circuitry using commercial
CMOS/BiCMOS chip technologies has become a major
sector of the semiconductor industry (Kamal, 2022). More
specifically, fast innovation and skyrocketing demand in several industry segments, such as wireless communication and
high-resolution imaging systems, has been driving interest
in analog, radio-frequency, and millimeter-wave circuits and
1

University of California, Irvine.
Correspondence
to: Dmitrii Krylov <dkrylov@uci.edu>, Hamidreza Aghasi
<haghasi@uci.edu>, Roy Fox <royf@uci.edu>.

However, this approach has severely limited usability, because it requires the user to make a rather precise guess of a

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

