EM-Network: Oracle Guided Self-distillation for Sequence Learning

Ji Won Yoon 1 Sunghwan Ahn 1 Hyeonseung Lee 1 Minchan Kim 1 Seok Min Kim 1 Nam Soo Kim 1

Abstract

learning the latent space Z and how to improve its quality are deemed critically important in sequence modeling.
Examples include various types of source-target alignment
(Graves et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2020; 2021), and feature
representation (Devlin et al., 2019; Hsu et al., 2021; Baevski
et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021).

We introduce EM-Network, a novel selfdistillation approach that effectively leverages
target information for supervised sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) learning. In contrast to
conventional methods, it is trained with oracle
guidance, which is derived from the target sequence. Since the oracle guidance compactly
represents the target-side context that can assist
the sequence model in solving the task, the EMNetwork achieves a better prediction compared to
using only the source input. To allow the sequence
model to inherit the promising capability of the
EM-Network, we propose a new self-distillation
strategy, where the original sequence model can
benefit from the knowledge of the EM-Network
in a one-stage manner. We conduct comprehensive experiments on two types of seq2seq models:
connectionist temporal classification (CTC) for
speech recognition and attention-based encoderdecoder (AED) for machine translation. Experimental results demonstrate that the EM-Network
significantly advances the current state-of-the-art
approaches, improving over the best prior work
on speech recognition and establishing state-ofthe-art performance on WMT’14 and IWSLT’14.

However, it is difficult to learn the optimal latent space
for the learning task. For example, in speech processing,
connectionist temporal classification (CTC) (Graves et al.,
2006) models often converge to sub-optimal alignment distributions and produce over-confident predictions (Liu et al.,
2018; Yu et al., 2021; Miao et al., 2015). Since there is an
exponential number of possible alignment paths, and the
alignment information between source and target sequences
is rarely available during training, settling on the optimal
alignment z is quite challenging.
For the tasks above, one promising approach is knowledge
distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2014) that allows a sequence
model (student) to learn a higher-capacity model (teacher)’s
latent knowledge z, including CTC alignment (Yoon et al.,
2021; Feng et al., 2021) and hidden representation (Sun
et al., 2019; Aguilar et al., 2020; Yoon et al., 2021). Despite their effective regularization in the latent space, such
techniques generally rely on a complex teacher model, requiring heavy computational costs. To mitigate the burden,
recent studies have attempted to train the model with a selfdistillation setup (Liang et al., 2021; Baevski et al., 2022;
Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2021), distilling the knowledge within the network itself without any extra teacher
network. In this setting, where the student network acts
as its own teacher, there is no guarantee that the distilled
knowledge is sufficient to provide an optimal solution for
the task. Also, some self-distillation methods (Pei et al.,
2021; Kong et al., 2022; Baevski et al., 2022; Grill et al.,
2020; Caron et al., 2021; Furlanello et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020a; Park et al., 2020) require an additional update
strategy, such as the exponential moving average (EMA) of
parameters and noisy student training.

1. Introduction
Throughout the literature on deep learning, sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) learning has achieved great success in a
wide range of applications, especially in speech and natural
language processing. A task of the seq2seq learning is to
learn a function f : X → Y that maps a source sequence
x ∈ X to a target sequence y ∈ Y. Since seq2seq tasks
generally suffer from source-target mismatch problems, e.g.,
unequal length, different modality, and domain mismatch,
1

Department of ECE and INMC, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Ji Won Yoon
<jwyoon@hi.snu.ac.kr>, Nam Soo Kim <nkim@snu.ac.kr>.

In this paper, we present a novel self-distillation framework,
namely EM-Network, that effectively leverages target information for supervised seq2seq learning. This work departs
from previous distillation approaches in three ways. First,
our method leverages the target sequence as the model’s ad-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

