DIFF2: Differential Private Optimization via Gradient Differences
for Nonconvex Distributed Learning

Tomoya Murata 1 2 Taiji Suzuki 2 3

Abstract

consisted of browsing history, check-in data, medical
records, financial records and so on, often contain private
information, and then publishing the statistics like trained
models or computed gradients on the private datasets causes
a leak of the private information. In the recently proposed
federated learning framework (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017), where each client possesses a private local
dataset and iteratively exchanges the own models or gradients with the central server, it is crucial to prevent the
malicious clients from stealing the private information contained in the local datasets.

Differential private optimization for nonconvex
smooth objective is considered. In the previous
√ work, the best known utility bound is
e d/(nεDP )) in terms of the squared full graO(
dient norm, which is achieved by Differential Private Gradient Descent (DP-GD) as an instance,
where n is the sample size, d is the problem dimensionality and εDP is the differential privacy
parameter. To improve the best known utility
bound, we propose a new differential private optimization framework called DIFF2 (DIFFerential
private optimization via gradient DIFFerences)
that constructs a differential private global gradient estimator with possibly quite small variance based on communicated gradient differences
rather than gradients themselves. It is shown
that DIFF2 with a gradient descent subroutine
e 2/3 /(nεDP )4/3 ), which
achieves the utility of O(d
can be significantly better than the previous one
in terms of the dependence on the sample size
n. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
fundamental
result to improve the standard utility
√
e d/(nεDP )) for nonconvex objectives. AddiO(
tionally, a more computational and communication efficient subroutine is combined with DIFF2
and its theoretical analysis is also given. Numerical experiments are conducted to validate the
superiority of DIFF2 framework.

Actually, many attacks to steal the private information from
the trained models or gradients are known. Major attacks
include membership inference attack (Shokri et al., 2017;
Yeom et al., 2018; Nasr et al., 2019) and reconstruction
attack (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2019d; Geiping et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020b). Membership inference attack aims to infer the
presence of the known individual or record in the dataset
from the shared statistics of the dataset. Reconstruction
attack aims to reconstruct the data samples of a victim user
or client from the shared information like gradients. Due
to the empirical success of these attacks, privacy protection
technology is essentially required.
To preserve the privacy of the datasets, the simplest approach is data anonymization. Roughly speaking, data
anonymization attempts to directly remove personally identifiable information from the datasets. The most major data
anonymization technique is k-anonymization (Samarati &
Sweeney, 1998) and its variants (Li et al., 2006; Machanavajjhala et al., 2007). k-anonymization suppresses/generalizes
attributes and/or adds dummy records to ensure that each
record is similar to at least k − 1 other records on the potentially identifying attributes called quasi-identifiers. However, k-anonymization is insufficient for privacy protection
due to the existence of de-anonymization algorithms using auxiliary information. On the other side, the advanced
variants of k-anonymization often destroy the utility of the
dataset and makes the learned model degraded, although it
improves the security of k-anonymization.

1. Introduction
Privacy protection has become one of the important components in modern artificial intelligence technologies. Datasets
*
Equal contribution 1 NTT DATA Mathematical Systems Inc.,
Tokyo, Japan 2 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 3 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Tomoya Murata <murata@msi.co.jp>, Taiji Suzuki
<taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Another approach for privacy protection is the use of differential privacy technique. Differential privacy is a general
1

