Robustly Learning a Single Neuron via Sharpness

Puqian Wang * 1 Nikos Zarifis * 1 Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Jelena Diakonikolas 1

Abstract

Problem 1.1 does not make realizability assumptions on
the distribution D. The labels are allowed to be arbitrary
and we are interested in the best-fit function with respect to
the L22 error. This corresponds to the (distribution-specific)
agnostic PAC learning model (Haussler, 1992; Kearns et al.,
1994). In this paper, we focus on developing constant factor
approximate learners, corresponding to the case that C is a
universal constant greater than one.

We study the problem of learning a single neuron with respect to the L22 -loss in the presence
of adversarial label noise. We give an efficient
algorithm that, for a broad family of activations
including ReLUs, approximates the optimal L22 error within a constant factor. Notably, our algorithm succeeds under much milder distributional
assumptions compared to prior work. The key ingredient enabling our results is a novel connection
to local error bounds from optimization theory.

The special case of Problem 1.1 where the labels are consistent with a function in H = {σ(w · x) : ∥w∥2 ≤ W } was
studied in early work (Kalai & Sastry, 2009; Kakade et al.,
2011). These papers gave efficient methods that succeed
for any distribution on the unit ball and any monotone Lipschitz activation1 . More recently, (Yehudai & Shamir, 2020)
showed that gradient descent on the nonconvex L22 loss succeeds under a natural class of distributions (again in the
realizable case) but fails in general. In other related work,
(Soltanolkotabi, 2017) analyzed the case of ReLUs in the realizable setting under the Gaussian distribution and showed
that gradient descent efficiently achieves exact recovery.

1. Introduction
We study the following learning task: Given labeled examples (x, y) ∈ Rd × R from an unknown distribution D,
output the best-fitting ReLU (or other nonlinear function)
with respect to square loss. This is a fundamental problem
in machine learning that has been extensively studied in a
number of interrelated contexts over the past two decades,
including learning GLMs and neural networks. More specifically, letting σ : R 7→ R denote a nonlinear activation, e.g.,
σ(t) = ReLU(t) = max{0, t}, the (population) square loss
of a vector w is defined as the L22 loss of the hypothesis
2
σ(w · x), i.e., LD,σ
2 (w) ≜ E(x,y)∼D [(σ(w · x) − y) ]. Our
learning problem is then formally defined as follows.

The agnostic setting is computationally challenging. First,
even for the case that the marginal distribution on the examples is Gaussian, there is strong evidence that any algorithm achieving error OPT + ϵ (corresponding to C = 1
in Problem 1.1) requires dpoly(1/ϵ) time (Goel et al., 2019;
Diakonikolas et al., 2020b; Goel et al., 2020; Diakonikolas
et al., 2021). Second, even if we relax our goal to constant
factor approximations, some distributional assumptions are
required: known NP-hardness results rule out proper learners achieving any constant factor (Sı́ma, 2002; Manurangsi
& Reichman, 2018). More recent work (Diakonikolas et al.,
2022a) has shown that no polynomial time constant factor
improper learner exists (under cryptographic assumptions),
even if the distribution is bounded. These intractability results motivate the design of constant factor approximate
learners — corresponding to C > 1 and C = O(1) — that
succeed under as mild distributional assumptions as possible.

Problem 1.1 (Robustly Learning a Single Neuron). Fix
ϵ > 0, W > 0, and a class of distributions G on Rd .
Let σ : R 7→ R be an activation and D a distribution
on labeled examples (x, y) ∈ Rd × R such that its xmarginal Dx belongs to G. For some C ≥ 1, a Capproximate proper learner is given ϵ, W and i.i.d. samples
from D and outputs ŵ ∈ Rd such that with high probability it holds LD,σ
2 (ŵ) ≤ C OPT + ϵ, where OPT ≜
min∥w∥2 ≤W LD,σ
2 (w) is the minimum attainable square
loss. We use W ∗ ≜ argmin∥w∥2 ≤W LD,σ
2 (w) to denote
the set of square loss minimizers.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer-Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA. Correspondence
to: Nikos Zarifis <zarifis@wisc.edu>.

Prior algorithmic work in the robust setting can be classified in two categories: A line of work (Frei et al., 2020;
Diakonikolas et al., 2022b; Awasthi et al., 2022) analyzes

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
The results in these works can tolerate zero mean random
noise, but do not apply to the adversarial noise setting.

1

