Warm-Start Actor-Critic: From Approximation Error to Sub-optimality Gap

Hang Wang 1 Sen Lin 2 Junshan Zhang 1

Abstract

(Kumar et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021), which hinders its
applicability in real-world tasks. Indeed, this is the case in
portfolio management (Choi et al., 2009), vehicles control
(Wu et al., 2017; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016) and other timesensitive settings (Li, 2017; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015). To
tackle this challenge, Warm-Start RL has recently garnered
much attention (Nair et al., 2020; Gelly & Silver, 2007;
Uchendu et al., 2022), by enabling online policy adaptation
from an initial policy pre-trained using offline data (e.g.,
via behavior cloning or offline RL). One main insight of
Warm-Start RL is that online learning can be significantly
accelerated, thanks to the bootstrapping by an initial policy.

Warm-Start reinforcement learning (RL), aided
by a prior policy obtained from offline training, is
emerging as a promising RL approach for practical applications. Recent empirical studies have
demonstrated that the performance of Warm-Start
RL can be improved quickly in some cases but
become stagnant in other cases, especially when
the function approximation is used. To this end,
the primary objective of this work is to build
a fundamental understanding on “whether and
when online learning can be significantly accelerated by a warm-start policy from offline RL?”.
Specifically, we consider the widely used ActorCritic (A-C) method with a prior policy. We first
quantify the approximation errors in the Actor update and the Critic update, respectively. Next, we
cast the Warm-Start A-C algorithm as Newton’s
method with perturbation, and study the impact of
the approximation errors on the finite-time learning performance with inaccurate Actor/Critic updates. Under some general technical conditions,
we derive the upper bounds, which shed light on
achieving the desired finite-learning performance
in the Warm-Start A-C algorithm. In particular,
our findings reveal that it is essential to reduce the
algorithm bias in online learning. We also obtain
lower bounds on the sub-optimality gap of the
Warm-Start A-C algorithm to quantify the impact
of the bias and error propagation.

Despite the encouraging empirical successes (Silver et al.,
2017; 2018; Uchendu et al., 2022), a fundamental understanding of the learning performance of Warm-Start RL
is lacking, especially in the practical settings with function approximation by neural networks. In this work, we
focus on the widely used Actor-Critic (A-C) method (Grondman et al., 2012; Peters & Schaal, 2008), which combines
the merits of both policy iteration and value iteration approaches (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and has great potential
for RL applications (Uchendu et al., 2022). Notably, in the
framework of abstract dynamic programming (ADP) (Bertsekas, 2022a), the policy iteration method (Sutton et al.,
1999) has been studied extensively, for warm-start learning
under the assumption of accurate updates. In such a setting,
policy iteration can be regarded as a second-order method in
convex optimization (Grand-Clément, 2021) from the perspective of ADP, and can achieve super-linear convergence
rate (Santos & Rust, 2004; Puterman & Brumelle, 1979;
Boyd et al., 2004). Nevertheless, when the A-C method
is implemented in practical applications, the approximation errors are inevitable in the Actor/Critic updates due
to many implementation issues, including function approximation using neural networks, the finite sample size, and
the finite number of gradient iterations. Moreover, the error
propagation from iteration to iteration may exacerbate the
‘slowing down’ of the convergence and have intricate impact
therein. Clearly, the (stochastic) accumulated errors may
throttle the convergence rate significantly and degrade the
learning performance dramatically (Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Farahmand et al., 2010; Dalal et al., 2020; Lazaric et al.,
2010). Thus, it is of great importance to characterize the
learning performance of Warm-Start RL in practical scenar-

1. Introduction
Online reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling et al., 1996;
Sutton & Barto, 2018) often faces the formidable challenge
of high sample complexity and intensive computational cost
1

Department of ECE, University of California, Davis,
CA, USA 2 Department of ECE, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Correspondence to: Hang Wang
<whang@ucdavis.edu>, Sen Lin <lin.4282@osu.edu>, Junshan
Zhang <jazh@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

