Rockmate: an Efficient, Fast, Automatic and Generic Tool
for Re-materialization in PyTorch

Xunyi Zhao * 1 Théotime Le Hellard * 2 Lionel Eyraud-Dubois 1 Julia Gusak 1 Olivier Beaumont 1

Abstract

time. Indeed, training is usually performed on computing resources such as GPUs or TPUs, on which memory is limited.
Therefore, different approaches have been proposed.

We propose Rockmate to control the memory requirements when training PyTorch DNN models.
Rockmate is an automatic tool that starts from the
model code and generates an equivalent model,
using a predefined amount of memory for activations, at the cost of a few re-computations. Rockmate automatically detects the structure of computational and data dependencies and rewrites the
initial model as a sequence of complex blocks.
We show that such a structure is widespread and
can be found in many models in the literature
(Transformer based models, ResNet, RegNets,...).
This structure allows us to solve the problem in
a fast and efficient way, using an adaptation of
Checkmate (too slow on the whole model but
general) at the level of individual blocks and an
adaptation of Rotor (fast but limited to sequential
models) at the level of the sequence itself. We
show through experiments on many models that
Rockmate is as fast as Rotor and as efficient as
Checkmate, and that it allows in many cases to
obtain a significantly lower memory consumption
for activations (by a factor of 2 to 5) for a rather
negligible overhead (of the order of 10% to 20%).
Rockmate is open source and available at https:
//github.com/topal-team/rockmate.

The first category of solutions consists in relying on parallelism. Data parallelism allows to distribute the memory
related to the activations, at the cost of exchanging the network weights between the different resources using collective communications such as MPI AllReduce which can
be expensive for networks such as those of the GPT2 class.
On the contrary, model parallelism allows to distribute the
weights of the network, at the cost of the communication
of activations and memory overheads in case it is used in a
pipelined way, and its scalability is limited by nature.
The second category of solutions is purely sequential. Offloading makes it possible to move some activations computed during the forward phase from the memory of the
accelerator (GPU or TPU) to the memory of the CPU,
and then to prefetch them back at the appropriate moment
into the memory of the GPU during the backward phase.
This solution therefore consumes bandwidth on the PCI-e
bus between the CPU and the accelerator, which is also
used to load training data. Another solution, called rematerialization, consists in deleting from accelerator memory some activations computed during the forward phase
and then recomputing them during the backward phase. This
approach does not consume communication resources, but
it does induce a computational overhead.
In the present paper, we focus on the latter re-materialization
approach on a single GPU or TPU, which is sufficient in
practice for the size of the networks we consider in the experiments and which can be trivially combined with data
parallelism to accelerate training. In this framework, for a
given memory constraint, the optimization problem consists in finding a sequence of computing, forgetting and
recomputing actions which allows to perform the training for given inputs and batch sizes, while fulfilling the
memory constraint and minimizing the computational
overhead.

1. Introduction
In recent years, very large networks have emerged. These
networks induce huge memory requirements both because
of the number of parameters and the size of the activations
that must be kept in memory to perform back-propagation.
Memory issues for training have been identified for a long
*
Equal contribution 1 Inria Center at the University of Bordeaux
École Normale Supérieure, PSL University, Paris. Correspondence to: Xunyi Zhao <xunyi.zhao@inria.fr>, Lionel EyraudDubois <lionel.eyraud-dubois@inria.fr>.
2

To find the optimal sequence, different approaches have
been proposed. In the first approach, like in Rotor (Beaumont et al., 2019b), it is assumed that the dependencies

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

