Reinforcement Learning in Low-rank MDPs with Density Features

Audrey Huang * 1 Jinglin Chen * 1 Nan Jiang 1

Abstract

et al., 2020b,c; Xie et al., 2021), which also builds the theoretical foundations that connect RL with (discriminative)
supervised learning. On the other hand, generative models
for unsupervised/self-supervised learning—which define a
sampling distribution explicitly or implicitly—are becoming increasingly powerful (Devlin et al., 2018; Goodfellow
et al., 2020), yet how to leverage them to address the key
challenges in RL remains under-investigated. While prior
works on RL with unsupervised-learning oracles exist (Du
et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2020), they often consider models
such as block MDPs, which are more restrictive than typical model structures considered in the value-based setting
such as low-rank MDPs.

MDPs with low-rank transitions—that is, the
transition matrix can be factored into the product
of two matrices, left and right—is a highly representative structure that enables tractable learning. The left matrix enables expressive function
approximation for value-based learning and has
been studied extensively. In this work, we instead investigate sample-efficient learning with
density features, i.e., the right matrix, which induce powerful models for state-occupancy distributions. This setting not only sheds light on
leveraging unsupervised learning in RL, but also
enables plug-in solutions for settings like convex RL. In the offline setting, we propose an algorithm for off-policy estimation of occupancies
that can handle non-exploratory data. Using this
as a subroutine, we further devise an online algorithm that constructs exploratory data distributions in a level-by-level manner. As a central
technical challenge, the additive error of occupancy estimation is incompatible with the multiplicative definition of data coverage. In the
absence of strong assumptions like reachability,
this incompatibility easily leads to exponential
error blow-up, which we overcome via novel
technical tools. Our results also readily extend to
the representation learning setting, when the density features are unknown and must be learned
from an exponentially large candidate set.

In this paper, we study model-free RL in low-rank MDPs
with density features for state occupancy estimation. In a
low-rank MDP, the transition matrix can be factored into
the product of two matrices, and the left matrix is known
to serve as powerful features for value-based learning (Jin
et al., 2020b), as it can be used to approximate the Bellman
backup of any function. On the other hand, the right matrix
can be used to represent the policies’ state-occupancy distributions, yet how to leverage such density features (without the knowledge of the left matrix) in offline or online RL
is unknown. To this end, our main research question is:
Is sample-efficient offline/online RL with density features
possible in low-rank MDPs?
We answer this question in the positive, and below is a summary of our contributions:
1. Offline: Section 3 provides an algorithm for off-policy
occupancy estimation. It bears similarity to existing algorithms for estimating importance weights (Hallak and
Mannor, 2017; Gelada and Bellemare, 2019), but our
setting gives rise to a number of novel challenges. Most
importantly, our algorithm enjoys guarantees under arbitrary offline data distributions, when the standard notion of importance weights are not even well-defined.
We introduce a novel notion of recursively clipped occupancy and show that it can be learned in a sampleefficient manner. The recursively clipped occupancy
always lower bounds the true occupancy, and the two
notions coincide when the data has sufficient coverage.
Such a guarantee immediately enables an offline policy

1. Introduction
The theory of reinforcement learning (RL) in large state
spaces has seen fast development. In the model-free
regime, how to use powerful function approximation to
learn value functions has been extensively studied in both
the online and the offline settings (Jiang et al., 2017; Jin
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Nan Jiang <nanjiang@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

