SeMAIL: Eliminating Distractors in Visual Imitation via Separated Models

Shenghua Wan 1 Yucen Wang 1 Minghao Shao 1 Ruying Chen 1 De-Chuan Zhan 1

Abstract
Model-based imitation learning (MBIL) is a
popular reinforcement learning method that improves sample efficiency on high-dimension input
sources, such as images and videos. Following the
convention of MBIL research, existing algorithms
are highly deceptive by task-irrelevant information, especially moving distractors in videos. To
tackle this problem, we propose a new algorithm named Separated Model-based Adversarial Imitation Learning (SeMAIL) - decoupling the environment dynamics into two parts by task-relevant dependency, which is determined by agent actions,
and training separately. In this way, the agent
can imagine its trajectories and imitate the expert
behavior efficiently in task-relevant state space.
Our method achieves near-expert performance on
various visual control tasks with complex observations and the more challenging tasks with different
backgrounds from expert observations.

Figure 1. Illustration of convention model-based imitation learning
which trains the policy in a single environment model. Real-world
cases may contain a large number of distractors, especially moving
distractors like walkers walking on the roadside. The model trained
in these cases will tell the agent not only the result of its action but
also something else irrelevant to the task. The discriminator may
mistakenly use those imagined distractors to distinguish the agent
and expert, even if they have similar task-relevant behaviors.

In model-based visual imitation learning algorithms, there
is a common issue caused by distractors that majorly hinder learning ability in complex real-world scenarios, as
shown in Figure 1. In this case, the agent already obtained
task-completion information from the expert by exploring
specific actions. However, the environment model contains
various task-irrelevant details and will take that irrelevant
information into the next predicted state. Because of the
difference in task-irrelevant parts, the agent only can receive
a low reward from the discriminator even if the action in the
task-relevant part nicely dovetails with the target.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning enables agents to autonomously
learn specific behaviors and acquire diverse skills by interacting in environments. However, the rewards used for
agent training are hard to define due to the expensive professional knowledge in domains (Hadfield-Menell et al.,
2017; Everitt et al., 2021). One promising direction is imitation learning (Ross et al., 2011; Osa et al., 2018), where
agents learn desired behaviors directly from expert demonstrations, especially from more readily available data such as
images and videos (Stadie et al., 2017; Young et al., 2020).
With model-based methods introduced in this field (Baram
et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2021; Rafailov et al., 2021; Hu et al.,
2022), agents can sample data and train policy in the learned
model, which significantly improves the sample efficiency
and representation learning ability in visual observations.

Recent studies attempted to exclude distractors by bottlenecking the information between latent states and observations (Peng et al., 2019) or extracting features unrelated to
the task from the initial frames explicitly (Zolna et al., 2020).
Other works match the policy and expert by minimizing mutual information using randomly pre-collected data in both
domains (Stadie et al., 2017; Cetin & Çeliktutan, 2021). In
real-world practice, these methods still have shortcomings :
(1) Only address IL problems on low-dimensional inputs or
images with static distractors. (2) Pre-collected data is required for aligning the agent and the expert. To close the gap,
we focus on excluding task-irrelevant information without
additional requirements, which benefits solving real-world
cases.

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology ,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: DeChuan Zhan <zhandc@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

