Pix2Struct: Screenshot Parsing as Pretraining for
Visual Language Understanding

Kenton Lee * 1 Mandar Joshi * 1 Iulia Turc 2 Hexiang Hu 1 Fangyu Liu 3 Julian Eisenschlos 1
Urvashi Khandelwal 1 Peter Shaw 1 Ming-Wei Chang 1 Kristina Toutanova 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Research on the interaction between language and vision
has traditionally focused on tasks where images and text
can be separated into distinct channels, e.g. visual question
answering or image captioning. However, visually-situated
language is a far more pervasive way in which these modalities interact and blend together. For example, documents,
tables, infographics, and user interfaces (UIs) are intended
to be consumed holistically, without clear boundaries between textual and visual elements (Figure 1). Comprehensive understanding of this information requires a deep set
of skills, including the ability to recognize text, understand
language, and incorporate diverse visual context.

Visually-situated language is ubiquitous—
sources range from textbooks with diagrams to
web pages with images and tables, to mobile
apps with buttons and forms. Perhaps due to
this diversity, previous work has typically relied
on domain-specific recipes with limited sharing
of the underlying data, model architectures,
and objectives. We present Pix2Struct,
a pretrained image-to-text model for purely
visual language understanding, which can be
finetuned on tasks containing visually-situated
language.
Pix2Struct is pretrained by
learning to parse masked screenshots of web
pages into simplified HTML. The web, with its
richness of visual elements cleanly reflected in
the HTML structure, provides a large source
of pretraining data well suited to the diversity
of downstream tasks. Intuitively, this objective
subsumes common pretraining signals such as
OCR, language modeling, and image captioning.
In addition to the novel pretraining strategy,
we introduce a variable-resolution input representation and a more flexible integration of
language and vision inputs, where language
prompts such as questions are rendered directly
on top of the input image. For the first time, we
show that a single pretrained model can achieve
state-of-the-art results in six out of nine tasks
across four domains: documents, illustrations,
user interfaces, and natural images.

Previous work on understanding visually-situated language
is scattered. The focus is typically on complex task-specific
combinations of available inputs and tools. For example,
document-understanding models (Huang et al., 2022) rely
on external OCR systems, UI-understanding models rely
on platform-specific metadata (e.g. Android view hierarchy) (Bai et al., 2021), and diagram-understanding models
rely on diagram parses (Kembhavi et al., 2016). Domainspecific engineering can be effective for high-resource settings such as documents, where there is an abundance of
tools and data available. However, these pipelined models
lack sharing of the underlying data, model architectures,
and objectives across domains, limiting their general applicability. Moreover, relying on external systems like OCR
increases engineering complexity, limits adaptability, and
can increase overall computational cost. Recent work on
OCR-free, end-to-end document understanding from images (Kim et al., 2022; Davis et al., 2022) has attempted
to remove such task-specific engineering and reliance on
external components during inference by learning to decode OCR outputs during pretraining—a significant step
towards more general-purpose models. However, the focus
on text at the surface level limits the depth of knowledge
transferred from unsupervised data.

*
1
Equal contribution
Google Research 2 succinctly.ai
University of Cambridge.
Correspondence to:
Kenton Lee <kentonl@google.com>, Mandar Joshi <mandarj@google.com>.
3

We present Pix2Struct2 , a pretrained model that com-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

2
For pretrained checkpoints and code, see https://
github.com/google-research/pix2struct.

1

