High-Probability Bounds for Stochastic Optimization and
Variational Inequalities: the Case of Unbounded Variance

Abdurakhmon Sadiev 1 Marina Danilova 2 Eduard Gorbunov 3 Samuel Horváth 3 Gauthier Gidel 4 5
Pavel Dvurechensky 6 Alexander Gasnikov 2 7 8 Peter Richtárik 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Training of machine learning models is usually performed via stochastic first-order optimization methods, e.g.,
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951)
xk+1 = xk − γ∇fξk (xk ),
(1)

During recent years the interest of optimization and machine learning communities in highprobability convergence of stochastic optimization methods has been growing. One of the main
reasons for this is that high-probability complexity bounds are more accurate and less studied
than in-expectation ones. However, SOTA highprobability non-asymptotic convergence results
are derived under strong assumptions such as
the boundedness of the gradient noise variance
or of the objective’s gradient itself. In this paper, we propose several algorithms with highprobability convergence results under less restrictive assumptions. In particular, we derive new
high-probability convergence results under the
assumption that the gradient/operator noise has
bounded central α-th moment for α ∈ (1, 2] in
the following setups: (i) smooth non-convex /
Polyak-Łojasiewicz / convex / strongly convex /
quasi-strongly convex minimization problems, (ii)
Lipschitz / star-cocoercive and monotone / quasistrongly monotone variational inequalities. These
results justify the usage of the considered methods for solving problems that do not fit standard
functional classes studied in stochastic optimization.

where ∇fξk (xk ) represents the stochastic gradient of the
objective/loss function f at point xk . Despite numerous
empirical studies and observations validating the good performance of such methods, it is also important for the field
to understand their theoretical convergence properties, e.g.,
under what assumptions a method converges and what the
rate is. However, since the methods of interest are stochastic,
one needs to specify what type of convergence is considered
before moving on to further questions.
Typically, the convergence of the stochastic methods is studied only in expectation, i.e., for some performance metric1
P(x), upper bounds are derived for the number of iterations
K needed to achieve E[P(xK )] ≤ ε, where xK is the output of the method after K steps, ε is an optimization error,
and E[·] is the full expectation. These bounds can be “blind”
to some important properties like light-/heavy-tailedness of
the noise distribution and, as a result, such guarantees do
not accurately describe the methods’ convergence in practice (Gorbunov et al., 2020). In contrast, high-probability
convergence guarantees are more sensitive to the noise distribution and thus are more accurate. Such results provide
upper bounds for the number of iterations K needed to
achieve P{P(xK ) ≤ ε} ≥ 1 − β for some confidence level
β ∈ (0, 1], where P{·} denotes some probability measure
determined by a setup.

1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, KSA
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia 3 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 4 Université de
Montréal and Mila, Canada 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 6 Weierstrass
Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics, Germany 7 Skolkovo
Institute of Science and Technology, Russia 8 Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS, Russia. Correspondence to:
Eduard Gorbunov <eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
2

With the ultimate goal of bridging the theory and practice
of stochastic methods, recent works on high-probability
convergence guarantees (Nazin et al., 2019; Davis et al.,
2021; Gorbunov et al., 2020; 2021; 2022a; Cutkosky &
Mehta, 2021) focus on an important direction of the relaxing
the assumptions under which these guarantees are derived.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Examples of performance metrics for minimization of function f : P(x) = f (x) − f (x∗ ), P(x) = ∥∇f (x)∥2 , P(x) =
∥x − x∗ ∥2 , where x∗ ∈ arg minx∈Rd f (x).

1

