For Pre-Trained Vision Models in Motor Control,
Not All Policy Learning Methods are Created Equal

Yingdong Hu 1 2 3 Renhao Wang 1 Li Erran Li 4 † Yang Gao 1 2 3
Prior works

Abstract

Few
Pre-Trained
Vision
Models

In recent years, increasing attention has been directed to leveraging pre-trained vision models
for motor control. While existing works mainly
emphasize the importance of this pre-training
phase, the arguably equally important role played
by downstream policy learning during controlspecific fine-tuning is often neglected. It thus
remains unclear if pre-trained vision models are
consistent in their effectiveness under different
control policies. To bridge this gap in understanding, we conduct a comprehensive study on 14
pre-trained vision models using 3 distinct classes
of policy learning methods, including reinforcement learning (RL), imitation learning through
behavior cloning (BC), and imitation learning
with a visual reward function (VRF). Our study
yields a series of intriguing results, including the
discovery that the effectiveness of pre-training
is highly dependent on the choice of the downstream policy learning algorithm. We show that
conventionally accepted evaluation based on RL
methods is highly variable and therefore unreliable, and further advocate for using more robust methods like VRF and BC. To facilitate
more universal evaluations of pre-trained models and their policy learning methods in the future, we also release a benchmark of 21 tasks
across 3 different environments alongside our
work. Source code and more details can be
found at https://yingdong-hu.github.
io/PVM-control/.

Ours
14 Different
Pre-Trained
Vision Models
MoCo

R3M

MAE

…

A Single Fixed
Policy Learning Method

Reinforcement Learning
Behavior Cloning
Visual Reward Function

…

Figure 1: (Top) Most prior works that leverage pre-trained
vision models as frozen perception modules for motor control only compare a few models using a single fixed policy
learning algorithm. (Bottom) We find that using different
policy learning algorithms results in significant changes in
the rankings of 14 different vision models, i.e., the effectiveness of a vision model is algorithm-dependent.

1. Introduction
The transfer of pre-trained features to various parallel and
even orthogonal downstream tasks is a ubiquitous paradigm
in modern deep learning. This well-explored approach has
revolutionized computer vision (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al.,
2020), natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018;
Brown et al., 2020), and other fields (Baevski et al., 2020).
The transferability of visual features has been thoroughly
demonstrated (Tan et al., 2018), leading to an explosion of
pre-trained models in computer vision.
A growing body of research is focused on rendering such
pre-trained models as the cornerstones for vision-based
motor control (Parisi et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022; Radosavovic et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022).
Since these models have typically been trained on largescale natural visual data, their features possess general
knowledge about the semantics of our world and its properties, which is invaluable for universal control. A downstream set of modules then learn a control policy by adapting
these out-of-domain features to in-domain control data.

1

Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 4 AWS AI, Amazon. † Work done outside of Amazon. Correspondence
to: Yang Gao <gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yingdong Hu
<huyd21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

