Efficient Latency-Aware CNN Depth Compression via
Two-Stage Dynamic Programming

Jinuk Kim * 1 2 Yeonwoo Jeong * 1 2 Deokjae Lee 1 2 Hyun Oh Song 1 2

Abstract

and generation (Tan & Le, 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Isensee
et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022). However, the success
of CNNs in such fields is accompanied by the challenge of
increased complexity and inference latency. For real-world
applications, accelerating the inference latency of CNNs is
of great practical importance, especially when deploying
the models on edge devices with limited resources.

Recent works on neural network pruning advocate
that reducing the depth of the network is more effective in reducing run-time memory usage and
accelerating inference latency than reducing the
width of the network through channel pruning.
In this regard, some recent works propose depth
compression algorithms that merge convolution
layers. However, the existing algorithms have
a constricted search space and rely on humanengineered heuristics. In this paper, we propose a
novel depth compression algorithm which targets
general convolution operations. We propose a
subset selection problem that replaces inefficient
activation layers with identity functions and optimally merges consecutive convolution operations
into shallow equivalent convolution operations
for efficient end-to-end inference latency. Since
the proposed subset selection problem is NP-hard,
we formulate a surrogate optimization problem
that can be solved exactly via two-stage dynamic
programming within a few seconds. We evaluate our methods and baselines by TensorRT for
a fair inference latency comparison. Our method
outperforms the baseline method with higher accuracy and faster inference speed in MobileNetV2
on the ImageNet dataset. Specifically, we achieve
1.41× speed-up with 0.11%p accuracy gain in
MobileNetV2-1.0 on the ImageNet.

To this end, a line of research called channel pruning has
been introduced to remove unnecessary channels in CNNs
to accelerate the wall-clock time in the edge device while
preserving the performance of the CNNs (Wen et al., 2016;
Tiwari et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022). However, with the
advancement of hardware technology for parallel computation, channel pruning which reduces the width of neural
networks has become less effective than removing entire
layers in terms of latency (Jordao et al., 2020; Chen & Zhao,
2018; Xu et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2022).
In contrast, layer pruning, which prunes entire layers, has
been proposed to reduce the depth of neural networks. Layer
pruning also significantly reduces the run-time memory usage and achieves effective speed-up in many edge devices
compared to channel pruning (Xu et al., 2020). However,
layer pruning is more aggressive than channel pruning in
terms of reducing the number of parameters and FLOPs,
thereby resulting in a more severe accuracy drop compared
to channel pruning methods. Instead of naively removing
an entire layer, Fu et al. (2022) present a depth compression algorithm called DepthShrinker which integrates layers
by replacing inefficient consecutive depth-wise convolution
and point-wise convolution with an efficient dense convolution operation in MobileNetV2 (Sandler et al., 2018). This
compression algorithm results in depth reduction with low
run-time memory usage and fast inference latency similar to
layer pruning. However, the depth compression algorithm
does not suffer from a commensurate accuracy drop.

1. Introduction
Deep learning with Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
has achieved outstanding results in various fields such as
image classification, object detection, image segmentation,

Although DepthShrinker has shown promising results in
reducing the depth of the network while preserving the performance, the method is limited to constricted search space
as it only considers merging within the Inverted Residual
Block (Fu et al., 2022; Sandler et al., 2018). Furthermore,
the method relies on human-engineered heuristics for layer
merging which is unlikely to scale to other architectures. To

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Seoul National University 2 Neural Processing Research Center. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh Song
<hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

