Complementary Attention for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Jianzhun Shao 1 Hongchang Zhang 1 Yun Qu 1 Chang Liu 1 Shuncheng He 1 Yuhang Jiang 1 Xiangyang Ji 1

Abstract

networks (Zhang & Lesser, 2013), and autonomous vehicle
control (Xu et al., 2018). With practical agent cooperation
and scalable deployment capability, centralized training with
decentralized execution (CTDE) (Rashid et al., 2018; Gupta
et al., 2017) has been widely adopted for MARL. Current
CTDE methods usually assume a fixed number of agents
such as QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), MADDPG (Lowe et al.,
2017), QPLEX (Wang et al., 2020a), etc.

In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning, centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) shows great promise for a tradeoff between independent Q-learning and joint action learning. However, vanilla CTDE methods
assumed a fixed number of agents could hardly
adapt to real-world scenarios where dynamic team
compositions typically suffer from dramatically
variant partial observability. Specifically, agents
with extensive sight ranges are prone to be affected by trivial environmental substrates, dubbed
the “distracted attention” issue; ones with limited observation can hardly sense their teammates,
degrading the cooperation quality. In this paper,
we propose Complementary Attention for MultiAgent reinforcement learning (CAMA), which
applies a divide-and-conquer strategy on input
entities accompanied with the complementary attention of enhancement and replenishment. Concretely, to tackle the distracted attention issue,
highly contributed entities’ attention is enhanced
by the execution-related representation extracted
via action prediction with an inverse model. For
better out-of-sight-range cooperation, the lowly
contributed ones are compressed to brief messages with a conditional mutual information estimator. Our CAMA facilitates stable and sustainable teamwork, which is justified by the impressive results reported on the challenging StarCraftII, MPE, and Traffic Junction benchmarks.

Figure 1: The dynamic sight range dilemma. (a) Agents can
hardly cooperate beyond their sight ranges. (b) Agents with
large sight ranges may perform worse due to “distracted
attention”. (c) A sketch of our CAMA.
To adapt to complicated and dynamic real-world scenarios with dynamic team compositions (i.e., the team size
varies), researchers extend these methods by introducing the
attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017), which usually
requires splitting the state of the environment into a series
of entities (Yang et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2019; Iqbal
et al., 2021).
However, attention-based methods can hardly handle the
varying partial observability (e.g., the varying sight range
of each agent) in multi-agent systems, Fig. 1. With severe
partial observability, agents usually lose the sight of teammates, leading to the poor coordination quality. We use a
demo in Sec. 5.1 to verify the phenomenon. With slight
partial observability (large sight ranges with near perfect
information), these methods exhibit apparent performance
degradation that more trivial entities may distract the agents’
attention and interfere with their decision making. See
Sec. 4.1 for a detailed analysis. Therefore, maintaining
agents’ attention on potential cooperators and executionrelated entities to adapt to the partial observability variation
is crucial for MARL in challenging environments.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
(MARL) has gained increasing attention in many areas such
as games (Berner et al., 2019; Samvelyan et al., 2019; Kurach et al., 2019), social science (Jaques et al., 2019), sensor
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Xiangyang Ji <xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a Complementary Attention for
Multi-Agent reinforcement learning (CAMA) approach,
1

