Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models via Operator Learning

Hongkai Zheng 1 Weilie Nie 2 Arash Vahdat 2 Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 2 Anima Anandkumar 1 2

Abstract

generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2020). Accelerating sampling in diffusion models remains
a challenging but important problem, especially when applying them to time-sensitive downstream applications such
as AI for art and design (Ramesh et al., 2022) or generative
models for decision making (Ajay et al., 2022).

Diffusion models have found widespread adoption in various areas. However, their sampling process is slow because it requires hundreds to thousands of network evaluations to emulate a continuous process defined by differential equations. In
this work, we use neural operators, an efficient
method to solve the probability flow differential
equations, to accelerate the sampling process of
diffusion models. Compared to other fast sampling methods that have a sequential nature, we
are the first to propose a parallel decoding method
that generates images with only one model forward pass. We propose diffusion model sampling
with neural operator (DSNO) that maps the initial condition, i.e., Gaussian distribution, to the
continuous-time solution trajectory of the reverse
diffusion process. To model the temporal correlations along the trajectory, we introduce temporal convolution layers that are parameterized in
the Fourier space into the given diffusion model
backbone. We show our method achieves stateof-the-art FID of 3.78 for CIFAR-10 and 7.83 for
ImageNet-64 in the one-model-evaluation setting.

Existing methods for fast sampling of diffusion models can
be summarized into two main categories: 1) training-free
sampling methods (Song et al., 2020a; Lu et al., 2022) and
2) training-based sampling methods (Luhman & Luhman,
2021; Salimans & Ho, 2021; Xiao et al., 2021). Specifically,
the training-free methods focus on reducing the number of
discretization steps from a numerical perspective while solving the stochastic differential equations (SDE) or probability
flow ordinary differential equations (ODE). However, even
the best well-designed numerical solvers (Lu et al., 2022;
Karras et al., 2022) still need 10∼30 model evaluations such
that the approximation error is small enough for an acceptable sampling quality. On the other hand, training-based
methods train a surrogate network to replace some parts
of the numerical solver or even the whole solver. Particularly, progressive distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2021) has
made a big step towards real-time sampling (e.g., decent
results with 4 steps) but it still has a sequential nature like
conventional numerical solvers.
The goal of this work is to develop a fast and parallel sampling method for diffusion models with only one model
evaluation. By parallel, we mean that our method can decode images at different time locations in the trajectory in
parallel and hence, generate the final solution using only
one model evaluation. The major challenge here arises from
the difficulty of solving a complicated and large-scale differential equation, which typically requires many discrete time
steps to emulate accurately from a numerical approximation
perspective.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020), also known as score-based generative models (Song
et al., 2020b), have emerged as a powerful generative modeling framework in various areas. They have achieved state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance in many applications including
image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), molecule
generation (Xu et al., 2022), audio synthesis (Kong et al.,
2021) and model robustness (Nie et al., 2022). However,
sampling from diffusion models requires hundreds of neural network evaluations, making them slower by orders of
magnitude compared to other generative models such as

In this paper, we employ the recent advances in neural
operators for solving differential equations to overcome
this challenge. Neural operators (Li et al., 2020b; Kovachki et al., 2021b), especially the Fourier neural operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020a) have shown several orders of
magnitude speedup over conventional solvers. This class of
models enables learning maps between spaces of functions
and is shown to be discretization invariant, allowing them to

1
Caltech 2 NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Hongkai Zheng <hzzheng@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

