STEP: Learning N:M Structured Sparsity Masks from Scratch
with Precondition
Yucheng Lu 1 Shivani Agrawal 2 Suvinay Subramanian 2 Oleg Rybakov 2
Christopher De Sa 1 Amir Yazdanbakhsh 3

Abstract

such as language modeling (Brown et al., 2020), translation
(Vaswani et al., 2017) and image classification (Liu et al.,
2021). However, modern DNNs usually contain millions
of billions of parameters (e.g. BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)
and GPT (Brown et al., 2020)), which hinders the inference
scalability. Recent innovation on hardware architecture
suggests structured sparsity is a promising way of alleviating
this issue by deploying N:M masks during inference (N
out of consecutive M elements in the the weight tensor are
kept while others are pruned). N:M masks accelerate model
inference with regular sparse structures (Pool, 2020; Fang
et al., 2022). Compared to traditional unstructured sparsity
(Frankle and Carbin, 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Evci et al., 2020)
or channel/block structured sparsity algorithms (Wen et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2016; He et al., 2017), adopting N:M masks
has negligible evaluation degradation and progressively
co-design algorithm (sparse matrix multiplication) and
hardware (e.g. Nvidia Ampere Sparse Tensor Core),
reaching a desirable trade-off.

Recent innovations on hardware (e.g. Nvidia
A100) have motivated learning N:M structured
sparsity masks from scratch for fast model inference. However, state-of-the-art learning recipes in
this regime (e.g. SR-STE) are proposed for nonadaptive optimizers like momentum SGD, while
incurring non-trivial accuracy drop for Adamtrained models like attention-based LLMs. In this
paper, we first demonstrate such gap origins from
poorly estimated second moment (i.e. variance)
in Adam states given by the masked weights. We
conjecture that learning N:M masks with Adam
should take the critical regime of variance estimation into account. In light of this, we propose
STEP, an Adam-aware recipe that learns N:M
masks with two phases: first, STEP calculates
a reliable variance estimate (precondition phase)
and subsequently, the variance remains fixed and is
used as a precondition to learn N:M masks (masklearning phase). STEP automatically identifies
the switching point of two phases by dynamically
sampling variance changes over the training trajectory and testing the sample concentration. Empirically, we evaluate STEP and other baselines such
as ASP and SR-STE on multiple tasks including CIFAR classification, machine translation and LLM
fine-tuning (BERT-Base, GPT-2). We show STEP
mitigates the accuracy drop of baseline recipes and
is robust to aggressive structured sparsity ratios.

Following this line of research, recent studies indicate it is
critical (and also possible) to learn these N:M masks from
scratch, without additional training or fine-tuning steps. Representative methods in this domain include SR-STE (Zhou
et al., 2021), DominoSearch (Sun et al., 2021) and Decaying
Mask (Kao et al., 2022), which sparsify the model weights
during each forward pass in training to compute gradients,
and update them to models. While these methods demonstrate promising results with momentum SGD, their performance over adaptive optimizers, such as Adam, is less satisfactory (Section 3). This implies the benefits of sparsity are
largely traded-off by adaptivity in training, leading to slow
convergence on many state-of-the-art models (Zhang et al.,
2020). In light of this, in this paper we answer the question:

1. Introduction

Can we learn N:M structured
sparsity masks with Adam, without model degradation?

Overparameterized Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
shown promising performance on various applications,
1

Motivated by the insights from recent studies on critical
learning regime of Adam in a distributed learning environment (Tang et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022), we first hypothesize
that with masked weights, the back propagation leads
to noisy gradients and gives a poorly estimated variance
(running average of second moment gradients) in the

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Google 3 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yucheng Lu
<yl2967@cornell.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

