Sequential Kernelized Independence Testing

Aleksandr Podkopaev 1 Patrick Blöbaum 2 Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan 2 Aaditya Ramdas 1 2

Abstract

are limited to the case of univariate random variables. Kernel tests (Jordan & Bach, 2001; Gretton et al., 2005c;a) are
amongst the most prominent modern tools for nonparametric independence testing that work for general X , Y spaces.

Independence testing is a classical statistical problem that has been extensively studied in the batch
setting when one fixes the sample size before collecting data. However, practitioners often prefer procedures that adapt to the complexity of a
problem at hand instead of setting sample size
in advance. Ideally, such procedures should (a)
stop earlier on easy tasks (and later on harder
tasks), hence making better use of available resources, and (b) continuously monitor the data
and efficiently incorporate statistical evidence after collecting new data, while controlling the false
alarm rate. Classical batch tests are not tailored
for streaming data: valid inference after data peeking requires correcting for multiple testing which
results in low power. Following the principle of
testing by betting, we design sequential kernelized
independence tests that overcome such shortcomings. We exemplify our broad framework using
bets inspired by kernelized dependence measures,
e.g., the Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion.
Our test is also valid under non-i.i.d. time-varying
settings. We demonstrate the power of our approaches on both simulated and real data.

In the literature, heavy emphasis has been placed on batch
testing when one has access to a sample whose size is specified in advance. However, even if random variables are
dependent, the sample size that suffices to detect dependence is never known a priori. If the results of a test are
promising yet non-conclusive (e.g., a p-value is slightly
larger than a chosen significance level), one may want to
collect more data and re-conduct the study. This is not allowed by traditional batch tests. We focus on sequential
tests that allow peeking at observed data to decide whether
to stop and reject the null or to continue collecting data.
Problem Setup. Suppose that one observes a stream of
iid
data: (Zt )t≥1 , where Zt = (Xt , Yt ) ∼ PXY . We design
sequential tests for the following pair of hypotheses:
iid

H0 : Zt ∼ PXY , t ≥ 1 and PXY = PX × PY ,

(1a)

H1 : Zt ∼ PXY , t ≥ 1 and PXY ̸= PX × PY .

(1b)

iid

Following the framework of “tests of power one” (Darling
& Robbins, 1968), we define a level-α sequential test as a
t
mapping Φ : ∪∞
t=1 (X × Y) → {0, 1} that satisfies
PH0 (∃t ≥ 1 : Φ(Z1 , . . . , Zt ) = 1) ≤ α.

1. Introduction

As is standard, 0 stands for “do not reject the null yet” and 1
stands for “reject the null and stop”. Defining the stopping
time τ := inf {t ≥ 1 : Φ(Z1 , . . . , Zt ) = 1} as the first time
that the test outputs 1, a sequential test must satisfy

Independence testing is a fundamental statistical problem
that has also been studied within information theory and
machine learning. Given paired observations (X, Y ) sampled from some (unknown) joint distribution PXY , the goal
is to test the null hypothesis that X and Y are independent.
The literature on independence testing is vast as there is no
unique way to measure dependence, and different measures
give rise to different tests. Traditional measures of dependence, such as Pearson’s r, Spearman’s ρ, and Kendall’s τ ,

PH0 (τ < ∞) ≤ α.
We work in a very general composite nonparametric setting: H0 and H1 consist of huge classes of distributions
(discrete/continuous) for which there may not be a common
reference measure, making it impossible to define densities
and thus ruling out likelihood-ratio based methods.

1

Statistics & Data Science and Machine Learning Departments,
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon Research. Correspondence
to: Aleksandr Podkopaev <podkopaev@cmu.edu>.

Our Contributions. Following the principle of testing by
betting, we design consistent sequential nonparametric independence tests. Our bets are inspired by popular kernelized
dependence measures: Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005a), constrained covariance

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

