Stable and Consistent Prediction of 3D Characteristic Orientation
via Invariant Residual Learning

Seungwook Kim * 1 Chunghyun Park * 1 Yoonwoo Jeong 1 Jaesik Park 1 2 Minsu Cho 1 2

Abstract

2019; Yu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021b) networks, the yielded
representations suffer from loss of expressivity in return for
robustness to rotation. A more straightforward and intuitive alternative is to canonicalize the point clouds by determining their characteristic orientation (Fang et al., 2020;
Katzir et al., 2022); the canonicalized point cloud, which
is obtained by canceling out the characteristic orientation,
preserves its shape information and is readily used for downstream tasks without loss of expressivity. Although it is nontrivial to define the canonical orientation of a point cloud,
there exist its desiderata (Katzir et al., 2022): stability - the
canonical orientation is invariant to any rotation transformations of the input point cloud - and consistentency - the
canonical orientation is invariant to intra-class variations
i.e., point clouds of the same class should have the same
canonical pose. Recent methods to canonicalize the point
clouds commonly exploit these desiderata to train their network in a self-supervised manner (Sun et al., 2021; Sajnani
et al., 2022; Katzir et al., 2022).

Learning to predict reliable characteristic orientations of 3D point clouds is an important yet challenging problem, as different point clouds of the
same class may have largely varying appearances.
In this work, we introduce a novel method to decouple the shape geometry and semantics of the
input point cloud to achieve both stability and consistency. The proposed method integrates shapegeometry-based SO(3)-equivariant learning and
shape-semantics-based SO(3)-invariant residual
learning, where a final characteristic orientation
is obtained by calibrating an SO(3)-equivariant
orientation hypothesis using an SO(3)-invariant
residual rotation. In experiments, the proposed
method not only demonstrates superior stability
and consistency but also exhibits state-of-the-art
performances when applied to point cloud part
segmentation, given randomly rotated inputs.

Existing methods to predict the characteristic orientation
of point clouds, however, suffer from satisfying both of the
criteria, stability and consistency, simultaneously. Earlier
methods either rely on heavy rotation augmentation (Sun
et al., 2021) to model equivariance, or rely on networks that
are not purely equivariant (Spezialetti et al., 2020) to predict
characteristic orientations, which therefore yield suboptimal stability. More recent methods propose to disentangle
the shape and pose of point clouds by yielding rotationinvariant shape representation and rotation-equivariant pose
information (Sajnani et al., 2022; Katzir et al., 2022). These
methods are tightly coupled with a class-sensitive point
cloud reconstruction pipeline (Groueix et al., 2018), consequently making them unsuitable for multi-class training.
While they may be stable, such approaches often fail to
obtain consistent orientation predictions.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in deep learning, there have been
successful attempts to reason about 3D geometric data such
as point clouds or meshes (Qi et al., 2017a; Wang et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2019). These attempts have eschewed the
need to rely on handcrafted features (Weinmann et al., 2015)
to perform various tasks, including 3D object recognition,
3D semantic segmentation, and point cloud registration.
However, a consistent inference with respect to variations of
input point clouds remains challenging, especially when an
arbitrary rotation is involved in the point clouds to handle.
While there exist methods to yield rotation-robust representations by employing rotation-equivariant (Shen et al.,
2020; Deng et al., 2021) or rotation-invariant (Sun et al.,

In this work, we introduce an effective method to learn the
characteristic orientation of point clouds achieving both stability and consistency. The idea is to decouple the shape
information of a point cloud into two factors, pure geometry
and semantics, and coordinate them by means of SO(3)equivariant learning and SO(3)-invariant residual learning.
Specifically, we predict a SO(3)-equivariant characteristic

*

Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence,
POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea. Correspondence to: Minsu Cho <mscho@postech.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

