Directed Chain Generative Adversarial Networks
Ming Min * 1 Ruimeng Hu * 1 2 Tomoyuki Ichiba 1

Abstract

data are not easy to get, use or share, due to privacy; and
financial time series data are inadequate due to their nonstationarity nature. Times-series generative models, instead
of seeking to learn the governing equations from real data,
aim to discover and learn data automatically, and output
new data that plausibly can be drawn from the original
dataset. Some existing infinite-dimensional generative adversarial networks (GANs) (e.g., Kidger et al. (2021); Li
et al. (2022)) showed successful performance in unimodal
time series datasets. However, many real-world phenomena
are multimodal distributed, e.g., data describing the opinion
divergence in a community (Tsang & Larson, 2014), the
interspike interval distribution (Sharma et al., 2018), and the
oscillators’ natural frequencies (Smith & Gottwald, 2019).
All these bring the necessity of developing new generative
models for multimodal time series data.

Real-world data can be multimodal distributed,
e.g., data describing the opinion divergence in
a community, the interspike interval distribution
of neurons, and the oscillators’ natural frequencies. Generating multimodal distributed realworld data has become a challenge to existing
generative adversarial networks (GANs). For example, it is often observed that Neural SDEs have
only demonstrated successful performance mainly
in generating unimodal time series datasets. In
this paper, we propose a novel time series generator, named directed chain GANs (DC-GANs),
which inserts a time series dataset (called a neighborhood process of the directed chain or input)
into the drift and diffusion coefficients of the directed chain SDEs with distributional constraints.
DC-GANs can generate new time series of the
same distribution as the neighborhood process,
and the neighborhood process will provide the key
step in learning and generating multimodal distributed time series. The proposed DC-GANs are
examined on four datasets, including two stochastic models from social sciences and computational neuroscience, and two real-world datasets
on stock prices and energy consumption. To our
best knowledge, DC-GANs are the first work that
can generate multimodal time series data and consistently outperforms state-of-the-art benchmarks
with respect to measures of distribution, data similarity, and predictive ability.

In this paper, we develop a novel time-series generator,
named directed chain GANs (DC-GANs), motivated by the
formulation of DC-SDEs (Detering et al., 2020). The drift
and diffusion coefficients in DC-SDEs depend on another
stochastic process, which we call the neighborhood process,
with distribution required to be the same as the SDEs’ distribution. Different from other GANs, which only use real data
in discriminators, our proposed algorithm naturally takes
the dataset as the neighborhood process, giving generators
access to data information. This feature enables our model
to outperform the state-of-the-art methods on many datasets,
particularly for the situation of multimodal time-series data.
Contribution. We propose a generator for multimodal distributed time series based on DC-SDEs (cf. Definition 2.1),
and prove that our model can handle any distribution that
Neural SDEs are capable of generating (see Theorem 2.1).
To train the generator, we propose to use a combination of
two types of discriminators: Sig-WGAN (Ni et al., 2021)
and Neural CDEs (Kidger et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Generative models are important to overcome the limitation
of data scarcity, privacy, and costs. In particular, medical

We notice that data generated immediately from DC-GANs
can be correlated, and propose an easy solution by walking
along the directed chain in the path space for further steps
(see Theorem 2.2). Combining branching the chain with
different Brownian noises enables our model to generate
unlimited independent fake data.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-3110,
USA. 2 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Santa
Barbara, CA 93106-3080, USA.. Correspondence to: Ming Min
<m min@pstat.ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We test our algorithms in four different experiments and
show that DC-GANs provide the best performance com1

