On the Functional Similarity of Robust and Non-Robust Neural Representations

András Balogh 1 Márk Jelasity 1 2

Abstract

ment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019) or the two variants of
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Raghu et al., 2017;
Morcos et al., 2018).

Model stitching—where the internal representations of two neural networks are aligned linearly—
helped demonstrate that the representations of
different neural networks for the same task are
surprisingly similar in a functional sense. At the
same time, the representations of adversarially
robust networks are considered to be different
from non-robust representations. For example,
robust image classifiers are invertible, while nonrobust networks are not. Here, we investigate
the functional similarity of robust and non-robust
representations for image classification with the
help of model stitching. We find that robust and
non-robust networks indeed have different representations. However, these representations are
compatible regarding accuracy. From the point of
view of robust accuracy, compatibility decreases
quickly after the first few layers but the representations become compatible again in the last layers,
in the sense that the properties of the front model
can be recovered. Moreover, this is true even
in the case of cross-task stitching. Our results
suggest that stitching in the initial, preprocessing
layers and the final, abstract layers test different
kinds of compatibilities. In particular, the final
layers are easy to match, because their representations depend mostly on the same abstract task
specification, in our case, the classification of the
input into n classes.

More recently, a new class of methods based on model
stitching have emerged that concentrate on functional similarity (Lenc & Vedaldi, 2019; Csiszárik et al., 2021; Bansal
et al., 2021). This methodology focuses on the question
whether the representation of one network can substitute the
representation of another network with the help of a simple
(often linear or affine) transformation, while keeping some
functional property such as classification accuracy.
In these works, it has been argued that functional similarity
does not necessarily correlate with the statistical measures of
similarity and, more importantly, the internal representations
seem to be surprisingly compatible in a large number of
different scenarios in this functional sense.
At the same time, there is a general consensus that adversarially robust networks (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2015) do have functionally different representations.
For example, robust networks are invertible as opposed to
non-robust networks (Engstrom et al., 2019b), their generalization seems to rely on an entirely different feature
set (Ilyas et al., 2019), and they cluster their representations
differently (Bai et al., 2021).
Model stitching is a promising empirical tool to shed more
light on the differences between robust and non-robust representations. It allows us to gain insight into the function
of each layer of a network architecture, and we can study
not only accuracy, but other functional properties as well,
such as robust accuracy. Motivated by this, we adopt the
model stitching approach to investigate a specific question:
do adversarially robust networks have functionally similar
representations to those of non-robust networks?

1. Introduction
Methods for studying the similarity of the internal representations of different neural networks are important tools for
understanding representations. Several such methods are
based on statistical approaches like Centered Kernel Align-

1.1. Our Contributions
In order to answer our research question, we performed
an empirical study of stitching adversarially robust models
and non-robust models in a number of different scenarios,
for the image classification task1 . Here, we list our most
important findings and contributions.

1

University of Szeged, Hungary 2 ELKH SZTE Research Group
on Artificial Intelligence, Szeged, Hungary. Correspondence
to: András Balogh <abalogh@inf.u-szeged.hu>, Márk Jelasity
<jelasity@inf.u-szeged.hu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Code to reproduce our results can be found at https://gi
thub.com/szegedai/robust-stitching

1

