Improved Analysis of Score-based Generative Modeling:
User-Friendly Bounds under Minimal Smoothness Assumptions

Hongrui Chen * 1 Holden Lee * 2 Jianfeng Lu * 3

Abstract

coders (Kingma & Welling, 2014), and energy-based models (Zhao et al., 2016). Due to the impressive sample quality,
SGM has great potential in various applications, including
computer vision (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al.,
2021), natural language processing (Austin et al., 2021),
inverse problems (Song et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2021),
molecular graph modeling (Shi et al., 2021; Gnaneshwar
et al., 2022), reinforcement learning (Wang et al., 2022), and
solving high-dimensional PDEs (Boffi & Vanden-Eijnden,
2022).

We give an improved theoretical analysis of
score-based generative modeling. Under a score
estimate with small L2 error (averaged across
timesteps), we provide efficient convergence guarantees for any data distribution with second-order
moment, by either employing early stopping or
assuming a smoothness condition on the score
function of the data distribution. Our result does
not rely on any log-concavity or functional inequality assumption and has a logarithmic dependence on the smoothness. In particular, we show
that under only a finite second moment condition,
approximating the following in reverse
 KL diver
gence in ϵ-accuracy can be done in Õ d log(1/δ)
ϵ
steps: 1) the variance-δ Gaussian perturbation of
any data distribution; 2) data distributions with
1/δ-smooth score functions. Our analysis also
provides a quantitative comparison between different discrete approximations and may guide the
choice of discretization points in practice.

The key idea of SGM is to use a forward process to diffuse
the data distribution to some prior (often the standard Gaussian), and learn a backward process to transform the prior
to the data distribution by estimating the score functions of
the forward diffusion process. Such a procedure provides
an expressive and efficient way to model high-dimensional
distributions for two reasons: 1) It is easy to construct a
forward process that converges fast to the Gaussian, no matter how complex the data distribution is. For example, the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process has stationary distribution equal to the standard Gaussian and converges rapidly. 2)
Several scalable score matching methods such as denoising
score matching (Vincent, 2011) and sliced score matching
(Song et al., 2019) allow us to learn the score function for
use by the backward process.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is one of the central tasks in machine
learning, which aims to learn a probability distribution
from data and generate data from the learned distribution.
Score-based generative modeling (SGM) has achieved stateof-art performance in data generation tasks (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020; 2021b; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021), surpassing other models like generative adversarial
networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), normalizing
flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), variational autoen-

While SGM has achieved great success in practice, theoretical understanding of the power of SGM is far from complete.
Recent works (Lee et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2022) established that when an accurate score estimator is given, SGM
can sample from general distributions with polynomial complexity and without requiring structural assumptions such
as log-concavity or functional inequalities. (By polynomial
complexity we mean that the running time is polynomial and
the final error depends polynomially on the score estimation
error and other parameters.) This is surprising in the sampling context, as it implies a sharp contrast between SGM
and sampling dynamics with gradient flow structure (such as
Langevin dynamics), where convergence rates depend crucially on the structure of the data distribution. In this paper,
we further establish the effectiveness of SGM by showing
that convergence with reasonable rates requires very weak
smoothness conditions. Indeed, we obtain a logarithmic

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Science,
Peking University 2 Applied Mathematics and Statistics Department, Johns Hopkins University 3 Department of Mathematics,
Duke University. Correspondence to: Hongrui Chen <hongrui chen@pku.edu.cn>, Holden Lee <hlee283@jhu.edu>, Jianfeng Lu <jianfeng@math.duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

