How Bad is Top-K Recommendation under Competing Content Creators?

Fan Yao 1 Chuanhao Li 1 Denis Nekipelov 2 Hongning Wang 1 Haifeng Xu 3

Abstract

a practice, often referred to as the top-K recommendation,
is believed to improve user satisfaction and has served as a
rule-of-thumb principle in both academia and industry for
decades (Konstan et al., 1997; Koren et al., 2009; He et al.,
2017).

This study explores the impact of content creators’
competition on user welfare in recommendation
platforms, as well as the long-term dynamics of
relevance-driven recommendations. We establish
a model of creator competition, under the setting
where the platform uses a top-K recommendation
policy, user decisions are guided by the Random
Utility model, and creators, in absence of explicit
utility functions, employ arbitrary no-regret learning algorithms for strategy updates. We study the
user welfare guarantee through the lens of Price of
Anarchy and show that the fraction of user welfare
loss due to creator competition is always upper
bounded by a small constant depending on K and
randomness in user decisions; we also prove the
tightness of this bound. Our result discloses an
intrinsic merit of the relevance-driven recommendation policy, as long as users’ decisions involve
randomness and the platform provides reasonably
many alternatives to its users.

Until recently, the community came to realize that users’ utilities cannot be maximized unilaterally due to the potential
strategic behaviors of content creators (Qian & Jain, 2022).
Because the content creators’ utilities are directly tied to
their content’s exposure, they are motivated to adaptively
maximize their own utilities. This leads to competition that
may potentially harm the social welfare (defined as the total
user satisfaction/engagement) (Fleder & Hosanagar, 2009).
For example, consider a scenario where the user population
contains a large group of sports fans and a small group of
travel enthusiasts. Social welfare is maximized when the
available content for recommendation covers both topics.
However, one possible equilibrium of the competition is
that all creators post homogeneous sports content when the
gain from creating niche content cannot compensate for the
utility loss caused by abandoning the exposure from the
majority of users. It is thus urgent to understand in the long
run how bad the social welfare loss could be under strategic
content creators driven by a top-K RS.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose the competing content creation
game to model the impact of the creators’ competition on
user engagement in a top-K RS. We measure the social welfare guarantee through the lens of Price of Anarchy (PoA)
(Koutsoupias & Papadimitriou, 1999), which quantifies the
inefficiency of selfish behavior by the ratio between the
worst-case welfare value of the game’s equilibrium and that
of an optimal outcome. Some previous works touched upon
this question under different competition models, and their
answers are all pessimistic. For example, Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz (2018) noticed that the PoA of social welfare under
the RS implemented by a Shapley mediator is unbounded.
Ben-Porat et al. (2019) studied a competition model in 1dimensional space and showed that the PoA under the top-1
matching principle could be as bad as a constant 2. These
negative results are either based on a deterministic user
choice model or assume creators compete for the shares
of content exposure. We overturn these pessimistic conclusions by showing that the PoA induced by a top-K RS is at
most 1 + O( log1K ) when (1) K > 1, (2) user choices have
mild stochastic noises, and (3) creators are incentivized to

“(Producers) are led by an invisible hand to make
nearly the same distribution of the necessaries of
life... thus without intending it, without knowing
it, advance the interest of the society.”
— Adam Smith, The Theory Of Moral Sentiments,
1759.
Online recommendation platforms such as Instagram and
YouTube have become prevalent in our daily life (Bobadilla
et al., 2013). At the core of those platforms is a recommender system (RS) designed to match each user with the
most relevant content based on predicted relevance. Such
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, USA 2 Department of Economics, University of Virginia, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, USA. Correspondence to:
Fan Yao
<fy4bc@virginia.edu>, Hongning Wang <hw5x@virginia.edu>,
Haifeng Xu <haifengxu@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

