On the Power of Pre-training for Generalization in RL:
Provable Benefits and Hardness
Haotian Ye * 1 Xiaoyu Chen * 2 Liwei Wang 2 3 Simon S. Du 4

Abstract

et al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2018) and online advertising (Cai
et al., 2017). However, many empirical applications of RL
algorithms are typically restricted to the single environment
setting. That is, the RL policy is learned and evaluated
in the exactly same environment. This learning paradigm
can lead to the issue of overfitting in RL (Sutton, 1995;
Farebrother et al., 2018), and may have degenerate performance when the agent is deployed to an unseen (but similar)
environment.

Generalization in Reinforcement Learning (RL)
aims to train an agent during training that generalizes to the target environment. In this work,
we first point out that RL generalization is fundamentally different from the generalization in
supervised learning, and fine-tuning on the target environment is necessary for good test performance. Therefore, we seek to answer the following question: how much can we expect pretraining over training environments to be helpful for efficient and effective fine-tuning? On
one hand, we give a surprising result showing
that asymptotically, the improvement from pretraining is at most a constant factor. On the other
hand, we show that pre-training can be indeed
helpful in the non-asymptotic regime by designing
a policy collection-elimination (PCE) algorithm
and proving a distribution-dependent regret bound
that is independent of the state-action space. We
hope our theoretical results can provide insight
towards understanding pre-training and generalization in RL.

The ability to generalize to test environments is important to
the success of reinforcement learning algorithms, especially
in the real applications such as autonomous driving (ShalevShwartz et al., 2016; Sallab et al., 2017), robotics (Kober
et al., 2013; Kormushev et al., 2013) and health care (Yu
et al., 2021). In these real-world tasks, the environment can
be dynamic, open-ended and always changing. We hope the
agent can learn meaningful skills in the training stage and
be robust to the variation during the test stage. Furthermore,
in applications such as robotics where we have a simulator
to efficiently and safely generate unlimited data, we can
firstly train the agent in the randomized simulator models
and then generalize it to the real environment (Rusu et al.,
2017; Peng et al., 2018; Andrychowicz et al., 2020). An
RL algorithm with good generalization ability can greatly
reduce the demand of real-world data and improve test-time
performance.

1. Introduction

Generalization in supervised learning has been widely studied for decades (Mitchell et al., 1986; Bousquet & Elisseeff,
2002; Kawaguchi et al., 2017). For a typical supervised
learning task such as classification, given a hypothesis space
H and a loss function ℓ, the agent aims to find an optimal solution in the average manner. That is, we hope the solution
is near-optimal compared with the optimal hypothesis h∗
in expectation over the data distribution,
which

 is formally
defined as h∗ = arg minh∈H E ℓ(h(X), Y ) . From this
perspective, generalization in RL is fundamentally different. Once the agent is deployed in the test environment M
sampled from distribution D, it is expected to achieve comparable performance with the optimal policy in M. In other
words, we hope the learned policy can perform near-optimal
∗
compared with the optimal value VM
in instance for the
sampled test environment M.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is concerned with sequential
decision making problems in which the agent interacts with
the environment aiming to maximize its cumulative reward.
This framework has achieved tremendous successes in various fields such as game playing (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019), resource management (Mao et al., 2016), recommendation systems (Shani
*

Equal contribution 1 Yuanpei College, Peking University,
China 2 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University, China 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University, China
4
University of Washington, United States. Correspondence to:
Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

