Context-Aware Bayesian Network Actor-Critic Methods for Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Dingyang Chen 1 Qi Zhang 1

Abstract

utility, or reward signals in the reinforcement learning (RL)
literature, which provides a promising paradigm for a range
of real-world applications, such as traffic control (Chu et al.,
2019), coordination of multi-robot systems (Corke et al.,
2005), and power grid management (Callaway & Hiskens,
2010). As a key distinction from the single-agent setting,
multi-agent joint action spaces grow exponentially with
the number of agents, which imposes significant scalability
issues. As a convenient and commonly adopted solution,
most existing cooperative MARL methods only consider
product policies, i.e., each agent selects its local action independently given the state or its observations. Restricting
to product policies, however, does come at a cost for cooperative tasks: consider an example where cars wait at a
crossroads, it would be hard for the cars to coordinate their
movements without knowing others’ intentions, potentially
resulting in a crash or congestion. Intuitively, optimizing
over the smaller joint policy space of all product policies
can lead to suboptimal joint policies compared to optimizing over the entire set of joint policies that also includes
correlated policies where the local actions of all agents are
sampled together in a potentially correlated manner.

Executing actions in a correlated manner is a common strategy for human coordination that often
leads to better cooperation, which is also potentially beneficial for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). However, the recent
success of MARL relies heavily on the convenient paradigm of purely decentralized execution,
where there is no action correlation among agents
for scalability considerations. In this work, we
introduce a Bayesian network to inaugurate correlations between agents’ action selections in their
joint policy. Theoretically, we establish a theoretical justification for why action dependencies are
beneficial by deriving the multi-agent policy gradient formula under such a Bayesian network joint
policy and proving its global convergence to Nash
equilibria under tabular softmax policy parameterization in cooperative Markov games. Further,
by equipping existing MARL algorithms with a
recent method of differentiable directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs), we develop practical algorithms
to learn the context-aware Bayesian network policies in scenarios with partial observability and
various difficulty. We also dynamically decrease
the sparsity of the learned DAG throughout the
training process, which leads to weakly or even
purely independent policies for decentralized execution. Empirical results on a range of MARL
benchmarks show the benefits of our approach.

The research question then arises naturally: how can we
introduce correlations for cooperative multi-agent joint policies, while taming the scalability issues? Noting that a joint
policy is joint distributions (over agents’ local actions), a
straightforward yet underexplored solution idea is to use a
Bayesian network (BN) that represents conditional dependencies between agents’ local actions via a directed acyclic
graph (DAG), where a desirable DAG topology structure
captures important dependencies that exist among hopefully
a set of sparsely connected agents. As our first contribution, we formalize this solution idea of BN joint policies in
the cooperative Markov game framework (Boutilier, 1999;
Peshkin et al., 2001), derive its associated BN policy gradient formula, and then prove the global convergence of its
gradient ascent to Nash equilibria under the tabular policy
parameterization.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
methods equip a group of autonomous agents with the capability of planning and learning to maximize their joint
1

Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of South
Carolina, SC, USA. Correspondence to: Dingyang Chen
<dingyang@email.sc.edu>, Qi Zhang <qz5@cse.sc.edu>.

As our second contribution, we then adapt existing multiagent actor-critic methods such as MAPPO (Yu et al., 2021)
to incorporate BN joint policies. For practicality and efficiency, our algorithm features the following two key design

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

