Provable Reset-free Reinforcement Learning by No-Regret Reduction

Hoai-An Nguyen 1 2 Ching-An Cheng 1

Abstract

agent can explore and whether the agent can recover from its
past mistakes (Kakade & Langford, 2002). In most settings,
completely avoiding resets without prior knowledge of the
reset states or environment is impossible. In the absence
of a reset mechanism, agents may get stuck in absorbing
states, such as those where it has damaged itself or irreparably altered the learning environment. For instance, a robot
learning to walk would inevitably fall before perfecting the
skill, and timely intervention is needed to prevent damaging
the hardware and to return the robot to a walkable configuration. Another example is a robot manipulator learning
to stack three blocks on top of each other. Unrecoverable
states would include the robot knocking a block off the table,
or the robot smashing itself forcefully into the table. Reset
would then reconfigure the scene to a meaningful initial
state that is good for the robot to learn from.

Reinforcement learning (RL) so far has limited
real-world applications. One key challenge is
that typical RL algorithms heavily rely on a reset
mechanism to sample proper initial states; these
reset mechanisms, in practice, are expensive to implement due to the need for human intervention or
heavily engineered environments. To make learning more practical, we propose a generic no-regret
reduction to systematically design reset-free RL
algorithms. Our reduction turns the reset-free
RL problem into a two-player game. We show
that achieving sublinear regret in this two-player
game would imply learning a policy that has both
sublinear performance regret and sublinear total
number of resets in the original RL problem. This
means that the agent eventually learns to perform
optimally and avoid resets. To demonstrate the
effectiveness of this reduction, we design an instantiation for linear Markov decision processes,
which is the first provably correct reset-free RL
algorithm.

Although resetting is necessary to real-world RL, it is nontrivial to implement. Unlike in simulation, a real-world
agent (e.g., a robot) cannot be reset to an arbitrary initial
state with a click of a button. Resetting in the real world is
expensive as it usually requires constant human monitoring
and intervention. Normally, a person would need to oversee
the entire learning process and manually reset the agent (e.g.,
a robot) to a meaningful starting state before it enters an unrecoverable state where the problem can no longer be solved.
Sometimes automatic resetting can be implemented by cleverly engineering the physical learning environment (Gupta
et al., 2021), but it is not always feasible.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) enables an artificial agent to
learn problem-solving skills directly through interactions.
However, RL is notorious for its sample inefficiency. Successful stories of RL so far are mostly limited to applications
where a fast and accurate simulator of the world is available for collecting large amounts of samples (like in games).
Real-world RL, such as robot learning, remains a challenging open question.

An approach we can take to make real-world RL more costefficient is through reset-free RL. The goal of reset-free RL
is not to completely remove resets, but to have an agent
learn how to perform well while minimizing the amount of
external resets required. Some examples of problems that
have been approached in reset-free RL include agents learning dexterity skills, such as picking up an item or inserting a
pipe, and learning how to walk (Ha et al., 2020; Gupta et al.,
2021). While there has been numerous works proposing
reset-free RL algorithms using approaches such as multitask learning (Gupta et al., 2021; Ha et al., 2020), learning
a reset policy (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Sharma et al., 2022),
and skill-space planning (Lu et al., 2020), to our knowledge,
there has not been any work with provable guarantees.

One key obstacle to scaling up data collection in real-world
RL problems is the need for resetting the agent. The ability
to reset the agent to proper initial states plays an important
role in typical RL algorithms, as it affects which region the
1

Microsoft Research 2 Rutgers University. Correspondence
to: Hoai-An Nguyen <hoaian.nguyen@rutgers.edu>, Ching-An
Cheng <chinganc@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we take the first step by providing a provably

1

