Cones: Concept Neurons in Diffusion Models for Customized Generation

Zhiheng Liu 1 * ‡ Ruili Feng 1 * ‡ Kai Zhu 1 Yifei Zhang 2 ‡ Kecheng Zheng 3 Yu Liu 4 Deli Zhao 4
Jingren Zhou 4 Yang Cao 1
Subject 1 (Person)

Person + Object

Person + Objects + Background

Subject 2 (Object)

Subject 3 (Background)

(a) Reference images

(b) Images generated by concatenating subject-specific concept neurons

Figure 1. We explore the subject-specific concept neurons in a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model. Concatenating multiple clusters
of concept neurons representing different persons, objects, and backgrounds can flexibly generate all related concepts in a single image.

Abstract

statistics of network gradients to a stimulation
connected with the given subject. The concept
neurons demonstrate magnetic properties in interpreting and manipulating generation results. Shutting them can directly yield the related subject
contextualized in different scenes. Concatenating
multiple clusters of concept neurons can vividly
generate all related concepts in a single image.
Our method attains impressive performance for
multi-subject customization, even four or more
subjects. For large-scale applications, the concept neurons are environmentally friendly as
we only need to store a sparse cluster of int
index instead of dense float32 parameter values,
reducing storage consumption by 90% compared
with previous customized generation methods.
Extensive qualitative and quantitative studies on
diverse scenarios show the superiority of our

Human brains respond to semantic features of presented stimuli with different neurons. This raises
the question of whether deep neural networks
admit a similar behavior pattern. To investigate
this phenomenon, this paper identifies a small
cluster of neurons associated with a specific subject in a diffusion model. We call those neurons
the concept neurons. They can be identified by
Equal contribution . ‡ Work performed during internship at
Alibaba DAMO Academy. 1 University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China 3 Ant Group, Hangzhou, China 4 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou,
China. Correspondence to: Yang Cao <forrest@ustc.edu.cn>.
*

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

