The Value of Out-of-Distribution Data
Ashwin De Silva 1 * Rahul Ramesh 2 * Carey E. Priebe 1 Pratik Chaudhari 2 † Joshua T. Vogelstein 1 †

1. Introduction

Abstract

Real data is often heterogeneous and more often than
not, suffers from distribution shifts. We can model this
heterogeneity as samples drawn from a mixture of a target
distributrion and from “out-of-distribution” (OOD). For a
model trained on such data, we expect one of the following
outcomes: (i) if the OOD data is similar to the target data,
then more OOD samples will help us generalize to the target
distribution; (ii) if the OOD data is dissimilar to the target
data, then more samples are detrimental. In other words,
we expect the target generalization error to be monotonic in
the number of OOD samples; this is indeed the rationale behind classical works such as that of Ben-David et al. (2010)
recommending against having OOD samples in the training
data.
We show that a third counter-intuitive possibility occurs:
OOD data from the same distribution can both improve
or deteriorate the target generalization depending on the
number of OOD samples. Generalization error (note:
error, not the gap) on the target task is non-monotonic in
the number of OOD samples. Across numerous examples,
we find that there exists a threshold below which OOD
samples improve generalization error on the target task but
if the number of OOD samples is beyond this threshold, then
the generalization error deteriorates. To our knowledge, this
phenomenon has not been predicted or demonstrated by any
other theoretical or empirical result in the literature.
We first demonstrate the non-monotonic behavior
through a simple but theoretically tractable problem using
Fisher’s Linear Discriminant (FLD). In §3.3, for the same
problem, we compare the actual expected target generalization error with the theoretical upper bound developed
by (Ben-David et al., 2010) to show that this phenomenon
is not captured by existing theory. We also present empirical evidence for the presence of non-monotonic trends
in target generalization error, on tasks and experimental settings constructed from the MNIST, CIFAR-10,
PACS and DomainNet datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/neurodata/value-of-ood-data.

Generalization error always improves with more
in-distribution data. However, it is an open question what happens as we add out-of-distribution
(OOD) data. Intuitively, if the OOD data is quite
different, it seems more data would harm generalization error, though if the OOD data are sufficiently similar, much empirical evidence suggests that OOD data can actually improve generalization error. We show a counter-intuitive
phenomenon: the generalization error of a task
can be a non-monotonic function of the amount
of OOD data. Specifically, we show that generalization error can improve with small amounts
of OOD data, and then get worse with larger
amounts compared to no OOD data. In other
words, there is value in training on small amounts
of OOD data. We analytically demonstrate these
results via Fisher’s Linear Discriminant on synthetic datasets, and empirically demonstrate them
via deep networks on computer vision benchmarks such as MNIST, CIFAR-10, CINIC-10,
PACS and DomainNet. In the idealistic setting
where we know which samples are OOD, we show
that these non-monotonic trends can be exploited
using an appropriately weighted objective of the
target and OOD empirical risk. While its practical
utility is limited, this does suggest that if we can
detect OOD samples, then there may be ways to
benefit from them. When we do not know which
samples are OOD, we show how a number of
go-to strategies such as data-augmentation, hyperparameter optimization and pre-training are not
enough to ensure that the target generalization error does not deteriorate with the number of OOD
samples in the dataset.

1.1. Outlook
Consider the idealistic setting where we know which
samples in the dataset are OOD. A trivial solution could be
to remove the OOD samples from the training set. But the
fact that the generalization error is non-monotonic also suggests a better solution. We show on a number of benchmark

*†

Equal contribution 1 Johns Hopkins University 2 University
of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Ashwin De Silva <ldesilv2@jhu.edu>, Rahul Ramesh <rahulram@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

