Trading-Off Payments and Accuracy
in Online Classification with Paid Stochastic Experts

Dirk van der Hoeven * 1 Ciara Pike-Burke * 2 Hao Qiu 3 Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi 3 4

Abstract

affects the expert’s performance in that round. This payment model of expert advice is realistic in many scenarios
since human annotators will often only give useful advice if
they are adequately compensated, and machine annotators
may require more computation to return accurate predictions. Moreover, monetary incentives have been studied in
crowdsourcing (Ho et al., 2015; 2016). Although this is a
different setting to that considered here, it is natural to study
the effect of these payments in online binary classification
with stochastic expert advice.

We investigate online classification with paid
stochastic experts. Here, before making their prediction, each expert must be paid. The amount
that we pay each expert directly influences the accuracy of their prediction through some unknown
Lipschitz “productivity” function. In each round,
the learner must decide how much to pay each
expert and then make a prediction. They incur
a cost equal to a weighted sum of the prediction
error and upfront payments for all experts. We
introduce an online learning algorithm whose total cost after T rounds exceeds that of a predictor
which knows the productivity of√allexperts in advance by at most O K 2 (ln T ) T where K is
the number of experts. In order to achieve this
result, we combine Lipschitz bandits and online
classification with surrogate losses. These tools
allow us to improve upon the bound of order T 2/3
one would obtain in the standard Lipschitz bandit
setting. Our algorithm is empirically evaluated on
synthetic data.

Motivated by results in crowdsourcing—e.g., (Ho et al.,
2016)—we assume that each expert has a productivity function which determines the probability that they predict the
label correctly given the payment they received. The productivity function can be different for each expert and is initially
unknown to the learner. In each round, the learner pays each
expert j = 1, . . . , K some amount cj ∈ [0, 1] before observing their advice. The accuracy of the advice that expert
j returns depends on the amount they are paid through the
unknown productivity function, pj : [0, 1] → [0, 1], where
pj (c) is the probability that expert j is correct when the
payment is c. The learner can use the expert advice to improve their prediction, but they also want to minimize the
payments to the experts. Therefore, they must trade-off between the price of the expert advice, and any improvements
to prediction accuracy it may bring.

1. Introduction
We investigate online classification in the framework of prediction with expert advice where, in each round, the learning
agent predicts an unknown binary label by aggregating the
stochastic predictions of a number of experts. At the end of
each round, the learner observes the true label and updates
the function used to aggregate experts. In the variant considered in this work, we assume that at the beginning of a
round the learner allocates a payment to each expert which

We define the learner’s cost over a sequence of T rounds as
the sum of classification mistakes and payments to experts.
If the probabilities pj (cj ) are known for some c1 , . . . , cK
and for all experts j = 1, . . . , K, then we can write down
the Bayes-optimal cost. In particular, if the events that
each expert makes a mistake are independent, then the
error probability of the Bayes-optimal aggregated prediction is known to decrease exponentially
fast with exponent

2
−2 γ12 (c1 ) + · · · + γK
(cK ) , where γj (cj ) = pj (cj ) − 12
for j = 1, . . . , K (Ho etal., 2013). Given productivity functions p = p1 , . . . , pK , we then define the optimal cost
over T rounds by T OPT(p), where


K


PK
X
2
OPT (p) =
min
e−2 j=1 γj (cj ) + λ
cj

c1 ,...,cK ∈[0,1] 

*
Equal contribution 1 Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London,
UK 3 Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy 4 Politecnico
di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Dirk van der Hoeven
<dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

j=1

and λ > 0 is a given parameter introduced to balance the
1

