Emergence of Adaptive Circadian Rhythms in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Aqeel Labash 1 Florian Stelzer 1 Daniel Majoral 1 Raul Vicente 1

Abstract

Helfrich-Förster, 2011). The biochemical mechanism involves several transcription-translation feedback loops in
which the transcription of genes is regulated by its protein
products. These feedback loops induce the expression of
so-called “clock” genes and protein levels to oscillate with
a period of roughly 24 hours (Peschel & Helfrich-Förster,
2011). At the functional level, one of the key advantages
of exhibiting an endogenous and entrainable rhythm is the
possibility to anticipate regular events from the environment
(Wikelski & Hau, 1995). In addition, endogenous rhythms
can also synchronise interdependent physiological processes
and interactions with other organisms (Zamm et al., 2016).

Adapting to regularities of the environment is critical for biological organisms to anticipate events
and plan. A prominent example is the circadian
rhythm corresponding to the internalization by
organisms of the 24-hour period of the Earth’s
rotation. In this work, we study the emergence
of circadian-like rhythms in deep reinforcement
learning agents. In particular, we deployed agents
in an environment with a reliable periodic variation while solving a foraging task. We systematically characterize the agent’s behavior during
learning and demonstrate the emergence of a
rhythm that is endogenous and entrainable. Interestingly, the internal rhythm adapts to shifts in
the phase of the environmental signal without any
re-training. Furthermore, we show via bifurcation
and phase response curve analyses how artificial
neurons develop dynamics to support the internalization of the environmental rhythm. From a
dynamical systems view, we demonstrate that the
adaptation proceeds by the emergence of a stable periodic orbit in the neuron dynamics with a
phase response that allows an optimal phase synchronisation between the agent’s dynamics and
the environmental rhythm.

As their biological counterparts, artificial learning agents
also need to adapt to the statistical regularities of their environments. In particular, reinforcement learning agents can
develop long-term strategies to explore and exploit the structure and reward signals in complex environments (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). Intuitively, the agent’s success is explained
in terms of a certain adaptation or internalization by the
agent to regularities of the environment, including the environment’s response to the agent’s actions. Indeed, the
internalization of environmental dynamics into the agent’s
internal states has been related to the degree of autonomy of
an agent (Bertschinger et al., 2008). Thus, higher levels of
autonomy indicate that the agent acts prompted by its internal state rather than being purely reactive to environmental
transitions (Bertschinger et al., 2008; Ingel et al., 2022).
In this work, we study the specific mechanisms by which a
learning agent internalizes a periodic variation in the environment. In particular, we explore how endogenous and entrainable rhythms emerge in reinforcement learning agents
controlled by an artificial neural network. To this end, we
deployed an agent in an environment with a reliable periodic
variation while the agent learns to solve a foraging task by
reinforcement learning. After characterizing the agent’s behavior, we tested whether the rhythm exhibited by the agent
after learning is endogenous and entrainable. Interestingly,
the agent’s rhythm quickly adapted to shifts in the phase of
the environmental rhythm without any re-training. Using
tools from dynamical systems theory, we describe how individual neurons in the network develop a stable (locally
attracting) periodic orbit through a bifurcation (Strogatz,
2019). Such neural dynamics are essential to sustain the
endogenous rhythm internalized by the agent. Furthermore,

1. Introduction
Circadian rhythms represent a major and well-studied adaptation of almost all terrestrial organisms to the 24-hour rotation of the Earth (Minors & Waterhouse, 2013; Panda
et al., 2002; Vitaterna et al., 2001; Kalsbeek et al., 2012).
This endogenous rhythm regulates in a periodic manner
the physiology of the organism, including obvious behavioral patterns such as the sleep and wakefulness cycle (Dunlap et al., 2004). At the physiological level, the circadian rhythm is best understood in Drosophila (Peschel &
1
Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Correspondence to: Raul Vicente <raulvicente@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

