Analyzing Convergence in Quantum Neural Networks:
Deviations from Neural Tangent Kernels

Xuchen You 1 Shouvanik Chakrabarti 2 Boyang Chen 3 Xiaodi Wu 1

Abstract

quantum circuit (also referred to as an ansatz) is composed
of parameterized quantum gates. A quantum neural network
(QNN) is nothing but an instantiation of learning with parametric models using variational quantum circuits and quantum measurements: A p-parameter d-dimensional QNN for
a dataset {xi , yi } is specified by an encoding xi 7→ ρi of
the feature vectors into quantum states in an underlying
d-dimensional Hilbert space H, a variational circuit U(θ)
with real parameters θ ∈ Rp , and a quantum measurement
M0 . The predicted output ŷi is obtained by measuring M0
on the output U(θ)ρi U† (θ). Like deep neural networks,
the parameters θ in the variational circuits are optimized by
gradient-based methods to minimize an objective function
that measures the misalignments of the predicted outputs
and the ground truth labels.

A quantum neural network (QNN) is a parameterized mapping efficiently implementable on nearterm Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ)
computers. It can be used for supervised learning when combined with classical gradient-based
optimizers. Despite the existing empirical and theoretical investigations, the convergence of QNN
training is not fully understood. Inspired by the
success of the neural tangent kernels (NTKs) in
probing into the dynamics of classical neural networks, a recent line of works proposes to study
over-parameterized QNNs by examining a quantum version of tangent kernels. In this work, we
study the dynamics of QNNs and show that contrary to popular belief it is qualitatively different
from that of any kernel regression: due to the
unitarity of quantum operations, there is a nonnegligible deviation from the tangent kernel regression derived at the random initialization. As a
result of the deviation, we prove the at-most sublinear convergence for QNNs with Pauli measurements, which is beyond the explanatory power of
any kernel regression dynamics. We then present
the actual dynamics of QNNs in the limit of overparameterization. The new dynamics capture the
change of convergence rate during training, and
implies that the range of measurements is crucial
to the fast QNN convergence.

With the recent development of quantum technology,
the near-term Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ)
(Preskill, 2018) computer has become an important platform
for demonstrating quantum advantage with practical applications. As a hybrid of classical optimizers and quantum
representations, QNNs is a promising candidate for demonstrating such advantage on quantum computers available to
us in the near future: quantum machine learning models are
proved to have a margin over the classical counterparts in
terms of the expressive power due the to the exponentially
large Hilbert space of quantum states (Huang et al., 2021;
Anschuetz, 2022). On the other hand by delegating the
optimization procedures to classical computers, the hybrid
method requires significantly less quantum resources, which
is crucial for readily available quantum computers with limited coherence time and error correction. There have been
proposals of QNNs (Dunjko & Briegel, 2018; Schuld & Killoran, 2019) for classification (Farhi et al., 2020; Romero
et al., 2017) and generative learning (Lloyd & Weedbrook,
2018; Zoufal et al., 2019; Chakrabarti et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Analogous to the classical logic gates, quantum gates are the
basic building blocks for quantum computing. A variational
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, United States 2 Global Technology Applied Research,
J. P. Morgan Chase & Co. 3 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xuchen You <xyou@umd.edu>, Xiaodi Wu
<xwu@cs.umd.edu>.

Despite their potential there are challenges in the practical deployment of QNNs. Most notably, the optimization
problem for training QNNs can be highly non-convex. The
landscape of QNN training may be swarmed with spurious local minima and saddle points that can trap gradientbased optimization methods (You & Wu, 2021; Anschuetz
& Kiani, 2022). QNNs with large dimensions also suffer

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

