The Blessing of Heterogeneity in Federated Q-Learning:
Linear Speedup and Beyond

Jiin Woo 1 Gauri Joshi 1 Yuejie Chi 1

Abstract

aiming to learn an optimal policy that maximizes the total rewards via interactions with an unknown environment.
RL is widely used in many real-world applications, such as
autonomous driving, games, clinical trials, and recommendation systems. However, due to the high dimensionality
of the state-action space, training of RL agents typically
requires a significant amount of computation and data to
achieve desirable performance. Moreover, data collection
can be extremely time-consuming with limited access in
the wild, especially when performed by a single agent. On
the other hand, it is possible to leverage multiple agents to
collect data simultaneously, under the premise that they can
learn a global policy collaboratively with the aid of a central server without the need of sharing local data. As a result, there is a growing need to conduct RL in a distributed
or federated fashion.

In this paper, we consider federated Q-learning,
which aims to learn an optimal Q-function by periodically aggregating local Q-estimates trained
on local data alone. Focusing on infinite-horizon
tabular Markov decision processes, we provide
sample complexity guarantees for both the synchronous and asynchronous variants of federated Q-learning. In both cases, our bounds exhibit a linear speedup with respect to the number of agents and sharper dependencies on other
salient problem parameters. Moreover, existing approaches to federated Q-learning adopt an
equally-weighted averaging of local Q-estimates,
which can be highly sub-optimal in the asynchronous setting since the local trajectories can
be highly heterogeneous due to different local
behavior policies. Existing sample complexity
scales inverse proportionally to the minimum entry of the stationary state-action occupancy distributions over all agents, requiring that every
agent covers the entire state-action space. Instead, we propose a novel importance averaging algorithm, giving larger weights to more frequently visited state-action pairs. The improved
sample complexity scales inverse proportionally
to the minimum entry of the average stationary
state-action occupancy distribution of all agents,
thus only requiring the agents collectively cover
the entire state-action space, unveiling the blessing of heterogeneity.

Although there have been many studies analyzing federated
learning (Kairouz et al., 2021) in other areas such as supervised machine learning (McMahan et al., 2017; Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020b), there are only a few recent works focused on federated RL. They consider issues
such as robustness to adversarial attacks (Wu et al., 2021;
Fan et al., 2021), environment heterogeneity (Jin et al.,
2022), as well as sample and communication complexities
(Doan et al., 2021; Khodadadian et al., 2022; Shen et al.,
2022). Encouragingly, some of these prior works offer nonasymptotic sample complexity analyses of federated RL
algorithms that highlight a linear speedup of the required
sample size in terms of the number of agents. However, the
performance characterization of these federated algorithms
is still far from complete.
1.1. Federated Q-Learning: Prior Art and Limitations

1. Introduction

This paper focuses on Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan,
1992), one of the most celebrated model-free RL algorithms, which aims to learn the optimal Q-function directly
without forming an estimate of the model. Two sampling
protocols are typically studied: synchronous sampling and
asynchronous sampling. With synchronous sampling, all
state-action pairs are updated uniformly assuming access to
a generative model or a simulator (Kearns & Singh, 1999).
With asynchronous sampling, only the state-action pair that

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is an
area of machine learning for sequential decision making,
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence
to: Jiin Woo <jiinw@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

