SparseGPT: Massive Language Models Can be Accurately Pruned in One-Shot

Elias Frantar 1 Dan Alistarh 1 2

Abstract

A complementary approach for compression is pruning,
which removes network elements, from individual weights
(unstructured pruning) to higher-granularity structures such
as rows/columns of the weight matrices (structured pruning).
Pruning has a long history (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi et al.,
1993), and has been applied successfully in the case of vision
and smaller-scale language models (Hoefler et al., 2021).
Yet, the best-performing pruning methods require extensive
retraining of the model to recover accuracy. In turn, this is
extremely expensive for GPT-scale models. While some accurate one-shot pruning methods exist (Hubara et al., 2021a;
Frantar et al., 2022b), compressing the model without retraining, unfortunately even they become very expensive
when applied to models with billions of parameters. Thus,
to date, there is essentially no work on accurate pruning of
billion-parameter models.

We show for the first time that large-scale generative pretrained transformer (GPT) family models can be pruned to at least 50% sparsity in
one-shot, without any retraining, at minimal
loss of accuracy. This is achieved via a new
pruning method called SparseGPT, specifically
designed to work efficiently and accurately on
massive GPT-family models. We can execute
SparseGPT on the largest available open-source
models, OPT-175B and BLOOM-176B, in under 4.5 hours, and can reach 60% unstructured
sparsity with negligible increase in perplexity: remarkably, more than 100 billion weights from
these models can be ignored at inference time.
SparseGPT generalizes to semi-structured (2:4
and 4:8) patterns, and is compatible with weight
quantization approaches. The code is available
at: https://github.com/IST-DASLab/
sparsegpt.

Overview. In this paper, we propose SparseGPT, the first
accurate one-shot pruning method which works efficiently
at the scale of models with 10-100+ billion parameters.
SparseGPT works by reducing the pruning problem to a
set of extremely large-scale instances of sparse regression. It
then solves these instances via a new approximate sparse regression solver, which is efficient enough to execute in a few
hours on the largest openly-available GPT models (175B parameters), on a single GPU. At the same time, SparseGPT
is accurate enough to drop negligible accuracy post-pruning,
without any fine-tuning. For example, when executed on the
largest publicly-available generative language models (OPT175B and BLOOM-176B), SparseGPT induces 50-60%
sparsity in one-shot, with minor accuracy loss, measured
either in terms of perplexity or zero-shot accuracy.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) from the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) family have shown remarkable
performance on a wide range of tasks, but are difficult to deploy because of their massive size and computational costs.
For illustration, the top-performing GPT-175B models have
175 billion parameters, which total at least 320GB (counting multiples of 1024) of storage in half-precision (FP16)
format, leading it to require at least five A100 GPUs with
80GB of memory each for inference. It is therefore natural that there has been significant interest in reducing these
costs via model compression. To date, virtually all existing
GPT compression approaches have focused on quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022; Xiao et al.,
2022; Frantar et al., 2022a), that is, reducing the precision
of the model’s numerical representation.

Our experiments, from which we provide a snapshot in Figures 1 and 2, lead to the following observations. First, as
shown in Figure 1, SparseGPT can induce uniform layerwise sparsity of up to 60% in e.g. the 175-billion-parameter
variant of the OPT family (Zhang et al., 2022), with minor accuracy loss. By contrast, the only known one-shot
baseline which easily extends to this scale, Magnitude Pruning (Hagiwara, 1994; Han et al., 2015), preserves accuracy
only until 10% sparsity, and completely collapses beyond
30% sparsity. Second, as shown in Figure 2, SparseGPT
can also accurately impose sparsity in the more stringent,
but hardware-friendly, 2:4 and 4:8 semi-structured sparsity
patterns (Mishra et al., 2021), although this comes at an accuracy loss relative to the dense baseline for smaller models.

1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Neural Magic Inc.
Correspondence to: Elias Frantar
<elias.frantar@ist.ac.at>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

