A Conditional Normalizing Flow for Accelerated Multi-Coil MR Imaging

Jeffrey Wen 1 Rizwan Ahmad 2 Philip Schniter 1

Abstract

the availability of multiple receiver coils. After estimating
coil-sensitivity maps or interpolation kernels, methods like
SENSE (Pruessmann et al., 1999) and GRAPPA (Griswold
et al., 2002) can use subsampled data from multiple coils to
remove aliasing artifacts in the fnal reconstruction. However, parallel imaging alone can typically allow only twoto three-fold acceleration of the acquisition process. For
higher acceleration, methods based on compressed-sensing
(CS) have been proposed (Lustig et al., 2007). The CS
methods are framed as iteratively minimizing the sum of
a data-fdelity term and a regularization term, where the
regularization term incorporates prior knowledge about the
images. The prior knowledge could be that the true images are sparse in some transform domain, as in traditional
CS, or that the true images are preserved by some denoising function, as in “plug-and-play” recovery (Ahmad et al.,
2020). Deep neural networks have also been proposed for
MR image recovery, based on end-to-end approaches like
(Zbontar et al., 2018; Eo et al., 2018; Sriram et al., 2020) or
algorithmic unrolling (Hammernik et al., 2018). Yet another
approach, known as compressed sensing with a generative
model (CSGM) (Bora et al., 2017), trains a deep image generator and then optimizes its input to give the image that,
after application of the forward model, best matches the
measurements.

Accelerated magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
attempts to reduce acquisition time by collecting data below the Nyquist rate. As an ill-posed
inverse problem, many plausible solutions exist, yet the majority of deep learning approaches
generate only a single solution. We instead focus on sampling from the posterior distribution,
which provides more comprehensive information
for downstream inference tasks. To do this, we design a novel conditional normalizing fow (CNF)
that infers the signal component in the measurement operator’s nullspace, which is later combined with measured data to form complete images. Using fastMRI brain and knee data, we
demonstrate fast inference and accuracy that surpasses recent posterior sampling techniques for
MRI. Code is available at https://github.
com/jwen307/mri_cnf

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a routine diagnostic
imaging tool that has the potential to provide high-quality
soft-tissue images without exposure to ionizing radiation.
However, MRI exams are generally time-consuming, which
reduces throughput, compromises patient comfort, and increases the likelihood of artifacts from patient motion. Scan
time can be reduced by sampling below the Nyquist rate,
but this makes the image reconstruction process more challenging. Hence, recovering high-accuracy images from
highly subsampled MRI scans has become an active area of
research (Knoll et al., 2020).

Although they achieve high reconstruction quality, the aforementioned methods provide only a point estimate. Yet, accelerated MRI is an ill-posed inverse problem, where there
exist many possible reconstructions that are consistent with
a given prior and set of subsampled measurements. Since
small variations in image content can impact the fnal diagnosis, it is crucial for radiologists to know whether a visual
structure is truly refective of the patient anatomy or merely
an imaging artifact. Problems of this form fall into the realm
of uncertainty quantifcation (UQ) (Abdar et al., 2021).

Many approaches have been proposed to recover MR images
from subsampled measurements. Parallel imaging, which
is available on all commercial scanners, takes advantage of

One approach that facilitates UQ is Bayesian imaging,
where the goal is not to compute a single “good” image
estimate but rather to sample from the posterior distribution.
The availability of a large batch of posterior samples enables
many forms of UQ. For example, a simple approach is to
generate the pixel-wise standard-deviation map, which quantifes which pixels are more trustworthy. A more involved
approach is to construct a hypothesis test for the absence of a
particular (multi-pixel) visual structure (Repetti et al., 2019).

1
Dept. of ECE, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH 43210, USA. 2 Dept. of BME, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Correspondence to: Jeffrey Wen
<wen.254@osu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

