Active Learning based Structural Inference

Aoran Wang 1 Jun Pang 1 2

Abstract

(i.e. connectivity). Moreover, the state-transition function
is often deterministic (Katok & Hasselblatt, 1995), which
simplifies the derivation of the future state as a Markovian
transition function.

In this paper, we propose a novel framework Active Learning based Structural Inference (ALaSI),
to infer the existence of directed connections from
observed agents’ states over a time period in a dynamical system. With the help of deep active
learning, ALaSI is competent in learning the representation of connections with a relatively small
pool of prior knowledge. Moreover, based on
information theory, the proposed inter- and outof-scope message learning pipelines are remarkably beneficial to structural inference for large dynamical systems. We evaluate ALaSI on various
large datasets including simulated systems and
real-world networks, to demonstrate that ALaSI
is able to outperform previous methods in precisely inferring the existence of connections in
large systems under either supervised learning or
unsupervised learning.

1

However, in most cases, we hardly have access to the connectivity, or only have limited knowledge about the connectivity. Is it possible to infer the connectivity from the
observed states of the agents over a time period? We formulate it as the problem of structural inference, and several
machine learning frameworks have been proposed to address it (Kipf et al., 2018; Webb et al., 2019; Alet et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2021; Löwe et al., 2022; Wang & Pang,
2022). Although these frameworks can accurately infer the
connectivity, as they perform representation learning on a
fully connected graph, these methods can only work for
small systems (up to dozens of agents), and cannot scale
well to real-world large dynamical systems, for example,
with hundreds of agents. Besides, as we show in the experiment and appendix sections in this work, the integration of
prior knowledge about partial connectivity of the system is
quite problematic among these methods.

Introduction

In this work, we propose a novel structural inference framework, namely, Active Learning based Structural Inference
(ALaSI), which is designed for the structural inference of
large dynamical systems based on Deep Active Learning
(DeepAL) (Ren et al., 2022), and is suitable for the integration of prior knowledge. In order to perform structural inference on large dynamical systems, unlike ordinal
deep active learning methods that build feature pools on
batches (Kirsch et al., 2019; Zhdanov, 2019; Ash et al.,
2020; Gentile et al., 2022), the pools of ALaSI are built
on agents, and the framework can consequently infer the
existence of directed connections with a little prior knowledge of the connections. ALaSI leverages query strategy
with dynamics for agent-wise selection to update the pool
with the most informative partial system, which encourages
ALaSI to infer the connections efficiently and accurately
with partial prior knowledge of the connectivity (named
‘scope’). Based on information theory, ALaSI learns both
inter-scope (IS) and out-of-scope (OOS) messages from the
current scope to distinguish the information which represents connections from agents within the scope and from
agents out of the scope, which reserves redundancy when
new agents come into scope. Moreover, with oracle such as

Dynamical systems are commonly observed in real-world,
including physical systems (Kwapień & Drożdż, 2012; Ha
& Jeong, 2021), biological systems (Tsubaki et al., 2019;
Pratapa et al., 2020), and multi-agent systems (Brasó & LealTaixé, 2020; Li et al., 2022). A dynamical system can be
described as a set of three core elements: (a) the state of the
system in a time period, including the state of the individual
agents, and can be viewed as time series; (b) the state-space
of the system; and (c) the state-transition function (Irwin &
Wang, 2017). Knowing these core elements, we can describe
and predict how a dynamical system behaves. Yet the three
elements are not independent of each other. The evolution of
the state is affected by the state-transition function, which
suggests that the future state may be predicted based on
the current state and the entities which affect the agents
1
Faculty of Science, Technology and Medicine, University of
Luxembourg, Luxembourg 2 Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg. Correspondence to: Aoran
Wang <aoran.wang@uni.lu>, Jun Pang <jun.pang@uni.lu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

