Learning Mixtures of Gaussians with Censored Data

Wai Ming Tai 1 Bryon Aragam 1

Abstract

data. Therefore, the bureau cannot collect data about these
populations. In this case, the census data are truncated.

We study the problem of learning mixtures of
Gaussians with censored data. Statistical learning
with censored data is a classical problem, with
numerous practical applications, however, finitesample guarantees for even simple latent variable
models such as Gaussian mixtures are missing.
Formally, we are given censored data from a mixture of univariate Gaussians
k
X

On the other hand, an example of censored data is test scores.
The range of scores in a test is typically set to be from 0 to
100. Some students may score the maximum score of 100
points, in which case it is unknown if they could have scored
even higher if the upper bound of the test score was higher
than 100. Of course, even though the students’ scores are
capped at 100, their scores are still being reported. Hence,
their scores are censored, which distinguishes them from
truncated data.

wi N (µi , σ 2 ),

Indeed, statistical estimation on truncated or censored data
is a classical problem, dating back to the eighteenth century
(Bernoulli, 1760). After Bernoulli, (Galton, 1898; Pearson,
1902; Pearson & Lee, 1908; Lee, 1914; Fisher, 1931) studied
how to estimate the mean and the variance of of a univariate
Gaussian distribution from truncated samples. However,
most existing results do not address the problem of finitesample bounds, i.e. the results are mostly experimental or
asymptotic (Lee & Scott, 2012; McLachlan & Jones, 1988).
In fact, one can learn the distribution with infinitely many
truncated or censored samples—under mild assumptions,
one can show that the function restricted on a certain region
can be extended to the entire space by the identity theorem
from complex analysis. Unfortunately, it is still not clear
how to translate such results to finite sample bounds.

i=1

i.e. the sample is observed only if it lies inside
a set S. The goal is to learn the weights wi and
the means µi . We propose an algorithm that takes
1
only εO(k)
samples to estimate the weights wi and
the means µi within ε error.

1. Introduction
When we collect data, we often encounter situations in
which the data are partially observed. This can arise for a
variety of reasons, such as measurements falling outside of
the range of some apparatus or device. In machine learning
and statistics, this phenomenon is known as truncated or
censored data. Both refer to the case where we do not
observe the data when they fall outside a certain domain.
For censored data, we know the existence of data that fall
outside the domain, while for truncated data, we do not.

A recent notable result by Daskalakis et al. (2018) gave the
first efficient algorithm to learn the mean and the covariance
of a single Gaussian with finitely many truncated samples.
A natural extension to the problem of learning a single
Gaussian is the problem of learning a mixture of Gaussians.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no provable guarantees
on the problem of learning a mixture of Gassians with a
finite number of truncated or censored samples even in one
dimension.

It is common to encounter truncated or censored data in
our daily lives. An example of truncated data is census
data. When a census bureau collects data, there may be
some difficulties for the bureau in collecting data for certain demographics for security, privacy, or legal reasons,
and these individuals may have no incentive to report their

As we will discuss in the related work section, there is a long
line of work on learning a mixture of Gaussians. Likelihoodbased approaches often do not provide provable guarantees
for learning mixtures of Gaussians since the objective function is not convex unless we impose strong assumptions
(Xu et al., 2016; Daskalakis et al., 2017). On the other
hand, many recent results rely heavily on the method of
moments, i.e. the algorithm estimates the moments E(X s )

1
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago,
Chicago, USA. Correspondence to:
Wai Ming Tai
<waiming.tai@chicagobooth.edu>,
Bryon
Aragam
<bryon@chicagobooth.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

