Beyond Lipschitz Smoothness: A Tighter Analysis for Nonconvex Optimization

Zhengmian Hu 1 2 Xidong Wu 2 Heng Huang 1

Abstract

In this paper, we propose to use separate upper and lower
smoothness assumptions to guide the analysis of nonconvex optimization problems. New proof techniques are also
developed under these new assumptions. We show that positive and negative eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix play
different roles in the convergence analysis: positive curvature determines the maximum step size for gradient descent,
while negative curvature controls the synchronization error
when multiple parameters are optimized independently, thus
controlling the minimum averaging frequency.

Negative and positive curvatures affect optimization in different ways. However, a lot of existing
optimization theories are based on the Lipschitz
smoothness assumption, which cannot differentiate between the two. In this paper, we propose
to use two separate assumptions for positive and
negative curvatures, so that we can study the different implications of the two. We analyze the
Lookahead and Local SGD methods as concrete
examples. Both of them require multiple copies
of model parameters and communication among
them for every certain period of time in order
to prevent divergence. We show that the minimum communication frequency is inversely proportional to the negative curvature, and when the
negative curvature becomes zero, we recover the
existing theory results for convex optimization.
Finally, both experimentally and theoretically, we
demonstrate that modern neural networks have
highly unbalanced positive/negative curvatures.
Thus, an analysis based on separate positive and
negative curvatures is more pertinent.

Based on this intuition, we derive tighter analysis via incorporating both upper and lower smoothness conditions for
two recently popular optimization algorithms: Lookahead
(Zhang et al., 2019) and Local SGD (Zinkevich et al., 2010;
Konečný et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Stich, 2019).
Compared to regular gradient descent, they both involve
multiple copies of model parameters and require to average
them from time to time to prevent exponential divergence.
For Lookahead, we show that look-ahead too far could prevent convergence and the maximum horizon is bounded by
the inverse negative curvature. Moreover, our analysis also
captures the very rarely considered increasing Lookahead
steps. We show that, when decreasing step size is used,
Lookahead steps could simultaneously increase without hindering convergence. For Local SGD, we derive a better
convergence condition than the previously known results
and show that the minimum communication frequency is
determined by the negative negative curvature. However,
the requirement for linear-speed up is still the same.

1. Introduction
Lipschitz smoothness, which provides both upper and lower
bounds for the Hessian matrix, is a common assumption for
analyzing the convergence of optimization methods when
the convexity is not guaranteed by the problem formulation.
While this assumption is enough to establish convergence for
many problems, it blurs certain structure of the underlying
optimization problem by imposing symmetric upper bound
and lower bounds for Hessian, which could lead to overly
conservative convergence condition.

Apart from using negative curvature upper bound as a precondition, we also explain why we can expect practical deep
learning to enjoy milder negative curvature than positive curvature. Our experiments show that modern neural networks
have very unbalanced positive and negative curvatures, making the Lipschitz smoothness assumption not tight. Thus,
analysis based on separate positive and negative curvatures
is more realistic. We further analyze theoretically why the
negative curvature of neural networks is unbalanced, which
is affected by network structure and loss function. We also
establish an upper bound for the negative curvature based
on first-order and zeroth-order information, which explains
the change of negative curvature during training.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.. Correspondence to: Zhengmian Hu <huzhengmian@gmail.com>,
Heng Huang <henghuanghh@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

