Neural Markov Jump Processes

Patrick Seifner 1 2 Ramsés J. Sánchez 1 2

Abstract

itself, which concern the long-time asymptotics, or thermodynamic quantities like (stochastic) entropy production, can
all be computed via the MJP transition rates.

Markov jump processes are continuous-time
stochastic processes with a wide range of applications in both natural and social sciences. Despite
their widespread use, inference in these models
is highly non-trivial and typically proceeds via
either Monte Carlo or expectation-maximization
methods. In this work we introduce an alternative, variational inference algorithm for Markov
jump processes which relies on neural ordinary
differential equations, and is trainable via backpropagation. Our methodology learns neural,
continuous-time representations of the observed
data, that are used to approximate the initial distribution and time-dependent transition probability
rates of the posterior Markov jump process. The
time-independent rates of the prior process are
in contrast trained akin to generative adversarial networks. We test our approach on synthetic
data sampled from ground-truth Markov jump
processes, experimental switching ion channel
data and molecular dynamics simulations. Source
code to reproduce our experiments is available
online.1

Such a family of mathematical models is simple enough to
have a wide range of approximate validity, which has led to
its application in many fields of science. Examples abound,
and range from physics (Griffiths et al., 1966), chemistry
(Gillespie, 1977) and biology (Kimura, 1980) all the way up
to meteorology (Madsen et al., 1985), finance (Turner et al.,
1989) and sociology (Singer & Spilerman, 1976). Indeed,
there is a large class of systems whose evolution can be
phenomenologically understood as the result of individual
encounters between members of some population – think of
reacting chemical species or population systems, which die,
mate and give birth. Researchers can model such systems
by assigning probability rates to the transitions caused by
those encounters. Likewise many large, complex systems
often give rise to long-lived collective modes, trapped in
a set of metastable states at some macroscopic scale of
observation, whose dynamics can also naturally be modelled
in terms of transition rates between their metastable states.
In practice, however, a judicious choice of the transition
probability rates from first principles, in the large majority
of these systems, is seldom analytically tractable, which
leads researchers to resort to statistical methods in order to
infer them directly from raw data.

1. Introduction

When a continuous record of the empirical process under
investigation exists, maximum likelihood estimation of the
transition rates is simple and well understood (Billingsley,
1961). When, on the contrary, the process is observed at
discrete time points only, as it is often the case, inference
becomes highly non-trivial and typically proceeds via either Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or Expectation
Maximization (EM) methods. Yet MCMC, while accurate,
does not normally scale well with data (Zhang et al., 2017),
whereas EM is frequently formulated to yield only point
estimates of its unknown parameters (Opper & Sanguinetti,
2007; Köhs et al., 2021) and can also struggle when faced
with large datasets.

Markov Jump Processes (MJP) model time-dependent, discrete probability distributions whose future is entirely determined by knowledge of their present. Given an initial
distribution, the time evolution in these processes is completely characterized by the instantaneous transition probability rates between their states, in terms of which one can
express quantities of interest that can be probed experimentally. Mean first-passage times, which provide information
regarding the short-term dynamics of the process, relaxation times to stationarity and the stationary distribution
1
Lamarr Institute, Bonn, Germany. 2 University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany. Correspondence to: Patrick Seifner <seifner@cs.unibonn.de>, Ramsés J. Sánchez <sanchez@bit.uni-bonn.de>.

In this work we introduce an alternative, variational inference algorithm for MJP – the Neural Markov Jump Process
model (NeuralMJP) – which relies on neural variational
inference (NVI) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/pseifner/NeuralMJP

1

