Random Teachers are Good Teachers
Felix Sarnthein 1 Gregor Bachmann 1 Sotiris Anagnostidis 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The teacher-student setting is a key ingredient in several
areas of machine learning. Knowledge distillation is a common strategy to achieve strong model compression by training a smaller student on the outputs of a larger teacher
model, leading to better performance compared to training
the small model on the original data only (Bucilǎ et al., 2006;
Ba & Caruana, 2013; Hinton et al., 2015; Polino et al., 2018;
Beyer et al., 2022). In the special case of self-distillation,
where the two architectures match, it is often observed in
practice that the student manages to outperform its teacher
(Yim et al., 2017; Furlanello et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018).
The predominant hypothesis in the literature attests this surprising gain in performance to the so-called dark knowledge
of the teacher, i.e., its logits encode additional information
about the data distribution (Hinton et al., 2015; Wang et al.,
2021; Xu et al., 2018).
Another area relying on a teacher-student setup is selfsupervised learning where the goal is to learn informative
representations in the absence of targets (Caron et al., 2021;
Grill et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021;
Assran et al., 2022). Here, the two models typically receive
two different augmentations of a sample, and the student
is forced to mimic the teacher’s behavior. Such a learning
strategy encourages representations that remain invariant to
the employed augmentation pipeline, which in turn leads to
better downstream performance.
Despite its importance as a building block, the teacherstudent setting itself remains very difficult to analyze as
its contribution is often overshadowed by stronger components in the pipeline, such as dark knowledge in the trained
teacher or the inductive bias of data augmentation. In this
work, we take a step towards simplifying and isolating the
key components in the setup by devising a very simple experiment; instead of working with a trained teacher, we
consider teachers at random initialization, stripping them
from any data dependence and thus removing any dark
knowledge. We also remove augmentations, making the
setting completely symmetric between student and teacher
and further reducing inductive bias. Counter-intuitively, we
observe that even in this setting, the student still manages
to learn from its teacher and even exceed it significantly in
terms of representational quality, measured through linearly
probing the features (see Fig. 1). This result shows the fol-

In this work, we investigate the implicit regularization induced by teacher-student learning dynamics in self-distillation. To isolate its effect,
we describe a simple experiment where we consider teachers at random initialization instead of
trained teachers. Surprisingly, when distilling a
student into such a random teacher, we observe
that the resulting model and its representations
already possess very interesting characteristics;
(1) we observe a strong improvement of the distilled student over its teacher in terms of probing accuracy. (2) The learned representations are
data-dependent and transferable between different
tasks but deteriorate strongly if trained on random
inputs. (3) The student checkpoint contains sparse
subnetworks, so-called lottery tickets, and lies
on the border of linear basins in the supervised
loss landscape. These observations have interesting consequences for several important areas in
machine learning: (1) Self-distillation can work
solely based on the implicit regularization present
in the gradient dynamics without relying on any
dark knowledge, (2) self-supervised learning can
learn features even in the absence of data augmentation, and (3) training dynamics during the early
phase of supervised training do not necessarily
require label information. Finally, we shed light
on an intriguing local property of the loss landscape: the process of feature learning is strongly
amplified if the student is initialized closely to
the teacher. These results raise interesting questions about the nature of the landscape that have
remained unexplored so far. Code is available at
www.github.com/safelix/dinopl.

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Felix Sarnthein <safelix@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

