X-Paste: Revisiting Scalable Copy-Paste for Instance Segmentation
using CLIP and StableDiffusion

Hanqing Zhao * 1 Dianmo Sheng * 1 Jianmin Bao 2 Dongdong Chen 2 Dong Chen 2 Fang Wen 2 Lu Yuan 2
Ce Liu 2 Wenbo Zhou 1 Qi Chu 1 Weiming Zhang 1 Nenghai Yu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Instance segmentation (Dai et al., 2016; He et al., 2017;
Hafiz & Bhat, 2020) is a fundamental task in computer vision with very broad applications. In order to get plausible
performance for one specific category, most existing methods (Li et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022;
He et al., 2017) rely on a large number of images annotated
for this category, which is not only expensive but also timeconsuming. This also makes expanding the object category
coverage extremely hard. In fact, the real-world images
often follow a long-tail distribution, so collecting enough
images for some rare categories itself is already very difficult. Therefore, it is of great value to study how to augment
and create training data in an efficient and scalable way.

Copy-Paste is a simple and effective data augmentation strategy for instance segmentation. By
randomly pasting object instances onto new background images, it creates new training data for
free and significantly boosts the segmentation performance, especially for rare object categories.
Although diverse, high-quality object instances
used in Copy-Paste result in more performance
gain, previous works utilize object instances either from human-annotated instance segmentation datasets or rendered from 3D object models, and both approaches are too expensive to
scale up to obtain good diversity. In this paper,
we revisit Copy-Paste at scale with the power
of newly emerged zero-shot recognition models
(e.g., CLIP) and text2image models (e.g., StableDiffusion). We demonstrate for the first time
that using a text2image model to generate images
or zero-shot recognition model to filter noisily
crawled images for different object categories is
a feasible way to make Copy-Paste truly scalable.
To make such success happen, we design a data
acquisition and processing framework, dubbed
“X-Paste”, upon which a systematic study is conducted. On the LVIS dataset, X-Paste provides
impressive improvements over the strong baseline
CenterNet2 with Swin-L as the backbone. Specifically, it archives +2.6 box AP and +2.1 mask
AP gains on all classes and even more significant
gains with +6.8 box AP +6.5 mask AP on longtail classes. Our code and models are available at
https://github.com/yoctta/XPaste.

As one simple yet effective data augmentation strategy,
Copy-Paste (Dwibedi et al., 2017; Ghiasi et al., 2021a;
Dvornik et al., 2018) has been extensively studied to improve data efficiency. By randomly pasting object instances
onto background images, it can generate a combinatorial
number of training data for free and boost the instance segmentation model performance, especially for rare categories.
Intuitively, if we can utilize more diverse object instances
in Copy-Paste, more performance gain can be achieved.
However, the object instances used in existing methods are
either from the instance segmentation dataset itself (Ghiasi et al., 2021a; Dvornik et al., 2018) or rendered from
external 3D models (Dwibedi et al., 2017). In this paper,
we argue that both these two manners are not scalable and
have not exploited the full potential of Copy-Paste. More
specifically, for the former manner, on one hand, collecting
human-annotated data is not scalable. On the other hand,
the limited instance number of rare categories also results
in limited diversity of Copy-Paste data. In the latter manner,
building/collecting 3D models itself is super difficult and
not scalable.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft.
Correspondence to: Jianmin Bao <jianmin.bao@microsoft.com>, Wenbo Zhou <welbeckz@ustc.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose a new object instance acquisition
and processing framework, dubbed “X-Paste”. X-Paste is
built upon Copy-Paste (Ghiasi et al., 2021a) to train the
instance segmentation model but aims to make Copy-Paste
more scalable, i.e., obtain large-scale object instances with
high-quality masks (“oxygen of Copy-Paste”) for unlimited

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

