TRAK: Attributing Model Behavior at Scale

Sung Min Park * 1 Kristian Georgiev * 1 Andrew Ilyas * 1 Guillaume Leclerc 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract

behavior has motivated extensive work on data attribution,
i.e., the task of tracing model predictions back to the training examples that informed these predictions. Recent work
demonstrates, in particular, the utility of data attribution
methods in applications such as explaining predictions (Koh
& Liang, 2017; Ilyas et al., 2022), debugging model behavior (Kong et al., 2022), assigning data valuations (Ghorbani
& Zou, 2019), detecting poisoned or mislabeled data (Lin
et al., 2022; Hammoudeh & Lowd, 2022a), and curating
data (Khanna et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021).

The goal of data attribution is to trace model predictions back to training data. Despite a long line
of work towards this goal, existing approaches
to data attribution tend to force users to choose
between computational tractability and efficacy.
That is, computationally tractable methods can
struggle with accurately attributing model predictions in non-convex settings (e.g., in the context of deep neural networks), while methods
that are effective in such regimes require training thousands of models, which makes them
impractical for large models or datasets. In
this work, we introduce TRAK (Tracing with the
Randomly-projected After Kernel), a data attribution method that is both effective and computationally tractable for large-scale, differentiable
models. In particular, by leveraging only a handful of trained models, TRAK can match the performance of attribution methods that require training thousands of models. We demonstrate the
utility of TRAK across various modalities and
scales: image classifiers trained on ImageNet,
vision-language models (CLIP), and language
models (BERT and mT5). We provide code
for using TRAK (and reproducing our work) at
https://github.com/MadryLab/trak.

However, a recurring tradeoff in the space of data attribution
methods is that of computational demand versus efficacy.
On the one hand, methods such as influence approximation (Koh & Liang, 2017; Schioppa et al., 2022) or gradient
agreement scoring (Pruthi et al., 2020) are computationally attractive but can be unreliable in non-convex settings
(Basu et al., 2021; Ilyas et al., 2022). On the other hand,
sampling-based methods such as empirical influence functions (Feldman & Zhang, 2020), Shapley value estimators
(Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) or datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022)
are more successful at accurately attributing predictions
to training data but require training thousands (or tens of
thousands) of models to be effective. We thus ask:
Are there data attribution methods that are both scalable
and effective in large-scale non-convex settings?
In the remainder of this paper, we answer this question in
the affirmative. Specifically:

1. Introduction
• Building on ideas from prior work (Ilyas et al., 2022),
we begin by providing a unifying metric for data attribution methods. We examine existing data attribution
methods and find that current approaches are either
prohibitively expensive, or cheap but ineffective.

Training data is a key driver of model behavior in modern
machine learning systems. Indeed, model errors, biases, and
capabilities can all stem from the training data (Ilyas et al.,
2019; Gu et al., 2017; Geirhos et al., 2019). Furthermore,
improving the quality of training data generally improves
the performance of the resulting models (Huh et al., 2016;
Lee et al., 2022). The importance of training data to model

• Leveraging results from classical statistics (Pregibon,
1981; Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984), and a connection between differentiable models and their corresponding kernel machines (Jacot et al., 2018), we
derive a new data attribution method called TRAK.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of EECS, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Sung Min Park <sp765@mit.edu>, Kristian Georgiev <krisgrg@mit.edu>, Andrew Ilyas <ailyas@mit.edu>.

• On standard computer vision and NLP tasks (CIFAR,
ImageNet, QNLI), TRAK scores are 100-1000x faster
than comparably effective methods (see Figure 1).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

