Analyzing Privacy Leakage in Machine Learning via Multiple Hypothesis
Testing: A Lesson From Fano

Chuan Guo 1 Alexandre Sablayrolles 1 Maziar Sanjabi 1

Abstract

tection conferred by DP against privacy attacks, the picture
is much more optimistic: Across a wide range of attacks including membership inference, attribute inference and data
reconstruction, even a small amount of DP noise is sufficient for thwarting most attacks (Jayaraman & Evans, 2019;
Zhu et al., 2019; Carlini et al., 2019; Hannun et al., 2021).
However, there is very little theoretical understanding of
this phenomenon.

Differential privacy (DP) is by far the most widely
accepted framework for mitigating privacy risks
in machine learning. However, exactly how small
the privacy parameter ϵ needs to be to protect
against certain privacy risks in practice is still
not well-understood. In this work, we study data
reconstruction attacks for discrete data and analyze it under the framework of multiple hypothesis testing. For a learning algorithm satisfying
(α, ϵ)-Rényi DP, we utilize different variants of
the celebrated Fano’s inequality to upper bound
the attack advantage of a data reconstruction adversary. Our bound can be numerically computed
to calibrate the privacy parameter ϵ to the desired
level of privacy protection in practice, and complements the empirical evidence for the effectiveness
of DP against data reconstruction attacks even at
relatively large values of ϵ.

In this paper, we analyze privacy leakage in connection to
the multiple hypothesis testing problem in information theory, and show that the empirical privacy protection conferred
by DP with high ϵ may be more than previously thought. To
this end, we first define a game (see Figure 1) between a
private learner and an adversary that tries to perform a data
reconstruction attack against the learned model. We analyze
this game using the celebrated Fano’s inequality to derive
upper bounds on the adversary’s attack advantage when the
model is trained differentially privately.
Our analysis reveals an interesting and practically important
insight that the DP parameter ϵ should scale with the number of possible values M that the private data can take on.
When M is large, e.g., M = 1010 when extracting social
security numbers from a trained language model (Carlini
et al., 2019), even a relatively large ϵ has sufficient protection against data reconstruction attacks. More generally,
given an input data distribution and a DP parameter ϵ, we
give a numerical method for deriving an upper bound on
the advantage of an arbitrary data reconstruction adversary.
We empirically validate our bound against several existing
attacks and show that it can provide useful guidance for
selecting the appropriate value of ϵ in practice.

1. Introduction
As machine learning becomes increasingly ubiquitous in
the real world, proper understanding of the privacy risks
of ML also becomes a crucial aspect for its safe adoption.
Numerous prior works have demonstrated privacy vulnerabilities throughout the ML training pipeline (Shokri et al.,
2017; Song et al., 2017; Nasr et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019;
Carlini et al., 2021). So far the only comprehensive defense
against privacy attacks is differential privacy (DP; Dwork
et al. (2006)), which has been successfully adapted for training private ML models (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Shokri &
Shmatikov, 2015; Abadi et al., 2016).

Contributions. Our main contributions are the following:

Unfortunately, differentially private training also comes at a
huge cost to model accuracy if a small privacy parameter ϵ
is desired. In contrast, in terms of the level of empirical pro1
Meta AI. Correspondence to:
guo@meta.com>.

1. We formalize data reconstruction attacks for discrete data
as an attack game (section 3).
2. We use Fano’s inequality to derive a numerical method
that upper bounds the adversary’s advantage for (α, ϵ)Rényi DP mechanisms (section 4 and section 5).
3. We experimentally validate our advantage bound against
existing attack and show that it can be used to guide the
selection of ϵ in practice (section 6).

Chuan Guo <chuan-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

