Tied-Augment: Controlling Representation Similarity Improves
Data Augmentation

Emirhan Kurtulus 1 2 Zichao Li 3 Yann Dauphin 3 Ekin D. Cubuk 3

Abstract

though data augmentation offers significant benefits (Simard
et al., 2003; Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Szegedy et al., 2015), as the complexity of the
augmentation increases, so does the minimum number of
epochs required for its effectiveness (Cubuk et al., 2019).
As neural networks and datasets get larger, machine learning
models get trained for fewer epochs (for example, Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) pretrained for 7 epochs), typically due to
computational limitations. In such cases, conventional data
augmentation methods lose their effectiveness. Additionally, data augmentation is not as effective when finetuning
pretrained models as it is when training from scratch.

Data augmentation methods have played an important role in the recent advance of deep learning models, and have become an indispensable
component of state-of-the-art models in semisupervised, self-supervised, and supervised training for vision. Despite incurring no additional
latency at test time, data augmentation often requires more epochs of training to be effective. For
example, even the simple flips-and-crops augmentation requires training for more than 5 epochs
to improve performance, whereas RandAugment
requires more than 90 epochs. We propose a
general framework called Tied-Augment, which
improves the efficacy of data augmentation in
a wide range of applications by adding a simple term to the loss that can control the similarity of representations under distortions. TiedAugment can improve state-of-the-art methods
from data augmentation (e.g. RandAugment,
mixup), optimization (e.g. SAM), and semisupervised learning (e.g. FixMatch). For example, Tied-RandAugment can outperform RandAugment by 2.0% on ImageNet. Notably, using
Tied-Augment, data augmentation can be made
to improve generalization even when training for
a few epochs and when fine-tuning. We open
source our code at https://github.com/
ekurtulus/tied-augment/tree/main

In this work, we present a general framework that mitigates
these problems and is applicable to a range of problems
from supervised training to semi-supervised learning by amplifying the effectiveness of data augmentation through feature similarity modulation. Our framework, Tied-Augment,
makes forward passes on two augmented views of the data
with tied (shared) weights. In addition to the classification loss, we add a similarity term to enforce invariance
between the features of the augmented views. We find that
our framework can be used to improve the effectiveness
of both simple flips-and-crops (Crop-Flip) and aggressive
augmentations even for few-epoch training. As the effect
of data augmentation is amplified, the sample efficiency
of the data increases. Therefore, our framework works
well even with small amounts of data, as shown by our
experiments on CIFAR-4K (4k samples from CIFAR-10),
Oxford-Flowers102, and Oxford-IIT Pets.
Despite the simplicity of our framework, Tied-Augment
empowers augmentation methods such as Crop-Flip and
RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020) to improve generalization even when trained for a few epochs, which we demonstrate for a diverse set of datasets. For longer training, TiedAugment leads to significant improvements over alreadystrong baselines such as RandAugment and mixup (Zhang
et al., 2017). For example, Tied-RandAugment achieves a
2% improvement over RandAugment when training ResNet50 for 360 epochs on ImageNet, without any architectural
modifications or additional regularization.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation is an integral part of training deep neural
networks to improve their performance by modulating the diversity and affinity of data (Gontijo-Lopes et al., 2020). Al1
Stanford University 2 Cagaloglu Anadolu Lisesi 3 Google
Research, Brain Team.
Correspondence to: Emirhan
Kurtulus <emirhank@stanford.edu>, Ekin D. Cubuk
<cubuk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

