How to Trust Your Diffusion Model:
A Convex Optimization Approach to Conformal Risk Control

Jacopo Teneggi 1 2 Matthew Tivnan 3 J. Webster Stayman 3 Jeremias Sulam 3 2

Abstract

Nasrabadi, 2006). Recently, the foundational works by Song
& Ermon (2019); Song et al. (2020a); Pang et al. (2020) on
sampling via score-matching (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005)
and by Ho et al. (2020) on denoising diffusion models (SohlDickstein et al., 2015) paved the way for a new class of
score-based generative models, which solve a reverse-time
stochastic differential equation (SDE) (Song et al., 2020b;
Anderson, 1982). These models have proven remarkably
effective on both unconditional (i.e., starting from random
noise) and conditional (e.g., inpainting, denoising, superresolution, or class-conditional) sample generation across
a variety of fields (Yang et al., 2022; Croitoru et al., 2022).
For example, score-based generative models have been applied to inverse problems in general computer vision and
medical imaging (Kadkhodaie & Simoncelli, 2021; Kawar
et al., 2021b;a; Xie & Li, 2022; Torem et al., 2022; Song
et al., 2021), 3D shape generation (Zeng et al., 2022; Xu
et al., 2022; Metzer et al., 2022), and even in protein design
(Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2022; Watson et al.,
2022; Ingraham et al., 2022).

Score-based generative modeling, informally referred to as diffusion models, continue to grow
in popularity across several important domains
and tasks. While they provide high-quality and
diverse samples from empirical distributions, important questions remain on the reliability and
trustworthiness of these sampling procedures for
their responsible use in critical scenarios. Conformal prediction is a modern tool to construct finitesample, distribution-free uncertainty guarantees
for any black-box predictor. In this work, we focus on image-to-image regression tasks and we
present a generalization of the Risk-Controlling
Prediction Sets (RCPS) procedure, that we term
K-RCPS, which allows to (i) provide entrywise
calibrated intervals for future samples of any diffusion model, and (ii) control a certain notion of risk
with respect to a ground truth image with minimal
mean interval length. Differently from existing
conformal risk control procedures, ours relies on
a novel convex optimization approach that allows
for multidimensional risk control while provably
minimizing the mean interval length. We illustrate our approach on two real-world image denoising problems: on natural images of faces as
well as on computed tomography (CT) scans of
the abdomen, demonstrating state of the art performance.

These strong empirical results highlight the potential of
score-based generative models. However, they currently
lack of precise statistical guarantees on the distribution of
the generated samples, which hinders their safe deployment
in high-stakes scenarios (Horwitz & Hoshen, 2022). For
example, consider a radiologist who is shown a computed
tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen of a patient reconstructed via a score-based generative model. How confident
should they be of the fine-grained details of the presented
image? Should they trust that the model has not hallucinated
some of the features (e.g., calcifications, blood vessels, or
nodules) involved in the diagnostic process? Put differently,
how different will future samples be from the presented image, and how far can we expect them to be from the ground
truth image?

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is one of the longest standing tasks
of classical and modern machine learning (Bishop &
1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, USA 2 Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 3 Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Jacopo Teneggi <jtenegg1@jhu.edu>, Jeremias
Sulam <jsulam1@jhu.edu>.

In this work we focus on image-to-image regression problems, where we are interested in recovering a high-quality
ground truth image given a low-quality observation. While
our approach is general, we focus on the problem of image
denoising as a running example. We address the questions
posed above on the reliability of score-based generative
models (and, more generally, of any sampling procedure)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

