Contrastive Energy Prediction for Exact Energy-Guided
Diffusion Sampling in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Cheng Lu * 1 Huayu Chen * 1 Jianfei Chen 1 Hang Su 1 Chongxuan Li 2 Jun Zhu 1 3

Abstract

models in real-world tasks is to embed human controllability in the sampling procedure. A common paradigm for
introducing human preference in diffusion models is guided
sampling, which includes classifier guidance (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021), classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans,
2021) and other guidance methods (Nichol et al., 2021; Ho
et al., 2022c; Zhao et al., 2022). By leveraging guided sampling, diffusion models can realize amazing text-to-image
generation (Saharia et al., 2022b), video generation (Ho
et al., 2022c;a; Yang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022), controllable text generation (Li et al., 2022), inverse molecular
design (Bao et al., 2022b) and reinforcement learning (Janner et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2022).

Guided sampling is a vital approach for applying
diffusion models in real-world tasks that embeds
human-defined guidance during the sampling procedure. This paper considers a general setting
where the guidance is defined by an (unnormalized) energy function. The main challenge for
this setting is that the intermediate guidance during the diffusion sampling procedure, which is
jointly defined by the sampling distribution and
the energy function, is unknown and is hard to
estimate. To address this challenge, we propose
an exact formulation of the intermediate guidance
as well as a novel training objective named contrastive energy prediction (CEP) to learn the exact
guidance. Our method is guaranteed to converge
to the exact guidance under unlimited model capacity and data samples, while previous methods
can not. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method by applying it to offline reinforcement
learning (RL). Extensive experiments on D4RL
benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art algorithms. We
also provide some examples of applying CEP for
image synthesis to demonstrate the scalability of
CEP on high-dimensional data. Code is available at https://github.com/thu-ml/
CEP-energy-guided-diffusion.

Both classifier and classifier-free guidance deal with a conditional sampling problem where there exists paired data
with additional conditioning variables during the training
procedure (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Graikos et al., 2022;
Rombach et al., 2022). However, sometimes it is difficult to
describe human preference through a conditioning variable
and we can only embed our preference through a scalar function. Examples of such a function include a reward function
or pretrained Q-function in reinforcement learning (Janner
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022), human feedback in dialogue
systems (Ziegler et al., 2019), cosine similarity between
sample features and designated features in image synthesis (Kwon & Ye, 2022), or L2 -distance between the sampled
frame and the previous frame in video synthesis (Ho et al.,
2022c). In such cases, we aim to leverage human preference
to manipulate the desired distribution and draw samples by
diffusion sampling with additional guidance, while it is hard
to directly use classifier or classifier-free guidance since no
actual condition is provided.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021b; Karras et al., 2022) have demonstrated incredible success. A key for applying diffusion

We consider a general form that subsumes all the above
cases. Let q(x) be an unknown data distribution in X ⊆ Rd .
We aim to sample from the following distribution:

*
Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for
AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua University 2 Gaoling School of AI, Renmin University
of China; Beijing Key Lab of Big Data Management and Analysis
Methods, Beijing, China 3 Pazhou Lab (Huangpu), Guangzhou,
China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

p(x) ∝ q(x)e−βE(x) ,

(1)

where E(·) is an energy function from X ∈ Rd to R and
we can compute E(x) for each datum. β ≥ 0 is the inverse
temperature for controlling the energy strength. The highdensity region of p(x) is approximately the intersection of
both the high-density regions of q(x) and e−βE(x) . As a

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

