Delay-agnostic Asynchronous Coordinate Update Algorithm

Xuyang Wu 1 Changxin Liu 1 Sindri Magnússon 2 Mikael Johansson 1

Abstract

many cases, the cost of computing Ti can be much lower
than that of computing the whole T (Nesterov, 2012).

We propose a delay-agnostic asynchronous coordinate update algorithm (DEGAS) for computing operator fixed points, with applications to
asynchronous optimization. DEGAS includes
novel asynchronous variants of ADMM and blockcoordinate descent as special cases. We prove that
DEGAS converges with both bounded and unbounded delays under delay-free parameter conditions. We also validate by theory and experiments
that DEGAS adapts well to the actual delays. The
effectiveness of DEGAS is demonstrated by numerical experiments on classification problems.

A natural approach for accelerating coordinate update methods is to implement them on multiple processors/machines
in a distributed environment. For example, in each iteration
we may let every processor compute Ti for a randomly chosen block i, update all the selected blocks, and then go to
the next iteration (Richtárik & Takáč, 2016). We consider
this to be a synchronous update, since all the processors are
synchronized and the algorithm does not proceed to the next
iteration until all processors finish their work. Due to the
use of multiple processors, synchronous coordinate update
methods can converge significantly faster than the centralized coordinate update (2). However, their convergence
speed is bottlenecked by the slowest processor and they are
sensitive to single-node failures. In contrast, asynchronous
coordinate update methods eliminate the need for global
synchronization and can be more efficient and robust.

1. Introduction
Many popular algorithms in machine learning, optimization,
and game theory can be formulated as fixed point iterations
x(k + 1) = T(x(k)),

This paper focuses on asynchronous coordinate updates.
Although these are useful in a wide range of sciences, this
paper only discusses applications in optimization and ML.

(1)

where k is the iteration index, x(k) ∈ Rd is the iterate at
iteration k, and T : Rd → Rd is an operator. For example,
the gradient descent method for minimizing a differentiable
function f is on the form (1) with T(x) = x − γ∇f (x) for
some positive step-size parameter γ > 0.

1.1. Related work
In the past few decades, there has been a growing interest
in developing parallel and asynchronous machine learning algorithms. As a part of this effort, a large number
of asynchronous and distributed optimization algorithms
with strong practical performance have been developed, including Async-SGD (Recht et al., 2011), Asynchronous
ADMM (Zhang & Kwok, 2014), PIAG (Aytekin et al.,
2016; Sun et al., 2019; Feyzmahdavian & Johansson, 2021),
Async-BCD (Liu et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2022a), DAve-RPG
(Mishchenko et al., 2018), DAve-QN (Soori et al., 2020),
and ADSAGA (Glasgow & Wootters, 2022). Most of these
algorithms are tailored to specific computing architectures
such as master-worker (Li et al., 2013) or shared-memory
(Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1989), while algorithms such as
AsySPA (Zhang & You, 2019), DFAL (Aybat et al., 2015),
and the Asynchronous primal-dual algorithm (Wu et al.,
2017) consider general communication topologies.

In machine learning applications, the problem dimension
is sometimes so large that evaluating the full operator T in
each iteration is impractical. For these problems, coordinate
update methods (Nesterov, 2012; Wright, 2015) have proven
to be very competitive. These methods split the decision
vector x into multiple blocks, x = (x1 , . . . , xm ) and only
update one block i in each iteration, i.e. they set
xi (k + 1) = Ti (x(k)),

(2)

while xj (k + 1) = xj (k) for all j ̸= i. Here, Ti is the
ith block of T such that T(x) = (T1 (x), . . . , Tm (x)). In
1
Division of Decision and Control Systems, EECS, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Department of Computer and System Science, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Xuyang Wu <xuyangw@kth.se>.

Two of the most influential frameworks for asynchronous
coordinate update methods are due to (Bertsekas, 1983) and
(Peng et al., 2016), respectively. In contrast to the related

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

