Sample Complexity Bounds for
Learning High-dimensional Simplices in Noisy Regimes

Amir Hossein Saberi 1 Amir Najafi 2 Seyed Abolfazl Motahari 3 Babak H. Khalaj 1

Abstract

dimensional geometric shapes from a given set of unlabeled data points. In particular, learning of simplices from
randomly scattered points arises in many fields ranging
from bioinformatics to remote sensing (Chan et al., 2009;
Schwartz & Shackney, 2010; Satas & Raphael, 2017). A
simplex is defined as the set of all convex combinations of
K + 1 points in RK , for K ∈ N. Formally speaking, our
problem can be stated as follows: assume n i.i.d. samples
are drawn from a uniform measure over an unknown simplex in RK . Also, each sample is assumed to be corrupted
by an additive multi-variate Gaussian noise with a covariance of σ 2 I K×K , for an unknown σ. The main question
that we try to address is: How large n needs to be in terms of
parameters K, σ, SNR and etc., such that the true simplex
can be consistently recovered with high probability?

In this paper, we find a sample complexity bound
for learning a simplex from noisy samples. Assume a dataset of size n is given which includes
i.i.d. samples drawn from a uniform distribution
over an unknown simplex in RK , where samples
are assumed to be corrupted by a multi-variate
additive Gaussian noise of an arbitrary magnitude.
We prove the existence of an algorithm that with
high probability outputs a simplex having a ℓ2 distance of at most ε from the true simplex (for
any ε > 0). Also, we theoretically show that
in order to achieve this bound, it is sufficient to

2
have n ≥ K 2 /ε2 eΩ(K/SNR ) samples, where
SNR stands for the signal-to-noise ratio. This
result solves an open problem in this area of re
search and shows as long as SNR ≥ Ω K 1/2 ,
the sample complexity of the noisy regime has
the same order to that of the noiseless case. Our
proofs are a combination of the so-called sample compression technique from (Ashtiani et al.,
2018), mathematical tools from high-dimensional
geometry, and Fourier analysis. In particular, we
have proposed a general Fourier-based technique
for recovery of a more general class of distribution families from additive Gaussian noise, which
can be further used in a variety of other related
problems.

Learning of simplices is a well-studied problem. Due to its
practical importance, several heuristic algorithms have been
proposed for different scenarios such as noisy and sparse
cases. In this paper, we focus on the theoretical aspects of
this problem which still has several open questions. There
exists at least one efficient algorithm for learning of simplices that comes with a theoretical guarantee (see Section
1.1), but still suffers from a very large sample complexity, i.e., requires n ≥ Ω K 22 . Concurrently, researchers
work on deriving information-theoretic sample complexity
bounds for this task irrespective time and memory requirements. Recently, the optimal sample complexity bound is derived for the noiseless case which is achieved by Maximum
Likelihood Estimator (MLE). The MLE for this problem
is the minimum volume simplex that contains all the samples, which runs in exponential time1 . Najafi et al. (2021)
proved that MLE in this case is a PAC-learning algorithm
with an asymptotically decreasing Total Variation (TV) dis
tance from the true simplex. They showed that Ω̃ K 2 /ε
(Logarithmic terms are ignored) samples are sufficient to
estimate the true simplex up to a TV distance of ε > 0.
However, the noiseless case is unrealistic since we do not
have access to clean data in real world. On the other hand,
the minimum-volume inclusive simplex proposed by Najafi
et al. (2021) is no longer a ‘proper’ solution when samples

1. Introduction
Many practical problems in machine learning and data
science can be naturally modeled by learning of high1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran. 2 School of Mathematics, Institute for
Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), P.O. Box: 19395-5746,
Tehran, Iran. 3 Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.. Correspondence to: Seyed
Abolfazl Motahari <motahari@sharif.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Finding a polynomial algorithm with provable guarantees that
comes with a reasonable dependency on K is still an open problem.

1

