MEWL: Few-shot multimodal word learning with referential uncertainty

Guangyuan Jiang 1 2 3 Manjie Xu 3 4 Shiji Xin 5 Wei Liang 4 6 Yujia Peng 1 3 7 Chi Zhang 3 Yixin Zhu 1

Abstract
Let’s learn some
new words!

Without explicit feedback, humans can rapidly
learn the meaning of words. Children can acquire a new word after just a few passive exposures, a process known as fast mapping. This
word learning capability is believed to be the most
fundamental building block of multimodal understanding and reasoning. Despite recent advancements in multimodal learning, a systematic and
rigorous evaluation is still missing for humanlike word learning in machines. To fill in this
gap, we introduce the MachinE Word Learning
( MEWL) benchmark to assess how machines
learn word meaning in grounded visual scenes.
MEWL covers human’s core cognitive toolkits in word learning: cross-situational reasoning,
bootstrapping, and pragmatic learning. Specifically, MEWL is a few-shot benchmark suite
consisting of nine tasks for probing various word
learning capabilities. These tasks are carefully
designed to be aligned with the children’s core
abilities in word learning and echo the theories in
the developmental literature. By evaluating multimodal and unimodal agents’ performance with a
comparative analysis of human performance, we
notice a sharp divergence in human and machine
word learning. We further discuss these differences between humans and machines and call for
human-like few-shot word learning in machines.

This is a hally tufa.

This is a daxy tufa.

daxy
hally
I know it!

Figure 1: Illustration of few-shot word learning. Children can acquire a novel word after only few exposures using cross-situational
information, even with referential uncertainty. In this example, a
child induces that daxy refers to the color green and hally magenta,
all from the experience of a daxy tufa (green cylinder) and a hally
tufa (magenta cylinder) without explicit guidance.

1. Introduction
Learning words and a language is one of the most fundamental stages of human cognitive development, serving
as the foundation for other crucial capabilities that come
later, such as learning new object categories, forming abstractions of conceptual structures, making generalizations,
and developing the ability to communicate (Lake & Murphy, 2021; Murphy, 2004; Smith & Gasser, 2005; Tenenbaum et al., 2011). Remarkably, we acquire the meaning of
words rapidly and effortlessly, even without explicit feedback (Bloom, 2001). One striking observation is that young
children can understand a novel word’s meaning merely
from a few examples, also known as fast mapping (Carey
& Bartlett, 1978; Heibeck & Markman, 1987); a child can
learn about 12 words per day by the age of eight (Bloom,
2002). These quickly learned words constitute our understanding of the world and the basis of symbol representation
for concepts.

Code and data: https://github.com/jianggy/MEWL.
Institute for AI, Peking University 2 Yuanpei College, Peking
University 3 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence 4 School
of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology 5 School of EECS, Peking University 6 Yangtze Delta Region
Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing 7 School of
Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory
of Behavior and Mental Health, Peking University. Correspondence to: Guangyuan Jiang <jgy@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Chi Zhang
<zhangchi@bigai.ai>, Yixin Zhu <yixin.zhu@pku.edu.cn>.

1

Human learning is inherently few-shot and open-ended,
even without explicit guidance (Landau et al., 1988; Lake
et al., 2015). Children experience substantial referential ambiguity while learning new words, yet they are nevertheless

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

