Online Learning with Feedback Graphs: The True Shape of Regret

Tomáš Kocák 1 Alexandra Carpentier 1

Abstract

The learning process, or the game, proceeds in rounds. In
round t, the learner picks one of the actions denoted by it
and incurs associated loss ℓt,it . The learner also observes
loss ℓt,it itself and possibly, losses of some other actions.
The set of observations depends on the feedback scheme,
we discuss different feedback schemes later.

Sequential learning with feedback graphs is a natural extension of the multi-armed bandit problem
where the problem is equipped with an underlying
graph structure that provides additional information - playing an action reveals the losses of all
the neighbors of the action. This problem was
introduced by Mannor & Shamir (2011) and received considerable attention in recent years. It
is generally stated in the literature that the√
minimax regret rate for this problem is of order αT ,
where α is the independence number of the graph,
and T is the time horizon. However, this is proven
only when the number of rounds T is larger than
α3 , which poses a significant restriction for the
usability of this result in large graphs. In this
paper, we define a new quantity R∗ , called the
problem complexity, and prove that the minimax
regret is proportional to R∗ for any graph and time
horizon T . Introducing an intricate exploration
strategy, we define the E XP 3-EX algorithm that
achieves the minimax optimal regret bound and
becomes the first provably optimal algorithm for
this setting, even if T is smaller than α3 .

The goal of the learner is to minimize the total loss received
at the end of the game, after T rounds. This is equivalent
to minimizing the difference between the total loss of the
learner and the loss of the strategy that plays the best-fixed
action in hindsight, after T rounds. We refer to this difference as regret and define it as
X

RT ≜ max E
(ℓt,it − ℓt,i ) ,
i∈[N ]

t∈[T ]

where the expectation is taken over the potential randomization of the environment and the learner.
A quantity of interest to characterize the difficulty of such a
sequential decision-making problem is what we will refer
to here as the minimax regret, namely the regret incurred
by the best possible strategy - the choice of actions (it )t on the most difficult possible bandit problem - the choice
of loss sequences (ℓt,i )t,i . Note that the minimax regret
depends on the feedback scheme considered.

1. Introduction

Traditionally, this problem is studied under different feedback schemes. The most relevant schemes for our paper are
the following:

In this paper, we consider a sequential decision-making
problem in an adversarial environment. This problem
consists of N actions, T rounds, and sequence of losses
(ℓt,i )(t,i)∈[T ]×[N ] where [K] ≜ {1, . . . , K}. Each loss ℓt,i
is associated with round t and action i. We do not impose
any statistical assumptions on the losses provided by the
environment. Instead, we assume that the losses are set by
an oblivious adversary before the learning process begins.
The only assumption on the losses is that they are bounded
in [0, 1], otherwise, the losses can be completely arbitrary
and change in every round.

Full-information feedback (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1997;
Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994; Vovk, 1990), sometimes
called prediction with expert advice. This feedback is
the simplest since the learner has access to all losses. At
the end of round t the learner observes whole loss vector
(ℓt,1
p . . . , ℓt,N ). The minimax rate for this feedback scheme
is T log(N ) and is attained by the EXP algorithm (CesaBianchi & Lugosi, 2006). Note that having access to all the
losses
in every round causes the minimax rate scale only as
p
log(N ) with the number of actions.

1

Institute of Mathematics, University of Potsdam, Germany. Correspondence to: Tomáš Kocák <kocak@math.unipotsdam.de>.

Bandit feedback (Thompson, 1933; Robbins, 1952; Auer
et al., 1995). In every round, the learner observes only the
loss of the selected action, namely ℓt,it , while the losses
of other actions are not disclosed. The minimax rate for

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

