Proper Scoring Rules for Survival Analysis

Hiroki Yanagisawa 1

Abstract

score (see, e.g., (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007) for the definitions of these scoring rules). In uncertainty quantification,
it is standard to use a strictly proper scoring rule both for a
loss function to train machine learning models and for an
evaluation metric to evaluate the models. Note that, if we
use a non-proper scoring rule S(F̂Y , y) as a loss function, a
prediction model (e.g., a neural network model) might find
an estimation F̂Y such that S(F̂Y , y) < S(FY , y) holds for
y ∼ Y on average and such F̂Y could be very different from
true FY .

Survival analysis is the problem of estimating
probability distributions for future event times,
which can be seen as a problem in uncertainty
quantification. Although there are fundamental
theories on strictly proper scoring rules for uncertainty quantification, little is known about those
for survival analysis. In this paper, we investigate
extensions of four major strictly proper scoring
rules for survival analysis and we prove that these
extensions are proper under certain conditions,
which arise from the discretization of the estimation of probability distributions. We also compare
the estimation performances of these extended
scoring rules by using real datasets, and the extensions of the logarithmic score and the Brier score
performed the best.

Survival analysis, which is also known as time-to-event
analysis, can be seen as a problem in uncertainty quantification. Despite the long history of research from the seminal
work (Cox, 1972) on survival analysis (see, e.g., (Wang
et al., 2019) for a comprehensive survey), little is known
about the strictly proper scoring rules for survival analysis.
Therefore, we investigate extensions of these strictly proper
scoring rules for survival analysis.
In survival analysis, the time between a well-defined starting point and the occurrence of an event is called the survival time or event time, and the goal of survival analysis
is to estimate the probability distribution of event times. In
healthcare applications, an event usually corresponds to an
undesirable event for a patient (e.g., a death or the onset
of disease). Survival analysis has important applications in
many fields such as credit scoring (Dirick et al., 2017) and
fraud detection (Zheng et al., 2019) as well as healthcare.

1. Introduction
The theory of scoring rules is a fundamental theory in statistical analysis, and it is widely used in uncertainty quantification (see, e.g., (Mura et al., 2008; Parmigiani & Inoue,
2009; Benedetti, 2010; Schlag et al., 2015)). Suppose that
there is a random variable Y whose cumulative distribution
function (CDF) is FY . Given an estimation F̂Y of FY and a
single sample y obtained from Y , a scoring rule S(F̂Y , y)
is a function that returns an evaluation score for F̂Y based
on y. Since F̂Y is a CDF and y is a single sample of Y ,
it is not straightforward to choose an appropriate scoring
rule S(F̂Y , y). The theory of scoring rules suggests how to
choose an appropriate one. This theory proves that a certain
class of scoring rules satisfies this natural property: the average evaluation score S(F̂Y , y) over y ∼ Y is minimized
only by the true CDF FY . A scoring rule that satisfies this
property is called strictly proper in this theory. Examples of
strictly proper scoring rules include the pinball loss, the logarithmic score, the Brier score, and the ranked probability

Datasets for survival analysis are censored, which means
that events of interest might not be observed for a number of
data points. This may be due to either a limited observation
time window or missing traces caused by other irrelevant
events. In this paper, we consider only right censored data,
which is a widely studied problem setting in survival analysis. The exact event time of a right censored data point is
unknown; we know only that the event had not happened
up to a certain time for the data point. The time between a
well-defined starting point and the last observation time of
a right censored data point is called the censoring time.
Many neural network models have been proposed for survival analysis (e.g., (Avati et al., 2019; Kamran & Wiens,
2021; Pearce et al., 2022)). A common problem with these
models is that they define their own custom loss functions,
and they use these loss functions without proving that they

1
IBM Research - Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Hiroki Yanagisawa <yanagis@jp.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

