A Unified Audio-Visual Learning Framework for
Localization, Separation, and Recognition

Shentong Mo 1 Pedro Morgado 2
https://github.com/stoneMo/OneAVM

Abstract

Source Localization

The ability to accurately recognize, localize and
separate sound sources is fundamental to any
audio-visual perception task. Historically, these
abilities were tackled separately, with several
methods developed independently for each task.
However, given the interconnected nature of
source localization, separation, and recognition,
independent models are likely to yield suboptimal
performance as they fail to capture the interdependence between these tasks. To address this
problem, we propose a unified audio-visual learning framework (dubbed OneAVM ) that integrates
audio and visual cues for joint localization, separation, and recognition. OneAVM comprises a shared
audio-visual encoder and task-specific decoders
trained with three objectives. The first objective
aligns audio and visual representations through a
localized audio-visual correspondence loss. The
second tackles visual source separation using a traditional mix-and-separate framework. Finally, the
third objective reinforces visual feature separation
and localization by mixing images in pixel space
and aligning their representations with those of
all corresponding sound sources. Extensive experiments on MUSIC, VGG-Instruments, VGGMusic, and VGGSound datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of OneAVM for all three tasks, audiovisual source localization, separation, and nearest neighbor recognition, and empirically demonstrate a strong positive transfer between them.

Source Separation

Cross-Modal Recognition
& Instance Retrieval

Figure 1: Sound source localization, separation, recognition
(CR-ACC), and instance retrieval (IR-ACC) performance
of a variety of models. The proposed framework, not only
surpasses prior state-of-the-art, but it does so using a single
model without requiring task-specific finetuning.

1. Introduction
Identifying, localizing, and recognizing objects or movements are critical cognitive functions, often requiring joint
visual and auditory processing. In fact, a variety of neurophysiological studies have demonstrated how audio-visual
interactions play a critical role in human perception. For
example, humans can localize events more accurately and
precisely in the presence of audio-visual sensory data compared to unisensory conditions (Odegaard et al., 2015).
Cross-modal integration effects have also been identified
as the cause of enhanced visual processing if reliably preceded by a sudden sound (Frassinetti et al., 2002), as well
as enhanced audio-visual speech perception in noisy environments (Schwartz et al., 2004). These studies provide
substantial evidence in support of the benefits of joint audiovisual processing for a wide range of tasks, from recognition
to localization and source separation.

1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of WisconsinMadison, Department of Electrical and Computer Eng. Correspondence to: Shentong Mo <shentonm@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

