Generative Pretraining for Black-box Optimization

Satvik Mashkaria * 1 Siddarth Krishnamoorthy * 1 Aditya Grover 1

Abstract

problems, we often have access to an offline dataset of function evaluations. Such an offline dataset can greatly reduce
the budget for online function evaluation. This introduces us
to the setting of offline black-box optimization (BBO) a.ka.
model-based optimization (MBO). A key difference exists
between the offline BBO setting and its online counterpart;
in offline BBO, we are not allowed to actively query the
black-box function during optimization, unlike in online
BBO where most approaches (Snoek et al., 2012; Shahriari
et al., 2016) utilize iterative online solving. One natural
approach for offline BBO would be to train a surrogate (forward) model that approximates the black-box function using
the offline data. Once learned, we can perform gradient
ascent on the input space to find the optimal point. Unfortunately, this method does not perform well in practice
because the forward model can incorrectly give sub-optimal
and out-of-domain points a high score (see Figure 1a). To
mitigate this issue, COMs (Trabucco et al., 2021) learns a
forward mapping that penalizes high scores on points outside the dataset, but this can have the opposite effect of
not being able to explore high-fidelity points that are far
from the dataset. Further, another class of recent approaches
(Kumar & Levine, 2020; Brookes et al., 2019; Fannjiang &
Listgarten, 2020) propose a conditional generative approach
that learns an inverse mapping from function values to the
points. For effective generalization, such a mapping needs
to be highly multimodal for high-dimensional functions,
which in itself presents a challenge for current approaches.

Many problems in science and engineering involve optimizing an expensive black-box function over a high-dimensional space. In the offline black-box optimization (BBO) setting, we
assume access to a fixed, offline dataset for pretraining and a small budget for online function
evaluations. Prior approaches seek to utilize the
offline data to approximate the function or its inverse but are not sufficiently accurate far from
the data distribution. We propose BONET, a generative framework for pretraining a novel modelbased optimizer using offline datasets. In BONET,
we train an autoregressive model on fixed-length
trajectories derived from an offline dataset. We
design a sampling strategy to synthesize trajectories from offline data using a simple heuristic
of rolling out monotonic transitions from lowfidelity to high-fidelity samples. Empirically,
we instantiate BONET using a causally masked
Transformer (Radford et al., 2019) and evaluate it
on Design-Bench (Trabucco et al., 2022), where
we rank the best on average, outperforming stateof-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Many fundamental problems in science and engineering,
ranging from the discovery of drugs and materials to the
design and manufacturing of hardware technology, require
optimizing an expensive black-box function in a large search
space (Larson et al., 2019; Shahriari et al., 2016). The key
challenge here is that evaluating and optimizing such a
black-box function is typically expensive, as it often requires real-world experimentation and exploration of a highdimensional search space.

We propose Black-box Optimization Networks (BONET),
a new generative framework for pretraining model-based
optimizers on offline datasets. Instead of approximating the
surrogate function (or its inverse), we seek to approximate
the dynamics of online black-box optimizers using an autoregressive sequence model. Naively, this would require
access to several trajectory runs of different black-box optimizers, which is expensive or even impossible in many
cases. Our key observation is that we can synthesize synthetic trajectories comprised of offline points that mimic
empirical characteristics of online BBO algorithms, such
as BayesOpt. While one could design many characteristic
properties, we build off an empirical observation related to
the function values of the proposed points. In particular,
averaged over multiple runs, online black-box optimizers
(e.g., BayesOpt) tend to show improvements in the function

Fortunately, for many such black-box optimization (BBO)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, US. Correspondence to: Siddarth
Krishnamoorthy <siddarthk@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

