Wasserstein Barycenter Matching for Graph Size
Generalization of Message Passing Neural Networks

Xu Chu * 1 Yujie Jin * 2 Xin Wang 1 3 Shanghang Zhang 2 Yasha Wang 2 Wenwu Zhu 1 3 Hong Mei 2

Abstract

common message passing neural network (MPNN) framework (Gilmer et al., 2017). An MPNN is size generalizable
if it generalizes to testing graphs exhibiting a different average number of nodes from that of the training graphs. The
size generalizability of an MPNN is desirable. Because the
graph sizes can vary significantly, e.g., the size of traffic networks can be much larger in metropolitan areas than those
in rural areas, and labeling large graphs can be costly, e.g.,
in combinatorial optimization (Bengio et al., 2021).

Graph size generalization is hard for Message
passing neural networks (MPNNs). The graphlevel classification performance of MPNNs degrades across various graph sizes. Recently, theoretical studies reveal that a slow uncontrollable
convergence rate w.r.t. graph size could adversely
affect the size generalization. To address the
uncontrollable convergence rate caused by correlations across nodes in the underlying dimensional signal-generating space, we propose to use
Wasserstein barycenters as graph-level consensus
to combat node-level correlations. Methodologically, we propose a Wasserstein barycenter matching (WBM) layer that represents an input graph by
Wasserstein distances between its MPNN-filtered
node embeddings versus some learned class-wise
barycenters. Theoretically, we show that the convergence rate of an MPNN with a WBM layer is
controllable and independent to the dimensionality of the signal-generating space. Thus MPNNs
with WBM layers are less susceptible to slow uncontrollable convergence rate and size variations.
Empirically, the WBM layer improves the size
generalization over vanilla MPNNs with different
backbones (e.g., GCN, GIN, and PNA) significantly on real-world graph datasets.

Empirical studies show that size generalization is hard for
widely used MPNNs (Joshi et al., 2021; Gasteiger et al.,
2022). Though efforts are made to promote the size generalization of MPNNs (Yehudai et al., 2021; Bevilacqua et al.,
2021; Buffelli et al., 2022), there are still gaps between
empirical success and reasonable theoretical understanding.
Lately, based on a graphon (Lovász, 2012) random graph
model and Monte Carlo theory, Maskey et al. (2022) developed a tight generalization bound decreasing with the graph
size at a −1/2DX rate, where DX is the dimensionality of
the underlying metric space generating the graph signals.
The −1/2DX convergence rate takes root in correlations
across nodes entailed by the graph structure.
The rate at −1/2DX is undesirable for the size generalization of MPNNs. The underlying metric space is not
necessarily a low-dimensional manifold. When the sample
size and the average graph size are limited, and DX is large,
the slow convergence rate −1/2DX would inflate the generalization risk. In widely used MPNNs, there is a lack of
mechanisms to tackle the uncontrollable −1/2DX rate.

1. Introduction

To address the uncontrollable −1/2Dχ rate that adversely
affects the size generalization, we propose to use the Wasserstein barycenters as a graph-level consensus to combat the
nodes-level consensus. Regarding the graphs as empirical
measures in the Wasserstein metric measure space, the nodes
across graphs of variant sizes can be registered (matched) by
the Wasserstein metric. Methodologically, we propose the
Wasserstein Barycenter Matching (WBM) layer for MPNNs
to improve size generalization with a controlled convergence rate. Specifically, the WBM layer approximates the
class-wise empirical Wasserstein barycenters in end-to-end
learning. When applying a WBM layer to an MPNN, an
input graph is represented by the Wasserstein distances be-

In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Bruna et al.,
2013; Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017) have
become the de facto choice for graph-level classification.
Most GNNs used in practice can be reformulated into the
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 2 Peking University,
Beijing 3 BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing.
Correspondence to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Yasha Wang <wangyasha@pku.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

