Task-specific experimental design for treatment effect estimation

Bethany Connolly * Kim Moore * Tobias Schwedes Alexander Adam
Gary Willis Ilya Feige Christopher Frye 1

Abstract

marketing (Verbeke et al., 2023).

Understanding causality should be a core requirement of any attempt to build real impact through
AI. Due to the inherent unobservability of counterfactuals, large randomised trials (RCTs) are the
standard for causal inference. But large experiments are generically expensive, and randomisation carries its own costs, e.g. when suboptimal
decisions are trialed. Recent work has proposed
more sample-efficient alternatives to RCTs, but
these are not adaptable to the downstream application for which the causal effect is sought. In
this work, we develop a task-specific approach to
experimental design and derive sampling strategies customised to particular downstream applications. Across a range of important tasks, realworld datasets, and sample sizes, our method
outperforms other benchmarks, e.g. requiring an
order-of-magnitude less data to match RCT performance on targeted marketing tasks.

The fundamental challenge of causal inference is the inaccessibility of counterfactuals: upon observing an individual’s
response to one treatment, their response had they received
a different treatment is not observable. Treatment effect estimation must therefore occur through observation of many
individuals, and large randomised controlled trials are the
hallmark of experimental design (Devriendt et al., 2018).
RCTs minimise bias in cohort selection and treatment assignment to produce treatment groups representative of the
population at large (Markozannes et al., 2021).
At smaller sample sizes, however, randomised treatment assignments often result in feature imbalances between treatment groups (Morgan & Rubin, 2012). This has spurred
substantial research into covariate balancing between treatment groups (Greevy et al., 2004; Morgan & Rubin, 2012;
Kallus, 2018). These techniques focus on treatment assignment given a fixed cohort of trial participants.
There is recent interest in optimising cohort selection as well
(Qin et al., 2021; Jesson et al., 2021; Addanki et al., 2022).
Such work aims to reduce the sample size required for performant treatment effect estimation. This is fundamentally
an active learning (AL) (Ren et al., 2021) task wherein a
population of unknown treatment response represents a pool
of unlabelled data; a point is labelled when that individual’s
outcome is observed in a trial (Puha et al., 2020). In this
context, AL can further be viewed as a multi-armed bandit
problem (Deng et al., 2011).

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence makes its impact through the influence
it has on actions taken in the real world. This influence is
often indirect, e.g. when machine learning predictions inform human decision making. The field of causal inference
studies the effect of actions on outcomes directly. Causal
inference is thus central to the broader programme of engineering AI’s positive effects on society.

In our view, AL techniques designed for supervised learning
are ill-suited for causal modelling. Due to the fundamental
challenge of causal inference, treatment effect models must
be trained on loss functions that do not directly target the
treatment effect. The T-learner (Gutierrez & Gérardy, 2017),
for example, is the difference in two models trained separately to predict outcomes in each treatment group. Such
proxy tasks are often far removed from the downstream application, e.g. ordering subjects by ITE. Loss-targeting AL
methods (Roy & McCallum, 2001) are thus ill-fit for causal
problems. Uncertainty-based AL (Beluch et al., 2018) is
not well-suited either: in treatment effect estimation, one
aims to learn the difference in two outcome probabilities,
irrespective of their entropies.

Treatment effect estimation is a paradigm of causal inference
that ranges from measuring the average treatment effect
(ATE) of an intervention at the population level to the more
granular prediction of individual treatment effects (ITE).
Such treatment efficacy measures are useful across domains,
from education (Olaya et al., 2020) and customer retention
(Devriendt et al., 2021) to medicine (Qi & Tang, 2019) and
*
Equal contribution 1 Faculty, 160 Old Street, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Christopher Frye <chris.f@faculty.ai>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

