Data Efficient Neural Scaling Law via Model Reusing

Peihao Wang 1 Rameswar Panda 2 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

(Brown et al., 2020; Schulman et al., 2022), large transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been dominating
a wide range of applications (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Rives et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021a; Jumper et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Zheng
et al., 2023). An interesting relation among performance,
training data, and model size has been recently revealed,
suggesting that these three variables generally should follow a power law (Rosenfeld et al., 2019; Kaplan et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). That being said, to avoid
performance saturation, the data scale should be grown in
proportion to the model parameter number. This signifies
that large-scale training of modern transformer models is
becoming increasingly data-hungry and less affordable.

The number of parameters in large transformers
has been observed to grow exponentially. Despite notable performance improvements, concerns have been raised that such a growing model
size will run out of data in the near future. As manifested in the neural scaling law, modern learning
backbones are not data-efficient. To maintain the
utility of the model capacity, training data should
be increased proportionally. In this paper, we
study the neural scaling law under the previously
overlooked data scarcity regime, focusing on the
more challenging situation where we need to train
a gigantic model with a disproportionately limited supply of available training data. We find
that the existing power laws underestimate the
data inefficiency of large transformers. Their performance will drop significantly if the training
set is insufficient. Fortunately, we discover another blessing - such a data-inefficient scaling
law can be restored through a model reusing approach that warm-starts the training of a large
model by initializing it using smaller models.
Our empirical study shows that model reusing
can effectively reproduce the power law under
the data scarcity regime. When progressively applying model reusing to expand the model size,
we also observe consistent performance improvement in large transformers. We release our code
at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/
Data-Efficient-Scaling.

In fact, besides the shortage of computational resources, the
lack of data resources has set another prohibitive barrier for
research labs to participate in and contribute to large model
training. Additionally, given the unparalleled growth rate of
model size and data scale, it is even considered foreseeable
that all web-collected data will be used up in the near future
(Villalobos et al., 2022). What is worse, training such everlarger models on limited data from fine-grained specific
domains or private data will become rather difficult, if not
impossible. Although transfer learning of publicly available
pre-trained models is always an option, their domain gaps
can often pose challenges to transfer effectiveness (Jiang
et al., 2022), and sometimes even fine-tuning a large pretrained model can be excessively costly.
It has not escaped our notice that all the raised questions
point to a core challenge: “How can we train large transformer models with higher data efficiency?” We tackle this
problem through the lens of the neural scaling law under
the extremely low data regime. Both language transformers
(Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019) and vision transformers
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) are studied in this paper. Existing
power laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Zhai et al., 2022) only
consider model and dataset sizes within a reasonable ratio. In contrast, our experiments focus on base-size models
(≲ 80M) trained with less than tens million tokens or tens
thousand images, where the model size is considered to be
overwhelmingly larger than the data scale. Consequently,
we provide a rectified functional relation in terms of test
error, model size, and dataset size, which can more accurately characterize the model-data size frontier for large

1. Introduction
With the number of parameters growing exponentially from
a few million (Devlin et al., 2019) to hundreds of billions
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, TX, United States 2 MIT-IBM
Watson Lab, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Peihao Wang <peihaowang@utexas.edu>, Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

