Optimal randomized multilevel Monte Carlo for repeatedly nested expectations

Yasa Syed 1 Guanyang Wang 1

Abstract

mating high-dimensional integrations, as they do not suffer
from the curse of dimensionality that plagues deterministic
numeric integration methods.

The estimation of repeatedly nested expectations
is a challenging task that arises in many realworld systems. However, existing methods generally suffer from high computational costs when
the number of nestings becomes large. Fix any
non-negative integer D for the total number of
nestings. Standard Monte Carlo methods typically cost at least O(ε−(2+D) ) and sometimes
O(ε−2(1+D) ) to obtain an estimator up to εerror. More advanced methods, such as multilevel
Monte Carlo, currently only exist for D = 1. In
this paper, we propose a novel Monte Carlo estimator called READ, which stands for “Recursive
Estimator for Arbitrary Depth.” Our estimator
has an optimal computational cost of O(ε−2 ) for
every fixed D under suitable assumptions, and a
nearly optimal computational cost of O(ε−2(1+δ) )
for any 0 < δ < 12 under much more general assumptions. Our estimator is also unbiased, which
makes it easy to parallelize. The key ingredients
in our construction are an observation of the problem’s recursive structure and the recursive use of
the randomized multilevel Monte Carlo method.

However, the above analysis implicitly assumes the integrand g can be pointwisely evaluated, which may not be
possible in many situations. This can arise, for instance,
when it is expressed as another integration over latent variables or when it involves solving a optimization problem.
In this paper, we study the problem of estimating repeatedly nested expectations (RNE), which means the integrand
depends on a sequence of other functions and conditional
expectations. Specifically, fix any positive integer D for
the total number of nestings, and {gd }D
d=0 for a family of
real-valued functions which can be pointwisely evaluated.
Let (y (0) , . . . , y (D) ) be a finite-time stochastic process with
underlying joint distribution π, and let y (0:d) denote the
vector (y (0) , . . . , y (d) ) for every d ≤ D. The RNE, first
formally formulated in (Rainforth et al., 2018), is defined
as:
h 

i
γ0 = E g0 y (0) , γ1 y (0)
,
(1)
where {γi }D−1
i=1 is recursively defined as:
 



(0:d−1)
(0:d)
(0:d)
(0:d−1)
γd (y
) = E gd y
, γd+1 y
y
,

1. Introduction

(2)

Monte Carlo methods are a class of algorithms that use
random sampling to estimate quantities of interest, such as
integrals or expected values. When the estimand can be
expressed as an expectation, for example Eπ [g(X)], these
methods work by generating independent random
Pn samples
X1 , . . . , Xn from π, and using the average i=1 g(Xi )/n
as an estimator. Monte Carlo estimators are unbiased and
converge at a rate of n−1/2 , regardless of the dimension of
the samples. This dimension-independent convergence rate
makes Monte Carlo methods a powerful tool for approxi-

and
γD (y

(0:D−1)

 


(0:D)
(0:D−1)
) = E gD y
y
.

(3)

The estimation of Resource-Optimal Nested Expectations
(RNEs) is a significant challenge that encompasses various
practical scenarios, where the desired outcome relies on
multiple stages or decision points. Here, we provide several
instances to illustrate this:

1

Department of Statistics, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, United States. Correspondence to: Guanyang Wang
<guanyang.wang@rutgers.edu>.

• In financial modeling, one crucial problem involves estimating RNEs when γ0 represents the expected utility
of an optimal strategy in a D-horizon optimal stopping
problem. Here, gd (y (0:d) , u) is defined as max y (d) , u
for 0 ≤ d ≤ D − 1, and gD (y (0:D) ) is simply y (D) .

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

