On the Global Convergence of Risk-Averse Policy Gradient Methods with
Expected Conditional Risk Measures

Xian Yu 1 Lei Ying 2

Abstract

where it is important to maintain reliable performance, we
aim to evaluate and control the risk.

Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) has
become a popular tool to control the risk of uncertain outcomes and ensure reliable performance
in various sequential decision-making problems.
While policy gradient methods have been developed for risk-sensitive RL, it remains unclear if
these methods enjoy the same global convergence
guarantees as in the risk-neutral case (Bhandari
& Russo, 2019; Mei et al., 2020; Agarwal et al.,
2021; Cen et al., 2022). In this paper, we consider a class of dynamic time-consistent risk measures, called Expected Conditional Risk Measures
(ECRMs), and derive policy gradient updates for
ECRM-based objective functions. Under both
constrained direct parameterization and unconstrained softmax parameterization, we provide
global convergence and iteration complexities of
the corresponding risk-averse policy gradient algorithms. We further test risk-averse variants of
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) and actor-critic
algorithms (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999) to demonstrate the efficacy of our method and the importance of risk control.

In particular, coherent risk measures (Artzner et al.,
1999) have been used in many risk-sensitive RL research
as they satisfy several natural and desirable properties.
Among them, conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar
et al., 2000; Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2002; Ruszczyński &
Shapiro, 2006; Shapiro et al., 2009) quantifies the amount
of tail risk. When the risk is calculated in a nested way via
dynamic risk measures, a desirable property is called time
consistency (Ruszczyński, 2010), which ensures consistent
risk preferences over time. Informally, it says that if a certain cost is considered less risky at stage k, then it should
also be considered less risky at an earlier stage l < k. In this
paper, we consider a class of dynamic risk measures, called
expected conditional risk measures (ECRMs) (Homem-de
Mello & Pagnoncelli, 2016), that are both coherent and
time-consistent.
Broadly speaking, there are two classes of RL algorithms,
value-based and policy-gradient-based methods. Policy gradient methods have captured a lot of attention as they are
applicable to any differentiable policy parameterization and
have been recently proved to have global convergence guarantees (Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Mei et al., 2020; Agarwal
et al., 2021; Cen et al., 2022). While Tamar et al. (2015a)
have developed policy gradient updates for both static coherent risk measures and time-consistent Markov coherent
risk measures (MCR), they do not provide any discussions
related to their global convergence. Recently, Huang et al.
(2021) show that the MCR objectives (unlike the risk-neutral
case) are not gradient dominated, and thus the stationary
points that policy gradient methods find are not, in general,
guaranteed to be globally optimal. To the best of our knowledge, it still remains an open question to develop policy
gradient methods for RL with dynamic time-consistent risk
measures that possess the same global convergence properties as in the risk-neutral case.

1. Introduction
As reinforcement learning (RL) becomes a popular technique for solving Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014), a stream of research has been devoted to
managing risk. In risk-neutral RL, one seeks a policy that
minimizes the expected total discounted cost. However,
minimizing the expected cost does not necessarily avoid the
rare occurrences of undesirably high cost, and in a situation
1

Department of Integrated Systems Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Correspondence to: Xian Yu
<yu.3610@osu.edu>.

This step aims at answering this open question. We apply
ECRMs on infinite-horizon MDPs and propose policy gradient updates for ECRMs-based objectives. Under both constrained direct parameterization and unconstrained softmax
parameterization, we provide global convergence guarantees

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

