A Game-Theoretic Framework for Managing Risk in Multi-Agent Systems

Oliver Slumbers 1 2 David Henry Mguni 2 Stefano B. Blumberg 1 Stephen McAleer 3 Yaodong Yang 4
Jun Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Game Theory (GT) is a fundamental tool for resolving problems within multi-agent systems (MAS) (Wellman, 2006).
Formalising scenarios in MAS as games allows practitioners
to model stable outcomes in real-world settings by computing equilibrium solutions. A core challenge for MAS
research is building systems that perform effectively while
mitigating the risk of adverse events for the agents within
the system. In particular, as the level of integration with
humans and AI agents increases, it becomes increasingly
important to avoid dangerous events for humans i.e. car
crashes (Gal & Grosz, 2022). In AI-only systems, risk can
come in the form of agents taking low probability yet dangerous strategies (e.g. ϵ-greedy policies outside of training
(Mnih et al., 2015)). Human-AI MAS differ markedly from
those of simulated systems that involve computerised agents
only, however the problem remains the same – humans
are prone to execution errors, a trait that seldom applies to
computerised agents (Gal & Grosz, 2022). Tackling this
challenge requires equilibrium concepts that can account for
all possible rewards dependent on other agents’ actions and,
enable agents to adopt risk-averse strategies in response.

In order for agents in multi-agent systems (MAS)
to be safe, they need to take into account the risks
posed by the actions of other agents. However, the
dominant paradigm in game theory (GT) assumes
that agents are not affected by risk from other
agents and only strive to maximise their expected
utility. For example, in hybrid human-AI driving
systems, it is necessary to limit large deviations in
reward resulting from car crashes. Although there
are equilibrium concepts in game theory that take
into account risk aversion, they either assume that
agents are risk-neutral with respect to the uncertainty caused by the actions of other agents, or
they are not guaranteed to exist. We introduce a
new GT-based Risk-Averse Equilibrium (RAE)
that always produces a solution that minimises the
potential variance in reward accounting for the
strategy of other agents. Theoretically and empirically, we show RAE shares many properties with a
Nash Equilibrium (NE), establishing convergence
properties and generalising to risk-dominant NE
in certain cases. To tackle large-scale problems,
we extend RAE to the PSRO multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework. We empirically demonstrate the minimum reward variance benefits of RAE in matrix games with highrisk outcomes. Results on MARL experiments
show RAE generalises to risk-dominant NE in a
trust dilemma game and that it reduces instances
of crashing by 7x in an autonomous driving setting versus the best performing baseline.

There are two prominent approaches in GT that propose
equilibrium concepts that address risk: Trembling Hand
Perfect Equilibrium (THPE) (Bielefeld, 1988) and Quantal
Response Equilibrium (QRE) (McKelvey & Palfrey, 1995)).
However, due to the linearity of expected utility (EU) these
concepts can undervalue comparatively large costs with low
probability given an agent’s tolerance for risk, which undermines their ability to successfully resolve notions of safety
and risk in various practical MAS (e.g. crashing has a large
negative utility). For example, as demonstrated in Fig.1, a
probability of 0.01% of Player 2 Overtaking only impacts
Player 1’s EU by 0.5. Therefore, based on EU, Overtaking
is preferable for Player 1, however exposing it to the possi1
University College London, London, UK 2 Huawei Technologies, London, UK 3 Independent Researcher 4 Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Oliver Slumbers
<oliver.slumbers.19@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

