Revisiting Pseudo-Label for Single-Positive Multi-Label Learning

Biao Liu 1 Ning Xu 1 Jiaqi Lv 2 Xin Geng 1

Abstract

text classification (Liu et al., 2017) and facial expression
recognition (Chen et al., 2020).

To deal with the challenge of high cost of annotating all relevant labels for each example in multilabel learning, single-positive multi-label learning
(SPMLL) has been studied in recent years, where
each example is annotated with only one positive
label. By adopting pseudo-label generation, i.e.,
assigning pseudo-label to each example by various strategies, existing methods have empirically
validated that SPMLL would significantly reduce
the amount of supervision with a tolerable damage in classification performance. However, there
is no existing method that can provide a theoretical guarantee for learning from pseudo-label on
SPMLL. In this paper, the conditions of the effectiveness of learning from pseudo-label for SPMLL
are shown and the learnability of pseudo-labelbased methods is proven. Furthermore, based
on the theoretical guarantee of pseudo-label for
SPMLL, we propose a novel SPMLL method
named M IME, i.e., Mutual label enhancement for
sIngle-positive Multi-label lEarning and prove
that the generated pseudo-label by M IME approximately converges to the fully-supervised case.
Experiments on four image datasets and five MLL
datasets show the effectiveness of our methods
over several existing SPMLL approaches.

Comparing with multi-class-single-label learning, where an
example is associated with only one positive label, multilabel learning requires a complete positive label set for each
example. However, it is extremely difficult to accurately
annotate each label of an example when the number of
examples or categories is large. To deal with the challenge
of high annotation cost, single-positive multi-label learning
(SPMLL) (Cole et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022) is proposed,
where each example is annotated with only one positive
label. Additionally, as many examples contain multiple
categories but the annotation is a single label in multi-class
datasets such as ImageNet (Yun et al., 2021), SPMLL would
obtain multi-label predictors on existing numerous multiclass datasets, which could enhance the application of MLL.
Comparing with the fully labeled case, SPMLL is a more
challenging problem, where a model trained with the single
positive labels would collapse to a trivial solution, i.e., the
model tends to predict every label as a positive one. To alleviate the problem, pseudo-label generation, i.e., assigning
pseudo-label to each example by various strategies, has been
extensively utilized in previous SPMLL methods. (Cole
et al., 2021) initializes all unannotated labels as negative
ones and updates the pseudo-labels as learnable parameters
with a regularization to constrain the number of expected
positive labels. (Xu et al., 2022) employs variational label enhancement (Xu et al., 2023; 2021) to recover latent
soft pseudo-labels. (Zhou et al., 2022) adopts asymmetrictolerance strategies for pseudo-labels cooperating with an
entropy-maximization loss. (Xie et al., 2022) recovers the
pseudo-labels leveraging the manifold structure information
learned by contrastive learning.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) aims to train a model on the
examples that are associated with multiple labels and obtain
a predictive model that is able to predict the relevant labels
for an unknown instance accurately (Zhang & Zhou, 2013;
Liu et al., 2021). Multi-label learning has been successfully
applied to a variety of real-world applications during the
past decade, such as image annotation (Wang et al., 2009),

By adopting pseudo-label generation, existing methods have
empirically validated that SPMLL would significantly reduce the amount of supervision with a tolerable damage in
classification performance. However, there is no existing
method that can provide a theoretical guarantee for learning from pseudo-label on SPMLL. In this paper, the conditions of the effectiveness of learning from pseudo-labels
for SPMLL are shown and the learnability of pseudo-labelbased methods is proven. Firstly, for any pseudo-label of an
instance, it must not always be mislabeled. Secondly, from

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan. Correspondence to: Ning
Xu <xning@seu.edu.cn>, Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

