On Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in Heterogeneous Causal Graphs

Richard Watson * 1 Hengrui Cai * 2 Xinming An 3 Samuel Mclean 3 Rui Song 1

Abstract

psychiatric disorders due to several unique challenges [18].
Accumulating evidence from existing research suggests that
Heterogeneity is a common issue for psychiatric disorders
based on traditional classification and diagnoses. Most of
the existing studies that address heterogeneity based on
symptom severity levels [8] are less likely to provide new
insights about underlying neurobiological mechanisms. On
the other hand, studying heterogeneous causal relationships
of different psychiatric disorders has the potential to improve understanding, risk prediction, and treatment selection. However, to date, no such studies have been conducted
due to the lack of appropriate analysis techniques. To fill
in this gap and advance research for psychiatric disorders,
we developed an innovative analysis approach to investigate
and test heterogeneous causal relationships and applied it
to study psychiatric disorders after trauma exposure using
data from a large cohort study.

Heterogeneity and comorbidity are two interwoven challenges associated with various healthcare
problems that greatly hampered research on developing effective treatment and understanding of
the underlying neurobiological mechanism. Very
few studies have been conducted to investigate
heterogeneous causal effects (HCEs) in graphical contexts due to the lack of statistical methods.
To characterize this heterogeneity, we first conceptualize heterogeneous causal graphs (HCGs)
by generalizing the causal graphical model with
confounder-based interactions and multiple mediators. Such confounders with an interaction with
the treatment are known as moderators. This allows us to flexibly produce HCGs given different
moderators and explicitly characterize HCEs from
the treatment or potential mediators on the outcome. We establish the theoretical forms of HCEs
and derive their properties at the individual level
in both linear and nonlinear models. An interactive structural learning is developed to estimate
the complex HCGs and HCEs with confidence
intervals provided. Our method is empirically
justified by extensive simulations and its practical usefulness is illustrated by exploring causality
among psychiatric disorders for trauma survivors.
Code implementing the proposed algorithm is
open-source and publicly available at: https:
//github.com/richard-watson/ISL.

Causal discovery, the task of discovering the causal relations between variables in a dataset, has interesting and important applications in many areas, such as epidemiology
[9], medicine [10], economics [24], etc. Under a general
causal graph, an event or a treatment may have a direct effect on the outcome of interest as well as an indirect effect regulated by a set of mediators (which are variables
that are affected by the treatment and in turn affect the outcome as M does in Figure 1) [see an overview in 26]. Yet,
due to the heterogeneity of individuals in response to different events/treatments, there may not exist a uniform causal
graph for everyone. This implies the existence of heterogeneous causal graphs under different moderators which are
pre-treatment confounders that also have an interaction term
with the treatment as X does in Figure 1). Learning such
heterogeneity is one of the most crucial obstacles that continue to hamper advances in many fields such as psychiatric
disorders [17]. With the launch of the Advancing Understanding of RecOvery afteR traumA (AURORA) study [18],
where thousands of trauma survivors were recruited after
traumatic experiences and followed to collect a broad range
of bio-behavioral data, discovering heterogeneous causal
patterns thus becomes a timely issue.

1. Introduction
During the last several decades, little progress has been
made in the understanding of the underlying neurobiological mechanism and in developing effective treatments for
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, North Carolina
State University, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of
California Irvine, USA 3 Department of Anesthesiology, University
of North Carolina Chapel Hill, USA. Correspondence to: Rui Song
<songray@gmail.com>.

Despite the popularity of causal discovery methods [e.g.,
36; 35; 13; 3; 30; 45; 43; 47], none of these works considers
heterogeneous causal graphs to account for the heterogeneity among different subjects. On the other hand, all existing

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

