An Investigation into Pre-Training Object-Centric Representations
for Reinforcement Learning

Jaesik Yoon 1 Yi-Fu Wu 2 Heechul Bae 3 Sungjin Ahn 4

Abstract
Unsupervised object-centric representation
(OCR) learning has recently drawn attention as
a new paradigm of visual representation. This
is because of its potential of being an effective
pre-training technique for various downstream
tasks in terms of sample efficiency, systematic
generalization, and reasoning. Although imagebased reinforcement learning (RL) is one of the
most important and thus frequently mentioned
such downstream tasks, the benefit in RL has
surprisingly not been investigated systematically
thus far. Instead, most of the evaluations have
focused on rather indirect metrics such as segmentation quality and object property prediction
accuracy. In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of OCR pre-training for image-based
reinforcement learning via empirical experiments.
For systematic evaluation, we introduce a simple
object-centric visual RL benchmark and conduct
experiments to answer questions such as “Does
OCR pre-training improve performance on
object-centric tasks?” and “Can OCR pre-training
help with out-of-distribution generalization?”.
Our results provide empirical evidence for
valuable insights into the effectiveness of OCR
pre-training for RL and the potential limitations
of its use in certain scenarios. Additionally,
this study also examines the critical aspects of
incorporating OCR pre-training in RL, including
performance in a visually complex environment
and the appropriate pooling layer to aggregate
the object representations. The benchmark
and source code are available on the project
website:https://sites.google.com/view/ocrl/home.

Figure 1: The model architectures for representation types.

1. Introduction
One of the main challenges in deep reinforcement learning
(RL) from pixels is determining how to effectively represent
the state of the environment. Many previous approaches
have represented the state using single-vector representations (Mnih et al., 2013; Träuble et al., 2021; Mnih et al.,
2013; Heravi et al., 2022), encoding the entire input image
into a single vector which is then used as input for the policy
network (Figure 1a). However, such representations may fail
to capture important relationships and interactions between
entities in the scene (Santoro et al., 2017). One way to address this limitation is to use a region-based representation,
where an image is encoded into a grid of representations
(Zambaldi et al., 2018) which are then combined using a
transformer encoder that allows for explicit modeling of
interactions between the different regions (Figure 1b).
Recent work in learning unsupervised Object-Centric Representations (OCR) provides another potentially promising
way of representing the state of the scene (Eslami et al.,
2016; Crawford & Pineau, 2019; Lin et al., 2019; Kipf et al.,
2019; Veerapaneni et al., 2020; Burgess et al., 2019; Greff
et al., 2019; Engelcke et al., 2019; 2021; Locatello et al.,
2020; Singh et al., 2021a). These approaches learn a structured visual representation from images without the need
for labels, modeling each image as a composition of objects. They provide a more semantically explicit way of
modeling the entities in the scene than region-based representation models and can be similarly combined using a
transformer encoder to model the relationships between the
objects (Figure 1c). Thus, they have the promise of being

1

SAP 2 Rutgers University 3 ETRI 4 KAIST. Correspondence
to: Jaesik Yoon and Sungjin Ahn <mail@jaesikyoon.com and
sjn.ahn@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

