Sampling-based Nyström Approximation and Kernel Quadrature

Satoshi Hayakawa 1 Harald Oberhauser 1 Terry Lyons 1

Abstract

ated with k into a low-dimensional RKHS. A consequence
of this is that the Gram matrix of kapp is a low-rank approximation of the original Gram matrix. Concretely, let µ
denote a probability measure on a (Hausdorff) space X and
k a kernel on X ; then the standard Nyström approximation
uses the random kernel

We analyze the Nyström approximation of a positive definite kernel associated with a probability
measure. We first prove an improved error bound
for the conventional Nyström approximation with
i.i.d. sampling and singular-value decomposition
in the continuous regime; the proof techniques
are borrowed from statistical learning theory. We
further introduce a refined selection of subspaces
in Nyström approximation with theoretical guarantees that is applicable to non-i.i.d. landmark
points. Finally, we discuss their application to
convex kernel quadrature and give novel theoretical guarantees as well as numerical observations.

k Z (x, y) := k(x, Z)k(Z, Z)+ k(Z, y).

(1)

where Z = (zi )ℓi=1 is an ℓ-point subset of X usually taken
i.i.d. from µ (Drineas et al., 2005; Kumar et al., 2012).
Further s-rank Approximation. While less common,
the following rank-reduced version is of our interest:
kapp (x, y) = ksZ (x, y) := k(x, Z)k(Z, Z)+
s k(Z, y), (2)
where k(Z, Z)+
s is the Moore–Penrose pseudo-inverse
of the best s-rank approximation of the Gram matrix
k(Z, Z) = (k(zi , zj ))ℓi,j=1 with s ≤ ℓ. Note that kℓZ = k Z .

1. Introduction
Kernel methods form a prominent part among modern machine learning tools. However, making kernel methods scalable to large datasets is an ongoing challenge. The main bottleneck is that the kernel Gram matrix scales quadratically
in the number of data points. For large scale problems the
number of matrix entries can easily be of the order hundredthousands or millions so that even storing the full Gram
matrix can become too costly. Several approaches have been
developed to deal with these, among the most prominent are
the Random Fourier Features and the Nyström method. In
this article, we revisit and generalize the Nyström method
and provide new error estimates. Consequences are theoretical guarantees for kernel quadrature and improvements
on the standard Nyström method that go beyond uniform
subsampling of data points.

Our motivation for this rank reduction comes from kernelbased numerical integration. Indeed, if we are given
an s-rank kernel kapp and a probability measure µ, by
Tchakaloff’s theorem there is a discrete probability measure
ν supported
over at most s + 1 points satisfying
R
R
f
dµ
=
f
dν
for all f ∈ Hkapp , where Hkapp is the
X
X
finite-dimensional RKHS associated with the kernel kapp .
Such a measure ν works as a kernel quadrature rule if the
kapp well approximates the original kernel k, and the rank s
directly affects the number of (possibly expensive) function
evaluations we need to estimate each integral. The primary
error criterion in this paper is
Z q
k(x, x) − kapp (x, x) dµ(x),
(3)
X

Nyström Approximation. The main idea of the Nyström
method is to replace the original kernel k by another kernel
kapp that is constructed by random projection of the elements in the (in general infinite-dimensional) RKHS associ-

which arises from the error estimate in kernel/Bayesian
quadrature (Hayakawa et al., 2022; Adachi et al., 2022).
Contribution. Our first theoretical

pP result is that the expectation of (3) is of the order O
i>s σi + polylog(ℓ)/ℓ
when the eigenvalues (σi )∞
i=1 of the kernel integral operator induced by (k, µ) enjoy exponential convergence
(the expectation is taken over the empirical sample Z).
Key to the proof of this bound is the use of concepts
from statistical learning theory; in particular, the (local)

1

Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Satoshi Hayakawa
<hayakawa@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

