Generalized Teacher Forcing for Learning Chaotic Dynamics

Florian Hess 1 2 3 Zahra Monfared 1 3 Manuel Brenner 1 2 Daniel Durstewitz 1 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Chaotic dynamical systems (DS) are ubiquitous
in nature and society. Often we are interested in
reconstructing such systems from observed time
series for prediction or mechanistic insight, where
by reconstruction we mean learning geometrical
and invariant temporal properties of the system
in question (like attractors). However, training
reconstruction algorithms like recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) on such systems by gradientdescent based techniques faces severe challenges.
This is mainly due to exploding gradients caused
by the exponential divergence of trajectories in
chaotic systems. Moreover, for (scientific) interpretability we wish to have as low dimensional
reconstructions as possible, preferably in a model
which is mathematically tractable. Here we report that a surprisingly simple modification of
teacher forcing leads to provably strictly all-time
bounded gradients in training on chaotic systems,
and, when paired with a simple architectural rearrangement of a tractable RNN design, piecewiselinear RNNs (PLRNNs), allows for faithful reconstruction in spaces of at most the dimensionality of the observed system. We show on several
DS that with these amendments we can reconstruct DS better than current SOTA algorithms, in
much lower dimensions. Performance differences
were particularly compelling on real world data
with which most other methods severely struggled. This work thus led to a simple yet powerful
DS reconstruction algorithm which is highly interpretable at the same time.

In many scientific and engineering settings we are interested
in learning the dynamics of an unknown, or hard to tackle,
underlying DS that we have observed through a set of time
series measurements. This may, for instance, be temperature
measurements to assess climate dynamics, tracking infected
cases for epidemiological dynamics, or neural recordings
from the brain. Having a faithful model of the underlying
dynamics enables rigorous scientific and mathematical analysis, as well as optimal predictions of the system’s future
temporal evolution. For many complex DS such as the brain
or social networks we have only rudimentary and insufficient knowledge about the governing equations. Given the
success of deep learning in so many areas and disciplines,
there has been a burgeoning interest in recent years in purely
data-driven approaches to DS reconstruction to bypass the
traditional tedious and protracted scientific model building
process (Brunton et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018; Koppe et al.,
2019; Vlachas et al., 2020; Schmidt et al., 2021; Brenner
et al., 2022; Lejarza & Baldea, 2022).
In DS reconstruction one aims to retrieve from data an
(approximate) model of the underlying dynamics that encapsulates all its geometrical and invariant temporal properties,
such as attractor states and other invariant sets (for some
applications, even just capturing the topological structure of
the underlying DS may be sufficient; Takens (1981); Sauer
et al. (1991)). Training machine learning systems such as
RNNs on time series observations from DS poses a number
of severe challenges, however. In fact, DS reconstruction algorithms have so far mostly been probed only on simulated
DS (Brunton et al., 2016; Vlachas et al., 2018; Pathak et al.,
2018; Champion et al., 2019; Otto & Rowley, 2019; Bakarji
et al., 2022), such as the Lorenz-63 (Lorenz, 1963) and
Lorenz-96 (Lorenz, 1996) models of atmospheric convection, or Navier-Stokes equations for turbulent flow. While
evaluation of algorithms on such ground truth benchmarks
is obviously important, the relative sparsity of real-world
applications demonstrates there is still a lot of ground to
make (cf. Brenner et al. (2022); Mikhaeil et al. (2022)).
One important challenge here is that most complex DS are
inherently chaotic (Olsen et al., 1988; Van Vreeswijk &
Sompolinsky, 1996; Durstewitz & Gabriel, 2007a; Duarte
et al., 2010; Faggini, 2014; Kesmia et al., 2020; Mangiarotti et al., 2020; Inoue et al., 2021; Kamdjeu Kengne et al.,

1

Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of
Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany 2 Faculty of Physics and Astronomy,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany 3 Cluster of Excellence STRUCTURES, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany 4 Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence to: Florian Hess <Florian.Hess@zi-mannheim.de>, Daniel Durstewitz
<Daniel.Durstewitz@zi-mannheim.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

