NP-SemiSeg: When Neural Processes meet Semi-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation

Jianfeng Wang 1 Daniela Massiceti 2 Xiaolin Hu 3 Vladimir Pavlovic 4 Thomas Lukasiewicz 5 1

Abstract

to autonomous driving systems, where the cost and time to
annotate large-scale training datasets with pixel-level labels
is prohibitive.

Semi-supervised semantic segmentation involves
assigning pixel-wise labels to unlabeled images
at training time. This is useful in a wide range
of real-world applications where collecting pixelwise labels is not feasible in time or cost. Current
approaches to semi-supervised semantic segmentation work by predicting pseudo-labels for each
pixel from a class-wise probability distribution
output by a model. If the predicted probability
distribution is incorrect, however, this leads to
poor segmentation results, which can have knockon consequences in safety critical systems, like
medical images or self-driving cars. It is, therefore, important to understand what a model does
not know, which is mainly achieved by uncertainty quantification. Recently, neural processes
(NPs) have been explored in semi-supervised image classification, and they have been a computationally efficient and effective method for uncertainty quantification. In this work, we move one
step forward by adapting NPs to semi-supervised
semantic segmentation, resulting in a new model
called NP-SemiSeg. We experimentally evaluated
NP-SemiSeg on the public benchmarks PASCAL
VOC 2012 and Cityscapes, with different training
settings, and the results verify its effectiveness.

Most recent works (Alonso et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021a;b;
French et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021a; Ouali et al., 2020;
Zhong et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022b; Guan et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2022; Kwon & Kwak, 2022; Yang et al., 2022;
Zhao et al., 2023) belong to the deterministic approach that
aims at directly making a prediction for an input image.
That is, it does not model the predictive distribution, and
only gives a point estimate. In contrast, a method modeling a predictive distribution for the input is classified as
probabilistic approach. Its key advantage is that one can
estimate the uncertainty for an input by simply sampling
from the posterior. The uncertainty provides information
about whether the prediction is reliable, and thus how to
estimate uncertainty should be considered under the setting
of semi-supervised learning (SSL), as the performance of
segmentation models is vulnerable to unlabeled data with
incorrect pseudo-labels, and decision-makers need to know
when they should not trust the models.
Unfortunately, the probabilistic approach is insufficiently
investigated, as researchers barely explored its application
to semi-supervised semantic segmentation for computer vision, and most related works focus on medical imaging
(Sedai et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Wang & Lukasiewicz, 2022;
Meyer et al., 2021; Xiang et al., 2022), in which Monte
Carlo (MC) dropout has been the mainstream option for
uncertainty quantification. MC dropout, however, has some
limitations that hinder it from real scenarios. For instance,
it can be time-consuming when it is combined with cumbersome segmentation models, as several feedforward passes
are required for estimating uncertainty. In addition, architectural choices, such as where to insert dropout layers and
the value of the dropout rate, are usually empirically set,
which may result in a suboptimal performance. To tackle
the limitations, a very recent work (Wang et al., 2022a) has
studied neural processes (NPs) for SSL, in which a new
model named NP-Match is proposed. Compared to MCdropout-based SSL models, NP-Match is computationally
significantly more efficient, as it only needs to perform one

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised image segmentation has seen a rapid progress in recent years and involves assigning class labels to
every pixel in an unlabeled image at training time. This
has many real-world applications, from medical imaging
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK.
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. 3 Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
4
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, New Jersey,
USA. 5 Vienna University of Technology, Austria. Correspondence
to: Jianfeng Wang <jianfeng.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

