Optimal Sets and Solution Paths of ReLU Networks

Aaron Mishkin 1 Mert Pilanci 2

Abstract
We develop an analytical framework to characterize the set of optimal ReLU neural networks by
reformulating the non-convex training problem
as a convex program. We show that the global
optima of the convex parameterization are given
by a polyhedral set and then extend this characterization to the optimal set of the non-convex
training objective. Since all stationary points of
the ReLU training problem can be represented
as optima of sub-sampled convex programs, our
work provides a general expression for all critical points of the non-convex objective. We then
leverage our results to provide an optimal pruning algorithm for computing minimal networks,
establish conditions for the regularization path of
ReLU networks to be continuous, and develop
sensitivity results for minimal ReLU networks.

Figure 1. Convex vs non-convex solution spaces for two-layer
ReLU networks. We plot the first feature of three different neurons;
the non-convex parameterization maps the compact polytope of
solutions for the convex parameterization into a curved manifold.

the non-convex optimization problem as a convex program
in a lifted parameter space (Pilanci & Ergen, 2020). We focus on the convex reformulation for two-layer networks with
ReLU activation functions and weight decay regularization.
The resulting problem is related to the group lasso (Yuan &
Lin, 2006) and induces neuron sparsity in the network.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have transformed machine learning. Despite their success, little is known about the global optima
for typical non-convex training problems, the solution path
of regularized networks, or how to prune networks without
degrading the model fit. This is in stark contrast to generalized linear models with ℓ2 or ℓ1 penalties; for example, it
is well-known that the lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) has a piecewise linear path (Osborne et al., 2000; Efron et al., 2004),
a polyhedral solution set (Tibshirani, 2013), and admits
efficient algorithms for computing minimal solutions (Tibshirani, 2013). In this paper, we close the gap by studying
neural networks through the lens of convex reformulations.

Let Z ∈ Rn×d be a data matrix and y ∈ Rn associated targets.
The prediction function for two-layer ReLU networks is
fW1 ,w2 (Z) =

m
X

(ZW1i )+ w2i ,

i=1

where W1 ∈ Rm×d , w2 ∈ Rm are the weights of the first
and second layers, m is the number of hidden units, and
(·)+ = max {·, 0} is the ReLU activation. Fitting fW1 ,w2
with convex loss L with weight decay (ℓ2 ) regularization
leads to the standard non-convex optimization problem:

 λ
min L fW1 ,w2 (Z), y + (∥W1 ∥2F + ∥w2 ∥22 ) . (1)
W1 ,w2
{z
}
2|

One of the main challenges of neural networks is nonconvexity. For non-convex problems, stationarity of the
training objective does not imply optimality of the network
weights and so, to the best of our knowledge, no work has
been able to derive an analytical expression for the optimal
set. Convex reformulations provide a solution by rewriting

R(W1 ,w2 )

The regularization path or solution function of this training
problem is the mapping between the regularization parameter λ and the set of optimal model weights,

 λ
O∗ (λ) = arg min L fW1 ,w2 (Z), y + R(W1 , w2 ). (2)
2
W1 ,w2

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Aaron Mishkin <amishkin@cs.stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In general, the optimal neural network is not unique and
O∗ (λ) will be set valued. Indeed, there are always at least
1

