Reducing SO(3) Convolutions to SO(2) for Efficient Equivariant GNNs

Saro Passaro 1 C. Lawrence Zitnick 1

Abstract

is narrowed to those that are equivariant. The hope is that
equivariance will provide a robust prior that can increase
data efficiency, improve generalization and eliminate the
need for data augmentation (Reisert & Burkhardt, 2009).

Graph neural networks that model 3D data, such
as point clouds or atoms, are typically desired to
be SO(3) equivariant, i.e., equivariant to 3D rotations. Unfortunately equivariant convolutions,
which are a fundamental operation for equivariant networks, increase significantly in computational complexity as higher-order tensors are
used. In this paper, we address this issue by reducing the SO(3) convolutions or tensor products to mathematically equivalent convolutions
in SO(2) . This is accomplished by aligning the
node embeddings’ primary axis with the edge vectors, which sparsifies the tensor product and reduces the computational complexity from O(L6 )
to O(L3 ), where L is the degree of the representation. We demonstrate the potential implications
of this improvement by proposing the Equivariant Spherical Channel Network (eSCN), a graph
neural network utilizing our novel approach to
equivariant convolutions, which achieves stateof-the-art results on the large-scale OC-20 and
OC-22 datasets.

SO(3)-Equivariant graph neural networks (GNNs) have
showed great promise in processing geometrical information, such as 3D point clouds of objects (Weiler et al., 2018;
Chen et al., 2021) or atoms (Batzner et al., 2022; Thomas
et al., 2018; Brandstetter et al., 2022; Liao & Smidt, 2023;
Musaelian et al., 2023). These networks incorporate the
inherent symmetry in their domains to SO(3), the group of
3D rotations. Specifically, they take advantage of geometric
tensors of irreducible representations, so-called irreps, to act
as node embeddings and utilize directional information. The
building block of these networks is an approach to message
passing that uses equivariant convolutions based on tensor
products of the irreps. Unfortunately, the full tensor product
using irreps up to degree L have a computational complexity
of O(L6 ), which significantly limits their use with degrees
higher than 2 or 3.
In this paper, we address this issue by proposing an efficient
method to perform equivariant convolutions. Our main observation is that node irreps exhibit special properties if the
irreps’ primary axis is aligned to the edge’s direction during
message passing. While SCN (Zitnick et al., 2022) observed
that this leads to a subset of the coefficients becoming SO(3)
invariant, we demonstrate the benefits extend even further.
Specifically, the tensor product becomes sparse, which reduces its computational complexity from O(L6 ) to O(L3 ),
and removes the need to compute the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. This enables computationally efficient equivariant
models that use irreps of significantly higher degree.

1. Introduction
In many domains, it is desired that machine learning models
obey specific constraints imposed by the task. A common
constraint is equivariance to specific operations on the inputs
(Bronstein et al., 2021). That is, if the input is transformed
in a certain manner, such as translated or rotated, the output
should be transformed appropriately. Prominent examples
include equivariance to translations for object detection in
images (Girshick et al., 2014), and equivariance to rotations
of 3D point clouds (Weiler et al., 2018; Satorras et al., 2021).
Machine learning models impose equivariance to a group of
symmetries by constraining the operations that can be performed. Namely, the class of functions that can be learned

Additionally, we shed light on this novel approach by revealing its relationship with SO(2) convolutions (Worrall
et al., 2017). In fact, while predicting per-atom forces in
atomic systems is a SO(3)-equivariant task, during message passing the symmetry of the problem gets reduced to
SO(2). Specifically, by aligning the irreps’ primary axis
with the edge’s direction, only a single degree of rotational
freedom remains. Thus, the SO(3) irreps can be projected
to the analogous irreducible representations of SO(2) and
the much more computationally efficient SO(2) convolutions may be performed. In conclusion, the tensor product

1

Fundamental AI Research at Meta AI. Correspondence
to: Saro Passaro <saro00@meta.com>, Larry Zitnick <zitnick@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

