Generative Causal Representation Learning for Out-of-Distribution Motion
Forecasting

Shayan Shirahmad Gale Bagi 1 Zahra Gharaee 2 Oliver Schulte 3 Mark Crowley 1

Abstract

erations, crowd abnormality detection systems, evacuation
situation analysis, and autonomous vehicles (Kothari et al.,
2022). It is also more challenging compared to other types
of agent trajectory prediction, such as vehicles, due to the
complex behaviour of humans in different environments.
Most of the proposed models in the literature of motion forecasting (Gupta et al., 2018; Kosaraju et al., 2019; Mangalam
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2019; Mohamed
et al., 2020; Salzmann et al., 2020) rely on statistical inference, which has two important shortcomings. First, the
learnt representations are not explainable and, therefore, are
ineffective to transfer into a new environment. Secondly,
statistical inference is susceptible to learn spurious correlations, which can significantly degrade the performance of
the models in presence of a domain shift or measurement
noise (Liu et al., 2022). In this work we aim to tackle these
shortcomings from a causality perspective.

Conventional supervised learning methods typically assume i.i.d samples and are found to be
sensitive to out-of-distribution (OOD) data. We
propose Generative Causal Representation Learning (GCRL) which leverages causality to facilitate knowledge transfer under distribution shifts.
While we evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method in human trajectory prediction models, GCRL can be applied to other domains as
well. First, we propose a novel causal model that
explains the generative factors in motion forecasting datasets using features that are common across
all environments and with features that are specific to each environment. Selection variables are
used to determine which parts of the model can be
directly transferred to a new environment without
fine-tuning. Second, we propose an end-to-end
variational learning paradigm to learn the causal
mechanisms that generate observations from features. GCRL is supported by strong theoretical results that imply identifiability of the causal model
under certain assumptions. Experimental results
on synthetic and real-world motion forecasting
datasets show the robustness and effectiveness
of our proposed method for knowledge transfer
under zero-shot and low-shot settings by substantially outperforming the prior motion forecasting
models on out-of-distribution prediction.

Causal representation learning has attracted much attention
in various applications (Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020a;
Schölkopf et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022). Causal inference
eliminates the confounding bias in predictions, (Pearl et al.,
2016) which is a common phenomenon in motion forecasting since inputs and targets come from the same interdependent time series. Furthermore, models based on causal
inference learn meaningful features that do not rely on spurious correlations. The coexistence of target trajectories and
observation noise, is an example of spurious correlation in
motion forecasting (Liu et al., 2022). Causality can also
identify the generative factors in the dataset (Suter et al.,
2019). Physical laws, social norms, and motion styles are examples of generative factors in HTP. Under covariate shifts,
a model that learns the causal structure of the data would
require many fewer samples to adapt to the new environment because most of the modules can be reused without
further training. This expectation is consistent with the
Sparse Mechanism Shift hypothesis in causal representation
learning (Schölkopf et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Human Trajectory Prediction (HTP) is a valuable task in
many applications such as infrastructure design, traffic op1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 Department of Systems
Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada. Correspondence to: Shayan Shirahmad Gale Bagi
<sshirahm@uwaterloo.ca>.

To this end, we propose Generative Causal Representation
Learning (GCRL) that leverages causality to increase the
identifiability and robustness of current motion forecasting
models. While our target application is motion forecasting,
our proposed solution can be applied to domain adapta-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

