Towards Omni-generalizable Neural Methods for Vehicle Routing Problems

Jianan Zhou 1 Yaoxin Wu 2 Wen Song 3 Zhiguang Cao 4 Jie Zhang 1

Abstract

group of COP instances, the neural method has the potential
to reduce computational efforts while achieving desirable
solution quality. In this paper, we focus on vehicle routing
problems (VRPs), which is a class of canonical NP-hard
COPs with wide applications in transportation (Garaix et al.,
2010; Zhou et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023) and logistics (Cattaruzza et al., 2017; Konstantakopoulos et al., 2022). The
neural methods for VRPs usually employ advanced deep
models (e.g., pointer network (Vinyals et al., 2015), attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) and graph neural
network (Bresson & Laurent, 2017)) to learn heuristics for
route construction or improvement with supervised learning
or reinforcement learning. They have achieved competitive
or even superior performance to the conventional heuristics.

Learning heuristics for vehicle routing problems
(VRPs) has gained much attention due to the less
reliance on hand-crafted rules. However, existing methods are typically trained and tested on
the same task with a fixed size and distribution
(of nodes), and hence suffer from limited generalization performance. This paper studies a
challenging yet realistic setting, which considers
generalization across both size and distribution
in VRPs. We propose a generic meta-learning
framework, which enables effective training of
an initialized model with the capability of fast
adaptation to new tasks during inference. We further develop a simple yet efficient approximation
method to reduce the training overhead. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and benchmark instances of the traveling salesman problem (TSP) and capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP) demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/RoyalSkye/Omni-VRP.

However, most of the neural methods are trained and tested
on the same task with a fixed size and distribution, and thus
suffer from poor generalization. For example, the popular attention-based models (Kool et al., 2018; Kwon et al.,
2020) are only trained and tested on instances of fixed size
(e.g., 100), with node coordinates sampled from the uniform
distribution. The performance of the learned heuristic drastically decreases when it is applied to an unseen task during
training (see POMO* in Table 1). This generalization issue
severely hinders the application of these neural methods
in practice. A simple measure for improvement is to train
them on diverse data. However, covering the whole problem
space is intractable (e.g., the "Catch-22" for NP-hard problems (Yehuda et al., 2020)). Thus how to effectively learn
from diverse data for VRPs is still a challenging problem.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) are of great
importance in computer science and operation research. The
exact methods suffer from the scalability issue due to the
NP-hardness, while the heuristic ones need substantial handcrafted rules and domain expertise for each specific problem.
Recently, the neural method, which leverages machine learning (ML) to automatically learn or discover heuristics for
a wide range of COPs, has gained much attention (Bengio
et al., 2021). By exploiting the underlying pattern among a

While some attempts have been made to tackle the generalization issue of neural methods for VRPs, most of them
solely focus on either size (Lisicki et al., 2020; Bdeir et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2022b) or distribution (Zhang et al., 2022;
Jiang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Geisler et al., 2022; Bi
et al., 2022). We argue that it is more realistic to simultaneously consider the generalization of size and distribution,
since the real-world VRP instances (e.g., TSPLIB (Reinelt,
1991) and CVRPLIB (Uchoa et al., 2017)) may vary in both.
As a promising work, Manchanda et al. (2022) handles this
challenging setting by exploiting a meta-learning technique,
i.e., Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018), which only relies on the
first-order derivatives for training. However, it is still far
from satisfaction in that, 1) Reptile is less sample efficient as
it typically needs multiple inner-loop updates to incorporate

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 2 Department of Information Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands 3 Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong
University, China 4 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yaoxin Wu <wyxacc@hotmail.com>, Wen Song <wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

