Group Equivariant Fourier Neural Operators for Partial Differential Equations

Jacob Helwig 1 * Xuan Zhang 1 * Cong Fu 1 Jerry Kurtin 1 Stephan Wojtowytsch 2 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract

(Raissi et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021b), whereas the second
is pursued by neural operators (Lu et al., 2021a; Li et al.,
2021a). While PINNs are used to solve equations individually and online, neural operators learn a solution map
between function spaces from problem data to the solution
offline. The second approach is highly efficient in contexts
where the same problem has to be solved often with slightly
varied parameters or initial conditions and is the focus of
this work.

We consider solving partial differential equations
(PDEs) with Fourier neural operators (FNOs),
which operate in the frequency domain. Since the
laws of physics do not depend on the coordinate
system used to describe them, it is desirable to
encode such symmetries in the neural operator architecture for better performance and easier learning. While encoding symmetries in the physical
domain using group theory has been studied extensively, how to capture symmetries in the frequency
domain is under-explored. In this work, we extend group convolutions to the frequency domain
and design Fourier layers that are equivariant to
rotations, translations, and reflections by leveraging the equivariance property of the Fourier transform. The resulting G-FNO architecture generalizes well across input resolutions and performs
well in settings with varying levels of symmetry.
Our code is publicly available as part of the AIRS
library (https://github.com/divelab/AIRS).

PDEs capture dynamics of physical processes in which symmetries exist, as visualized in Figure 1. Symmetries of the
underlying problem are reflected in the PDE and its solution operator: the laws of physics do not depend on the
coordinate system used to describe them. Many differential
operators are rotation invariant, including common models
for fluid flow, heat propagation and electrodynamics, but
asymmetries in the domain of computation can break symmetries in a more global way: for instance, two directions
in a cylindrical container behave similarly while the third
plays a different role. It is therefore global symmetries
that solution operators capture. Explicit encoding of these
symmetries in network architectures can improve model generalization, interpretability, and sample complexity (Weiler
& Cesa, 2019; Worrall & Welling, 2019).

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are widely used to
model physical processes that evolve in time and space, including fluid flows (Wang et al., 2020; Bonnet et al., 2022;
Eckert et al., 2019), heat transfer (Zobeiry & Humfeld, 2021)
and electromagnetic waves (Lim & Psaltis, 2022). Classically, solving a PDE has been viewed as the task of finding
a sufficiently smooth function that satisfies a pointwise relationship between derivatives of a different order. A more
modern approach is to consider differential operators as (often non-linear) maps between function spaces and utilize
techniques of functional analysis to construct and analyze
solutions. The first philosophy is present in neural PDE
solvers such as physics-informed neural networks (PINNs)

While equivariant architectures have been studied in diverse
applications (Thomas et al., 2018; Cohen & Welling, 2017;
Weiler et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2018), most current studies
parameterize their convolution kernels in physical space or
group space, as opposed to Fourier space. Therefore, the
networks are constrained to the resolution of the training
data. That is, the trained models may not generalize well
to data sampled on a discretization differing from that used
in the training data. Additionally, the kernel is most often
assumed to have compact, local support, which is effective
for sharing information at short distances but requires deep
architectures for long-range signal propagation, whereas
Fourier convolutions offer an efficient approach for performing global convolutions (Li et al., 2021a).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, TX, USA 2 Department of Mathematics, Texas A&M University, TX, USA. Correspondence to:
Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.

In this work, we propose the Group Equivariant Fourier
Neural Operator (G-FNO). By leveraging symmetries of
the Fourier transform, we extend group convolution to the
frequency domain and design Fourier layers that are equivariant to rotations, reflections and translations. As a result,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

