Fascinating Supervisory Signals and Where to Find Them:
Deep Anomaly Detection with Scale Learning

Hongzuo Xu 1 2 Yijie Wang 1 2 Juhui Wei 3 Songlei Jian 2 Yizhou Li 1 2 Ning Liu 1 2

Abstract

itive rare events (e.g., diseases, cyberspace intrusions, financial frauds, industrial faults, and marketing opportunities).
Deep learning has shown strong modeling capability, which
enables deep anomaly detection methods to yield drastic
performance improvement over traditional methods (Pang
et al., 2021). Due to the unsupervised nature of anomaly
detection, designing deep anomaly detection models is a
journey of finding reasonable supervisory signals .

Due to the unsupervised nature of anomaly detection, the key to fueling deep models is finding supervisory signals. Different from current reconstruction-guided generative models and
transformation-based contrastive models, we devise novel data-driven supervision for tabular data
by introducing a characteristic – scale – as data
labels. By representing varied sub-vectors of data
instances, we define scale as the relationship between the dimensionality of original sub-vectors
and that of representations. Scales serve as labels
attached to transformed representations, thus offering ample labeled data for neural network training. This paper further proposes a scale learningbased anomaly detection method. Supervised by
the learning objective of scale distribution alignment, our approach learns the ranking of representations converted from varied subspaces of each
data instance. Through this proxy task, our approach models inherent regularities and patterns
within data, which well describes data “normality”. Abnormal degrees of testing instances are obtained by measuring whether they fit these learned
patterns. Extensive experiments show that our
approach leads to significant improvement over
state-of-the-art generative/contrastive anomaly detection methods.

Many deep anomaly detection methods (Xia et al., 2015;
Chen et al., 2017; Zhou & Paffenroth, 2017; Liu et al., 2019;
2021) construct various kinds of autoencoders, generative
adversarial networks, or prediction models. Their learning
objectives are adapted to anomaly detection by treating reconstruction errors of incoming data as abnormal degrees.
These generative methods are intuitive and show favorable
performance on several popular benchmarks. However, as
has been discussed in (Larsen et al., 2016; Ruff et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2022), one imperfection is that their learning target is primarily designed to reconstruct/generate the whole
data. That is, they are forced to focus on reducing errors
in each fine-grained point, but overemphasizing low-level
details may make the model hard to converge when the normal class is complicated. Besides, some underlying hard
anomalies can be only identified by investigating high-level
pattern information in inlier data.
To address this limitation, recent efforts (Golan & El-Yaniv,
2018; Li et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Ristea et al., 2022)
have been made to liberate deep anomaly detection from the
above reconstruction-based pipeline. They define various
transformations and design pretext tasks, learning to classify,
compare, or map these transformations. They either use
the learned representations for independent abnormality
estimators or utilize loss values as anomaly scores. These
models can embed high-level semantic information into the
learned representations, thus leading to stronger anomaly
detectors with promising detection accuracy. However, most
popular transformation operations (e.g., rotations, cropping,
and flip) can be only applied to image data. As for nonperceptual tabular data, it is still a non-trivial task to define
suitable supervisory signals to actuate deep learning models.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection, the task of discovering exceptional
data that deviate significantly from the majority (Aggarwal,
2017), has been successfully applied in many real-world domains when there is a need to identify both negative and pos1
National Key Laboratory of Parallel and Distributed Computing 2 College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology 3 College of Science, National University of Defense Technology. Correspondence to: Yijie Wang <wangyijie@nudt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To this end, we introduce a new data characteristic – scale –
to devise a novel kind of data-driven supervision. Generally,
1

