Towards a Persistence Diagram that is Robust to Noise and Varied Densities

Hang Zhang * 1 Kaifeng Zhang * 1 Kai Ming Ting 1 Ye Zhu 2

Abstract

forming a PD into some features, to be used as the input
representation for machine learning algorithms (Chan et al.,
2022; Kusano et al., 2017; Hofer et al., 2019). Most of
the work (Reininghaus et al., 2015; Adams et al., 2017;
Carrière et al., 2017; Kusano et al., 2017; Le & Yamada,
2018; Polanco & Perea, 2019; Bubenik, 2020) have focused
on different vectorization methods in order to improve the
results of machine learning algorithms, with a strong assumption that a correct and good PD has been derived.

Recent works have identified that existing methods, which construct persistence diagrams in
Topological Data Analysis (TDA), are not robust
to noise and varied densities in a point cloud. We
analyze the necessary properties of an approach
that can address these two issues, and propose a
new filter function for TDA based on a new datadependent kernel which possesses these properties. Our empirical evaluation reveals that the
proposed filter function provides a better means
for t-SNE visualization and SVM classification
than three existing methods of TDA.

This work begins by asking a question: Do existing methods
produce a correct and good PD? Unless we are certain that
they do, any vectorization method used only propagates the
errors introduced by PD, leading to poor final task-specific
performance.
Existing works use a distance measure in their core computations, e.g., (Zomorodian & Carlsson, 2004). Some have
identified shortcomings in using a distance measure (Chazal
et al., 2017; Berry & Sauer, 2019; Vishwanath et al., 2020;
Blumberg & Lesnick, 2022; Vipond, 2020). There are two
fundamental issues, i.e., PD is not robust to outliers (Chazal
et al., 2017; Vishwanath et al., 2020) and varied densities
(Berry & Sauer, 2019) in a point cloud. Current research
has provided some solutions to each of these issues independently.

1. Introduction
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) is an important approach
to study the shape of a point cloud using techniques from
topology (Wasserman, 2016). An important and popular
technique is persistent homology (PH) (Edelsbrunner et al.,
2000), which typically produces a persistence diagram (PD)
to describe the topological characteristics of a point cloud.
PH has been applied to many fields. In biology, it has been
applied to (a) systematically study DNA structures, and successfully discriminates three types of DNA (Meng et al.,
2020); and (b) protein-ligand binding affinity prediction
(Liu et al., 2022). In chemistry, it was employed to accelerate a first-principle screening for the discovery of the next
generation of functionalized molecules and materials, such
as screening a large database to discover the CO2 -philic
functional groups (Townsend et al., 2020).

The multi-parameter approach (Blumberg & Lesnick, 2022)
attempts to address both issues. But it still suffers from the
same flaw of the one-parameter approach (see Appendix B.6
for details). No attempts have been afforded to address both
issues in the one-parameter approach. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to address both issues, i.e., when
both noise and varied densities coexist in a point cloud.
The main contributions of this work are:

PD is beneficial for machine learning methods because it
captures the topological structure information of a point
cloud (Hensel et al., 2021) which cannot be obtained by
other means. Recent efforts have been devoted to trans-

1. Investigating the shortcomings of existing methods to
produce correct and good PDs.

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Centre for Cyber Resilience and Trust, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, Australia. Correspondence to: Kai Ming Ting
<tingkm@nju.edu.cn>.

2. Highlighting the importance of the problem of the lack
of robustness of PD when noise and varied densities
coexist in a point cloud.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

3. Proposing a new data-dependent kernel and a new
method to produce a PD in order to address the above
problem.
1

