G RAFENNE: Learning on Graphs with Heterogeneous and Dynamic Feature Sets

Shubham Gupta * 1 Sahil Manchanda * 1 Sayan Ranu 1 Srikanta Bedathur 1

Abstract

2021; You et al., 2019), modeling of physical systems (Bhattoo et al., 2023; Bishnoi et al., 2023; Thangamuthu et al.,
2022; Bhattoo et al., 2022), traffic forecasting (Gupta et al.,
2023; Jain et al., 2021), material discovery (Bihani et al.,
2023), learning combinatorial algorithms (Manchanda
et al., 2020; Ranjan et al., 2022; Chakraborty et al.,
2023; Manchanda & Ranu, 2023), and graph generative
modeling (Goyal et al., 2020; You et al., 2018; Gupta et al.,
2022; Vignac et al., 2023). The effectiveness of G NNs is
closely associated with the availability of high-quality input
node features (Rossi et al., 2021). An inherent assumption
in existing G NNs is the availability of all features for each
node in the graph. In practice, this assumption is often
violated producing heterogeneous and dynamic feature sets.
To motivate, we list two commonly occurring scenarios.

Graph neural networks (G NNs), in general, are
built on the assumption of a static set of features
characterizing each node in a graph. This assumption is often violated in practice. Existing methods partly address this issue through feature imputation. However, these techniques (i) assume
uniformity of feature set across nodes, (ii) are
transductive by nature, and (iii) fail to work when
features are added or removed over time. In this
work, we address these limitations through a novel
G NN framework called G RAFENNE. G RAFENNE
performs a novel allotropic transformation on the
original graph, wherein the nodes and features are
decoupled through a bipartite encoding. Through
a carefully chosen message passing framework
on the allotropic transformation, we make the
model parameter size independent of the number
of features and thereby inductive to both unseen
nodes and features. We prove that G RAFENNE
is at least as expressive as any of the existing
message-passing G NNs in terms of WeisfeilerLeman tests, and therefore, the additional inductivity to unseen features does not come at the cost
of expressivity. In addition, as demonstrated over
four real-world graphs, G RAFENNE empowers
the underlying G NN with high empirical efficacy
and the ability to learn in continual fashion over
streaming feature sets.

• Applicability of features: In graphs with heterogeneous
features, the feature set characterizing node v may not be
relevant for node u. As an example, consider a co-purchase
graph over items in an e-commerce database. While the
feature C PU clock-speed is relevant for smartphones, it
does not apply to smartphone covers. While one may
homogenize the features set across all nodes by attributing a
special value to denote non-relevant features, it significantly
enlarges feature dimensionality leading to inefficiencies in
the modeling, computational and storage components.
• Feature set refinement: Feature sets may get altered
over time (Leskovec & Krevl, 2014; Bai et al., 2018).
Consider the evolution of smartphones into the foldable
form factor. While a feature characterizing the form-factor
is required in today’s context, it was not conceivable five
years back. Similarly, in a dating network, users might
choose to remove/hide personal attributes related to income,
education, and occupation at a later stage after initial
sign-up. Furthermore, the dating app might ask for covid
vaccination status in the post-pandemic era. Since the
number of model parameters in G NNs is a function of the
input node feature dimension, when the feature set changes,
the entire model needs to be retrained from scratch. The
ideal solution lies in decoupling the G NNs parameters with
feature set size and continually adapting the existing model
to new features without forgetting the past.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Graph Neural Networks (G NNs) have witnessed immense
popularity in modeling topological data. G NNs have
produced state-of-the-art results in molecular property prediction (Ying et al., 2021; Rampášek et al., 2022), protein
function prediction (Hamilton et al., 2017; Nishad et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, IIT Delhi.
Correspondence to: Shubham Gupta <shubham.gupta@cse.iitd.ac.in>, Sahil Manchanda
<sahil.manchanda@cse.iitd.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

