Patch-level Contrastive Learning via Positional Query for Visual Pretraining

Shaofeng Zhang 1 Qiang Zhou 2 Zhibin Wang 2 Fan Wang 2 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

encoders (Zhang et al., 2016), etc). 3) Contrastive methods (Chen et al., 2020a;b) take augmented views of the
same image as positive pairs and others as negative pairs.
Contrastive-based methods have shown great promise e.g.,
in image classification/detection, video classification (Caron
et al., 2021), multi-modal learning (Jin et al., 2022; 2023a)
and others (Jin et al., 2023b).

Dense contrastive learning (DCL) has been recently explored for learning localized information
for dense prediction tasks (e.g., detection and segmentation). It still suffers the difficulty of mining pixels/patches correspondence between two
views. A simple way is inputting the same view
twice and aligning the pixel/patch representation.
However, it would reduce the variance of inputs,
and hurts the performance. We propose a plug-in
method PQCL (Positional Query for patch-level
Contrastive Learning), which allows performing
patch-level contrasts between two views with exact patch correspondence. Besides, by using positional queries, PQCL increases the variance of inputs, to enhance training. We apply PQCL to popular transformer-based CL frameworks (DINO
and iBOT, and evaluate them on classification, detection and segmentation tasks, where our method
obtains stable improvements, especially for dense
tasks. It achieves new state-of-the-art in most settings. Code is available at https://github.
com/Sherrylone/Query_Contrastive.

Existing contrastive learning in general (Chen et al., 2020a;
Caron et al., 2021) aims to learn global-discriminative features, which may lack spatial sensitivity (Yun et al., 2022),
limiting their ability on dense vision tasks like detection and
segmentation. Consequently, pixel-wise (Xie et al., 2021c;
Wang et al., 2021) and patch-wise (Yun et al., 2022) contrastive objectives and frameworks are proposed. However,
one main shortcoming of these DCL methods is establishing
the correspondence among pixels/patches usually requires
bilinear interpolation, which is complex and heavily sensitive to random crop augmentation (in an extreme case, if
two views have no intersection parts, there are no correspondence relation). To overcome this issue, patch-level masked
augmentation is proposed within the same view is proposed
in iBOT (Zhou et al., 2022). However, the variance of the
inputs (masked and unmasked views) is much lower than inputting two different views, where variance has been proven
to be the key to success in contrastive learning (Wang et al.,
2022a). To address this issue, inspired by query crop and
cross attention mechanism proposed in (Zhang et al., 2023),
we propose positional-query-based patch-level contrasting,
which only inputs relative positional embedding (without
pixel information) to student branch, and feeds the query
crop (with pixel information) to teacher branch to guide the
student. Such that, PQCL allows to perform patch-level contrasts with larger variance, and learns more spatial-sensitive
information. The main contributions are:

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has achieved promising results across variant tasks due to it’s strong transferability.
Besides, unlike supervised learning, SSL does not rely on
heavily labeled data in pre-training stage, which reduces the
cost of data annotations. Existing SSL methods mainly fall
into three categories: 1) Generative approaches (Goodfellow et al., 2014) learn to estimate the distribution of input
data. However, generation can be computationally expensive and pixel-wise information may not be necessary for
representation learning. 2) Contextual methods (Zhang
et al., 2016; Gidaris et al., 2018) design pretext tasks (denoising auto-encoders (Vincent et al., 2008), context auto

1) We propose PQCL, a positional-query-based patch-level
contrastive learning method, which inputs relative positional
embedding (without pixel information) to the student branch,
and feeds the query crop (with pixel information) to the
teacher branch to guide the student. PQCL could further
increase variance between inputs, resulting in better performance in downstream tasks. Besides, PQCL can serve as
a plug-in tool, and can be easily integrated into recent advanced transformer-based contrastive learning architecture
(e.g., DINO (Caron et al., 2021), iBOT (Zhou et al., 2022)).

1

Department of CSE, and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

