Towards Bridging the Gaps between the Right to Explanation
and the Right to be Forgotten

Satyapriya Krishna * 1 Jiaqi Ma * 1 Himabindu Lakkaraju 1

Abstract

ing scenarios including hiring and loan approvals. Consequently, a number of regulatory policies and principles (GDPR, 2016; CCPA, 2018) were introduced to ensure that algorithmic decisions and data usage practices
in real-world applications do not cause any undue harm
to individuals. The Right to Explanation and the Right
to be Forgotten are two such notable regulatory principles
which were first introduced by the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (GDPR, 2016).
While the right to explanation ensures that individuals who
are negatively impacted by adverse algorithmic outcomes
are provided with an actionable explanation, the right to be
forgotten ensures that individuals have the right to ask for
their data to be removed from all the databases and models
of an organization.

The Right to Explanation and the Right to be Forgotten are two important principles outlined to
regulate algorithmic decision making and data usage in real-world applications. While the right
to explanation allows individuals to request an
actionable explanation for an algorithmic decision, the right to be forgotten grants them the
right to ask for their data to be deleted from all
the databases and models of an organization. Intuitively, enforcing the right to be forgotten may
trigger model updates which in turn invalidate previously provided explanations, thus violating the
right to explanation. In this work, we investigate
the technical implications arising due to the interference between the two aforementioned regulatory principles, and propose the first algorithmic
framework to resolve the tension between them.
To this end, we formulate a novel optimization
problem to generate explanations that are robust to
model updates due to the removal of training data
instances by data deletion requests. We then derive an efficient approximation algorithm to handle the combinatorial complexity of this optimization problem. We theoretically demonstrate that
our method generates explanations that are provably robust to worst-case data deletion requests
with bounded costs in case of linear models and
certain classes of non-linear models. Extensive
experimentation with real-world datasets demonstrates the efficacy of the proposed framework.

To operationalize the right to explanation in practice, several strategies have been considered in recent literature. A
particular class of explanations commonly referred to as
counterfactual explanations or algorithmic recourse are often considered very promising in this regard. For instance,
when an individual is denied a loan by a predictive model
employed by a bank, a counterfactual explanation (or an
algorithmic recourse) provides them with inputs about what
aspects (features) of their profile should be changed and by
how much in order to obtain a positive outcome. Several
approaches in recent literature tackled the problem of generating such counterfactual explanations (Wachter et al., 2017;
Ustun et al., 2019; Pawelczyk et al., 2020; Karimi et al.,
2020).
Prior research has also explored various strategies to operationalize the right to be forgotten (Cao & Yang, 2015; Ginart
et al., 2019; Garg et al., 2020). Since the right to be forgotten requires organizations to delete pertinent user data from
all their databases and models, it often involves retraining
or updating their models. To this end, several methods were
proposed to efficiently update machine learning models in
the face of (training) data deletion requests without having
to retrain them from scratch (Guo et al., 2020; Bourtoule
et al., 2021; Izzo et al., 2021; Neel et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, machine learning models have been
increasingly deployed in various high-stakes decision mak*

Equal contribution 1 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS), Harvard University, Boston, USA. Correspondence
to: Himabindu Lakkaraju <hlakkaraju@hbs.edu>.

Despite the significance of the two aforementioned regulatory principles, there is very little research that explores
potential interference between them. Intuitively, enforcing

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

