LESSON: Learning to Integrate Exploration Strategies for Reinforcement
Learning via an Option Framework

Woojun Kim * 1 Jeonghye Kim * 1 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract

tasks but to have negative effects on some environments with
dense rewards. Temporally-extended exploration, which encourages the temporal persistence of exploration, tends to
outperform simple exploration strategies such as ϵ-greedy
and Gaussian noise injection, but struggles to solve hard
exploration tasks. In some cases, ϵ-greedy even performs
better than the aforementioned methods. Thus, for the best
performance, one needs to try various exploration methods and select the best one for each given task. However,
this is a time-consuming and difficult task. In addition to
the variability of good exploration strategy across tasks,
the required exploration strategy can even vary over time
during the training period within a given task. Thus, one
selected exploration strategy may not be optimal throughout
the whole training period for a given task.

In this paper, a unified framework for exploration
in reinforcement learning (RL) is proposed based
on an option-critic model. The proposed framework learns to integrate a set of diverse exploration strategies so that the agent can adaptively
select the most effective exploration strategy over
time to realize a relevant exploration-exploitation
trade-off for each given task. The effectiveness
of the proposed exploration framework is demonstrated by various experiments in the MiniGrid
and Atari environments.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we address such variability of good exploration strategy and propose a unified exploration framework
named LESSON, aiming at universality across tasks and
learning phases. In our framework, the agent learns to integrate a set of diverse exploration strategies so that it can
automatically select the most effective exploration strategy for each phase of learning for each given task from
the context of exploration-exploitation trade-off. To devise
such a unification framework for multiple exploration strategies, we adopt an option-critic model (Bacon et al., 2017).
However, simple application of an option-critic model to
exploration strategies does not yield the desired unification. We circumvent this difficulty by employing off-policy
learning and judiciously designing the overall off-policy
structure with objective functions and action value functions
suitable to our off-policy exploration-exploitation trade-off.
We show that LESSON can achieve significant performance
improvement over existing exploration methods. To the best
of our knowledge, LESSON is the first unified framework
that can learn to integrate multiple exploration strategies
for adaptive exploration strategy selection targeting relevant
exploration-exploitation trade-off over the learning phase.

RL is a powerful framework to obtain an optimal policy
that maximizes the expected return by learning from experiences. However, the convergence to an optimal policy by
model-free RL requires that all state-action pairs should be
visited infinitely often (Sutton & Barto, 2018), but this is
impractical in real-world situations with limited time and
resources. Therefore, efficient exploration has been one of
the core research topics of RL throughout its history and
many sophisticated methods have been proposed recently
for efficient exploration, e.g., temporally-extended exploration (Osband et al., 2016; Dabney et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2021), intrinsic motivation-based exploration (Bellemare
et al., 2016; Achiam & Sastry, 2017; Burda et al., 2018),
maximum entropy RL (Haarnoja et al., 2017; 2018; Han
& Sung, 2021a;b; Kim et al., 2023; Kim & Sung, 2023),
parallel search (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Jung et al., 2020).
However, there is no single exploration method found yet
that is shown to be universally effective across all tasks. For
example, intrinsic motivation-based exploration, which augments extrinsic reward with additional exploration-oriented
intrinsic reward, is shown to be effective for hard exploration
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST,
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to:
Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>.

2. Background and Related Works
We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) defined as
a tuple < S, A, P, R, γ >, where S is the state space, A is
the action space, P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the transition

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

