Revisiting Data-Free Knowledge Distillation with Poisoned Teachers

Junyuan Hong * 1 Yi Zeng * 2 Shuyang Yu * 1 Lingjuan Lyu 3 Ruoxi Jia 2 Jiayu Zhou 1

Abstract

ated learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2021).

Data-free knowledge distillation (KD) helps
transfer knowledge from a pre-trained model
(known as the teacher model) to a smaller model
(known as the student model) without access
to the original training data used for training
the teacher model. However, the security of
the synthetic or out-of-distribution (OOD) data
required in data-free KD is largely unknown
and under-explored. In this work, we make
the first effort to uncover the security risk of
data-free KD w.r.t. untrusted pre-trained models. We then propose Anti-Backdoor Data-Free
KD (ABD), the first plug-in defensive method
for data-free KD methods to mitigate the chance
of potential backdoors being transferred. We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed ABD in diminishing transferred backdoor
knowledge while maintaining compatible downstream performances as the vanilla KD. We envision this work as a milestone for alarming and
mitigating the potential backdoors in data-free
KD. Codes are released at https://github.
com/illidanlab/ABD.

To tailor the highly performant large models for the budgetconstrained devices, knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton
et al., 2015) and more recently data-free KD (Chawla et al.,
2021; Ye et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2022), has emerged as a
fundamental tool in the DL community. Data-free KD, in
particular, can transfer knowledge from a pre-trained large
model (known as the teacher model) to a smaller model
(known as the student model) without access to the original
training data of the teacher model. The non-requirement
of training data generalizes KD to broad real-world scenarios, where data access is restricted for privacy and security
concerns. For instance, many countries have strict laws
on accessing facial images (Parkhi et al., 2015), financial
records (Shah et al., 2022), and medical information (Antonelli et al., 2022). Recently, data-free KD also empowers
federated learning on heterogeneous clients (Zhu et al.,
2021; Seo et al., 2022) and on low-bandwidth communication networks (Zhu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022b;a).
Despite the benefits of data-free KD and the vital role it has
been playing, a major security concern has been overlooked
in its development and implementation: Can a student trust
the knowledge transferred from an untrusted teacher? The
untrustworthiness comes from the non-trivial chance that
pre-trained models could be retrieved from non-sanitized
or unverifiable sources, for example, third-party model
vendors (Liu et al., 2022) or malicious clients in federated
learning (Bagdasaryan et al., 2020). One significant risk is
from the backdoor pre-implanted into a teacher model (Jia
et al., 2022), which alters model behaviors drastically in
the presence of predesigned triggers but remains silent on
clean samples. As traditional attacks typically require to
poison training data (Gu et al., 2019; Souri et al., 2021;
Barni et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2022b), it remains unclear if
student models distilled from a poisoned teacher will suffer
from the same threat without using the poisoned data.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning (DL) has witnessed tremendous success in solving real-world challenges (Yu et al.,
2022; Yamada et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020) by training huge models on giant data (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022c). Yet the
performance-favored large model size has hindered their
deployment to resource-limited (Beyer et al., 2022) and
communication-limited (Tan et al., 2022) systems that
meanwhile require responsive inferences, e.g., on tiny sensors, and frequent sharing of model parameters, e.g., feder-

In this paper, we take the first leap to uncover the datafree backdoor transfer from a poisoned teacher to a student through comprehensive experiments on 10 backdoor
attacks. We evaluated one vanilla KD using clean training data (Hinton et al., 2015) and three training-datafree KD method which use synthetic data (ZSKT (Micaelli & Storkey, 2019) & CMI (Fang et al., 2021)) or

*

Equal contribution 1 Michigan State University, Michigan,
USA 2 Virginia Tech, Virginia, USA 3 Sony AI, Japan. Correspondence to: Lingjuan Lyu <lingjuan.lv@sony.com>, Jiayu Zhou
<jiayuz@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

