POUF: Prompt-Oriented Unsupervised Fine-tuning for Large Pre-trained
Models
Korawat Tanwisuth * 1 Shujian Zhang * 1 Huangjie Zheng 1 Pengcheng He 2 Mingyuan Zhou 1

Abstract

needs labeled examples, which are expensive to acquire, to
adapt the pre-trained model to a specific task.

Through prompting, large-scale pre-trained models have become more expressive and powerful, gaining significant attention in recent years.
Though these big models have zero-shot capabilities, in general, labeled data are still required to
adapt them to downstream tasks. To overcome
this critical limitation, we propose an unsupervised fine-tuning framework to directly fine-tune
the model or prompt on the unlabeled target data.
We demonstrate how to apply our method to both
language-augmented vision and masked-language
models by aligning the discrete distributions extracted from the prompts and target data. To verify
our approach’s applicability, we conduct extensive
experiments on image classification, sentiment
analysis, and natural language inference tasks.
Across 13 image-related tasks and 15 languagerelated ones, the proposed approach achieves consistent improvements over the baselines. PyTorch
code is available at https://github.com/
korawat-tanwisuth/POUF.

Without introducing task-specific parameters and objective functions for fine-tuning, recent foundation models,
such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al.,
2021), and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), leverage the power
of language supervision during pre-training to perform
zero-shot predictions through language prompting. For example, to make predictions on a new dataset, users only
need to convert class names into textual prompts such as
“a photo of a {CLASS}.”. A prediction is then made by obtaining the prompt yielding the highest similarity score with
a given image. Despite the capability to perform zero-shot
predictions, the distribution shift problem still persists.
Recent methods focus on prompt engineering to adapt these
models to downstream tasks. Prompt engineering refers
to the process of finding the most appropriate prompt to
allow a language model to solve the task at hand (Liu et al.,
2021a). Many works (Wallace et al., 2019; Shin et al., 2020)
focus on discrete prompt search (finding the prompt in the
space of the vocabularies of the language model). Since the
interpretability of the prompt is often not as important as
the performance of the model, various works (Li & Liang,
2021; Lester et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022b;a) propose
using continuous prompts that perform prompting in the
embedding space of the model. Notably, Lester et al. (2021)
and Zhou et al. (2022b) introduce continuous parameters in
the word-embedding space and optimize them by maximizing the likelihood of the model on the labeled target data.
While these approaches successfully adapt the pre-trained
models, they still require a few annotated samples.

1. Introduction
The pre-train and fine-tune paradigm has become a standard
approach to solve many machine learning applications (Qiu
et al., 2020; Du et al., 2022). In this paradigm, a model is
first pre-trained on an extensive collection of datasets. While
the model may see many examples during pre-training, the
target dataset may contain unseen examples with new variations (Wenzel et al., 2022). To address the problem of
distribution shift between the source and target domains,
practitioners fine-tune the pre-trained model on different
downstream tasks with task-specific parameters and objective functions. However, this fine-tuning stage generally

To overcome this limitation, we propose prompt-oriented
unsupervised fine-tuning (POUF), a simple yet effective
framework for fine-tuning pre-trained prompt-based large
models with zero-shot capabilities, directly on the unlabeled
target data. We formulate unsupervised fine-tuning as a process of minimizing the statistical distance between the empirical distribution of the textual prototypes and that of the
target features. Our framework relies on language prompts
to construct class prototypes or target features depending on
the model type. For language-augmented vision models, we
align the representations of class-specific language prompts,

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Texas at Austin
Microsoft Azure AI. Correspondence to: Mingyuan Zhou
<mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

