Score Approximation, Estimation and Distribution Recovery of
Diffusion Models on Low-Dimensional Data
Minshuo Chen∗ 1 Kaixuan Huang∗ 1 Tuo Zhao 2 Mengdi Wang 1

Abstract

the clean data point. Using the trained denoising network for
the backward process, one can generate diverse and high fidelity samples by first sampling from the standard Gaussian
distribution and then progressively removing noises.

Diffusion models achieve state-of-the-art performance in various generation tasks. However, their
theoretical foundations fall far behind. This paper
studies score approximation, estimation, and distribution recovery of diffusion models, when data
are supported on an unknown low-dimensional
linear subspace. Our result provides sample complexity bounds for distribution estimation using
diffusion models. We show that with a properly chosen neural network architecture, the score
function can be both accurately approximated and
efficiently estimated. Further, the generated distribution based on the estimated score function captures the data geometric structures and converges
to a close vicinity of the data distribution. The
convergence rate depends on subspace dimension,
implying that diffusion models can circumvent
the curse of data ambient dimensionality.

The distinctive denoising objective separates diffusion models from other deep generative models such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and Normalizing Flows (Rezende &
Mohamed, 2015). As shown by Vincent (2011), the training
of denoising network essentially learns the so-called “score
function”, i.e., the gradient of log probability density function. Therefore, diffusion models fall into the category of
Score-based Generative Models (SGMs).
Despite the empirical success of diffusion models, the theory
is still in its embryo. Here we are interested in answering
two fundamental questions:
Q1. Can neural networks well approximate and learn score
functions, especially when data have intrinsic geometric
structures? If so, how should one choose the neural network architectures, and what is the sample complexity of
learning?

1. Introduction

Q2. Can diffusion models estimate the data distribution
using the learned score functions? If so, how are the data
intrinsic geometric structures being captured and how do
they affect the sample complexity?

Diffusion models achieve state-of-the-art performance in
image and audio generating tasks (Song & Ermon, 2019;
Dathathri et al., 2019; Song et al., 2020b; Ho et al., 2020)
and are one of the fundamental building blocks of the more
advanced image synthesis system, e.g., DALL-E-2 (Ramesh
et al., 2022) and stable diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022).

Both Q1 and Q2 raise a practical concern about the real
world data, such as high resolution images. These data,
though having high ambient dimensions, often exhibit lowdimensional structures (Pope et al., 2021), due to symmetries, repetitive patterns, and local regularities (Tenenbaum
et al., 2000; Roweis & Saul, 2000). Deep neural networks
have been known for capturing certain low-dimensional data
geometric structures (Schmidt-Hieber, 2017; Suzuki, 2018;
Nakada & Imaizumi, 2020; Shen et al., 2022). However,
whether such abilities hold for diffusion models remains
unclear.

A standard diffusion model (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020) consists of a forward process and a backward
process: In the forward process, a data point is sequentially
corrupted by Gaussian random noises and in the limit the
data distribution is transformed into white noise; In the
backward process, a denoising neural network is trained to
sequentially remove the added noise in the data and restore
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Princeton University 2 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Tech. Correspondence to: Mengdi
Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Some recent works skipped Q1 and attempted to study Q2,
by directly assuming that the score function is accurately
learned up to a small error under certain metric, e.g., L2 /L∞
norm (De Bortoli, 2022; Lee et al., 2022a; Chen et al.,
2022b; Lee et al., 2022b). De Bortoli (2022) in particular
studied low-dimensional manifold data. These progresses

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

