Constant Matters: Fine-grained Error Bound on Differentially Private
Continual Observation
Hendrik Fichtenberger 1 Monika Henzinger 2 Jalaj Upadhyay 3

Abstract

with the goal of preparing some appropriate response. However, the privacy of the user data (such as a positive or negative test result) is equally important. In such an application,
the system is required to continually produce outputs while
preserving a robust privacy guarantee such as differential
privacy. This setting was already used as a motivating example by Dwork et al. (2010) in the first work on differential
privacy under continual release, where they write:

We study fine-grained error bounds for differentially private algorithms for counting under continual observation. Our main insight is that the
matrix mechanism when using lower-triangular
matrices, can be used in the continual observation
model. More specifically, we give an explicit factorization for the counting matrix Mcount and upper bound the error explicitly. We also give a finegrained analysis, specifying the exact constant in
the upper bound. Our analysis is based on upper and lower bounds of the completely bounded
norm (cb-norm) of Mcount . Along the way, we
improve the best-known bound of 28 years by
Mathias (SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and
Applications, 1993) on the cb-norm of Mcount for
a large range of the dimension of Mcount . Furthermore, we are the first to give concrete error bounds for various problems under continual observation such as binary counting, maintaining a histogram, releasing an approximately
cut-preserving synthetic graph, many graph-based
statistics, and substring and episode counting. Finally, we note that our result can be used to get a
fine-grained error bound for non-interactive local
learning and the first lower bounds on the additive error for (ϵ, δ)-differentially-private counting
under continual observation.

“Consider a website for H1N1 self-assessment.
Individuals can interact with the site to learn
whether symptoms they are experiencing may
be indicative of the H1N1 flu. The user fills in
some demographic data (age, zipcode, sex), and
responds to queries about his symptoms (fever
over 100.4◦ F?, sore throat?, duration of symptoms?). We would like to continually analyze
aggregate information of consenting users in order to monitor regional health conditions, with
the goal, for example, of organizing improved
flu response. Can we do this in a differentially
private fashion with reasonable accuracy (despite
the fact that the system is continually producing
outputs)?"
In the continual release (or observation) model the input
data arrives as a stream of items x1 , x2 , . . . , xT , with data
xi arriving in round i and the mechanism has to be able to
output an answer after the arrival of each item. The study
of the continual release model was initiated concurrently
by Dwork et al. (2010) and Chan et al. (2011) through the
study of the (continual) binary counting problem: Given
a stream of bits, i.e., zeros and ones, after each bit, output the sum of the bits so far, i.e., the number of ones in
the input so far. Dwork et al. (2010) showed that there exists a differentially private mechanism, called the binary
(tree) mechanism, for this problem with an additive error of
O(log5/2 T ), where the additive error is the maximum additive error over all rounds i. This was further improved to
O(log5/2 (t)) at time t ⩽ T by Chan et al. (2011) (see their
Corollary 5.3). These algorithms use Laplace noise for differential privacy. Jain et al. (2021) showed that using
p Gaussian noise instead an additive error of O(log(t) log(T ))
can be achieved. However, the constant has never been

1. Introduction
In recent times, many large-scale applications of data analysis involved repeated computations because of the incidence
of infectious diseases (Apple, 2021; CDC, 2020), typically
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Zurich, Switzerland 2 Institute
of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA), Klosterneuburg,
Austria 3 Rutgers University, USA. Correspondence to: Hendrik Fichtenberger <fichtenberger@google.com>, Monika
Henzinger <monika.henzinger@ist.ac.at>, Jalaj Upadhyay
<jalaj.upadhyay@rutgers.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

