Transcendental Idealism of Planner:
Evaluating Perception from Planning Perspective for Autonomous Driving

Wei-Xin Li 1 Xiaodong Yang 1

Abstract

nities. As a complex system, an autonomous vehicle (AV)
comprises numerous hardware components and interactive
onboard modules. One such core component is the onboard
perception module (Feng et al., 2022), which serves as the
major source of real-time characterisation of the dynamic
and stochastic environment an AV navigates through.

Evaluating the performance of perception modules in autonomous driving is one of the most
critical tasks in developing the complex intelligent system. While module-level unit test metrics
adopted from traditional computer vision tasks
are feasible to some extent, it remains far less explored to measure the impact of perceptual noise
on the driving quality of autonomous vehicles in
a consistent and holistic manner. In this work,
we propose a principled framework that provides
a coherent and systematic understanding of the
impact an error in the perception module imposes
on an autonomous agent’s planning that actually
controls the vehicle. Specifically, the planning
process is formulated as expected utility maximisation, where all input signals from upstream modules jointly provide a world state description, and
the planner strives for the optimal action by maximising the expected utility determined by both
world states and actions. We show that, under
practical conditions, the objective function can
be represented as an inner product between the
world state description and the utility function in
a Hilbert space. This geometric interpretation enables a novel way to analyse the impact of noise
in world state estimation on planning and leads
to a universal metric for evaluating perception.
The whole framework resembles the idea of transcendental idealism in the classical philosophical
literature, which gives the name to our approach.

To evaluate and improve the perception module, conventional perception tasks (such as detection and tracking) have
been well-defined and established with corresponding performance measurements in computer vision for benchmarking (Lin et al., 2014; Caesar et al., 2020). Despite their great
success in advancing perceptual information processing
modules, almost all such metrics exclusively focus on the
perception-centric performance in a deployment-agnostic
fashion, ignoring the actual impact of the result to the entire
AV system. Indeed, not all perception errors render the same
consequence on AV planning: missing an obstacle in front
of an AV moving forward is obviously far more serious than
one behind. This problem is further compounded by the
heterogeneity of perceptual errors that share few semantics
in common (‘How does an error of 5m/s in velocity compare
to that of a size 25% larger?’), where manual engineering
based on intuition is widely adopted (Caesar et al., 2020;
Deng et al., 2021). Although these issues are typically addressed through integration road tests in the real world, the
process is extremely costly and time-consuming, if not infeasible (Wachenfeld & Winner, 2016; Åsljung et al., 2017).
Consequently, tools are in great demand to effectively and
efficiently measure the performance of perception in the context of the entire AV system before test or deployment on
the road. Unfortunately, these solutions still remain largely
unexplored in the literature.
Recently, the community has begun to approach this problem with some initial efforts (Sun et al., 2020; Philion et al.,
2020; Deng et al., 2021; Ivanovic & Pavone, 2022). Despite encouraging results, these preliminary solutions only
address certain aspects of the problem, either implicitly relying on weak correlation between behaviour change and driving cost (Philion et al., 2020), inferring the holistic cost via
local properties (Ivanovic & Pavone, 2022), or at coarse levels (Sun et al., 2020). In this work, we propose a principled
and universal framework to quantify how noise in perception

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has recently emerged as a rapidly advancing realm in both academia and industry, attracting a
surge of interest from scientific and engineering commu1
QCraft, Santa Clara, CA 95054, USA. Correspondence to:
Xiaodong Yang <xiaodong@qcraft.ai>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

