A Mathematical Model for Curriculum Learning for Parities

Elisabetta Cornacchia 1 Elchanan Mossel 2

Abstract

many subsequent works, that studied curriculum learning
strategies in various application domains, e.g. computer
vision (Sarafianos et al., 2017; Dong et al., 2017), computational biology (Xiong et al., 2021), auto-ML (Graves
et al., 2017), natural language modelling (Shi et al., 2013;
Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014; Shi et al., 2015; Campos,
2021). While extensive empirical analysis of CL strategies have been carried out, there is a lack of theoretical
analysis. In this paper, we make progress in this direction.

Curriculum learning (CL) - training using samples that are generated and presented in a meaningful order - was introduced in the machine learning context around a decade ago. While CL has
been extensively used and analysed empirically,
there has been very little mathematical justification for its advantages. We introduce a CL model
for learning the class of k-parities on d bits of
a binary string with a neural network trained by
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We show that
a wise choice of training examples involving two
or more product distributions, allows to reduce
significantly the computational cost of learning
this class of functions, compared to learning under
the uniform distribution. Furthermore, we show
that for another class of functions - namely the
‘Hamming mixtures’ - CL strategies involving a
bounded number of product distributions are not
beneficial.

A stylized family of functions that is known to pose computational barriers is the class of k-parities over d bits of
a binary string. In this work we focus on this class. To
define this class: for each subset S of coordinates, the parity over S is defined as +1 if the number of negative
Q bits
in S is even, and −1 otherwise, i.e. χS (x) := i∈S xi ,
xi ∈ {±1}. The class of k-paritiescontains all χS such
that |S| = k and it has cardinality kd . Learning k-parities
requires learning the support of χS by observing samples
(x, χS (x)), x ∈ {±1}d , with the knowledge of the cardinality of S being k. This
 requires finding the right target
function among the kd functions belonging to the class.
Learning parities is always possible, and efficiently so, by
specialized methods (e.g. Gaussian elimination over the
field of two elements). Moreover, ((Abbe & Sandon, 2020))
showed that there exists a neural net that learns parities of
any degree if trained by SGD with small batch size. However, this is a rather unconventional net. In fact, under the
uniform distribution, parities are not efficiently learnable
by population queries with any polynomially small noise.
The latter can be explained as follows. Assume we sample our binary string uniformly at random, i.e. for each
i ∈ {1, ..., d}, xi ∼ Rad(1/2)1 . Then, the covariance between two parities χS , χS ′ is given by:
(
1 if S = S ′ ,
Ex∼Rad(1/2)⊗d [χS (x)χS ′ (x)] =
0 if S ̸= S ′ ,

1. Introduction
Several experimental studies have shown that humans and
animals learn considerably better if the learning materials
are presented in a curated, rather than random, order (Elio
& Anderson, 1984; Ross & Kennedy, 1990; Avrahami et al.,
1997; Shafto et al., 2014). This is broadly reflected in the
educational system of our society, where learning is guided
by an highly organized curriculum. This may involve several
learning steps: with easy concepts introduced at first and
harder concepts built from previous stages.
Inspired by this, (Bengio et al., 2009) formalized a curriculum learning (CL) paradigm in the context of machine learning and showed that for various learning tasks it provided
improvements in both the training speed and the performance obtained at convergence. This seminal paper inspired

where x ∼ Rad(1/2)⊗d denotes the product measure such
iid

that xi ∼ Rad(1/2), i ∈ {1, ..., d}. More abstractly, a
parity function of k bits is uncorrelated with any function
of k − 1 or less bits. This property makes parities hard
to learn for any progressive algorithm, such as gradient
descent. Indeed, when trying to learn the set of relevant

1

Institute of Mathematics, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Department of Mathematics and IDSS, MIT, US. Correspondence
to: Elisabetta Cornacchia <elisabetta.cornacchia@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

z ∼ Rad(p) if P(z = 1) = 1 − P(z = −1) = p.

