Matrix Estimation for Individual Fairness
Cindy Y. Zhang * 1 Sarah H. Cen * 2 Devavrat Shah 2

Abstract

Frequency

In recent years, multiple notions of algorithmic
fairness have arisen. One such notion is individual
fairness (IF), which requires that individuals who
are similar receive similar treatment. In parallel,
matrix estimation (ME) has emerged as a natural
paradigm for handling noisy data with missing
values. In this work, we connect the two concepts.
We show that pre-processing data using ME can
improve an algorithm’s IF without sacrificing performance. Specifically, we show that using a popular ME method known as singular value thresholding (SVT) to pre-process the data provides a
strong IF guarantee under appropriate conditions.
We then show that, under analogous conditions,
SVT pre-processing also yields estimates that are
consistent and approximately minimax optimal.
As such, the ME pre-processing step does not, under the stated conditions, increase the prediction
error of the base algorithm, i.e., does not impose
a fairness-performance trade-off. We verify these
results on synthetic and real data.

with SVT pre-processing
without SVT pre-processing

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1.25

D(f(a), f(b))/d(a, b)

1.50

1.75

2.00

Figure 1. We run a deep neural network on synthetic data with
and without SVT pre-processing (see Section 6, Experiment #1 for
details). We randomly select pairs a, b ∈ X then compute the ratio
D(f (a), f (b))/d(a, b), where f denotes the neural network with
(red) and without (blue) SVT pre-processing. As shown, applying
SVT pre-processing results in lower ratios, which indicates that it
improves individual fairness, as defined in (1). Indeed, we show in
Section 4 that, under appropriate conditions, SVT pre-processing
strengthens an algorithm’s IF guarantee.

for the choice of distance metrics d and D. The Lipschitz
constant L captures how strictly the IF condition is enforced.
An algorithm f that satisfies IF ensures that the outcomes
between two individuals who are close in feature space X
also receive outcomes that are close in outcome space Y,
where the level of closeness is captured by L. A smaller
Lipschitz constant therefore implies a stronger IF constraint.

1. Introduction
As data-driven decision-making becomes more ubiquitous,
there is increasing attention on the fairness of machine learning (ML) algorithms. Because what is deemed to be fair
is context-dependent (e.g., reflects a given value system),
there is no universally accepted notion of fairness.

In parallel, matrix estimation (ME) has arisen as a natural
paradigm to handle data that is noisy and/or has missing values. In this work, we propose a two-step procedure in which
the data (e.g., training data) is first pre-processed using a
ME technique known as singular value thresholding (SVT)
before being used by an inference algorithm h (e.g., a neural network). We show that, under appropriate conditions,
this pre-processing step strengthens the IF guarantee of the
inference algorithm, i.e., combining SVT with h results in a
lower Lipschitz constant in (1) than h does alone.

One notion of algorithmic fairness is individual fairness
(IF), which is distinct from notions of group fairness (e.g.,
equalized odds). Stated informally, IF says that similar
individuals should receive similar treatment. More precisely,
an algorithm f : X → Y acting on a set of individuals X is
individually fair if for any two individuals a, b ∈ X ,
D(f (a), f (b)) ≤ L · d(a, b),

1750
1500
1250
1000
750
500
250
0
0.00

(1)

Although SVT can improve an algorithm’s IF, it is not clear
whether such an improvement comes at a cost to the algorithm’s performance. In this work, we show that the same
thresholds that allow SVT to improve IF also imply that
SVT has strong performance guarantees. In other words,
under the appropriate conditions, SVT improves IF without
imposing a performance cost in settings where ME can be

*

Equal contribution 1 Princeton University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Cindy Y. Zhang
<cindyz@princeton.edu>, Sarah H. Cen <shcen@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

