Tuning Computer Vision Models With Task Rewards

André Susano Pinto * 1 Alexander Kolesnikov * 1
Yuge Shi 1 2 Lucas Beyer 1 Xiaohua Zhai 1

|

After

Input

Misalignment between model predictions and intended usage can be detrimental for the deployment of computer vision models. The issue is
exacerbated when the task involves complex structured outputs, as it becomes harder to design procedures which address this misalignment. In natural language processing, this is often addressed
using reinforcement learning techniques that align
models with a task reward. We adopt this approach and show its surprising effectiveness to
improve generic models pretrained to imitate example outputs across multiple computer vision
tasks, such as object detection, panoptic segmentation, colorization and image captioning. We believe this approach has the potential to be widely
useful for better aligning models with a diverse
range of computer vision tasks.

Before

Abstract

After

|

Before

Input

(a) Optimize mAP: 39 → 54, results in a much higher recall and
learns box prediction confidences.

The main criteria for success when dealing with complex
outputs in computer vision is not how well the model optimizes the training objective, but whether the predictions
are aligned with the task risk, i.e. the model’s performance
on the intended usage. In order to improve this alignment,
as a community we iterate on model architectures, data, optimization, sampling procedures, post-processing, etc. As
an example, in the context of object detection, researchers
use non-maximum suppression post-processing (Ren et al.,
2015; Lin et al., 2017), set-based global loss (Carion et al.,
2020) or even alter the input data (Chen et al., 2022) to obtain models with improved behavior at test time. Although
these approaches deliver significant gains, they are often
highly specialized to the task and method at hand.

|

After

Input

1. Introduction

Before

(b) Optimize PQ: 43.1 → 46.1, removes many incoherent predictions, especially for small-scale objects.

(c) Optimize “colorfulness” score: 0.41 → 1.79, improves color
diversity and saturation.
Figure 1. By tuning a strong, pretrained model with a reward that
relates to the task, we can significantly improve the model’s alignment with the intended usage.

This problem is not new. It has been extensively studied by
the natural language processing (NLP) and reinforcement
learning (RL) fields, where it is notoriously hard to formulate an optimization objective for tasks with less tangible
goals, such as translation (Kreutzer et al., 2018) or summarization (Stiennon et al., 2020). A popular approach when
dealing with this type of problem is to learn to imitate example outputs, followed by reinforcement-learning to align
the model with a reward function. Using this approach, the
NLP field is now producing exciting results with systems
that use large pretrained language models and rewards defined by human feedback to tackle tasks that were otherwise
hard to specify (Ouyang et al., 2022). Additionally, the

*

Shared first authorship and leadership. 1 Google DeepMind,
Zürich, Switzerland 2 Work done during internship while being
a PhD student at the University of Oxford. Correspondence
to: André Susano Pinto <andresp@google.com>, Alexander
Kolesnikov <akolesnikov@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

