I N G RAM: Inductive Knowledge Graph Embedding via Relation Graphs

Jaejun Lee 1 Chanyoung Chung 1 Joyce Jiyoung Whang 1

Abstract

University Contains Oxford
of Oxford
Contains

Graduated

Inductive knowledge graph completion has been
considered as the task of predicting missing
triplets between new entities that are not observed
during training. While most inductive knowledge
graph completion methods assume that all entities
can be new, they do not allow new relations to appear at inference time. This restriction prohibits
the existing methods from appropriately handling
real-world knowledge graphs where new entities
accompany new relations. In this paper, we propose an I Nductive knowledge G RAph eMbedding
method, I N G RAM, that can generate embeddings
of new relations as well as new entities at inference time. Given a knowledge graph, we define a relation graph as a weighted graph consisting of relations and the affinity weights between
them. Based on the relation graph and the original
knowledge graph, I N G RAM learns how to aggregate neighboring embeddings to generate relation
and entity embeddings using an attention mechanism. Experimental results show that I N G RAM
outperforms 14 different state-of-the-art methods
on varied inductive learning scenarios.

Barack Nationality USA
Obama

Lewis
Carroll Nationality England

Graduated

(a) Transductive Inference
Nationality

Paris

Austin

France
Nationality

BornIn
DiedIn

Victor
Hugo

for relations

BornIn

TimeZone

Bruce
Sterling
LivedIn

Central
Time Zone

(b) Semi-Inductive Inference
Triplet with Known Relation

California
HeadquarterIn

Training Graph

for relations
Roman
Polanski

Contains

Occidental
College

TimeZone

Texas

(c) Inductive Inference
for relations

Triplet with New Relation

Predicted Triplet

Figure 1: For relations, (a) is a transductive inference, (b) is
a semi-inductive inference, and (c) is an inductive inference.

triplet by identifying a plausible combination of the observed entities and relations (Wang et al., 2017).
In recent years, inductive knowledge graph completion has
been studied to predict missing triplets between new entities that are not observed at training time (Teru et al.,
2020). If an entity or a relation is observed during training,
we call them known and new otherwise; they are sometimes referred to as seen and unseen (Xu et al., 2022).
To handle new entities, some methods focus on learning
entity-independent relational patterns by logical rule mining (Sadeghian et al., 2019), while others exploit Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Yan et al., 2022). However, most
existing methods assume that only entities can be new, and
all relations should be observed during training. Thus, they
perform inductive inference for entities but transductive
inference for relations as shown in Figure 1(a).

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs represent known facts as a set of triplets,
each of which is composed of a head entity, a relation, and
a tail entity (Ji et al., 2022). Among various approaches to
predicting missing triplets in knowledge graphs, embeddingbased methods are known to be effective, where entities
and relations are converted into low-dimensional embedding vectors (Nathani et al., 2019). Classical knowledge
graph embedding models (Liu et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019)
assume a transductive learning. That is, it is assumed that all
entities and relations are observed during training. Transductive knowledge graph embedding methods predict a missing

In this paper, we consider more realistic inductive learning scenarios: (i) the relations at inference time consist of
a mixture of known and new relations (semi-inductive inference for relations), or (ii) the relations are all new due
to an entirely new set of entities (inductive inference for
relations). Figure 1(b) and Figure 1(c) show these scenarios. We propose I N G RAM, an I Nductive knowledge G RAph
eMbedding method that can generate embedding vectors for
new relations and entities only appearing at inference time.
Figure 2 shows an overview of I N G RAM when all relations
and entities are new. A key idea is to define a relation graph

1
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Joyce Jiyoung Whang <jjwhang@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

