Optimizing NOTEARS Objectives via Topological Swaps

Chang Deng 1 Kevin Bello 1 2 Bryon Aragam 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
We study a class of constrained nonconvex optimization
problems defined as follows:

Recently, an intriguing class of non-convex optimization problems has emerged in the context of
learning directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). These
problems involve minimizing a given loss or score
function, subject to a non-convex continuous constraint that penalizes the presence of cycles in a
graph. In this work, we delve into the optimization challenges associated with this class of nonconvex programs. To address these challenges,
we propose a bi-level algorithm that leverages
the non-convex constraint in a novel way. The
outer level of the algorithm optimizes over topological orders by iteratively swapping pairs of
nodes within the topological order of a DAG. A
key innovation of our approach is the development of an effective method for generating a set
of candidate swapping pairs for each iteration. At
the inner level, given a topological order, we utilize off-the-shelf solvers that can handle linear
constraints. The key advantage of our proposed
algorithm is that it is guaranteed to find a local
minimum or a KKT point under weaker conditions compared to previous work and finds solutions with lower scores. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches in terms of achieving a better
score. Additionally, our method can also be used
as a post-processing algorithm to significantly improve the score of other algorithms. Code implementing the proposed method is available at
https://github.com/duntrain/topo.

min Q(Θ) subject to h(W (Θ)) = 0,
Θ

(1)

where Θ ∈ Rl corresponds to all model parameters,
and W (Θ) ∈ Rd×d is a weighted adjacency matrix —
representing the structure of a directed graph of d nodes—
induced by Θ. Moreover, Q : Rl → R is a (possibly
non-convex) differentiable function that we will refer to
as the score or loss function; while h : Rd×d → [0, ∞)
is a nonnegative non-convex differentiable function that
penalizes cycles in the weighted adjacency matrix W (Θ),
and whose level set at zero corresponds to directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs).
The class of problems (1) arose in the paper by Zheng et al.
(2018) in the context of learning the underlying structure of
a structural equation model (SEM), typically assumed to be
a DAG. In Zheng et al. (2018), the challenges of combinatorial optimization were replaced by those of differentiable
non-convex optimization. While global optimality remains
intractable in general, the key advantage of the class of
problems (1) is that it admits the use of general purpose
non-linear optimizers. Due to the latter, several studies have
built upon the work of Zheng et al. (2018), usually by either
proposing a new characterization of h (e.g., Yu et al., 2019;
Bello et al., 2022), or using different score functions Q (e.g.,
Zheng et al., 2018; 2020; Ng et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019;
Lachapelle et al., 2020). All, however, with a clear lack of
optimality guarantees.
Based on these formulations, Wei et al. (2020) and Ng et al.
(2022) studied some of the optimization-theoretic curiosities
associated with this class of problems. Wei et al. (2020)
provides local optimality guarantees assuming linear models and a convex score Q, while Ng et al. (2022) studies
the convergence challenges of (1). The focus of our work
is studying optimality for the class of problems (1) in a
more general setting, i.e., admitting a possibly non-convex
score Q and nonlinear models. We pay close attention to the
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) optimality conditions, building upon similar results first studied in Wei et al. (2020).
The KKT conditions are known to be a necessary first-order
characterization of optimal solutions under some regularity

1
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago,
USA. 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Chang Deng <changdeng@chicagobooth.edu>, Kevin Bello <kbello@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

