From Relational Pooling to Subgraph GNNs:
A Universal Framework for More Expressive Graph Neural Networks

Cai Zhou * 1 Xiyuan Wang * 2 Muhan Zhang 2

k-1,2-WL

…

…

…

…

3-WL

3,0-WL

3,1-WL

3,2-WL

2-WL

2,0-WL

2,1-WL

2,2-WL

1-WL

1,0-WL

1,1-WL

1,2-WL

1-WL

1-OSAN

2-OSAN

k-1,l-WL

k-1,l-1-WL

…

k-1,1-WL

…

k-1,0-WL

k,l-WL

3,l-1-WL

3,l-WL

2,l-1-WL

2,l-WL

1,l-1-WL

1,l-WL

…

k-1-WL

k,l-1-WL

…

k,2-WL

…

k,1-WL

…

k,0-WL

…

Relational pooling (RP) is a framework for building more expressive and permutation-invariant
graph neural networks (GNN). However, there is
limited understanding of the exact enhancement
in the expressivity of RP and its connection with
the Weisfeiler–Lehman (WL) hierarchy. Starting
from RP, we propose to explicitly assign labels to
nodes as additional features to improve graph isomorphism distinguishing power of message passing neural networks. The method is then extended
to higher-dimensional WL, leading to a novel k, lWL algorithm, a more general framework than
k-WL. We further introduce the subgraph concept into our hierarchy and propose a localized
k, l-WL framework, incorporating a wide range
of existing work, including many subgraph GNNs.
Theoretically, we analyze the expressivity of k, lWL w.r.t. k and l and compare it with the traditional k-WL. Complexity reduction methods are
also systematically discussed to build powerful
and practical k, l-GNN instances. We theoretically and experimentally prove that our method is
universally compatible and capable of improving
the expressivity of any base GNN model. Our
k, l-GNNs achieve superior performance on many
synthetic and real-world datasets, which verifies
the effectiveness of our framework.

k-WL

…

Abstract

l-1-OSAN

l-OSAN

Figure 1. The expressivity hierarchy of k, l-WL. The blue arrows
indicate Theorem 5.5 and Theorem 5.6, showing that increasing
k and l will strictly increase expressivity. The yellow arrows
imply Theorem 5.7, which states that k + 1, l-WL is strictly more
powerful than k, l + 1-WL when k ≥ 2.

et al., 2017). Message passing neural network (MPNN) is
one of the simplest and most commonly used GNNs (Zhou
et al., 2018), whereas its expressivity in distinguishing
non-isomorphic graphs is bounded by the one-dimensional
Weisfeiler-Lehman test (1-WL) (Xu et al., 2018; Morris
et al., 2018). Therefore, designing GNNs with stronger
expressivity has aroused increasing attention.
Numerous approaches have been proposed to enhance
GNN’s expressivity. Relational Pooling (RP) (Murphy et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020) is a framework to build powerful
permutation-invariant models by symmetrizing expressive
permutation-sensitive base models. Concretely, RP first feed
adjacency matrix to a powerful permutation-sensitive model,
like Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), to achieve strong expressivity. Then the permutation invariance is guaranteed
by averaging or summing over representations under all permutations of node IDs (hence all permutations of adjacency
matrix). However, RP is impractical for most real-world
graphs due to the O(n!) complexity, where n is the number
of nodes. Based on RP, Chen et al. (2020) further introduce a
local version called Local Relational Pooling (LRP), which
performs permutation and averaging within an induced sub-

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data has recently revealed a significant
importance in many fields, including bio-informatics, combinatorial optimization and social-network analysis, among
which graph neural networks (GNNs) achieve great successes (Bronstein et al., 2016; Klicpera et al., 2020; Dai
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University 2 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

