Rigid Body Flows for Sampling Molecular Crystal Structures

Jonas Köhler * 1 2 Michele Invernizzi * 2 Pim de Haan 3 4 Frank Noé 1 2 5 6
stochastic sign

marginalize
inv.

Abstract
Normalizing flows (NF) are a class of powerful
generative models that have gained popularity in
recent years due to their ability to model complex distributions with high flexibility and expressiveness. In this work, we introduce a new type
of normalizing flow that is tailored for modeling
positions and orientations of multiple objects in
three-dimensional space, such as molecules in a
crystal. Our approach is based on two key ideas:
first, we define smooth and expressive flows on
the group of unit quaternions, which allows us to
capture the continuous rotational motion of rigid
bodies; second, we use the double cover property
of unit quaternions to define a proper density on
the rotation group. This ensures that our model
can be trained using standard likelihood-based
methods or variational inference with respect to
a thermodynamic target density. We evaluate the
method by training Boltzmann generators for two
molecular examples, namely the multi-modal density of a tetrahedral system in an external field and
the ice XI phase in the TIP4P water model. Our
flows can be combined with flows operating on
the internal degrees of freedom of molecules, and
constitute an important step towards the modeling
of distributions of many interacting molecules.

equi.

Figure 1. Flow on SO(3) via the S 3 double cover: we first transform a system of Cartesian coordinates x via T into the triple
(x0 , R, Ψ), containing the global translation x0 , the global rotation R and its fixed inner degrees of freedom Ψ (e.g., bond lengths
and inner angle of water molecules). While keeping Ψ fixed we
transform the poses as follows: first map R onto one of the two
representing quaternions q or −q stochastically (here we picked
q as indicated in red). Then transform (x0 , q) into (x′0 , q ′ ) using
a sign-flip equivariant coupling flow F made of position updates
ξ and rotation updates Φ. As the double cover projection g maps
both q ′ and −q ′ to the same rotation element R′ , transforming
back corresponds to a simple marginalization over both stochastic
paths. We finally obtain x′ using the inverse rigid body transform
T −1 .

Boyda et al., 2021; Albergo et al., 2019), approximating
the equilibrium density of molecular systems (Noé et al.,
2019; Köhler et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021),
and estimating free energy differences (Wirnsberger et al.,
2020; Ding & Zhang, 2021). This success is motivated by
the fact that, contrary to other generative models, NF are
built to provide an efficient reweighting scheme that allows
for exact sampling from a given energy-based probability
distribution. In this work we present a novel NF architecture that is particularly suited to sample molecular crystals,
i.e. periodic systems where multiple copies of the same
molecule are arranged in a lattice structure. Molecular crystals are of key importance for several applications, ranging
from the pharmaceutical industry to solar energy production
(Bernstein, 2020). For this reason, there is great interest
in developing efficient and effective methods to predict the
physical properties of molecular crystals through computer
simulations rather than expensive laboratory experiments.

1. Introduction
Normalizing flows (NF) (Tabak et al., 2010; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2021) are popular deep
learning generative models, that have been applied to the
physical sciences in a variety of ways, such as for sampling
lattice models (Nicoli et al., 2020; 2021; Li & Wang, 2018;
*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research AI4Science 2 Freie
Universität Berlin, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science 3 Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative from Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 4 University of Amsterdam 5 Freie Universität Berlin,
Department of Physics 6 Rice University, Department of Chemistry.
Correspondence to: Frank, Noé <franknoe@microsoft.com>.

Normalizing flows for equilibrium sampling and freeenergy difference estimation In this work, we focus on
methods that have a primary application in the field of Boltzmann Generators (BG) (Noé et al., 2019). BGs are gener-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

