Causal Bounds in Quasi-Markovian Graphs

Madhumitha Shridharan 1 Garud Iyengar 1

Abstract

effects in small graphs with special properties. To bound the
causal effect of a treatment on a target variable, Richardson
et al. (2014) invoke additional (untestable) assumptions and
assess how inference about the treatment effect changes as
these assumptions are modified. In small graphs where any
two observed variables are neither adjacent in the graph,
nor share a latent parent, Evans (2012) present a graphical
approach to bound causal effects. Geiger & Meek (2013)
leverage Tarski’s procedure for quantifier elimination in the
first order theory of real numbers to bound causal effects
in a model under specific parametric assumptions. Kilbertus et al. (2020) and Zhang & Bareinboim (2021) develop
procedures for computing causal bounds in extensions of
the instrumental variable model to the continuous setting.
Finkelstein & Shpitser (2020) develop a method for obtaining bounds on causal queries using probability rules and the
conditions on counterfactuals implied by causal graphs.

We consider the problem of computing bounds for
causal queries on quasi-Markovian graphs with
unobserved confounders and discrete valued observed variables, where identifiability does not
hold. Existing non-parametric approaches for
computing such bounds use multilinear programming (MP) formulations that are often intractable
for existing solvers when the degree of the polynomial objective is greater than two. Hence, one often has to resort to either fast approximate heuristics which are not guaranteed to contain the true
query value, or more accurate but computationally
intensive procedures. We show how to construct
an equivalent MP with a polynomial objective of
lower degree. In particular, the degree of the objective in the new MP is equal to only the number
of C-components that are intervened upon, instead
of the total number of C-components. As a result,
we can compute exact bounds for significantly
larger causal inference problems as compared to
what is possible using existing techniques. We
also propose a very efficient Frank-Wolfe heuristic that produces very high quality bounds, and
scales to large multilinear problems of higher degree.

While fewer in number, there have also been attempts to
bound causal effects in large general graphs. Poderini et al.
(2020) propose a technique, originally developed in the field
of quantum foundations, to compute bounds in large graphs
with multiple instruments and observed variables. Finkelstein et al. (2021) propose a method for partial identification
in a class of measurement error models. Sachs et al. (2020;
2022) identify a large problem class for which linear programming (LP) can be used to compute causal bounds, and
develop an algorithm for formulating the objective function
and the constraints of the corresponding LP. However, such
LP formulations quickly become intractable for existing
solvers because the size of the LP grows exponentially in
the number of edges in the underlying causal graph. Shridharan & Iyengar (2022) extend this work by showing that
this LP can be significantly pruned by carefully considering
the structure of the causal query, and show how to compute
bounds for significantly larger causal inference problems
as compared to what is possible using existing techniques.
Zhang et al. (2022) and Duarte et al. (2021) propose general
polynomial programming based approaches to solve general
causal inference problems, but their procedures are either
computationally intensive, or are complex to implement.

1. Introduction
Many practical applications of causal inference involve variables that are important for the identification of causal effects, but are either unknown or unmeasured, i.e. unobserved confounders (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Pearl, 2009).
It is impossible to accurately identify causal effects in the
presence of unobserved confounders. However, it is possible
to obtain bounds on such effects.
There have been multiple such attempts to bound causal
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Madhumitha Shridharan <ms6143@columbia.edu>.

In this work, we extend the class of large graphs for which
causal effects can be efficiently bounded. In particular, we
focus on a class of causal graphs known as quasi-markovian
causal graphs, where every variable has only a single unob-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

