Sketched Ridgeless Linear Regression: The Role of Downsampling

Xin Chen * 1 Yicheng Zeng * 2 Siyue Yang 3 Qiang Sun 3

Abstract

as many traditional statistical methods and learning algorithms struggle to scale effectively.

Overparametrization often helps improve the generalization performance. This paper presents a
dual view of overparametrization suggesting that
downsampling may also help generalize. Focusing on the proportional regime m ≍ n ≍ p, where
m represents the sketching size, n is the sample
size, and p is the feature dimensionality, we investigate two out-of-sample prediction risks of
the sketched ridgeless least square estimator. Our
findings challenge conventional beliefs by showing that downsampling does not always harm generalization but can actually improve it in certain
cases. We identify the optimal sketching size
that minimizes out-of-sample prediction risks and
demonstrate that the optimally sketched estimator exhibits stabler risk curves, eliminating the
peaks of those for the full-sample estimator. To
facilitate practical implementation, we propose
an empirical procedure to determine the optimal
sketching size. Finally, we extend our analysis
to cover central limit theorems and misspecified
models. Numerical studies strongly support our
theory.

In recent years, sketch-and-solve methods, also referred
to as sketching algorithms, have emerged as a powerful
solution for approximate computations over large datasets
(Pilanci, 2016; Mahoney, 2011). Sketching algorithms first
employ random sketching/projection or random sampling
techniques to construct a small “sketch” of the full dataset,
and then use this sketch as a surrogate to perform analyses of
interest that would otherwise be computationally impractical
on the full dataset.
This paper focuses on the linear regression problem. We
assume that we have collected a set of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data points following the model:
yi = β ⊤ xi + εi , i = 1, · · · , n,

(1)

where yi ∈ R represents the label of the i-th observation,
β ∈ Rp is the unknown random regression coefficient vector, xi ∈ Rp ∼ x ∼ Px is the p-dimensional feature vector
of the i-th observation, with Px denoting a probability distribution on Rp having mean E(x) = 0 and covariance
cov(x) = Σ. The i-th random noise term εi ∼ ε ∼ Pε is
independent of xi , with Pε being a probability distribution
on R having mean E(ε) = 0 and variance var(ε) = σ 2 . In
matrix form, the model can be expressed as:

1. Introduction

Y = Xβ + ε,

According to international data corporation, worldwide data
will grow to 175 zettabytes by 2025, with as much of the
data residing in the cloud as in data centers. These massive
datasets hold tremendous potential to revolutionize operations and analytics across various domains. However, their
sheer size presents unprecedented computational challenges,

where X = (x1 , · · · , xn )⊤ ∈ Rn×p , Y = (y1 , · · · , yn )⊤ ∈
Rn , and ε = (ε1 , · · · , εn )⊤ ∈ Rn .
We consider the following ridgeless least square estimator
βb := (X T X)+ X T Y = lim (X T X + nλIp )−1 X T Y,
λ→0+

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, 98 Charlton
St, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of
Big Data, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2001 Longxiang Boulevard, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. 3 Department of
Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, 700 University Ave,
Toronto, ON M5G 1X6, Canada. Correspondence to: Qiang Sun
<qiang.sun@utoronto.ca>.

where (·)+ denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse and
Ip ∈ Rp×p is the identity matrix. In the case where
rank(X) = p, the estimator βb reduces to the ordinary least
square (OLS) estimator, which is the de-facto standard for
linear regression due to its optimality properties. However,
computing the OLS estimator, typically done via QR decomposition (Golub & Van Loan, 2013), has a computational
complexity of O(np2 ). This renders the computation of the
full-sample OLS estimator infeasible when the sample size

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

