Who Needs to Know? Minimal Knowledge for Optimal Coordination

Niklas Lauffer 1 Ameesh Shah 1 Micah Carroll 1 Michael Dennis 1 Stuart Russell 1

Abstract

relevant information from the strategically irrelevant information. If much of the information is irrelevant, it’s easy to
imagine how this could lead to significant increases in efficiency for finding optimal policies. For example, this could
allow a focused effort on few-shot or zero-shot adaptation to
co-players (Zand et al., 2022; Albrecht & Stone, 2019; Stone
et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2021) or more efficient DecPOMDP
planning algorithms (Szer & Charpillet, 2006; Seuken &
Zilberstein, 2007). In order to leverage these benefits, we
build the theory, data structures, and algorithms required to
distinguish between relevant and irrelevant information.

To optimally coordinate with others in cooperative games, it is often crucial to have information
about one’s collaborators: successful driving requires understanding which side of the road to
drive on. However, not every feature of collaborators is strategically relevant: the fine-grained
acceleration of drivers may be ignored while maintaining optimal coordination. We show that there
is a well-defined dichotomy between strategically
relevant and irrelevant information. Moreover, we
show that, in dynamic games, this dichotomy has
a compact representation that can be efficiently
computed via a Bellman backup operator. We
apply this algorithm to analyze the strategically
relevant information for tasks in both a standard
and a partially observable version of the Overcooked environment. Theoretical and empirical
results show that our algorithms are significantly
more efficient than baselines. Videos are available
at https://minknowledge.github.io.

We formalize the idea of the strategically relevant information via the idea of strategic ambiguity, described in Section
4. We show that this leads to a uniquely well-defined dichotomy between the strategically relevant and irrelevant
information, captured by the strategic equivalence relation
(SER) which defines two co-player policies as being strategically equivalent if and only if they have the same set of
best-response policies.
We show that this strategic equivalence relation can be efficiently computed and stored in Section 5. In fact, we find
that our proposed algorithm for computing these strategic
equivalence relations has better computational complexity
than the state of the art for finding best-response policies in
DecPOMDPs.

1. Introduction
When designing a policy for a cooperative multi-agent setting, it is often critical to have some idea of how one’s
co-players will behave. A policy for a self driving car must
take into account various driving norms such as which side
of the street other cars will drive on, and how to interpret
stop light signals.

We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows:
1. We formalize the dichotomy between strategically relevant and irrelevant information by introducing the
concept of a strategic equivalence relation (SER).

While there are many relevant features of co-player behavior
that a policy designer must keep in mind, there are often
many more irrelevant features that can be safely ignored. It
is unnecessary for a self driving car to know the final destination of every other car, the current positions or trajectories
of far away cars, or their idiosyncratic driving behaviors.

2. We demonstrate and prove that SERs have a recursive
substructure in dynamic games and show how they can
be stored compactly in the form of a directed acyclic
graph.
3. We provide novel algorithms for computing SERs in
both fully-observed and partially-observed commonpayoff stochastic games. These algorithms also
have notable applications in more efficiently solving
DecPOMDPs.

In such settings, it can be useful to separate the strategically
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Niklas Lauffer <nlauffer@berkeley.edu>.

4. We demonstrate what SERs look like in various problems and use them to analyze the levels of coordination
required in Overcooked, a popular benchmark for testing coordination in the AI literature.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

