Single Point-Based Distributed Zeroth-Order Optimization with a Non-Convex
Stochastic Objective Function

Elissa Mhanna * 1 Mohamad Assaad * 1

Abstract

to achieve consensus while the local objective functions are
kept private. Further, these functions are assumed to be nonconvex, and to solve this problem, agent i can only query the
function values of fi at exactly one point at a time. These
function queries are assumed to be noisy f˜i = fi +ζi with ζi
some additive noise. We note that ζi is added to differentiate
between the stochastic nature of fi and the noise imposed
on its querying. While the expectation of the local function
might not change with this addition, its variance increases,
presenting an added difficulty to the analysis

Zero-order (ZO) optimization is a powerful tool
for dealing with realistic constraints. On the
other hand, the gradient-tracking (GT) technique
proved to be an efficient method for distributed
optimization aiming to achieve consensus. However, it is a first-order (FO) method that requires
knowledge of the gradient, which is not always
possible in practice. In this work, we introduce a
zero-order distributed optimization method based
on a one-point estimate of the gradient tracking
technique. We prove that this new technique converges with a single noisy function query at a
time in the non-convex setting. We then establish
1
a convergence rate of O( √
) after a number of
3
K

Distributed optimization appears across many applications,
in distributed data processing and control in sensor networks,
parallel computing and data storing, and big-data analytics.
It has many interests in machine learning applications such
as data rights, privacy, and scalability (Lian et al., 2017;
Nedic, 2020). One important technique in this domain is
the gradient tracking method, which is agnostic to the data
distribution (Koloskova et al., 2022), meaning there’s no
need for data to be i.i.d across all the devices. In addition,
this technique was shown to have interesting rates. For
example, it converges linearly to the optimal solution with
constant step size (Qu & Li, 2018; Nedić et al., 2017; Pu,
2020).

iterations K, which competes with that of O( 4√1K )
of its centralized counterparts. Finally, a numerical example validates our theoretical results.

1. Introduction
We consider a network encompassing a set of agents N =
{1, 2, . . . , n}, where the communication is limited to network neighbors. Each agent i maintains a local objective
function fi : Rd → R and the aim is for the agents to collaboratively find the decision variable x ∈ Rd that minimizes
the stochastic global objective function:

However, all these references assume the availability of firstorder information, which is not always the case, especially
when gradient computation can be impractical like when the
system is constantly changing, costly when the system is
too complex or too huge in dimension, or even impossible
such as in black-box optimization. For example, when
training a deep neural network, the loss output is an intricate
function of the weights, which complicates the derivation
of the gradient (Lian et al., 2016). In bandit settings, an
adversary reveals a cost value at every period, and the player
must compete with this adversary without any knowledge
of the underlying cost function (Flaxman et al., 2004). In
centralized and distributed settings, much work has been
done on zero-order (ZO) optimization. ZO methods include
substituting the gradient by one-point estimates with one
functional value at a time (Li & Assaad, 2021; Flaxman
et al., 2004; Roy et al., 2022; Mhanna & Assaad, 2022),

n

1X
Fi (x)
n i=1

(1)

Fi (x) = Eξ∼Di fi (x, ξ),

(2)

min F(x) =

x∈Rd

with
where ξ denotes an i.i.d. ergodic stochastic process that
follows a local distribution Di . Hence, the goal is for agents
1

Université Paris-Saclay,
CNRS, CentraleSupélec,
Laboratoire des signaux et systèmes, 91190, Gif-surYvette, France.
Correspondence to:
Elissa Mhanna
<elissa.mhanna@centralesupelec.fr>,
Mohamad Assaad
<mohamad.assaad@centralesupelec.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

