Reprogramming Pretrained Language Models for Antibody Sequence Infilling

Igor Melnyk 1 Vijil Chenthamarakshan 1 Pin-Yu Chen 1 Payel Das 1 Amit Dhurandhar 1 Inkit Padhi 1
Devleena Das 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Antibodies comprise the most versatile class of
binding molecules, with numerous applications in
biomedicine. Computational design of antibodies
involves generating novel and diverse sequences,
while maintaining structural consistency. Unique
to antibodies, designing the complementaritydetermining region (CDR), which determines
the antigen binding affinity and specificity, creates its own unique challenges. Recent deep
learning models have shown impressive results,
however the limited number of known antibody
sequence/structure pairs frequently leads to degraded performance, particularly lacking diversity in the generated sequences. In our work we
address this challenge by leveraging Model Reprogramming (MR), which repurposes pretrained
models on a source language to adapt to the tasks
that are in a different language and have scarce
data – where it may be difficult to train a highperforming model from scratch or effectively finetune an existing pre-trained model on the specific task. Specifically, we introduce ReprogBert
in which a pretrained English language model is
repurposed for protein sequence infilling – thus
considers cross-language adaptation using less
data. Results on antibody design benchmarks
show that our model on low-resourced antibody
sequence dataset provides highly diverse CDR
sequences, up to more than a two-fold increase
of diversity over the baselines, without losing
structural integrity and naturalness. The generated sequences also demonstrate enhanced antigen binding specificity and virus neutralization
ability. Code is available at https://github.
com/IBM/ReprogBERT

Antibodies have emerged as essential therapeutic agents in
the treatment of cancer and various other autoimmune, infectious and metabolic diseases. Since 1985, approximately
100 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have been designated
as drugs by FDA (Jin et al., 2022). Compared to small
molecule drugs, the advantage of using antibody proteins
as therapeutics is their high specificity resulting in less adverse effects. A key challenge in antibody design is tailoring
their binding specificity, which is mainly influenced by the
complementarity determining region (CDR). CDR plays a
crucial role in antigen recognition and binding processes.
It is composed of six hypervariable loops, three formed by
each of heavy (H) and light (L) chains. Together, the CDRs
shape the antigen binding site of the antibody.
Five of the six loops usually adopt well-characterized canonical conformations. In contrast, the CDR-H3 loop shows
substantial variability in sequence and structure, and hence
cannot be described by a canonical structure model. When
compared to other protein loop structures, the CDR-H3
stands out with its significantly higher structural diversity.
There is a high demand and need for efficient in-silico methods for designing CDRs with improved specificity and other
desired properties, to reduce the cost and time associate with
wet lab production and testing of antibody candidates. Generative machine learning has emerged as an attractive and
viable path for this purpose. For example, for a more general
task of protein design, creating new protein sequences that
fold to a desired 3D structure and/or exhibit a specific function, many deep generative models have been adapted and
expanded (Ingraham et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2021; Karimi
et al., 2020; Syrlybaeva & Strauch, 2022; Lee & Kim, 2022;
Anand & Achim, 2022). However, compared to other protein design challenges, CDR design (Eguchi et al., 2020;
Shin et al., 2021; Adolf-Bryfogle et al., 2018; Fu & Sun,
2022; Kong et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022), especially CDRH3 design, comes with additional complexities, such as
out-of-distribution generation to accommodate functional
novelty. Additionally, in antibody design, sequence similarity may not reflect binding behavior. For example, in HER2
binding antibodies, two very similar sequences (Levenshtein
distance < 2) had opposing binding behavior (Mason et al.,

1
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA. 2 Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. This work was
done during Devleena Das’s internship at IBM Research. Correspondence to: Igor Melnyk <igor.melnyk@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

