Near-optimal Conservative Exploration in Reinforcement Learning under
Episode-wise Constraints

Donghao Li * 1 Ruiquan Huang * 1 Cong Shen 2 Jing Yang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

One of the major obstacles that prevent state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms from being deployed
in real-world systems is the lack of performance guarantee
throughout the learning process. In particular, for many
practical systems, a reasonable albeit not necessarily optimal baseline policy is often in place, and RL is later brought
in as a (supposedly) superior solution to replace the baseline. System designers want the potentially better RL policy,
but are also wary of the possible performance degradation
incurred by exploration during the learning process. This
dilemma exists in many domains, including digital marketing, robotics, autonomous driving, healthcare, and networking; see Garcıa & Fernández (2015); Wu et al. (2016) for a
detailed discussion of practical examples. It is desirable to
have the RL algorithm perform nearly as well (or better) as
the baseline policy at all times.

This paper investigates conservative exploration
in reinforcement learning where the performance
of the learning agent is guaranteed to be above
a certain threshold throughout the learning process. It focuses on the tabular episodic Markov
Decision Process (MDP) setting that has finite
states and actions. With the knowledge of an existing safe baseline policy, an algorithm termed as
StepMix is proposed to balance the exploitation
and exploration while ensuring that the conservative constraint is never violated in each episode
with high probability. StepMix features a unique
design of a mixture policy that adaptively and
smoothly interpolates between the baseline policy
and the optimistic policy. Theoretical analysis
shows that StepMix achieves near-optimal regret
order as in the constraint-free setting, indicating
that obeying the stringent episode-wise conservative constraint does not compromise the learning performance. Besides, a randomization-based
EpsMix algorithm is also proposed and shown to
achieve the same performance as StepMix. The algorithm design and theoretical analysis are further
extended to the setting where the baseline policy
is not given a priori but must be learned from an
offline dataset, and it is proved that similar conservative guarantee and regret can be achieved if
the offline dataset is sufficiently large. Experiment results corroborate the theoretical analysis
and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
conservative exploration strategies.

To address this challenge, conservative exploration has received increased interest in RL research over the past few
years (Garcelon et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2022; Efroni et al.,
2020; Zheng & Ratliff, 2020; Xu et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2021). In the online learning setting, exploration of the
unknown environment is necessary for RL to learn about
the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP). However,
“free” exploration provides no guarantee on the RL performance, particularly in the early phases where the knowledge
of the environment is minimal and the algorithm tends to
explore almost randomly. To solve this problem, the vast
majority of the conservative exploration literature relies on
a key idea of invoking the baseline policy early on to build a
conservative budget, which can be spent in later episodes to
take explorative actions. This intuition, however, critically
depends on the definition of the conservative constraint being the cumulative expected reward over a horizon falling
below a certain threshold. If a more stringent constraint
defined on a per episode basis is adopted, this idea becomes
infeasible and it is unclear how conservative exploration can
be achieved.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of EECS, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA, USA 2 ECE Department, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. Correspondence to:
Jing Yang <yangjing@psu.edu>.

In this paper, we focus on conservative exploration in an
episodic MDP with finite states and actions. Unlike most
of the prior works, we enforce a more strict conservative
constraint that the expected reward of the RL policy cannot

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

