Tight Certification of Adversarially Trained Neural Networks
via Nonconvex Low-Rank Semidefinite Relaxations
Hong-Ming Chiu 1 Richard Y. Zhang 1

Abstract
Adversarial training is well-known to produce
high-quality neural network models that are empirically robust against adversarial perturbations.
Nevertheless, once a model has been adversarially trained, one often desires a certification that
the model is truly robust against all future attacks. Unfortunately, when faced with adversarially trained models, all existing approaches have
significant trouble making certifications that are
strong enough to be practically useful. Linear
programming (LP) techniques in particular face
a “convex relaxation barrier” that prevent them
from making high-quality certifications, even after refinement with mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) and branch-and-bound (BnB)
techniques. In this paper, we propose a nonconvex certification technique, based on a lowrank restriction of a semidefinite programming
(SDP) relaxation. The nonconvex relaxation
makes strong certifications comparable to much
more expensive SDP methods, while optimizing
over dramatically fewer variables comparable to
much weaker LP methods. Despite nonconvexity, we show how off-the-shelf local optimization
algorithms can be used to achieve and to certify
global optimality in polynomial time. Our experiments find that the nonconvex relaxation almost
completely closes the gap towards exact certification of adversarially trained models.

Figure 1: Certified adversarial training vs. ℓ2 attacks. While
PGD attacks indicate an empirical upper-bound of 77.4% (red),
state-of-the-art LP-based verifiers face a “convex relaxation barrier” (pink shading) that prevent them from certifying lowerbounds better than 20.9% (blue). Even an award-winning state-ofthe-art branch-and-bound verifier like α, β-CROWN cannot significantly improve past 67.2% in reasonable time. Our nonconvex relaxation overcomes the convex relaxation barrier, certifying
a lower-bound of 76.2% that almost fully closes the empiricalcertified gap. (See Section 5 for details.)

Madry et al., 2018; Shafahi et al., 2019; Wong et al., 2019),
is to attack a pre-trained model, and then to re-train the
model with the training set augmented or replaced by the
attack. Despite its simplicity, adversarial training works remarkably well in practice. For example, the robust models adversarially trained by Madry et al. (2018) back in
2017 remain essentially unbroken in 2022, after more than
four years of white-box penetration testing by researchers
world-wide. Later, Shafahi et al. (2019); Wong et al. (2019)
have extended the idea to train robust ImageNet classifiers,
that achieve a similar level of accuracy, and within a comparable amount of training time, to nonrobust classifiers.

1. Introduction
To make neural network models robust to adversarial perturbation attacks, one popular strategy, known as adversarial training (Kurakin et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al., 2015;

Nevertheless, adversarial training is an empirical strategy
that does not promise a truly robust model. Given a model
that has been made empirically robust through adversarial
training, one often desires a formal mathematical proof or
certification that the model is truly robust against all future attacks. Unfortunately, when faced with an adversarially trained model, all existing approaches have significant
trouble making certifications that are strong enough to be
practically useful. A model that achieves 77.4% test accuracy on adversarial inputs might only have a certified robust

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. Correspondence to:
Hong-Ming Chiu <hmchiu2@illinois.edu>, Richard Y. Zhang
<ryz@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

