Learning Belief Representations for Partially Observable Deep RL

Andrew Wang * 1 2 Andrew C. Li * 1 2 Toryn Q. Klassen 1 2 3 Rodrigo Toro Icarte 4 5 Sheila A. McIlraith 1 2 3

Abstract

environment. If the RL agent will subsequently be operating in a partially observable environment, we would like to
ensure that the agent’s learned policy is robust to any lack
of observability it will encounter. Sometimes this partial
observability is dynamic and unpredictable – perhaps the
result of visual occlusion. In a subset of such cases, partial
observability can be mitigated or rectified by the agent taking some action such as changing its viewpoint or opening a
box to see what’s inside. In other cases, aspects of the state
that are unobservable at deployment time are known or can
be inferred because of known sensor placement, such as the
fixed sensors in a car engine or other electro-mechanical device. Our claim is that having full observability at learning
time, combined with knowing what won’t be observable at
deployment time, enables an RL agent to learn a policy that
is more robust to its partial observability. How we build RL
systems to exploit this knowledge is the topic of this paper.

Many important real-world Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems involve partial observability
and require policies with memory. Unfortunately,
standard deep RL algorithms for partially observable settings typically condition on the full history of interactions and are notoriously difficult
to train. We propose a novel deep, partially observable RL algorithm based on modelling belief
states — a technique typically used when solving tabular POMDPs, but that has traditionally
been difficult to apply to more complex environments. Our approach simplifies policy learning
by leveraging state information at training time,
that may not be available at deployment time. We
do so in two ways: first, we decouple belief state
modelling (via unsupervised learning) from policy
optimization (via RL); and second, we propose a
representation learning approach to capture a compact set of reward-relevant features of the state.
Experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on partially observable domains requiring
information seeking and long-term memory.

Motivated by this setting, we propose a novel approach for
partially observable reinforcement learning (PO-RL) that exploits a fully observable state at training time. Our approach
is inspired by traditional belief state methods for solving
POMDPs (Monahan, 1982; Kaelbling et al., 1998; Silver &
Veness, 2010), which naturally incorporate inference and
memory. While these methods are limited to POMDPs
with small, tractable state spaces and known models, our
approach targets domains with complex, high-dimensional
states and observations and unknown models. Furthermore,
while many applied problems and their solutions involve
estimating pre-determined state variables (e.g. localization
(Lauri & Ritala, 2016), decentralized robotic coordination
(Spaan et al., 2010); see Lauri et al. (2022) for more), our
approach is general, assuming no such knowledge.

1. Introduction
The world is inherently partially observable. Agents (humans or otherwise) operating in real-world environments
rarely have full information about environment state. In
the context of Reinforcement Learning (RL), partial observability is identified as one of nine important challenges to
the deployment of RL in real-world settings (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2021). Nevertheless, in many real-world settings we
are able to train our RL agents under full or near-full observability using a simulator or other generative model of the

Our end-to-end approach achieves this via three key steps:
1. Representation Learning: we extract critical features
of the state that are task-relevant and unobservable to
the agent at deployment time to produce a compact
state encoding;

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Schwartz Reisman Institute
for Technology and Society 4 Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile 5 Centro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial. Correspondence
to: Andrew Wang <andrewwang@cs.toronto.edu>, Andrew Li
<andrewli@cs.toronto.edu>.

2. Belief Modelling: we model the complex belief distribution over these state encodings given histories using
variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014);

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

3. Policy Learning: we incorporate the learned belief to
serve as a memory for an RL policy.
1

