Is Consensus Acceleration Possible in Decentralized Optimization over Slowly
Time-Varying Networks?

Dmitry Metelev 1 Alexander Rogozin 1 2 Dmitry Kovalev 3 Alexander Gasnikov 4 5 1

Abstract

over time). Each node is an independent computational
agent that can perform local computations based only on
the information in its local memory. At each communication step, nodes can only exchange information with their
neighbours.

We consider decentralized optimization problems where one aims to minimize a sum of
strongly convex smooth objective functions distributed between nodes in the network. The links
in the network can change from time to time. For
the setting when the amount of changes is arbitrary, lower complexity bounds and corresponding optimal algorithms are known, and the consensus acceleration is not possible. However,
in practice the magnitude of network changes
may be limited. We derive lower communication complexity bounds for several regimes of velocity of networks changes. Moreover, we show
how to obtain accelerated communication rates
for a certain class of time-varying graphs using a
specific consensus algorithm.

Sum-type problems of type (1) have applications in practical scenarios where centralized coordination is not possible. Communication constraints may appear due to large
amounts of data or due to privacy constraints (Konečný
et al., 2016) and are determined by the structure of the network. Decentralized optimization is widely used in distributed machine learning (Rabbat & Nowak, 2004; Forero
et al., 2010; Nedić, 2020; Gorbunov et al., 2022), distributed control (Ram et al., 2009; Gan et al., 2012) and
distributed sensing (Bazerque & Giannakis, 2009).
1.1. Time-Varying Networks
We study the setting when the network is time-varying.
That means that the links between the nodes may appear
and disappear from time to time. In practice, the changes
in the links may occur due to loss of wireless connection
between the agents or other technical malfunctions. Note
that while the set of edges may change, the set of vertices
stays the same.

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider a decentralized optimization
problem
n
1X
fi (x),
(1)
minm f (x) =
x∈R
n i=1
where each function fi is convex, has a Lipschitz gradient
and is stored at a separate computational node. Nodes are
connected by a communication network (that may change

1.2. Related work
In this paper, we assume the objective f (x) in (1) to be
L-smooth and µ-strongly convex. Complexity bounds for
decentralized optimization include two quantities: objective condition number κg = L/µ and network condition
number χ. In case of the time-varying network, χ denotes
the worst-case condition number over time steps.

The work was supported by a grant for research centers
in the field of artificial intelligence, provided by the Analytical Center for the Government of the Russian Federation in
accordance with the subsidy agreement (agreement identifier
000000D730321P5Q0002) and the agreement with the Ivannikov
Institute for System Programming of the Russian Academy of Sciences dated November 2, 2021 No. 70-2021-00142. 1 Moscow
Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 HSE
University, Moscow, Russia 3 Université Catholique de Louvain,
Ottignies-Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium 4 ISP RAS Research Center
for Trusted Artificial Intelligence 5 Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Alexander
Rogozin <aleksandr.rogozin@phystech.edu>.

Lower complexity bounds for optimization over static
graphs were proposed in (Scaman et al., 2017).
The lower communication complexity bound is
1/2
Ω(κg χ1/2 log(1/ε)).
The corresponding optimal
algorithms are MSDA (Scaman et al., 2017) (using dual
oracle) and OPAPC (Kovalev et al., 2020) (using primal
oracle).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

For time-varying networks, the lower communication

1

