PAC Prediction Sets for Large Language Models of Code

Adam Khakhar 1 Stephen Mell 1 Osbert Bastani 1

Abstract

2021). These techniques are critical for applications of machine learning, where machine learning models are used
to guide human decision-makers (e.g., medical or financial decisions), since they convey confidence in the model
predictions that can be used to aid downstream decisions.

Prediction sets have recently been shown to be a
promising strategy for quantifying the uncertainty
of deep neural networks in a way that provides theoretical guarantees. However, existing techniques
have largely targeted settings where the space of
labels is simple, so prediction sets can be arbitrary subsets of labels. For structured prediction
problems where the space of labels is exponential
in size, even prediction sets containing a small
fraction of all labels can be exponentially large.
In the context of code generation, we propose a
solution that considers a restricted set of prediction sets that can compactly be represented as partial programs, which are programs with portions
replaced with holes. Given a trained code generation model, our algorithm leverages a programming language’s abstract syntax tree to generate
a set of programs such that the correct program
is in the set with high-confidence. Valuable applications of our algorithm include a Codex-style
code generator with holes in uncertain parts of
the generated code, which provides a partial program with theoretical guarantees. We evaluate
our approach on PICARD (a T5 model for SQL
semantic parsing) and Codex (a GPT model for
over a dozen programming languages, including
Python), demonstrating that our approach generates compact PAC prediction sets. This is the first
research contribution that generates PAC prediction sets for generative code models.1

One promising strategy is conformal prediction (Wilks,
1941; Vovk et al., 2005), a statistical technique that has
recently been adapted to machine learning (Tibshirani et al.,
2019; Park et al., 2020; Bates et al., 2021). These techniques focus on constructing prediction sets, which capture
uncertainty by predicting sets of labels rather than individual labels. A benefit of these approaches is that they come
with provable guarantees—typically, that the prediction set
includes the ground truth label with high probability.
Most of the work so far has focused on settings where the input x may be complex, but the label y has a relatively simple
structure, such as classification and regression.2 While there
is no theoretical obstacle to considering more structured
labels, the prediction sets can easily become uninterpretable
when the label space is complex as the uncertainty in the
model is not easily identifiable. We consider the case of
large language models for code generation, where the output
is a sequence of tokens. For such models, the output space is
exponentially large in the length of the generated sequence,
meaning that even if a prediction set contains only a small
fraction of labels, it may still be exponentially large.
While recent work has studied structured prediction
problems such as object detection and image segmentation (Schulz & Behnke), they avoid this problem by breaking up the prediction space into individual components for
which compact prediction sets can be constructed. For instance, for object detection, while the output is a list of
bounding boxes, we can construct a prediction set of bounding boxes that may occur, and then separately construct a
prediction set for each bounding box.

1. Introduction
There has been a great deal of recent interest in uncertainty quantification for deep learning models (Abdar et al.,

A natural strategy to construct prediction sets for structured
outputs is that rather than considering prediction sets consisting of arbitrary subsets of labels, we can restrict them to
ones that can be represented in a compact way. However,

1
University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Adam
Khakhar <ak@alumni.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
adamkhakhar/python-pac-code-prediction-set.

2

Regression problems have an infinite label space, but existing
approaches restrict to prediction sets in the form of intervals, which
automatically satisfy the monotonicity property described below.

1

