Robust Consensus in Ranking Data Analysis:
Definitions, Properties and Computational Issues

Morgane Goibert 1 2 Clément Calauzènes 1 Ekhine Irurozki 2 Stephan Clémençon 2

Abstract

has recently motivated a wide variety of dedicated works
(refer to Lugosi & Mendelson (2019); Lerasle et al. (2019)
for instance), revisiting in particular seminal concepts in
Robust Statistics such as the ε-contamination model, where
the training dataset is supposedly contaminated by a fraction ε ∈ (0, 1) of outliers (Huber, 1964). It is the goal of
this paper to investigate the statistical analysis of ranking
data from the perspective of robustness. Ranking data are
indeed ubiquitous in modern technologies such as search
engines or recommending systems and the question of their
reliability in presence of corrupted data is a scientific challenge. Given the nature of preference data, observable in
the form of permutations (complete rankings, i.e. elements
of the symmetric group Sn ) in the simplest case, informative statistics based on the latter are far from being simple.
This is mainly due to the lack of vector space structure on
Sn and the impossibility of averaging directly such data.
A major problem in ranking data analysis referred to as
Consensus Ranking or Ranking Aggregation, and which the
present article focuses on, consists in its simplest formulation in summarizing a ranking distribution (i.e. a probability
distribution on Sn ) by a median ranking (Kemeny, 1959).
Even though this problem has a long history in social choice
theory, see e.g. De Condorcet et al. (1785); de Borda (1781),
it has been the subject of much attention within the machinelearning community, see e.g. Procaccia & Shah (2016); Jiao
et al. (2016) among many others, references being far too
numerous to be listed exhaustively. While most documented
works concern the issue of computing (approximately) median rankings with theoretical guarantees, this paper studies
in contrast the robustness properties of consensus ranking
methods by means of a novel approach, extending that developed in Huber & Ronchetti (2009) for multivariate data.
We emphasize that this angle is original to the best of our
knowledge and distinguishes itself from related results in
social choice theory, where median rankings are identified
with voting rules. In line with these works, the well-known
Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem (Gibbard et al., 1973; Satterthwaite, 1975) states that every reasonable voting rule
can be manipulated. We point out that there has been a
wide body of research devoted to characterizing the complexity of computing manipulations, NP-hardness result on
manipulation being considered as a guarantee for robustness

As the issue of robustness in AI systems becomes
vital, statistical learning techniques that are reliable even in presence of partly contaminated data
have to be developed. Preference data, in the form
of (complete) rankings in the simplest situations,
are no exception and the demand for appropriate concepts and tools is all the more pressing
given that technologies fed by or producing this
type of data (e.g. search engines, recommending
systems) are now massively deployed. However,
the lack of vector space structure for the set of
rankings (i.e. the symmetric group Sn ) and the
complex nature of statistics considered in ranking
data analysis make the formulation of robustness
objectives in this domain challenging. In this paper, we introduce notions of robustness, together
with dedicated statistical methods, for Consensus Ranking the flagship problem in ranking data
analysis, aiming at summarizing a probability distribution on Sn by a median ranking. Precisely,
we propose specific extensions of the popular concept of breakdown point, tailored to consensus
ranking, and address the related computational
issues. Beyond the theoretical contributions, the
relevance of the approach proposed is supported
by an experimental study.

1. Introduction
One of the keys to the path of a trustworthy AI is undeniably
the design of statistical learning techniques that can resist, to
a certain extent, possible corruptions of the training dataset.
The analysis of the influence of atypical observations on
the outputs of machine-learning algorithms has received increasing interest in the AI literature these last few years and
1

Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 2 Télécom Paris, Paris,
France.
Correspondence to: Morgane Goibert <morgane.goibert@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

