Improving Graph Neural Networks with Learnable Propagation Operators

Moshe Eliasof 1 Lars Ruthotto 2 Eran Treister 1

Abstract

(Veličković et al., 2018; Kim & Oh, 2021; Brody et al.,
2022).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are limited in
their propagation operators. In many cases, these
operators often contain non-negative elements
only and are shared across channels, limiting
the expressiveness of GNNs. Moreover, some
GNNs suffer from over-smoothing, limiting their
depth. On the other hand, Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) can learn diverse propagation
filters, and phenomena like over-smoothing are
typically not apparent in CNNs. In this paper,
we bridge these gaps by incorporating trainable
channel-wise weighting factors ω to learn and mix
multiple smoothing and sharpening propagation
operators at each layer. Our generic method is
called ωGNN, and is easy to implement. We study
two variants: ωGCN and ωGAT. For ωGCN, we
theoretically analyse its behaviour and the impact
of ω on the obtained node features. Our experiments confirm these findings, demonstrating and
explaining how both variants do not over-smooth.
Additionally, we experiment with 15 real-world
datasets on node- and graph-classification tasks,
where our ωGCN and ωGAT perform on par with
state-of-the-art methods.

Most recent GNNs follow a general structure that involves
two main ingredients – the propagation operator, denoted by
S(l) , and a 1 × 1 convolution denoted by K(l) , as follows
f (l+1) = σ(S(l) f (l) K(l) ),

(1)

where f (l) denotes the feature tensor at the l-th layer. The
main limitation of the above formulation is that the propagation operators in most common architectures are constrained
to be non-negative. This leads to two drawbacks. First, this
limits the expressiveness of GNNs (Chien et al., 2021). For
example, the gradient of given graph node features can not
be expressed by a non-negative operator. A mixed-sign
operator, as in our proposed method, can achieve this, as
demonstrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. Second, the utilization of strictly non-negative propagation operators yields a
smoothing process, that may lead GNNs to suffer from oversmoothing. That is, the phenomenon where node features
become indistinguishable from one another as more GNN
layers are stacked – causing severe performance degradation
in deep GNNs (Nt & Maehara, 2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2020;
Cai & Wang, 2020).
The above drawbacks are two gaps between GNNs and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), which can be interpreted as structured versions of GNNs (i.e., GNNs operating
on a regular grid). The structured convolutions in CNNs allow to learn diverse propagation operators, and in particular,
it is known that mixed-sign (high-pass) kernels like sharpening filters are useful feature extractors in CNNs (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012), and such operators cannot be obtained by nonnegative (smoothing) kernels only. In the context of GNNs,
Chien et al. (2021) have noticed that high-pass polynomial
filters are learnt in their framework for heterophilic datasets,
while low-pass filters are learnt for homophilic ones. A similar observation was noted in Eliasof et al. (2022b) as well.
In addition, the over-smoothing phenomenon is typically
not evident in standard CNNs where the spatial filters are
learnt, and usually adding more layers improves accuracy
(He et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are useful for a wide array
of fields, from computer vision and graphics (Monti et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018; Eliasof & Treister, 2020) and social
network analysis (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Defferrard et al.,
2016) to bio-informatics (Eliasof et al., 2022a; Jumper et al.,
2021). Most GNNs are defined by applications of propagation and point-wise operators, where the former is often
fixed and based on the graph Laplacian (e.g., GCN (Kipf
& Welling, 2017)), or is defined by an attention mechanism
1
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University,
Beer-Sheva, Israel. 2 Department of Mathematics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Correspondence to: Moshe Eliasof
<eliasof@post.bgu.ac.il>, Eran Treister <erant@cs.bgu.ac.il>.

A third gap between GNNs and CNNs is the ability of
the latter to learn and mix multiple propagation operators.
In the scope of separable convolutions, CNNs typically
learn a distinct kernel per channel, known as a depth-wise

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

