Random Grid Neural Processes for Parametric Partial Differential Equations

Arnaud Vadeboncoeur 1 Ieva Kazlauskaite 1 Yanni Papandreou 2 Fehmi Cirak 1 Mark Girolami 1 3
Ömer Deniz Akyildiz 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are of central importance in natural sciences and engineering as models for
describing physical phenomena. Numerical solvers of these
equations have received immense attention over the decades
with the development of methods such as finite differences,
finite elements, spectral methods, to name a few (Quarteroni
& Valli, 2008). The main computational problems pertinent
to PDE modelling can be categorised into two main classes:
The task of obtaining a solution to a PDE for a given set
of parameters (forward problem) and the task of recovering
model parameters from solution fields or observations of
solution fields (inverse problem) (Belov, 2012; Stuart, 2010).
Solving each of these problems efficiently and accurately
remains an open problem in the field of scientific computing.
Both problems are of fundamental importance in scientific
and engineering applications and creating efficient and scalable methods for solving these problems could have large
ramifications for engineering practice. Recently, physics
informed machine learning (ML) (Raissi et al., 2019) offers
a novel perspective on solving these types of problems for
parametric PDEs and has been shown to be advantageous to
train large networks to learn parametric PDEs for ranges of
parameters (Lu et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2020). These models
can then be deployed to solve PDEs in real-time. The central
objective of this paper is to introduce accurate and uncertainty aware physics informed probabilistic deep learning
methods that go beyond fixed grid approaches to parametric
PDEs, allowing for a synthesis with noisy data measured on
arbitrary grids for forward and inverse problems.

We introduce a new class of spatially stochastic
physics and data informed deep latent models for
parametric partial differential equations (PDEs)
which operate through scalable variational neural
processes. We achieve this by assigning probability measures to the spatial domain, which allows
us to treat collocation grids probabilistically as
random variables to be marginalised out. Adapting this spatial statistics view, we solve forward
and inverse problems for parametric PDEs in a
way that leads to the construction of Gaussian
process models of solution fields. The implementation of these random grids poses a unique set
of challenges for inverse physics informed deep
learning frameworks and we propose a new architecture called Grid Invariant Convolutional Networks (GICNets) to overcome these challenges.
We further show how to incorporate noisy data
in a principled manner into our physics informed
model to improve predictions for problems where
data may be available but whose measurement
location does not coincide with any fixed mesh
or grid. The proposed method is tested on a nonlinear Poisson problem, Burgers equation, and
Navier-Stokes equations, and we provide extensive numerical comparisons. We demonstrate significant computational advantages over current
physics informed neural learning methods for
parametric PDEs while improving the predictive
capabilities and flexibility of these models.

1.1. Contributions
In this paper, we propose a new framework for jointly learning probabilistic mappings of forward and inverse problems
of parametric PDEs using ideas from spatial statistics (Ripley, 2005; Cressie & Moores, 2021). This new approach
connects neural Gaussian process models of PDE solution
fields with physical parameters through conditioning on random domain partitions. More precisely, we propose (1) a
physics driven variational inference framework based on
random grids; (2) new kernels for the learning of Gaussian
random fields; (3) a new grid invariant architecture to enable
learning through random collocation. We demonstrate our

1
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington St, Cambridge CB2 1PZ. 2 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, Exhibition Rd, South Kensington, London
SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. 3 The Alan Turing Institute, British
Library, 96 Euston Rd, London NW1 2DB, United Kingdom..
Correspondence to: Arnaud Vadeboncoeur <av537@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

