Last Switch Dependent Bandits with Monotone Payoff Functions

Ayoub Foussoul * 1 Vineet Goyal 1 Orestis Papadigenopoulos * 2 Assaf Zeevi 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Shortly after the introduction of the (stochastic) multiarmed bandits (MAB) framework (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi,
2012; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), practitioners and researchers quickly raised the issue of nonstationarity, thus
questioning the restrictive assumption of the original model
(Thompson, 1933; Lai et al., 1985) that the environment
(meaning the payoff distributions of the actions) remains
intact. This opened the way to the development of important
and well-studied extensions of the model, including adversarial bandits (Auer et al., 2002b), reinforcement learning
(Jaksch et al., 2010; Szepesvari, 2010), and more (Keskin
& Zeevi, 2017; Besbes et al., 2014; Kleinberg et al., 2010;
Auer et al., 2019). In many situations, a potential shift in
the environment is not solely the result of external factors,
rather than a natural consequence of its interaction with previously made decisions (see (Whittle, 1988) for examples).
In an attempt to address this issue of action-induced nonstationarity various models have been proposed with restless
(Whittle, 1988; Tekin & Liu, 2012; Guha et al., 2010) and
rested (Gittins, 1979; Tekin & Liu, 2012) bandits being the
most prominent. In these settings, every arm is associated
with a state-machine and its mean payoff depends on the
current state. The state of each arm can change (potentially stochastically) at every round (in the restless case) or
only after the arm is pulled (in rested case). Even ignoring
the learning aspect and assuming complete knowledge of
the underlying arm-state distributions, any attempt to compute a (near-)optimal planning policy – usually via solving
Bellman’s equations (Bertsekas, 2000)) – requires an exponentially large space in the number of actions and hits the
wall of strong inapproximability results (Papadimitriou &
Tsitsiklis, 1999).

In a recent work, Laforgue et al. introduce the
model of last switch dependent (LSD) bandits,
in an attempt to capture nonstationary phenomena induced by the interaction between the player
and the environment. Examples include satiation,
where consecutive plays of the same action lead to
decreased performance, or deprivation, where the
payoff of an action increases after an interval of
inactivity. In this work, we take a step towards understanding the approximability of planning LSD
bandits, namely, the (NP-hard) problem of computing an optimal arm-pulling strategy under complete knowledge of the model. In particular, we
design the first efficient constant approximation
algorithm for the problem and show that, under a
natural monotonicity assumption on the payoffs,
its approximation guarantee (almost) matches the
state-of-the-art for the special and well-studied
class of recharging bandits (also known as delaydependent). In this attempt, we develop new tools
and insights for this class of problems, including a novel higher-dimensional relaxation and
the technique of mirroring the evolution of virtual states. We believe that these novel elements
could potentially be used for approaching richer
classes of action-induced nonstationary bandits
(e.g., special instances of restless bandits). In the
case where the model parameters are initially unknown, we develop an online learning adaptation
of our algorithm for which we provide sublinear regret guarantees against its full-information
counterpart.

More recently, researchers have shifted their attention to
special cases of restless bandits, which are simple enough
to accept efficient (near-)optimal planning algorithms, yet
expressive enough to capture fundamental action-induced
nonstationary phenomena (Levine et al., 2017; Metelli et al.,
2022). Immorlica & Kleinberg (2018) first attempt to model
the effect of deprivation in online decision-making by introducing the model of recharging (a.k.a., delay-dependent)
bandits. Here, the (mean) payoff of each action depends
– in an increasing fashion – on the time elapsed since the
action was played for the last time (often called “delay”).

*
Equal contribution 1 Industrial Engineering and Operations
Research, Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Data Science
Institute, Columbia University, New York, USA 3 Graduate School
of Business, Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Ayoub Foussoul <af3209@columbia.edu>, Orestis Papadigenopoulos <opapadig@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

