Concurrent Shuffle Differential Privacy Under Continual Observation

Jay Tenenbaum 1 Haim Kaplan 2 1 Yishay Mansour 2 1 Uri Stemmer 2 1

Abstract

privacy has been extensively studied under many different
sub-models of privacy. On one end of the spectrum lies the
centralized model where the users trust the server who holds
a database of their data and is liable to protect it. This server
receives a (maybe interactive) sequence of queries to the
database, and must make sure that the published aggregated
statistics respect the privacy constraints. On the other end
of the spectrum lies the (strictly stronger) local model of
differentialy privacy (LDP), where each user privatizes its
own data prior to sending it to the server. In the middle
between the local and the centralized models lies the shuffle
model (Bittau et al., 2017; Cheu et al., 2019; Ghazi et al.,
2019; Balle et al., 2019; Erlingsson et al., 2019; 2020). This
model introduces a trusted shuffler (or shuffler for short) that
receives (encoded) messages from the users and permutes
them (i.e., disassociates a message from its sender) before
they are delivered to the server.1 Intuitively, protocols in
the shuffle model ensure that sufficiently many reports are
collected and shuffled together so that any one report can
hide in a shuffled batch.

We introduce the concurrent shuffle model of differential privacy. In this model we have multiple concurrent shufflers permuting messages from
different, possibly overlapping, batches of users.
Similarly to the standard (single) shuffle model,
the privacy requirement is that the concatenation
of all shuffled messages should be differentially
private. We study the private continual summation problem (a.k.a. the counter problem) and
show that the concurrent shuffle model allows for
significantly improved error compared to a standard (single) shuffle model. Specifically, we give
a summation algorithm with error Õ(n1/(2k+1) )
with k concurrent shufflers on a sequence of
length n. Furthermore, we prove that this bound
is tight for any k, even if the algorithm can choose
the sizes of the batches adaptively. For k = log n
shufflers, the resulting error is polylogarithmic,
much better than Θ̃(n1/3 ) which we show is the
smallest possible with a single shuffler. We use
our online summation algorithm to get algorithms
with improved regret bounds for the contextual
linear bandit
problem. In particular we get opti√
mal Õ( n) regret with k = Ω̃(log n) concurrent
shufflers.

Motivated by real-world applications, such as monitoring
systems or search trends which output continual statistics,
Dwork et al. (2010a) studied “differential privacy under continual observation”. They focus on the fundamental problem
of private summation under continual observation (PSCO)
in which the server continuously reports an approximation
of an accumulating sum of bounded values in [0, 1], one
from each new user. They guarantee event-level privacy,
which protects the content of a single user in a single interaction with the server. Over n users, Dwork et√al. (2010a)
and Chan et al. (2011) reduced the trivial O( n/ε) error
achieved by advanced composition (and is optimal in LDP
Vadhan (2017)), to O(polylog(n)/ε) using a tree-based algorithm. Briefly, they maintain a binary tree with leaves
1, . . . , n, where the t’th leaf contains the value of the t’th
user, and each internal node (not a leaf or the root) contains the sum of the leaves in its subtree with added noise
Lap(Θ̃(1/ε)) to ensure privacy. The error bound follows

1. Introduction
Differential privacy, introduced in the seminal work of
Dwork et al. (2006), is a formal notion of privacy that enables the release of statistical information about a set of
users, without compromising the privacy of any individual
user. Briefly, differential privacy requires that any change
in a single user’s data changes the probability of any output
of the computation by only a limited amount. Differential
1

Google Research 2 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Jay Tenenbaum <jayten@google.com>, Haim Kaplan <haimk@tau.ac.il>,
Yishay Mansour <mansour.yishay@gmail.com>, Uri Stemmer
<u@uri.co.il>.

1
For privacy analysis, we assume that the shuffle is perfectly
secure, i.e., its output contains no information about which user
generated each of the messages. This is traditionally achieved by
the shuffler stripping implicit metadata from the messages (e.g.,
timestamps, routing information), and frequently forwarding this
data to remove time and order information.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

