Temporal Label Smoothing for Early Event Prediction

Hugo Yèche * 1 Alizée Pace * 1 2 3 Gunnar Rätsch + 1 2 4 Rita Kuznetsova + 1

Abstract

tality [3; 4]. Deteriorating patient signals are often identified
by mining large quantities of existing medical data and associated patient outcomes, which has sparked a growing
interest in machine learning and medical literature. Applications of such adverse event prediction models include
alarm systems for delirium [5], septic shock [6], as well
as circulatory or kidney failure in the intensive care unit
(ICU) [7; 8].

Models that can predict the occurrence of events
ahead of time with low false-alarm rates are critical to the acceptance of decision support systems in the medical community. This challenging
task is typically treated as a simple binary classification, ignoring temporal dependencies between
samples, whereas we propose to exploit this structure. We first introduce a common theoretical
framework unifying dynamic survival analysis
and early event prediction. Following an analysis of objectives from both fields, we propose
Temporal Label Smoothing (TLS), a simpler, yet
best-performing method that preserves prediction
monotonicity over time. By focusing the objective
on areas with a stronger predictive signal, TLS
improves performance over all baselines on two
large-scale benchmark tasks. Gains are particularly notable along clinically relevant measures,
such as event recall at low false-alarm rates. TLS
reduces the number of missed events by up to a
factor of two over previously used approaches in
early event prediction.

Still, prediction systems often suffer from high false-alarm
rates with limited usefulness in a practical context [2], despite the development of deep learning architectures addressing issues of high dimensionality, irregular sampling,
or informative missingness in time-series [6; 8; 9; 10].
The typically rare occurrence and noisy definition of
events of interest induce challenging, highly imbalanced
datasets for model training [8], yet early event prediction
remains largely considered as a simple binary classification
task [7; 11; 9; 12].
In this work, we systematically study different choices of
objective functions for this task and outline a novel, simple, yet best-performing approach to early event prediction.
In particular, we argue that leveraging the temporal structure of early event prediction is critical to improving model
performance. The dynamic survival analysis (DSA) framework [13], for instance, which aims to regress the time until
a unique event of interest occurs, enforces structural properties across timepoints and studied horizons [14; 15]. As
shown in Figure 1, inspired by this, we propose to induce
monotonicity in model predictions over time with Temporal
Label Smoothing (TLS). This novel regularization strategy
also mirrors our expected confidence in the strength of prediction signals over time.

1. Introduction
Early event prediction (EEP) is a time-series task concerned
with determining whether an event will occur within a fixed
time horizon. Key to safety-critical operations such as environmental monitoring [1], EEP is also highly relevant
to clinical decision-making, where the deployment of inpatient risk stratification models can significantly improve
patient outcomes and facilitate resource planning [2]. For instance, the National Early Warning Score (NEWS), a simple
rule-based model predicting acute deterioration in critical
care units, has been demonstrated to reduce in-patient mor-

Contributions. The contributions of our work are threefold: (i) First, we adapt and benchmark existing approaches
from the survival literature to early event prediction, highlighting theoretical similarities between these frameworks.
We bridge the gap with prior work [8; 13; 16], showing that
these enforce temporal structure properties in model predictions. (i) Next, we introduce a simple method to achieve this
for our single-horizon prediction framework1 . (iii) Finally,
we explore real-world event prediction tasks and demon-

*

Equal contribution + Co-supervised 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 ETH AI Center, ETH
Zürich, Switzerland 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany 4 Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics, Zürich,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Hugo Yèche <hyeche@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
All code is made publicly available at https://github.
com/ratschlab/tls.

1

