N UGGET: Neural Agglomerative Embeddings of Text

Guanghui Qin 1 Benjamin Van Durme 1

Abstract
Embedding text sequences is a widespread requirement in modern language understanding.
Existing approaches focus largely on constantsize representations. This is problematic, as the
amount of information contained in text can vary.
We propose a solution called N UGGET , which encodes language into a representation based on
a dynamically selected subset of input tokens.
These nuggets are learned through tasks like autoencoding and machine translation, and intuitively segment language into meaningful units.
We demonstrate N UGGET outperforms related approaches in tasks involving semantic comparison.
Finally, we illustrate these compact units allow for
expanding the contextual window of a language
model (LM), suggesting new future LMs that can
condition on larger amounts of content.

Figure 1. Three approaches to embedding text. Token-level models
map each token to a vector, while passage-level models map the
whole passage into a single vector. N UGGET generates a dynamic
number of vectors, where each nugget encodes a segment of text.

Our solution, N UGGET , is an encoding strategy employing
hard-attention to map linguistic input into a fractional number of dynamically selected embeddings called nuggets. As
the nugget selection process is non-differentiable, we build
a residual connection between the selector and decoder to
allow gradient propagation, enabling the model to be trained
in an end-to-end manner via tasks such as autoencoding
or machine translation. This approach allows the number
of vectors to grow with input length, trading performance
against memory as a configurable compression ratio.

1. Introduction
You can’t cram the meaning of a whole %&!$#
sentence into a single $&!#* vector!
Ray Mooney

Embedding language into dense representations is a central
pursuit in modern Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning. Recent work on text encoding has largely
focused on fixed-dimensional representations that use either
one or a constant number of vectors, e.g., DAN (Iyyer et al.,
2015), DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020), or TSDAE (Wang
et al., 2021). At the other extreme, C OL BERT (Khattab &
Zaharia, 2020) represents and indexes content by storing the
final BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) layer encoding of nearly
every input token. Unfortunately a fixed dimensional representation risks not scaling to long texts, while a solution
like C OL BERT comes at significant cost. We propose that
a flexible balance can be found, leading to a “semantically
useful level of granularity” (Rudinger et al., 2017).

N UGGET leads to an intrinsically interesting representation,
where the encoder learns to favor clausal text delimiters,
such as punctuation and conjunction words. Moreover, without any explicit guidance during training, each resultant
nugget encodes a contiguous segment of text preceding
these clausal delimiters, such as illustrated in fig. 1.
We demonstrate that extrinsically these nuggets outperform
prior unsupervised approaches in experiments on documentlevel paraphrase selection and related passage retrieval.
Finally, through an experiment on language modeling we
show that N UGGET can provide context information to other
models in an efficient way. Looking ahead, we believe
fractional representation strategies like N UGGET will allow
for exciting new developments in large language models
(LLMs). As nuggets support highly accurate reconstruction,
they hold promise as a compressed unit of language that
could enable scaling LLMs to condition on significantly
longer textual inputs.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Johns Hopkins, USA. Correspondence to: Guanghui Qin <gqin2@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

