Transformers Meet Directed Graphs

Simon Geisler * 1 Yujia Li 2 Daniel Mankowitz 2 Ali Taylan Cemgil 2 Stephan Günnemann 1 Cosmin Paduraru 2

Abstract

rected graphs as they are omnipresent, and directedness can
rule semantics. Transformers that handle both undirected
and directed graphs could become an important building
block for many applications. For this, the attention mechanism needs to become aware of the graph structure. For
example, prior work modified the attention mechanism to
incorporate structural information (Ying et al., 2021) or proposed hybrid architectures that also contain Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) (Mialon et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022).
Another (complementary) option are positional encodings
that are used by many, if not most, structure-aware transformers (Min et al., 2022; Müller et al., 2023).

Transformers were originally proposed as a
sequence-to-sequence model for text but have become vital for a wide range of modalities, including images, audio, video, and undirected graphs.
However, transformers for directed graphs are
a surprisingly underexplored topic, despite their
applicability to ubiquitous domains, including
source code and logic circuits. In this work, we
propose two direction- and structure-aware positional encodings for directed graphs: (1) the eigenvectors of the Magnetic Laplacian – a directionaware generalization of the combinatorial Laplacian; (2) directional random walk encodings. Empirically, we show that the extra directionality
information is useful in various downstream tasks,
including correctness testing of sorting networks
and source code understanding. Together with a
data-flow-centric graph construction, our model
outperforms the prior state of the art on the Open
Graph Benchmark Code2 relatively by 14.7%.3

Directional positional encodings. Most of the literature
for structure-aware positional encodings either uses basic
measures like pair-wise shortest path distances (Guo et al.,
2021; Ying et al., 2021) or symmetrizes the graph for principled positional encodings, e.g., based on the combinatorial
Laplacian (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021).
Importantly, symmetrization might discard essential information that determines the semantics of the input. For these
reasons, we propose two direction-aware positional encodings: (1) the eigenvectors of the Magnetic Laplacian (§ 3),
which naturally generalizes the well-known combinatorial
Laplacian to directed graphs (see Fig. 1); and (2) directional
random walk encodings (§ 4) that generalize basic measures
like the shortest path distances. We show that our positional
encodings are predictive for various distances on graphs
(§ 5) and are useful in downstream tasks. Moreover, our
positional encodings can also improve GNNs (see Fig. 10).

1. Introduction
Transformers have become a central component in many
state-of-the-art machine learning models spanning a wide
range of modalities. For example, transformers are used
to generate solutions for competitive programming tasks
from textual descriptions (Li et al., 2022), for conversational
question answering with the popular ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2022), or to find approximate solutions to combinatorial
optimizations problems like the Traveling Salesman Problem (Kool et al., 2019). Transformers have also had success
in graph learning tasks, e.g., for predicting the properties
of molecules (Min et al., 2022). While virtually all prior
works focus on undirected graphs, we advocate the use of di-

Motivation for directed graphs. We make the impact of appropriately modeling inputs via directed graphs explicit for
our applications. One example is the correctness prediction
of sorting networks (§ 6). Sorting networks (Knuth, 1973)
are a certain sorting procedures that can be represented by

* Work performed while at Google DeepMind 1 Dept. of
Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich 2 Google DeepMind. 3 Code and configuration:
www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/digraph-transformer
Correspondence to: Simon Geisler <s.geisler@tum.de>.

(a) Sequence

(b) Undir. seq.

(c) Binary tree

(d) Trumpet

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Figure 1: First eigenvector of Magnetic Laplacian. Node
size encodes the real value and colors the imaginary value.
1

