One-Shot Compression of Large Edge-Exchangeable Graphs
using Bits-Back Coding

Daniel Severo 1 2 James Townsend 3 Ashish Khisti 1 Alireza Makhzani 1 2

Abstract
We present a one-shot method for compressing
large labeled graphs called Random Edge Coding.
When paired with a parameter-free model based
on Pólya’s Urn, the worst-case computational and
memory complexities scale quasi-linearly and linearly with the number of observed edges, making
it efficient on sparse graphs, and requires only
integer arithmetic. Key to our method is bits-back
coding, which is used to sample edges and vertices without replacement from the edge-list in a
way that preserves the structure of the graph. Optimality is proven under a class of random graph
models that are invariant to permutations of the
edges and of vertices within an edge. Experiments
indicate Random Edge Coding can achieve competitive compression performance on real-world
network datasets and scales to graphs with millions of nodes and edges.

Figure 1: A diagram of our method, Random Edge Coding,
compressing a single edge. The ANS stack is represented in
blue. First, a random edge is sampled without replacement
from the edge-list using an ANS decode. Then, a binary
indicator b is decoded that defines the order in which vertices
will be encoded: first edge[b] then edge[1 − b].
data. The main advantage of this approach over ad hoc
methods is that it enables the use of existing domain knowledge on statistical modelling, which in the case of graphs
is a well studied field (see Section 4.1). Bridging network
modeling and data compression has yielded significant gains
in compression performance with little additional effort by
the research community (Steinruecken, 2014). For example,
BB-ANS (Townsend et al., 2019) allowed powerful latent
variable models to be easily repurposed for lossless data
compression including variational autoencoders (Townsend
et al., 2019), diffusion models (Kingma et al., 2021), and
integer discrete flows (Hoogeboom et al., 2019; Berg et al.,
2020), leading to state-of-the-art compression performance
on image, speech (Havtorn et al., 2022) and smart meter
time-series (Jeong et al., 2022) data. In many domains, current state-of-the-art compression algorithms such as CMIX
(Knoll & de Freitas, 2012) and DeepZip (Goyal et al., 2019)
use entropy coding together with a powerful neural network
model.

1. Introduction
Network data, such as social networks and web graphs (Newman, 2018), can be represented as large graphs, or multigraphs, with millions of nodes and edges corresponding to
members of a population and their interactions. To preserve
the underlying community structure, as well as other relational properties, algorithms for compressing and storing
network graphs must be lossless.
Entropy coding is a popular lossless compression technique
that makes use of a probabilistic model over the observed
For the most recent version, see https://arxiv.org/
abs/2305.09705.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute for Artificial Inteligence 3 Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab (AMLab),
University of Amsterdam.
Correspondence to: Daniel
Severo <d.severo@mail.utoronto.ca>, Alireza Makhzani
<makhzani@vectorinstitute.ai>.

Compressing a single network is a one-shot lossless compression problem. This precludes the use of methods that
require amortizing over repeated independent observations
to reach the fundamental lower bound on lossless compression: the entropy (Cover, 1999). To minimize the average

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

