GuardHFL: Privacy Guardian for Heterogeneous Federated Learning

Hanxiao Chen 1 2 Meng Hao 1 Hongwei Li 1 Kangjie Chen 3 Guowen Xu 3 Tianwei Zhang 3 Xilin Zhang 1
gated response predictions via a centralized cloud server1 .
Then the client retrains his local model on the query data and
corresponding predictions. This flexible approach facilitates
customized FL-driven services in areas like healthcare and
finance (Gao et al., 2022), while resolving the intellectual
property concerns of FL models (Tekgul et al., 2021).

Abstract
Heterogeneous federated learning (HFL) enables
clients with different computation and communication capabilities to collaboratively train their
own customized models via a query-response
paradigm on auxiliary datasets. However, such
a paradigm raises serious privacy concerns due
to the leakage of highly sensitive query samples and response predictions. We put forth
GuardHFL, the first-of-its-kind efficient and
privacy-preserving HFL framework. GuardHFL
is equipped with a novel HFL-friendly secure
querying scheme built on lightweight secret sharing and symmetric-key techniques. The core of
GuardHFL is two customized multiplication and
comparison protocols, which substantially boost
the execution efficiency. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate that GuardHFL significantly outperforms the alternative instantiations based on existing state-of-the-art techniques in both runtime
and communication cost.

However, HFL suffers from several privacy issues. First,
directly sharing query samples violates their privacy. For example, in healthcare applications, the auxiliary dataset may
contain patients’ medical conditions. Disclosure of such
highly sensitive information is illegal under current regulations like General Data Protection Regulation. Second,
disclosing response predictions may still compromise the
privacy of local data (Papernot et al., 2016). Specifically, the
predicted logits indicate how confident the model is in classifying the query samples, e.g., reflecting the capabilities of
medical diagnostic systems. Even worse, they may imply
the knowledge of model parameters and training samples.
Although in traditional FL systems, the privacy issue could
be mitigated through well-studied secure gradient aggregation protocols (Bell et al., 2020), it becomes more challenging to realize this guarantee in HFL, due to the heterogeneity
of the clients’ models (refer to Appendix B.3). To bridge
this gap, a possible solution is to structurally integrate into
HFL existing secure querying (a.k.a. private inference)
schemes (Rathee et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022; Wagh
et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2021). These schemes utilize various
cryptographic primitives, including homomorphic encryption (HE) (Gentry, 2009), garbled circuit (GC) (Yao, 1986)
or oblivious transfer (OT) (Ishai et al., 2003), to provide
rigorous privacy guarantees for query data and response
predictions. Although with non-trivial modifications, these
secure querying schemes can be extended to HFL scenarios (refer to Section 2.3), they have two major limitations:
(1) lacking customized protocol designs and (2) relying on
heavy cryptographic primitives. These bottlenecks lead to
poor performance and hinder the efficient instantiation of
HFL. Therefore, it is necessary but challenging to design
customized protocols and implement a privacy-preserving
HFL with desirable performance.

1. Introduction
As a promising variant of federated learning (FL), heterogeneous federated learning (HFL) (Li & Wang, 2019) enables
clients equipped with different computation and communication capabilities to collaboratively train their own customized models that may differ in size, numerical precision
or structure (Lin et al., 2020). In particular, the knowledge
of models is shared via a query-response paradigm on auxiliary datasets, such as unlabeled datasets from the same task
domain (Choquette-Choo et al., 2021) or related datasets
from different task domains (Li & Wang, 2019; Lin et al.,
2020). In such a paradigm, each client queries others with
samples in the auxiliary querying dataset, and obtains aggre1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
China 2 This work was done at NTU as a visiting student. 3 Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Hongwei Li <hongweili@uestc.edu.cn>.

1

As demonstrated in Bonawitz et al. (2017); Bell et al. (2020),
the clients (e.g., mobile devices) in real-world applications are
generally widely distributed and coordinated only by the server.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

