Tighter Information-Theoretic Generalization Bounds from Supersamples

Ziqiao Wang 1 Yongyi Mao 1

Abstract

suggests complex models tend to overfit the training data
and perform poorly on unseen data (Vapnik, 1998). In contrast, the information-theoretic bounds have experimentally
demonstrated that they are capable of tracking the generalization behaviour of modern neural networks (Negrea et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2021; Harutyunyan et al., 2021; Wang &
Mao, 2022a;b; Hellström & Durisi, 2022a).

In this work, we present a variety of novel
information-theoretic generalization bounds for
learning algorithms, from the supersample setting
of Steinke & Zakynthinou (2020)—the setting
of the “conditional mutual information” framework. Our development exploits projecting the
loss pair (obtained from a training instance and
a testing instance) down to a single number
and correlating loss values with a Rademacher
sequence (and its shifted variants). The presented bounds include square-root bounds, fastrate bounds, including those based on variance
and sharpness, and bounds for interpolating algorithms etc. We show theoretically or empirically
that these bounds are tighter than all informationtheoretic bounds known to date on the same supersample setting.

The original information-theoretic bound of Xu & Raginsky (2017) has been extended or improved in many different ways, such as the chaining method (Asadi et al.,
2018; Hafez-Kolahi et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022b; Clerico
et al., 2022), the random subset or individual technique (Negrea et al., 2019; Bu et al., 2019; Haghifam et al., 2020;
Rodríguez-Gálvez et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022a) and so
on. Remarkably, Steinke & Zakynthinou (2020) has developed generalization bounds based on a conditional mutual
information (CMI) measure obtained for a “supersample”
setting. Specifically, the supersample is an n × 2 matrix
of data instances. In each row, one instance is selected at
random for training and the other is masked out for testing.
The authors then show that the CMI of the mask variables
and the learned weights conditioned on the supersample
can be used to upper-bound the generalization error. Although better behaving than the unconditional weight-based
MI bounds (e.g., having boundedness guaranty), the CMI
bounds can be difficult to measure for high-dimensional
weights, which limits their application. To overcome such
difficulty, functional CMI (f -CMI) bounds are proposed
by Harutyunyan et al. (2021), where the weight variable in
CMI is replaced by the predictions for the supersample. In
this case, each prediction pair is a two-dimensional discrete
random variable, making the CMI easier to measure and
also a tighter bound. More recently, Hellström & Durisi
(2022a) uses loss pairs to replace the predictions in f -CMI
and obtain even tighter CMI bounds, known as evaluated
CMI (e-CMI) bounds. In fact, the earliest version of e-CMI
bound appeared in Steinke & Zakynthinou (2020). The
notion was also exploited in later works (Haghifam et al.,
2021; 2022; 2023). Note that e-CMI still measures the dependence between an one-dimensional variable (mask) and a
two-dimensional variable (loss pair). In this work, we show
that it is possible to further tighten the CMI bounds, using
MI terms involving only two one-dimensional variables.

1. Introduction
Using information-theoretic bounds to analyze the generalization properties of a learning algorithm has attracted
increasing attention since the seminal works of (Russo &
Zou, 2016; 2019; Xu & Raginsky, 2017). One major advantage of such bounds is that the information-theoretic
quantities, e.g., the mutual information (MI) between the
training sample and the trained parameter weights, are
both distribution-dependent and algorithm-dependent. This
makes them an ideal tool to characterize the generalization
properties of a learning algorithm, particularly when the traditional algorithm-independent learning-theoretic tools (e.g.,
VC-dimension (Vapnik, 1998) and Rademacher complexity
(Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002)) appear inadequate. For example, Zhang et al. (2017; 2021) show that the high-capacity
deep neural networks can still generalize well, contradicting the traditional wisdom in statistical learning theory that
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada. Correspondence to: Ziqiao Wang <zwang286@uottawa.ca>, Yongyi Mao
<ymao@uottawa.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our development is restricted to the supersample setting
1

