Random Classification Noise does not defeat All Convex Potential Boosters
Irrespective of Model Choice

Yishay Mansour 1 2 Richard Nock 2 Robert C. Williamson 3

Abstract

2022), patents (Olabiyi et al., 2021), textbooks (Mohri
et al., 2018), etc. (many others in Appendix, Section I)...
(Notwithstanding mentions in the original papers of noisetolerant partition-inducing boosting algorithms minimizing
concave losses, thus seemingly following a different boosting blueprint (Long & Servedio, 2008b; 2010)).

A landmark negative result of Long and Servedio has had a considerable impact on research
and development in boosting algorithms, around
the now famous tagline that ”noise defeats all
convex boosters”. In this paper, we appeal to
the half-century+ founding theory of losses for
class probability estimation, an extension of Long
and Servedio’s results and a new general convex
booster to demonstrate that the source of their
negative result is in fact the model class, linear
separators. Losses or algorithms are neither to
blame. This leads us to a discussion on an otherwise praised aspect of ML, parameterisation.

Our contribution is primarily formal and shows that this
tagline, taken at face value, is inaccurate. In the course
of our arguments, we introduce a new convex booster that
overcomes Long and Servedio’s specific hardness result.
Our contribution starts with a striking paradox arising from
the tagline above: when they are symmetric, proper losses
(Savage, 1971) – loss functions eliciting Bayes optimal
prediction and overwhelmingly popular in ML – have a dual
surrogate form, for real-valued classification, which exactly
fits to Long and Servedio’s margin loss blueprint. Enters
the aforementioned paradox: on Long and Servedio’s data,
such losses end up eliciting nothing better than a fair coin –
quite arguably far from even the noise-dependent optimal
prediction!

1. Introduction
In a now very influential paper, Long and Servedio (Long
& Servedio, 2008b; 2010) made a series of observations
on how simple symmetric label noise can “wipe out” the
edge of a learner against the fair coin. The negative result
is extreme in the sense that without noise, the learner fits a
large margin, 100% accurate classifier but as soon as noise
afflicts labels, regardless of its magnitude, the learner ends
up with a classifier only as good as the fair coin; furthermore,
the result also holds if we remove the algorithm from the
equation and just focus on the convex loss’ minimizer* .

As we then show, this paradox has deeper roots in Savage’s
properness theory, as Long and Servedio’s results survive
to dropping the “symmetry” constraint on the loss. We thus
extend their result to any strictly proper loss not necessarily
admitting a margin form, albeit satisfying differentiability
and lower-boundedness of the partial losses, which are weak
constraints. Long and Servedio’s result has no flaw, so the
question that follows is naturally what is the source of their
negative result?

It is fair to say that the paper had sizeable impact on research
and development in boosting at large, especially alongside
the tagline retained by history that (emphasis ours)

We unveil the source of the paradox and show how to resolve
it via a new convex booster. The functional pipeline that estimates class probabilities involves training a model, which
is a linear model in Long & Servedio (2010). Informally,
what we show – and which could be a tagline summary of
our work – is that

noise defeats all convex losses / boosters,
as can be seen in papers (Amid et al., 2019a), theses (Ju,
1
Tel Aviv University 2 Google Research 3 University of
Tübingen and Tübingen AI center. Correspondence to: Richard
Nock <richardnock@google.com>.

linear models can break the promise of properness.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
* Some convex boosters are consistent (Bartlett & Traskin,
2006; Telgarsky, 2013), but the results are based on assumptions
that would not be met in the context of Long and Servedio.

To show that, we introduce a simple and general “modeladaptive” convex booster (M ODA B OOST) following the
“boosting blueprint” of Long & Servedio (2010). Through
the reliance on an oracle called an architecture emulation
1

