Prompting Large Language Model for Machine Translation: A Case Study

Biao Zhang * Barry Haddow Alexandra Birch 1

Abstract

constructs task-specific prompts by rephrasing test examples with descriptive task instructions and executes the task
by feeding prompts to LLMs directly. It can be further
enhanced through in-context learning by providing a few
labeled examples (or prompt examples) as a demonstration (Brown et al., 2020). As a new paradigm, prompting LLMs has achieved state-of-the-art performance over a
range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Chung
et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022c;a; Chowdhery et al., 2022).

Research on prompting has shown it to have excellent performance with little or even no supervised
training across many tasks. However, prompting for machine translation is still under-explored
in the literature. We fill this gap by offering
a systematic study on prompting strategies for
translation, examining various factors for prompt
template and demonstration example selection.
We further explore the use of monolingual data
and the feasibility of cross-lingual, cross-domain,
and sentence-to-document transfer learning in
prompting. Extensive experiments with GLM130B (Zeng et al., 2022) as the testbed show that
1) the number and the quality of prompt examples
matter, where using suboptimal examples degenerates translation; 2) several features of prompt
examples, such as semantic similarity, show significant Spearman correlation with their prompting performance; yet, none of the correlations are
strong enough; 3) using pseudo parallel prompt
examples constructed from monolingual data via
zero-shot prompting could improve translation;
and 4) improved performance is achievable by
transferring knowledge from prompt examples selected in other settings. We finally provide an
analysis on the model outputs and discuss several
problems that prompting still suffers from.

In this paper, we focus on prompting LLMs for machine
translation (MT). MT represents a complex task requiring
transforming a source input into its semantically equivalent
target output in a different language, which combines sequence understanding and generation. It offers a unique
platform to assess the cross-lingual generation capability of LLMs, and the assessment may shed light on pretraining/finetuning algorithm design for achieving universal
LLMs (Chowdhery et al., 2022). While a few studies have
reported translation results (Brown et al., 2020; Reynolds
& McDonell, 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022), a systematic
study on how prompting works for MT is still missing in
the literature.
We aim at filling this gap by thoroughly examining different prompting setups using the recently released GLM130B (Zeng et al., 2022), particularly concerning three aspects: the prompting strategy, the use of unlabeled/monolingual data, and the feasibility of transfer learning. Prompting
has shown varying sensitivity to the choice of prompt templates and examples (Zhao et al., 2021). For MT, prior
studies adopted different templates (Brown et al., 2020;
Wei et al., 2022a; Chowdhery et al., 2022), and we reevaluate them to figure out the optimal one. We further design
a set of features for prompt examples and explore which
one(s) could explain the prompting performance, according
to which we develop the example selection strategy.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) pretrained on massive unlabeled corpora have shown impressive emergent abilities
under model scaling which enable prompting for downstream applications (Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020;
Wei et al., 2022b; Zhang et al., 2022a; Chowdhery et al.,
2022). Different from task-specific finetuning, prompting

Since leveraging monolingual data to improve MT has long
been of interest, we would like to determine whether and
how such data can be used in prompt example construction. We make a step in this direction by studying the effect
of data augmentation using back-/forward-translation (Sennrich et al., 2016b; Zhang & Zong, 2016) via zero-shot
prompting. In addition, neural MT and pretrained LLMs

*

Now at Google DeepMind; work done prior to joining Google.
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Correspondence
to: Biao Zhang <biaojiaxing@google.com>, Barry Haddow <bhaddow@inf.ed.ac.uk>, Alexandra Birch <a.birch@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

