Machine Learning Force Fields with Data Cost Aware Training

Alexander Bukharin 1 2 Tianyi Liu 2 Shengjie Wang 2 Simiao Zuo 1 Weihao Gao 2 Wen Yan 2 Tuo Zhao 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a key technology
driving scientific discovery in fields such as chemistry, biophysics, and materials science (Alder & Wainwright, 1960;
McCammon et al., 1977). By simulating the dynamics of
molecules, important macro statistics such as the folding
probability of a protein (Tuckerman, 2010) or the density
of new materials (Varshney et al., 2008) can be estimated.
These macro statistics are an essential part of many important applications such as structure-driven drug design
(Hospital et al., 2015) and battery development (Leung &
Budzien, 2010). Most MD simulation techniques share a
common iterative structure: MD simulations calculate the
forces on each atom in the molecule, and use these forces to
move the molecule forward to the next state.

Machine learning force fields (MLFF) have been
proposed to accelerate molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation, which finds widespread applications
in chemistry and biomedical research. Even for
the most data-efficient MLFFs, reaching chemical accuracy can require hundreds of frames
of force and energy labels generated by expensive quantum mechanical algorithms, which may
scale as O(n3 ) to O(n7 ), with n proportional
to the number of basis functions. To address
this issue, we propose a multi-stage computational framework – ASTEROID, which lowers
the data cost of MLFFs by leveraging a combination of cheap inaccurate data and expensive accurate data. The motivation behind ASTEROID is
that inaccurate data, though incurring large bias,
can help capture the sophisticated structures of
the underlying force field. Therefore, we first
train a MLFF model on a large amount of inaccurate training data, employing a bias-aware
loss function to prevent the model from overfitting the potential bias of this data. We then finetune the obtained model using a small amount
of accurate training data, which preserves the
knowledge learned from the inaccurate training
data while significantly improving the model’s
accuracy. Moreover, we propose a variant of ASTEROID based on score matching for the setting where the inaccurate training data are unlabeled. Extensive experiments on MD datasets and
downstream tasks validate the efficacy of ASTEROID. Our code and data are available at https:
//github.com/abukharin3/asteroid.

The fundamental challenge of MD simulation is how to
efficiently calculate the forces at each iteration. An exact calculation requires solving the Schrödinger equation,
which is not feasible for many-body systems (Berezin &
Shubin, 2012). Instead approximation methods such as
the Lennard-Jones potential (Johnson et al., 1993), Density
Functional Theory (DFT, (Kohn, 2019)), or Coupled Cluster
Single-Double-Triple (CCSD(T), (Scuseria et al., 1988))
are used. CCSD(T) is seen as the gold-standard for force
calculation, but is computationally expensive. In particular,
CCSD(T) has complexity O(n7 ) with respect to the number
of basis functions used along with a huge storage requirement (Chen et al., 2020). To accelerate MD simulations
while maintaining high accuracy, machine learning based
force fields (MLFFs) have been proposed. MLFFs take a
molecular configuration as input and then predict the forces
on each atom in the molecule, consequently speeding up the
force calculation step.
Most recently, deep learning techniques for force fields have
been developed, resulting in highly accurate force fields
parameterized by large neural networks (Gasteiger et al.,
2021; Batzner et al., 2022). Despite their empirical success,
these methods suffer from a critical drawback: in order to
train state-of-the-art machine learning force field models, a
large amount of costly training data must be generated. For
example, to train a model at the CCSD(T) level of accuracy,
at least a thousand CCSD(T) calculations must be done to
construct the training set. This is computationally expensive

Work was done during Alexander Bukharin’s internship at
ByteDance 1 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 ByteDance
Inc, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Alexander Bukharin
<abukharin3@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

