How Many Perturbations Break This Model? Evaluating Robustness Beyond
Adversarial Accuracy

Raphael Olivier 1 Bhiksha Raj 1

Abstract

enabling data poisoning attacks (Shafahi et al., 2018) and
even membership inference attacks (Choquette-Choo et al.,
2021). Making models robust to adversarial perturbations
is very difficult for multiple reasons; one of them is that
the proper evaluation method of robustness is not a trivial
problem.

Robustness to adversarial attacks is typically evaluated with adversarial accuracy. While essential,
this metric does not capture all aspects of robustness and in particular leaves out the question of
how many perturbations can be found for each
point. In this work, we introduce an alternative
approach, adversarial sparsity, which quantifies
how difficult it is to find a successful perturbation
given both an input point and a constraint on the
direction of the perturbation. We show that sparsity provides valuable insight into neural networks
in multiple ways: for instance, it illustrates important differences between current state-of-the-art
robust models them that accuracy analysis does
not, and suggests approaches for improving their
robustness. When applying “broken” defenses
effective against weak attacks but not strong ones,
sparsity can discriminate between the “totally ineffective” and the “partially effective” defenses.
Finally, with sparsity we can measure increases in
robustness that do not affect accuracy: we show
for example that data augmentation can by itself
increase adversarial robustness, without using adversarial training.

A few years ago, it was common to evaluate defenses against
a variety of adversarial attacks, like FGSM ((Goodfellow
et al., 2014)), DeepFool ((Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016))
or JSMA ((Papernot et al., 2016)). Some defenses could
claim good results on some attacks, but remained vulnerable to others (e.g. Papernot et al. (2015) broken in Carlini
& Wagner (2016a)), suggesting multiple aspects to robustness and giving adversarial research the form of an “arms
race” between attacks and defenses. Nowadays however,
this approach has lost popularity and it is considered good
practice to focus on the accepted strongest attacks for evaluation: typically PGD ((Madry et al., 2018)) or its step-size
free variant APGD (Croce & Hein, 2020) for bounded attacks and Carlini&Wagner ((Carlini & Wagner, 2016b)) for
unbounded attacks.
We argue that this approach ignores important aspects of
adversarial robustness. PGD for instance is considered a surrogate to the worst-case accuracy given a fixed threat model.
With input x, label y and a set of admissible perturbations
∆, worst case accuracy on x is equal to 1 if:

1. Introduction

∀δ ∈ ∆, f (x + δ) = y

1

Designing adversarially robust machine learning models
has become one of the main objectives of the research community. Adversarial examples, these slightly perturbed inputs that pose significant problems for output prediction,
are the source of multiple security threats: not only are they
dangerous in and of themselves, but they also contribute to

(1)

and 0 otherwise. This metric reflects whether, in the vicinity
of an input point, there is one successful perturbation. This
can be misleading in the quest for robustness. Consider a
hypothetical defense that, around every point, eliminates
99% of all dangerous perturbations, leaving 1% to find. Its
worst-case accuracy would be 0%, just like an undefended
model, and the defense would be considered “broken” by
the research community. In other words, worst-case accuracy is biased towards defenses that are totally effective for
some points, and against those that are partially effective
around all points. Whether a point has any or no adversarial perturbation is relevant knowledge, but it leaves out a
lot of information. The “broken” defense above may for
instance be useful in real-world contexts, where perturba-

1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Raphael Olivier <rolivier@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
RaphaelOlivier/sparsity

1

