GNOT: A General Neural Operator Transformer for Operator Learning

Zhongkai Hao 1 2 Zhengyi Wang 1 3 Hang Su 1 Chengyang Ying 1 Yinpeng Dong 1 3
Songming Liu 1 Ze Cheng 4 Jian Song 2 Jun Zhu 1 3

Abstract
Input
Mesh

Learning partial differential equations’ (PDEs)
solution operators is an essential problem in machine learning. However, there are several challenges for learning operators in practical applications like the irregular mesh, multiple input
functions, and complexity of the PDEs’ solution.
To address these challenges, we propose a general neural operator transformer (GNOT), a scalable and effective transformer-based framework
for learning operators. By designing a novel
heterogeneous normalized attention layer, our
model is highly flexible to handle multiple input functions and irregular meshes. Besides, we
introduce a geometric gating mechanism which
could be viewed as a soft domain decomposition to solve the multi-scale problems. The large
model capacity of the transformer architecture
grants our model the possibility to scale to large
datasets and practical problems. We conduct
extensive experiments on multiple challenging
datasets from different domains and achieve a remarkable improvement compared with alternative
methods. Our code and data are publicly available
at https://github.com/thu-ml/GNOT.

Irregular Mesh

-1

-1

Transformer
4

FEM Solver 10 ~10 s

-2

Multiple Inputs

Neural Operator 10 s

Multiple Scales

Velocity

Pressure

Figure 1. A pre-trained neural operator using transformers is much
more efficient for the numerical simulation of physical systems.
However, there are several challenges in training neural operators
including irregular mesh, multiple inputs, and multiple scales.

structural optimization, we usually need to simulate the
system under different settings and parameters in a massive and repeating manner. Thus, FEM can be extremely
inefficient since a single simulation using numerical methods could take from seconds to days. Recently, machine
learning methods (Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; 2022b) are
proposed to accelerate solving PDEs by learning an operator
mapping from the input functions to the solutions of PDEs.
By leveraging the expressivity of neural networks, such
neural operators could be pre-trained on a dataset and then
generalize to unseen inputs. The operators predict the solutions using a single forward computation, thereby greatly
accelerating the process of solving PDEs. Much work has
been done on investigating different neural architectures for
learning operators (Hao et al., 2022). For instance, DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019) uses a branch network and a trunk
network to process input functions and query coordinates.
FNO (Li et al., 2020) learns the operator in the spectral
space. Transformer models (Cao, 2021; Li et al., 2022b),
based on attention mechanism, are proposed since they have
a larger model capacity.

1. Introduction
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are ubiquitously used
in characterizing systems in many domains like physics,
chemistry, and biology (Zachmanoglou & Thoe, 1986).
These PDEs are usually solved by numerical methods like
the finite element method (FEM). FEM discretizes PDEs
using a mesh with a large number of nodes, and it is often
computationally expensive for high dimensional problems.
In many important tasks in science and engineering like
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Techn., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University 2 Dept. of
EE, Tsinghua University 3 RealAI 4 Bosch China Investment Ltd.
Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This progress notwithstanding, operator learning for practical real-world problems is still highly challenging and the
1

