Protecting Language Generation Models via Invisible Watermarking

Xuandong Zhao 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 1 Lei Li 1

Abstract

(a) Process of watermarking
Query

Language generation models have been an increasingly powerful enabler for many applications.
Many such models offer free or affordable API access, which makes them potentially vulnerable to
model extraction attacks through distillation. To
protect intellectual property (IP) and ensure fair
use of these models, various techniques such as
lexical watermarking and synonym replacement
have been proposed. However, these methods can
be nullified by obvious countermeasures such as
“synonym randomization”. To address this issue,
we propose G INSEW, a novel method to protect
text generation models from being stolen through
distillation. The key idea of our method is to inject secret signals into the probability vector of the
decoding steps for each target token. We can then
detect the secret message by probing a suspect
model to tell if it is distilled from the protected
one. Experimental results show that G INSEW can
effectively identify instances of IP infringement
with minimal impact on the generation quality
of protected APIs. Our method demonstrates an
absolute improvement of 19 to 29 points on mean
average precision (mAP) in detecting suspects
compared to previous methods against watermark
removal attacks.

Raw input

Extracted Model

Train
Watermarked
Generated text
response

Victim Model API

Adversary

(b) Process of watermark detection
Suspect Model

Probing input

Query

Response
Probing output

Does the suspect model extract
the victim model?

Figure 1. Overview of the process of watermarking and the process
of watermark detection. The victim model API embeds watermarks
in the response to input queries from the adversaries. The API
owner can then use a key to verify if the suspect model has been
distilled from the victim model.

While healthy competition is good to prevent monopoly in
the LLM service market, a fairly priced API-service may
expose a “short cut” that allows a company to distill a comparable model at a much lower cost — forcing the original
model creator out of the market and stifling future innovation. Anticipating this, rational LLM owners will likely
never provide API access at a fair price. Instead, they must
dramatically increase fees - far beyond service costs - to
make model distillation unprofitable.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become increasingly
powerful (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022), but
their owners are reluctant to open-source them due to high
training costs. Most companies provide only API access to
their models for free or for a fee to cover innovation and
maintenance costs. While many applications benefit from
these APIs, some are looking for cheaper alternatives.

The increased fee might be tolerable for downstream applications with good commercial values, but it makes research
and LLM applications for public good unaffordable. To
address this, governments could fund public LLMs for research and public service. However, public LLMs could also
be distilled for commercial gain or military use by unethical
entities.

1
Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Xuandong Zhao <xuandongzhao@cs.ucsb.edu>,
Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu>,
Lei Li
<leili@cs.ucsb.edu>.

Recently, a Stanford group (Taori et al., 2023) claimed to
have distilled ChatGPT for just $600 in API calls, demonstrating the issue’s urgency. The cheaper cost to distill
versus retrain models can be justified theoretically (Shalev-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

