Weakly Supervised Regression with Interval Targets

Xin Cheng 1 Yuzhou Cao 2 Ximing Li 3 Bo An 2 Lei Feng 2

Abstract

Fully supervised regression Regression with interval targets

This paper investigates an interesting weakly supervised regression setting called regression with
interval targets (RIT). Although some of the previous methods on relevant regression settings can
be adapted to RIT, they are not statistically consistent, and thus their empirical performance is not
guaranteed. In this paper, we provide a thorough
study on RIT. First, we proposed a novel statistical model to describe the data generation process
for RIT and demonstrate its validity. Second, we
analyze a simple selection method for RIT, which
selects a particular value in the interval as the target value to train the model. Third, we propose
a statistically consistent limiting method for RIT
to train the model by limiting the predictions to
the interval. We further derive an estimation error
bound for our limiting method. Finally, extensive
experiments on various datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

The true age: 58.

The age interval: [40, 70].

Figure 1. An example of facial age estimation. Both photos were
taken when Pele was 58 years old.

Wasserman & Lafferty, 2007; Kostopoulos et al., 2018),
multiple-instance regression (Amar et al., 2001; Wang et al.,
2011; Park et al., 2020), uncoupled regression (Carpentier &
Schlüter, 2016; Xu et al., 2019), and regression with noisy
targets (Ristovski et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2020).

College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 College of Computer Science and
Technology, Jilin University, China. Correspondence to: Lei Feng
<lfengqaq@gmail.com>.

This paper investigates another interesting weakly supervised regression setting called regression with interval targets (RIT). For RIT, we aim to learn a regression model
from weakly supervised training examples, each annotated
with only an interval that contains the true target value.
The learned regression model in this setting is expected to
predict the target value of any test instance as accurately
as possible. In many real-world scenarios, it is difficult to
collect the exact true target value, while it could be easy
to provide an interval in which the true target value is contained. A typical example is facial age estimation (Geng
et al., 2013). In Figure 1, there are two photos of Ballon
d’Or King Pele at the age of 58. The fully supervised regression task requires the exact age of Pele, which is quite
difficult to provide because it is common for a person to
look the same over a long period of time. However, we
can easily get an age interval that contains the true age of
Pele. Based on the facial wrinkles, we can determine that
the true age is at least 40 but not more than 70. In reality, many regression tasks face this challenge (especially in
size/length/age estimation), where it is costly or impossible
to obtain a true target value.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our studied RIT is highly related to interval-valued data prediction (IVDP) (Ishibuchi & Tanaka, 1991; Neto & De Carvalho, 2008; 2010; Fagundes et al., 2014). IVDP allows

1. Introduction
Regression is a significantly important task in machine learning and statistics (Stulp & Sigaud, 2015; Uysal & Güvenir,
1999). The goal of the regression task is to learn a predictive
model from a given set of training examples, where each
training example consists of an instance (or feature vector)
and a real-valued target. Conventional supervised regression normally requires a vast amount of labeled data to learn
an effective regression model with excellent performance.
However, it could be difficult to obtain fully supervised
training examples due to the high cost of data labeling in
real-world applications. To alleviate this problem, many
weakly supervised regression settings have been investigated, such as semi-supervised regression (Li et al., 2017;
1

2

1

