Hidden Symmetries of ReLU Networks

J. Elisenda Grigsby * 1 Kathryn Lindsey * 1 David Rolnick * 2 3

Abstract

parameter vectors to map to the same function.

The parameter space for any fixed architecture
of feedforward ReLU neural networks serves as
a proxy during training for the associated class
of functions – but how faithful is this representation? It is known that many different parameter settings θ can determine the same function f .
Moreover, the degree of this redundancy is inhomogeneous: for some networks, the only symmetries are permutation of neurons in a layer and
positive scaling of parameters at a neuron, while
other networks admit additional hidden symmetries. In this work, we prove that, for any network
architecture where no layer is narrower than the
input, there exist parameter settings with no hidden symmetries. We also describe a number of
mechanisms through which hidden symmetries
can arise, and empirically approximate the functional dimension of different network architectures at initialization. These experiments indicate
that the probability that a network has no hidden symmetries decreases towards 0 as depth increases, while increasing towards 1 as width and
input dimension increase.

Indeed, for any fully connected neural network with ReLU
activation, it has been observed that the following transformations to the parameters are symmetries – i.e., they do not
change the function computed by the network (Rolnick &
Kording, 2020; Bui Thi Mai & Lampert, 2020):
• Permutation (P). Reordering the neurons in any hidden layer, along with the corresponding permutation
of the weights and biases associated with them,
• Scaling (S). For any neuron in any hidden layer, multiplying the incoming weights and the bias by any c > 0,
while dividing the outgoing weights by c.
Such symmetries can have important implications for
gradient-based learning algorithms that operate on parameters. Many authors have considered methods to optimize
neural networks accounting for scaling symmetries (see
e.g. Neyshabur et al. (2015)). While networks trained on
the same data from different initializations are far apart in
parameter space, they express similar functions; recent work
suggests that such networks may in fact be close in parameter space if one accounts for permutation symmetries (see
e.g. Ainsworth et al. (2023)).

1. Introduction

It remains unknown, however, in what cases permutation
and scaling are the only symmetries admitted by the parameters of a neural network, and how often there are other
hidden symmetries (formalization in Definition F.4). Rolnick & Kording (2020) prove that under certain conditions,
no hidden symmetries exist, and indeed that under these
conditions it is possible to reverse-engineer a network’s parameters up to permutation and scaling. Bui Thi Mai &
Lampert (2020) prove that for all architectures with nonincreasing widths, there exist parameter settings with no
hidden symmetries. Work by Grigsby et al. (2022b) on
the functional dimension of networks suggests that a wide
variety of hidden symmetries may exist depending on the
parameter setting.

The success of deep learning relies upon the effectiveness
of neural networks in expressing a wide variety of functions.
However, it is generally impractical to explicitly write down
the function computed by a network, so networks of a given
architecture are described and learned via parameter vectors
(encompassing weights and biases). The space of parameter vectors serves as a convenient proxy for the space of
functions represented by a given network architecture, but it
is an imperfect proxy since it is possible for two different
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Boston College, Boston, USA 2 School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 3 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: J. Elisenda Grigsby <grigsbyj@bc.edu>.

Our key results in this paper are as follows:

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We prove (Theorem 4.1) that if all layers in a fully
connected ReLU network are at least as wide as the
1

