Recasting Self-Attention with Holographic Reduced Representations

Mohammad Mahmudul Alam 1 Edward Raff 1 2 3 Stella Biderman 2 3 4 Tim Oates 1 James Holt 2

Abstract
90

In recent years, self-attention has become the
dominant paradigm for sequence modeling in a variety of domains. However, in domains with very
long sequence lengths the O(T 2 ) memory and
O(T 2 H) compute costs can make using transformers infeasible. Motivated by problems in
malware detection, where sequence lengths of
T ≥ 100, 000 are a roadblock to deep learning,
we re-cast self-attention using the neuro-symbolic
approach of Holographic Reduced Representations (HRR). In doing so we perform the same
high-level strategy of the standard self-attention:
a set of queries matching against a set of keys,
and returning a weighted response of the values
for each key. Implemented as a “Hrrformer” we
obtain several benefits including O(T H log H)
time complexity, O(T H) space complexity, and
convergence in 10× fewer epochs. Nevertheless,
the Hrrformer achieves near state-of-the-art accuracy on LRA benchmarks and we are able to learn
with just a single layer. Combined, these benefits
make our Hrrformer the first viable Transformer
for such long malware classification sequences
and up to 280× faster to train on the Long Range
Arena benchmark. Code is available at https:
//github.com/NeuromorphicComputa
tionResearchProgram/Hrrformer

OOT
OOM

88

Accuracy (%)

86
OOM

84

OOT

82

Transformer
H-Transformer-1D
Luna-256
Performer
Linformer
F-Net
Hrrformer

80
78
76
74 2 9

OOM

2 10

2 11 2 12 2 13 2 14 2 15
Maximum Sequence Length

2 16

2 17

Figure 1: Our primary result, comparison of our Hrrformer
with other self-attention models in EMBER malware classification dataset. Most prior methods fail early by running
Out Of Memory (OOM) or Time (OOT). Hrrformer is presented in a solid line and achieves the best accuracy, scales
to longer sequences. The two prior best models according
to the Long Range Arena, H-Transformer-1D and Luna-256,
are in the dashed lines, and do not perform as well as the
LRA would have indicated in speed or accuracy. The rest of
the models are in the dotted line.

1. Introduction
Self-attention has risen to prominence due to the development of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and their recent
successes in machine translation, large language modeling,
and computer vision applications. The fundamental con-

struction of self-attention includes a triplet of “queries, keys,
and values”, where the response is a weighted average over
the values based on the query-key interactions. This results
in a quadratic memory and computational complexity, that
has inhibited the use of Transformers to those without significant GPU infrastructure and prevented applications to
longer sequences. Ever since, a myriad of approaches has
been proposed to approximate the self-attention mechanism,
with the vast majority trading some amount of accuracy for
speed or memory use. The “market” of self-attention strategies currently offers various trade-offs in the total package
of speed, memory use, and accuracy.

1
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD,
USA 2 Laboratory for Physical Sciences, College Park, MD, USA
3
Booz Allen Hamilton, McLean, VA, USA 4 EleutherAI. Correspondence to: Edward Raff <Raff Edward@bah.com>, Tim
Oates <oates@cs.umbc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

