Few-bit Backward: Quantized Gradients of Activation Functions for Memory
Footprint Reduction

Georgii Novikov 1 2 Daniel Bershatsky 1 Julia Gusak 1 * Alex Shonenkov Denis Dimitrov 2 Ivan Oseledets 1 2

Abstract

Memory consumed by the model during training (except
intermediate tensors) can be split into two groups: 1) the
model weights (including additional memory for the optimizer state); 2) activations saved for the backward pass,
over which the computation is not carried out directly at the
moment but will be required in the future to compute the
gradients.

Memory footprint is one of the main limiting factors for large neural network training. In backpropagation, one needs to store the input to each
operation in the computational graph. Every modern neural network model has quite a few pointwise nonlinearities in its architecture, and such
operations induce additional memory costs that,
as we show, can be significantly reduced by quantization of the gradients. We propose a systematic
approach to compute optimal quantization of the
retained gradients of the pointwise nonlinear functions with only a few bits per each element. We
show that such approximation can be achieved
by computing an optimal piecewise-constant approximation of the derivative of the activation
function, which can be done by dynamic programming. The drop-in replacements are implemented
for all popular nonlinearities and can be used in
any existing pipeline. We confirm the memory
reduction and the same convergence on several
open benchmarks.

Every operation in the computational graph generates a
memory footprint. It is typically overlooked that the application of the pointwise nonlinearity (such as GELU or
sigmoid) results in storing the input for the backward pass.
We show that instead of keeping the full input tensor, it
is possible to store a low-bit representation, which allows
accurate gradient approximation.
In this work, we propose to approximate the derivative of
the activation function in a piecewise-constant form. Such
an approximation problem has to be solved once for each
activation function, and we propose a simple technique to
do that. The proposed approximation divides all values into
several bins and saves only their corresponding bin indices
instead of storing all values. This is a lossy compression,
but the additional noise introduced by it is negligible, as
we show on several benchmarks in Section 4. The main
contributions of our paper are:

1. Introduction

• We propose new approximate backward computation
schemes that significantly reduce the memory consumption of neural network training.

Modern neural network models are getting larger and larger.
One of the main bottlenecks in the training loop is the required device memory storage (Ojika et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2020). In this paper, we propose a universal approach that
helps reduce the model memory footprint during backpropagation. Note that this approach is complementary to other
memory-reducing techniques such as checkpointing (Chen
et al., 2016) or offloading (Beaumont et al., 2021). Our
method can be applied to any neural network without any
additional preprocessing.

• We benchmark our approach on several tasks. We
show that it provides up to 40% memory reduction on
various tasks while maintaining accuracy on par with
the model trained via the standard approach.

2. Quantized Gradients of Activations
Gradients of activations using automatic differentiation.
Modern deep learning frameworks use the reverse mode
automatic differentiation to calculate the gradients of the
loss over the model parameters. Forward computation can
be associated with a directed acyclic graph, depicted in Figure 2. Each operation f computes the output Xl+1 given the
input Xl and has to save some information Sl that would be

*
Now at Inria, University of Bordeaux, France. 1 Center for
Artificial Intelligence Technology, Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 AIRI, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Georgii Novikov <georgii.novikov@skoltech.ru>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

