Go Beyond Imagination: Maximizing Episodic Reachability with World Models

Yao Fu 1 Run Peng 1 Honglak Lee 1 2

Abstract

visited starting from the beginning of training.

Efficient exploration is a challenging topic in reinforcement learning, especially for sparse reward
tasks. To deal with the reward sparsity, people
commonly apply intrinsic rewards to motivate
agents to explore the state space efficiently. In
this paper, we introduce a new intrinsic reward
design called GoBI - Go Beyond Imagination,
which combines the traditional lifelong novelty
motivation with an episodic intrinsic reward that
is designed to maximize the stepwise reachability
expansion. More specifically, we apply learned
world models to generate predicted future states
with random actions. States with more unique
predictions that are not in episodic memory are assigned high intrinsic rewards. Our method greatly
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods on
12 of the most challenging Minigrid navigation
tasks and improves the sample efficiency on locomotion tasks from DeepMind Control Suite.

While the above methods achieves great improvement on
hard-exploration tasks like Montezuma’s Revenge (Burda
et al., 2018), they generally only work well on “singleton” environments, where training and evaluation environments are the same. However, due to the poor generalization
performance of reinforcement learning in unseen environments (Kirk et al., 2021), nowadays researchers have been
paying more attention on procedurally-generated environments (Cobbe et al., 2019; 2020; Flet-Berliac et al., 2021),
where the nature of task remains the same but the environment is randomly constructed for each new episode. For
example, a maze-like environment will have different maze
structures, making it rare for the agent to encounter the
same observations across different episodes. Therefore,
lifelong novelty intrinsic motivations usually fail in hard
procedurally-generated environments of this kind (Raileanu
& Rocktäschel, 2020; Zha et al., 2021) because an agent
will be trapped around newly-generated states.
Inspired by human’s frequent use of short-term memory (Andersen et al., 2006; Eichenbaum, 2017) to avoid repeatedly
visiting the same space, recent work propose to derive intrinsic rewards on episodic level (Savinov et al., 2018; Badia
et al., 2020; Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020; Zha et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2021). The episodic intrinsic rewards generally give bonus to large episodic-level state space visitation
coverage, therefore encourage visiting as many states as
possible in the same episode. However, does visiting more
states necessarily mean efficient episodic-level exploration?
We notice that some state visitations are unnecessary and
can be avoided if they are predictable from episodic memory. For example, when navigating through a house to find
a fridge, if you open a door and find an empty room, you
do not need to go into it anymore because you can easily
predict what the states are like in the room (i.e., intuitively
speaking, you would be moving around in an empty room).
With this inspiration, we propose to design the episodic intrinsic reward to not only maximize the number of visited
states in an episode, but also consider those states that are
not visited but can be predicted from episodic memory.

1. Introduction
Efficient exploration in state space is a fundamental challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) (Hazan et al., 2019;
Lee et al., 2019), especially when the environment rewards
are sparse (Mnih et al., 2013; 2016; Schulman et al., 2017)
or absent (Liu & Abbeel, 2021; Parisi et al., 2021). Such
reward sparsity makes RL algorithms easy to fail due to the
lack of useful signals for policy update (Riedmiller et al.,
2018; Florensa et al., 2018; Sekar et al., 2020). A common approach for exploration is to introduce self-motivated
intrinsic rewards such as state visitation counts (Strehl
& Littman, 2008; Kolter & Ng, 2009) and prediction errors (Stadie et al., 2015; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al.,
2018). Most of these intrinsic reward designs measure lifelong state novelty and prioritize visiting states that are less
1
University of Michigan 2 LG AI. Correspondence to:
Yao Fu <violetfy@umich.edu>, Run Peng
<roihn@umich.edu>, Honglak Lee <honglak@eecs.umich.edu
& honglak@lgresearch.ai>.

More precisely, we maintain an episodic buffer to store all
the visited states as well as states reachable from the visited
states within a few time steps. To get the reachable states,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

