Direct Parameterization of Lipschitz-Bounded Deep Networks

Ruigang Wang 1 Ian R. Manchester 1

Abstract

which certifiable robustness is required, or the smoothness
of a learned function is important.

This paper introduces a new parameterization
of deep neural networks (both fully-connected
and convolutional) with guaranteed ℓ2 Lipschitz
bounds, i.e. limited sensitivity to input perturbations. The Lipschitz guarantees are equivalent to
the tightest-known bounds based on certification
via a semidefinite program (SDP). We provide a
“direct” parameterization, i.e., a smooth mapping
from RN onto the set of weights satisfying the
SDP-based bound. Moreover, our parameterization is complete, i.e. a neural network satisfies
the SDP bound if and only if it can be represented
via our parameterization. This enables training
using standard gradient methods, without any inner approximation or computationally intensive
tasks (e.g. projections or barrier terms) for the
SDP constraint. The new parameterization can
equivalently be thought of as either a new layer
type (the sandwich layer), or a novel parameterization of standard feedforward networks with
parameter sharing between neighbouring layers.
A comprehensive set of experiments on image
classification shows that sandwich layers outperform previous approaches on both empirical and
certified robust accuracy. Code is available at
https://github.com/acfr/LBDN.

A standard way to quantify sensitivity of models is via a
Lipschitz bound, which generalises the notion of a sloperestricted scalar function. A function x 7→ f (x) between
normed spaces satisfies a Lipschitz bound γ if
∥f (x1 ) − f (x2 )∥ ≤ γ∥x1 − x2 ∥

(1)

for all x1 , x2 in its domain. The (true) Lipschitz constant
of a function, denoted by Lip(f ), is the smallest such γ.
Moreover, we call f a γ-Lipschitz function if Lip(f ) ≤ γ.
A natural application of Lipschitz-bounds is to control a
model’s sensitivity to adversarial (worst-case) inputs, e.g.
(Madry et al., 2018; Tsuzuku et al., 2018), but they can
also be effective for regularisation (Gouk et al., 2021) and
Lipschitz constants often appear in theoretical generalization bounds (Bartlett et al., 2017; Bubeck & Sellke, 2023).
Lipschitz-bounded networks have found many applications,
including: stabilising the learning of generative adversarial networks (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017);
implicit geometry mechanisms for computer graphics (Liu
et al., 2022); in reinforcement learning to controlling sensitivity to measurement noise (e.g. (Russo & Proutiere,
2021)) and to ensure robust stability of feedback loops during learning (Wang & Manchester, 2022); and the training of
differentially-private neural networks (Bethune et al., 2023).
In robotics applications, several learning-based planning
and control algorithms require known Lipschitz bounds in
learned stability certificates, see e.g. the recent surveys
(Brunke et al., 2022; Dawson et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Neural networks have enjoyed wide application due to their
many favourable properties, including highly accurate fits to
training data, surprising generalisation performance within
a distribution, as well as scalability to very large models and
data sets. Nevertheless, it has also been observed that they
can be highly sensitive to small input perturbations (Szegedy
et al., 2014). This is a critical limitation in applications in

Unfortunately, even for two-layer perceptrons with ReLU
activations, exact calculation of the true Lipschitz constant
for ℓ2 (Euclidean) norms is NP-hard (Virmaux & Scaman,
2018), so attention has focused on approximations that balance accuracy with computational tractability. Crude ℓ2 bounds can be found via the product of spectral norms of
layer weights (Szegedy et al., 2014), however to date the
most accurate polynomial-time computable bounds require
solution of a semidefinite program (SDP) (Fazlyab et al.,
2019), which is computationally tractable only for relatively
small fully-connected networks.

1
Australian Centre for Robotics, School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Correspondence to: Ruigang Wang
<ruigang.wang@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

While certification of a Lipschitz bound of a network is
a (convex) SDP with this method, the set of weights sat1

