Computational Doob h-transforms for Online Filtering of Discretely Observed
Diffusions
Nicolas Chopin 1 Andras Fulop 2 Jeremy Heng 2 Alexandre H. Thiery 3

Abstract

Brownian motions or Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) processes.
This difficulty has hindered the use of standard methodologies for inference and data-assimilation of models driven
by diffusion processes and various approaches have been
developed to circumvent or mitigate some of these issues,
as discussed in Section 4.

This paper is concerned with online filtering of
discretely observed nonlinear diffusion processes.
Our approach is based on the fully adapted auxiliary particle filter, which involves Doob’s htransforms that are typically intractable. We
propose a computational framework to approximate these h-transforms by solving the underlying
backward Kolmogorov equations using nonlinear
Feynman-Kac formulas and neural networks. The
methodology allows one to train a locally optimal particle filter prior to the data-assimilation
procedure. Numerical experiments illustrate that
the proposed approach can be orders of magnitude more efficient than state-of-the-art particle
filters in the regime of highly informative observations, when the observations are extreme under
the model, or if the state dimension is large.

Consider a time-homogeneous multivariate diffusion process dXt = µ(Xt ) dt + σ(Xt ) dBt that is discretely observed at regular intervals. Noisy observations yk of
the latent process Xtk are collected at equispaced times
tk ≡ k T for k ≥ 1. We consider the online filtering
problem which consists in estimating the conditional laws
πk (dx) = P(Xtk ∈ dx|y1 , . . . , yk ), i.e. the filtering distributions, as observations are collected. We focus on the use
of Particle Filters (PFs) that approximate the filtering distributions with a system of weighted particles. Although many
previous works have relied on the Bootstrap Particle Filter
(BPF), which simulates particles from the diffusion process,
it can perform poorly in challenging scenarios as it fails to
take the incoming observation yk into account. This issue is
partially mitigated in Guided Intermediate Resampling Filters (GIRF) by relying on resampling at intermediate times
between observations using guiding functions that forecast
the likelihood of future observations (Del Moral & Murray,
2015; Park & Ionides, 2020).

1. Introduction
Diffusion processes are fundamental tools in applied mathematics, statistics, and machine learning. Because this
flexible class of models is easily amenable to computations and simulations, diffusion processes are very common
in biological sciences (e.g. population and multi-species
models, stochastic delay population systems), neuroscience
(e.g. models for synaptic input, stochastic Hodgkin–Huxley
model, stochastic Fitzhugh–Nagumo model), and finance
(e.g. modeling multi assets prices) (Allen, 2010; Shreve
et al., 2004; Capasso & Capasso, 2021). In these disciplines,
tracking signals from partial or noisy observations is a very
common task. However, working with diffusion processes
can be challenging as their transition densities are only
tractable in rare and simple situations such as (geometric)

The (locally) optimal approach given by the Fully Adapted
Auxiliary Particle Filter (FA-APF) (Pitt & Shephard, 1999;
Doucet et al., 2000) can only be implemented in simple
settings such as finite state-spaces or linear and Gaussian
models. We show in this article that the FA-APF can be
practically implemented in a much larger class of models;
see Figure 1a for a comparison between the FA-APF and
the BPF. The proposed method simulates a conditioned diffusion process, which can be formulated as a control problem involving an intractable Doob’s h-transform (Rogers
& Williams, 2000; Chung & Walsh, 2006); see Figure 1b
for an illustration. We propose the Computational Doob’s
h-Transform (CDT) framework for efficiently approximating these quantities. Since the latent process is a diffusion process, the Doob’s h-transform satisfies the backward
Kolmogorov equation: our proposed method relies on nonlinear Feynman-Kac formulas for solving this backward
Kolmogorov partial differential equation simultaneously for

1

Institut Polytechnique de Paris, ENSAE Paris, Paris, France
ESSEC Business School, Paris and Singapore 3 Department of
Statistics and Data Science
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Alexandre H. Thiery <a.h.thiery@nus.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

