Revisiting Domain Randomization via Relaxed State-Adversarial
Policy Optimization
Yun-Hsuan Lien 1 Ping-Chun Hsieh 1 Yu-Shuen Wang 1

Abstract

as the ”reality gap,” which can greatly reduce the performance of these agents. To address this issue, domain randomization (DR) methods have been developed to perturb
environmental parameters (Tobin et al., 2017; Rajeswaran
et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2021), such as mass and friction coefficient, in order to simulate uncertainty in state transition
probabilities and improve the agents’ ability to maximize
return in various environments. Despite its effectiveness,
DR has two major limitations: (1) it requires direct access to
the underlying parameters of the simulation, which may not
be possible when only off-the-shelf simulation platforms
are available, and (2) it relies on prior knowledge of the
distribution of environmental parameters, which can greatly
affect performance in real-world environments.

Domain randomization (DR) is widely used in
reinforcement learning (RL) to bridge the gap between simulation and reality by maximizing its
average returns under the perturbation of environmental parameters. However, even the most
complex simulators cannot capture all details in
reality due to finite domain parameters and simplified physical models. Additionally, the existing methods often assume that the distribution
of domain parameters belongs to a specific family of probability functions, such as normal distributions, which may not be correct. To overcome these limitations, we propose a new approach to DR by rethinking it from the perspective of adversarial state perturbation, without the
need for reconfiguring the simulator or relying
on prior knowledge about the environment. We
also address the issue of over-conservatism that
can occur when perturbing agents to the worst
states during training by introducing a Relaxed
State-Adversarial Algorithm that simultaneously
maximizes the average-case and worst-case returns. We evaluate our method by comparing it to
state-of-the-art methods, providing experimental
results and theoretical proofs to verify its effectiveness. Our source code and appendix are available
at https://github.com/sophialien/RAPPO.

To prevent the above limitations, we rethink DR from the
perspective of adversarial state perturbation, which eliminates the need for reconfiguring the simulator or relying
on prior knowledge about the environment. Our method
involves perturbing states after nominal state transitions
rather than altering transition probabilities. A popular approach from the robust optimization literature (Ben-Tal &
Nemirovski, 1998) is to take a worst-case viewpoint and
perturb the states to nearby states with the lowest longterm expected return under the current policy (Kuang et al.,
2022). However, this worst-case strategy can lead to severe
over-conservatism in the learned policy, which will not be
useful even in nominal environments. We identify that the
over-conservative behavior results from the tight coupling
between temporal difference (TD) learning in robust RL and
the worst-case state perturbation. Specifically: (1) In robust RL, the value functions are learned with bootstrapping
in TD methods since finding nearby worst-case states via
Monte-Carlo sampling is NP-hard (Ho et al., 2018; Chow
et al., 2015; Behzadian et al., 2021). (2) When the state perturbations are in the worst-case scenario, the value function
updates are based on the local minimum within a neighborhood of the nominal next state, ignoring the value of the
nominal next state. This causes the learner to fail to identify
or explore states with high potential returns. To illustrate
the issue of over-conservatism, we present a toy example
using a grid world environment where the goal is to find the
shortest path to a specific location. As shown in Figure 1(a),
despite the goal state having a high value, the use of the

1. Introduction
The use of reinforcement learning (RL) agents in real-world
environments is often hindered by the difficulty of collecting
data. As a result, many RL agents are trained in simulated
environments. However, there is often a significant difference between the simulated and real environments, known
*

Equal contribution 1 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Yun-Hsuan Lien
<sophia.yh.lien@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

