Learning Physical Models that Can Respect Conservation Laws

Derek Hansen 1 Danielle C. Maddix 2 Shima Alizadeh 2 Gaurav Gupta 2 Michael W. Mahoney 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Conservation laws are ubiquitous in science and engineering, where they are used to model physical phenomena
ranging from heat transfer to wave propagation to fluid flow
dynamics, and beyond. These laws can be expressed in two
complementary ways: in a differential form; or in an integral form. They are most commonly expressed as partial
differential equations (PDEs) in a differential form,

Recent work in scientific machine learning
(SciML) has focused on incorporating partial
differential equation (PDE) information into the
learning process. Much of this work has focused
on relatively “easy” PDE operators (e.g., elliptic and parabolic), with less emphasis on relatively “hard” PDE operators (e.g., hyperbolic).
Within numerical PDEs, the latter problem class
requires control of a type of volume element
or conservation constraint, which is known to
be challenging. Delivering on the promise of
SciML requires seamlessly incorporating both
types of problems into the learning process. To
address this issue, we propose P ROB C ONSERV,
a framework for incorporating conservation constraints into a generic SciML architecture. To do
so, P ROB C ONSERV combines the integral form
of a conservation law with a Bayesian update.
We provide a detailed analysis of P ROB C ON SERV on learning with the Generalized Porous
Medium Equation (GPME), a widely-applicable
parameterized family of PDEs that illustrates the
qualitative properties of both easier and harder
PDEs. P ROB C ONSERV is effective for easy
GPME variants, performing well with state-ofthe-art competitors; and for harder GPME variants it outperforms other approaches that do
not guarantee volume conservation. P ROB C ON SERV seamlessly enforces physical conservation constraints, maintains probabilistic uncertainty quantification (UQ), and deals well with
shocks and heteroscedasticities. In each case,
it achieves superior predictive performance on
downstream tasks.

ut + ∇ · F (u) = 0,

for an unknown u and a nonlinear flux function F (u). This
differential form of the conservation law can be integrated
over a spatial domain Ω using the divergence theorem to
result in an integral form of the conservation law,
Z
Ut = − F (u) · ndΓ,
Γ

where U = Ω u(t, x)dΩ and Γ denotes the boundary of
Ω. As examples: in the case of heat transfer, u denotes the
temperature, and U the conserved energy of system; and in
the case of porous media flow, u denotes the density, and U
the conserved mass of the porous media.
R

Global conservation states that the rate of change in time of
the conserved quantity U over a domain Ω is given by the
flux across the boundary Γ of the domain. Local conservation arises naturally in the numerical solution of PDEs.
Traditional numerical methods (e.g., finite differences, finite elements, and finite volume methods) have been developed to solve PDEs numerically, with finite volume methods being designed for (and being particularly well-suited
for) conservation laws (LeVeque, 1990; 2002; 2007). Finite volume methods divide the domain Ω into control volumes and apply the integral form locally. They enforce that
the time derivative of the cell-averaged unknown is equal
to the difference of the in-flux and out-flux over the control volume. (This local conservation—so-called since the
out-flux that leaves one cell equals the in-flux that enters a
neighboring cell—can be used to guarantee global conservation over the whole domain.) This numerical approach
should be contrasted with finite difference methods, which
use the differential form directly, and which are thus not
guaranteed to satisfy the conservation condition.

1

Dept. of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA (Work done during an internship at AWS AI Labs.) 2 AWS
AI Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA 3 Amazon Supply Chain Optimization Technologies, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Danielle C. Maddix <dmmaddix@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This discussion is relevant for machine learning (ML)
since there has been an interest recently in Scientific ML
1

