Random Matrix Analysis to Balance between Supervised
and Unsupervised Learning under the Low Density Separation Assumption

Vasilii Feofanov * 1 Malik Tiomoko * 1 Aladin Virmaux * 1

Abstract

received a lot of attention over the past decade due to its
relevance to many real-world applications, where the annotation of data is costly and performed manually (Imran et al.,
2020), while the data acquisition is cheap and may result
in an abundance of unlabeled data (Fergus et al., 2009). As
such, semi-supervised learning could be seen as a learning
framework that lies in between the supervised and the unsupervised settings, where the former occurs when all the data
is labeled, and the latter is restored when only unlabeled
data is available. Generally, a semi-supervised algorithm is
expected to outperform its supervised counterpart trained
only on labeled data by efficiently extracting the information
valuable to the prediction task from unlabeled examples.

We propose a theoretical framework to analyze
semi-supervised classification under the low density separation assumption in a high-dimensional
regime. In particular, we introduce QLDS, a
linear classification model, where the low density separation assumption is implemented via
quadratic margin maximization. The algorithm
has an explicit solution with rich theoretical properties, and we show that particular cases of our
algorithm are the least-square support vector machine in the supervised case, the spectral clustering in the fully unsupervised regime, and a class
of semi-supervised graph-based approaches. As
such, QLDS establishes a smooth bridge between
these supervised and unsupervised learning methods. Using recent advances in random matrix theory, we formally derive a theoretical evaluation of
the classification error in the asymptotic regime.
As an application, we derive a hyperparameter
selection policy that finds the best balance between the supervised and the unsupervised terms
of our learning criterion. Finally, we provide extensive illustrations of our framework, as well as
an experimental study on several benchmarks to
demonstrate that QLDS, while being computationally more efficient, improves over cross-validation
for hyperparameter selection, indicating a high
promise of the usage of random matrix theory for
semi-supervised model selection.

In practice, integration of unlabeled observations to
the learning process does not always affect the performance (Singh et al., 2008), since the marginal data distribution p(x) must contain information on the prediction task
p(y|x). Consequently, most semi-supervised approaches
rely on specific assumptions about how p(x) and p(y|x)
are linked with each other. It is principally assumed that
examples similar to each other tend to share the same class
labels (van Engelen and Hoos, 2019), and implementation
of this assumption results in different families of semisupervised learning models. The first approaches aim to
capture the intrinsic geometry of the data using a graph
Laplacian (Chong et al., 2020; Song et al., 2022) and suppose that high-dimensional data points with the same label lie on the same low-dimensional manifold (Belkin and
Niyogi, 2004). Another family of semi-supervised algorithms suggests that examples from a dense region belong
to the same class. While some methods explicitly look for
such regions by relying on a clustering algorithm (Rigollet, 2007; Peikari et al., 2018), another idea is to directly
restrict the classification model to have a decision boundary
that only passes through low density regions. This latter
approach is said to rely on the Low Density Separation
(LDS) assumption (Chapelle and Zien, 2005; van Engelen
and Hoos, 2019), and it has been widely used in practice in
recent decades, combined with the support vector machine
(Bennett and Demiriz, 1998; Joachims, 1999), ensemble
methods (d’Alché-Buc et al., 2001; Feofanov et al., 2019)
and deep learning methods (Sajjadi et al., 2016; Berthelot
et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL, Chapelle et al., 2010; van
Engelen and Hoos, 2019) aims to learn using both labeled
and unlabeled data at once. This machine learning approach
*

1
Equal contribution
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
Paris, France.
Correspondence to:
Vasilii Feofanov
<vasilii.feofanov@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

