A Toy Model of Universality:
Reverse Engineering how Networks Learn Group Operations

Bilal Chughtai 1 Lawrence Chan 2 Neel Nanda 1

Abstract
Universality is a key hypothesis in mechanistic
interpretability – that different models learn similar features and circuits when trained on similar
tasks. In this work, we study the universality
hypothesis by examining how small neural networks learn to implement group composition. We
present a novel algorithm by which neural networks may implement composition for any finite
group via mathematical representation theory. We
then show that networks consistently learn this
algorithm by reverse engineering model logits
and weights, and confirm our understanding using ablations. By studying networks of differing
architectures trained on various groups, we find
mixed evidence for universality: using our algorithm, we can completely characterize the family
of circuits and features that networks learn on this
task, but for a given network the precise circuits
learned – as well as the order they develop – are
arbitrary.

Figure 1. The algorithm implemented by a one hidden layer MLP
for arbitrary group composition. Given two input group elements
a and b, the model learns representation matrices ρ(a) and ρ(b)
in its embeddings. Using the ReLU activations in its MLP layer,
it then multiplies these matrices, computing ρ(a)ρ(b) = ρ(ab).
Finally, it ‘reads off’ the logits for each output group element c
by computing characters – the matrix trace tr ρ(abc−1 ), denoted
χρ (abc−1 ), which is maximized when c = ab.

1. Introduction

and circuits in detail (Elhage et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022;
Nanda et al., 2023). If the universality hypothesis holds,
then the insights and principles found by studying small
models will transfer to state-of-the-art models that are used
in practice. But if universality is false, then although we
may learn some general principles from small models, we
should shift focus to developing scalable, more automated
interpretability techniques that can directly interpret models
of genuine interest.

Do models converge on the same solutions to a task, or are
the algorithms implemented arbitrary and unpredictable?
The universality hypothesis (Olah et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2016) asserts that models learn similar features and circuits across different models when trained on similar tasks.
This is an open question of significant importance to the
field of mechanistic interpretability. The field focuses on
reverse engineering state-of-the-art models by identifying
circuits (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022; Nanda et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2022), subgraphs of networks consisting sets of tightly linked features and the weights between
them.(Olah et al., 2020). Recently, the field of mechanistic interpretability has increasingly shifted towards finding
small, toy models easier to interpret, and employing labor intensive approaches to reverse-engineering specific features

In this work, we study to what extent the universality hypothesis is true by interpreting networks trained on composition
of group elements in various finite groups 1 . We focus on
composition of arbitrary groups as this defines a large family
of related tasks, forming an algorithmic test bed for investigating universality. We first exhibit a general algorithm
by which networks can compute compositions of elements
in an arbitrary finite group, using concepts from the mathematical field of representation2 and character theory. We

1
Independent 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Bilal Chughtai <brchughtaii@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Code and a demo notebook are available at
https://github.com/bilal-chughtai/rep-theory-mech-interp
2
We note our use of the word ‘representation’ is distinct to the

1

