Multi-Symmetry Ensembles: Improving Diversity and Generalization
via Opposing Symmetries

Charlotte Loh 1 2 Seungwook Han 1 Shivchander Sudalairaj 2 Rumen Dangovski 1 Kai Xu 3 Florian Wenzel 4
Marin Soljačić 5 Akash Srivastava 2

Abstract
Deep ensembles (DE) have been successful in improving model performance by learning diverse
members via the stochasticity of random initialization. While recent works have attempted to
promote further diversity in DE via hyperparameters or regularizing loss functions, these methods primarily still rely on a stochastic approach
to explore the hypothesis space. In this work,
we present Multi-Symmetry Ensembles (MSE),
a framework for constructing diverse ensembles
by capturing the multiplicity of hypotheses along
symmetry axes, which explore the hypothesis
space beyond stochastic perturbations of model
weights and hyperparameters. We leverage recent
advances in contrastive representation learning
to create models that separately capture opposing hypotheses of invariant and equivariant functional classes and present a simple ensembling
approach to efficiently combine appropriate hypotheses for a given task. We show that MSE
effectively captures the multiplicity of conflicting hypotheses that is often required in large, diverse datasets like ImageNet. As a result of their
inherent diversity, MSE improves classification
performance, uncertainty quantification, and generalization across a series of transfer tasks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
clott3/multi-sym-ensem

(a)

(b) 𝑇 = four-fold rotations
Hypothesis
Space

𝐻" ′

𝐻! ′: 𝐼𝑛𝑣 𝑡𝑜 𝑇!

𝐼𝑛𝑣

𝐻#

𝐻# '

𝐻! : 𝐸𝑞 𝑡𝑜 𝑇!

𝐻"

𝐸𝑞
: Deep Ensemble (random init.)
: Deep Ensemble of Eq.
: Multi-Symmetry Ensemble (ours)

Figure 1. (a) A comparative illustration of the diversity in the
hypothesis space that traditional deep ensembles and our MultiSymmetry Ensembles can achieve. While deep ensembles are
effective at capturing different solutions around one hypothesis,
Multi-Symmetry Ensembles can learn diverse solutions around
inherently opposing hypotheses. (b) Schematic visualization of invariance (top) v.s. equivariance (bottom) for the four-fold rotation.
The spheres denote the representation space of the models.

the advancements in model architectures, learning methods, and the availability of large-scale datasets (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020). Large
and diverse datasets have proved crucial in improving performance, yet they present new challenges. The increased
diversity of datasets makes it more difficult for a single
dominant hypothesis to capture all semantic classes. To
overcome this problem, model ensembling (Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Breiman, 1996) can be utilized to combine multiple networks. A popular approach is Deep Ensembles
(DE) (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2016), which combines networks with different random initializations and relies on the
non-convexity of the loss landscape (Fort et al., 2019) and
stochasticity of the training algorithm to arrive at different
solutions. They often significantly improve model performance and uncertainty quantification (Ovadia et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
The field of computer vision has seen significant progress
in various tasks such as classification and semantic segmentation in recent years. This success can be attributed to
1

MIT EECS 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 Amazon (work done
outside of Amazon) 4 AWS (work done outside of Amazon) 5 MIT
Physics. Correspondence to: Charlotte Loh <cloh@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Their success can be attributed to the diversity amongst the
ensemble members (Rame & Cord, 2021); ensemble perfor1

