When and How Does Known Class Help Discover Unknown Ones?
Provable Understanding Through Spectral Analysis

Yiyou Sun 1 Zhenmei Shi 1 Yingyu Liang 1 Yixuan Li 1
Known Classes

Abstract

Novel Classes

?

Novel Class Discovery (NCD) aims at inferring
novel classes in an unlabeled set by leveraging
prior knowledge from a labeled set with known
classes. Despite its importance, there is a lack
of theoretical foundations for NCD. This paper bridges the gap by providing an analytical
framework to formalize and investigate when
and how known classes can help discover novel
classes. Tailored to the NCD problem, we introduce a graph-theoretic representation that can
be learned by a novel NCD Spectral Contrastive
Loss (NSCL). Minimizing this objective is equivalent to factorizing the graph’s adjacency matrix,
which allows us to derive a provable error bound
and provide the sufficient and necessary condition for NCD. Empirically, NSCL can match or
outperform several strong baselines on common
benchmark datasets, which is appealing for practical usage while enjoying theoretical guarantees.
Code is available at: https://github.com/
deeplearning-wisc/NSCL.git.

Case 1

Case 2

Kn
ow

led
ge

Knowledge

ge

led

ow
Kn

?

Case 3
(Three Types) Labeled Data

Unlabeled Data

Figure 1. Novel Class Discovery (NCD) aims to cluster similar
samples in unlabeled data (right), by way of utilizing knowledge
from the labeled data (left). We illustrate scenarios where different
known classes could result in different novel clusters (e.g., red
mushrooms or mushrooms with umbrella shapes). This paper aims
to provide a formal understanding.

an unlabeled dataset (of novel classes) by way of utilizing
knowledge from the labeled data (of known classes). Key
to NCD is harnessing the power of labeled data for possible
knowledge sharing and transfer to the unlabeled data (Hsu
et al., 2018; Han et al., 2019; Hsu et al., 2019; Zhong et al.,
2021b; Han et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2022; Sun & Li, 2023).

1. Introduction

One promising approach for NCD is to learn feature representation jointly from both labeled and unlabeled data, so
that meaningful cluster structures emerge as novel classes.
We argue that interesting intricacies can arise in this learning
process—the resulting novel clusters may be very different,
depending on the type of known class provided. We exemplify the nuances in Figure 1. In one scenario, the novel
class “red mushroom” can be discovered, provided with the
known class “strawberry” of a shared color feature. Alternatively, a different novel class can also emerge by grouping the bottom two images together (as “mushroom with
umbrella shape” class), if the umbrella-shape images are
given as a known class to the learner. We argue—perhaps
obviously—that a formalized understanding of the intricate
phenomenon is needed. This motivates our research:

Though modern machine learning methods have achieved
remarkable success (He et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022), the vast majority of learning
algorithms have been driven by the closed-world setting,
where the classes are assumed stationary and unchanged
between training and testing. However, machine learning
models in the open world will inevitably encounter novel
classes that are outside the existing known categories (Sun
et al., 2021; 2022; Ming et al., 2022; 2023). Novel Class
Discovery (NCD) (Han et al., 2019) has emerged as an
important problem, which aims to cluster similar samples in
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin Madison. Correspondence to: Yiyou Sun, Yixuan Li <sunyiyou,
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

When and how does the known class help discover novel
classes?
1

