Omnipredictors for Constrained Optimization

Lunjia Hu * 1 Inbal Rachel Livni Navon * 1 Omer Reingold * 1 Chutong Yang * 1

Abstract

algorithm may try to come up with a hypothesis that determines an action to minimize an expected loss based on
a particular loss function. The challenge in this prevalent
paradigm of loss minimization is that different loss functions call for very different learning algorithms, which is
problematic for a variety of reasons (e.g. multiple relevant
loss functions or loss functions that are undetermined at
the time of learning). The notion of omnipredictors that
was introduced recently by Gopalan, Kalai, Reingold, Sharan and Wieder (Gopalan et al., 2022) provides a way to
learn a single predictor that can be naturally post-processed
(without access to data) to an action that minimizes any one
of a very wide collection of loss functions. Gopalan et al.
(2022) showed that omniprediction is implied by multicalibrated prediction, a notion introduced by Hébert-Johnson,
Kim, Reingold and Rothblum in the algorithmic fairness
literature (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018).

The notion of omnipredictors (Gopalan, Kalai,
Reingold, Sharan and Wieder ITCS 2022), suggested a new paradigm for loss minimization.
Rather than learning a predictor based on a known
loss function, omnipredictors can easily be postprocessed to minimize any one of a rich family
of loss functions compared with the loss of hypotheses in a class C. It has been shown that such
omnipredictors exist and are implied (for all convex and Lipschitz loss functions) by the notion
of multicalibration from the algorithmic fairness
literature. In this paper, we introduce omnipredictors for constrained optimization and study their
complexity and implications. The notion that we
introduce allows the learner to be unaware of the
loss function that will be later assigned as well
as the constraints that will be later imposed, as
long as the subpopulations that are used to define
these constraints are known. We show how to
obtain omnipredictors for constrained optimization problems, relying on appropriate variants of
multicalibration. We also investigate the implications of this notion when the constraints used are
so-called group fairness notions.

While loss minimization is a natural goal, it may not be the
only consideration in choosing an action. There may, for
example, be capacity constraints (e.g. a limited number of
vaccines) as well as fairness and diversity considerations.
In this work, we introduce a notion of omniprediction that
applies to the task of loss minimization conditioned on a
set of constraints. For example, imagine we are deciding on
which patients would receive a medical intervention when
the budget for offering that intervention is limited (capacity
constraint), or when we want this intervention to be assigned
proportionally to the size of two subpopulations (statistical
parity), or when we want the probability of receiving an
intervention among patients who experience medical complications to be the same in two different subpopulations
(equal opportunity). Our notion of omniprediction allows
learning a single predictor that could be used to minimize
a large collection of loss functions, even when arbitrary
subsets of constraints are imposed from a rich family of constraints. We show how to formalize such a notion (exposing
subtleties not existing in the original notion of omniprediction), how to obtain it using some variants of multicalibration, demonstrating that seeking an accurate depiction of
the current world may be useful even when the final goal
is a socially engineered action. Finally, we study the interaction between loss minimization and fairness constraints,
showing that loss minimization has the potential to support
fairness objectives.

1. Introduction
A predominant usage for outcome prediction is to inform
the choice of a related action. Predicting the probability of
a medical condition may help decide on a medical intervention or determine a life insurance premium rate. Predicting
the probability of rain may help decide on the method of
commuting to work or on a vacation destination or on wedding plans. For each possible action and outcome pair, there
may be an associated loss – the cost of catching a cold while
riding to work on a bike in the rain or perhaps the cost of
changing a wedding venue at the last minute. A learning
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Stanford
University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Lunjia Hu <lunjia@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

