Diffusion Models as Artists:
Are we Closing the Gap between Humans and Machines?

Victor Boutin 1 2 Thomas Fel 1 2 Lakshya Singhal 2 Rishav Mukherji 2 Akash Nagaraj 2 Julien Colin 2 3
Thomas Serre 1 2

Abstract
An important milestone for AI is the development
of algorithms that can produce drawings that are
indistinguishable from those of humans. Here,
we adapt the “diversity vs. recognizability” scoring framework from Boutin et al., 2022 and find
that one-shot diffusion models have indeed started
to close the gap between humans and machines.
However, using a finer-grained measure of the
originality of individual samples, we show that
strengthening the guidance of diffusion models
helps improve the humanness of their drawings,
but they still fall short of approximating the originality and recognizability of human drawings.
Comparing human category diagnostic features,
collected through an online psychophysics experiment, against those derived from diffusion models
reveals that humans rely on fewer and more localized features. Overall, our study suggests that
diffusion models have significantly helped improve the quality of machine-generated drawings;
however, a gap between humans and machines
remains – in part explainable by discrepancies in
visual strategies.

Figure 1. Can you tell apart human from machine-generated samples in each pair1 ? Machine samples are generated using a
CFGDM (see Section 2.2).

trauma (Koppitz, 1968) and developmental disorders (RyanWenger, 2001) to intellectual deficits (Goodenough, 1926).
Cognitive psychologists and computer scientists have also
used drawing tasks to probe the human ability to learn new
visual concepts from just a single example (Feldman, 1997;
Lake et al., 2015). From a computational perspective, such
one-shot drawing tasks offer an unprecedented challenge –
to solve the seemingly impossible task of estimating entire probability distributions for novel image categories
from a unique sample. Nevertheless, humans can effortlessly produce drawings that are original (i.e., sufficiently
different from the shown exemplar), yet, easily recognizable (Tiedemann et al., 2022) – suggesting strong inductive
biases (Tenenbaum, 1999; Ullman & Tenenbaum, 2020) that
are yet to be discovered.

1. Introduction
Drawing is a fundamental human skill; from paintings on
cave walls to the finest pieces of art, generations of humans have expressed their creative skills and imagination
through drawings (Donald, 1991). Drawings are so deeply
rooted in human cognition that they are routinely used in
a variety of clinical settings – from evaluating emotional

While a common criticism of modern AI approaches is
their appetite for large training datasets, significant progress
has been made in the field of few-shot image generation.
In particular, one-shot generative models based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) or Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) have started to take advantage of various inductive biases via specific forms of spatial attention (Rezende et al., 2016) or the integration of contextual information (Edwards & Storkey, 2016; Giannone &
Winther, 2021; Antoniou et al., 2017). Furthermore, the recent breakthrough achieved using diffusion models (Song &
Ermon, 2019; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) makes them a par-

1
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France. 2 Carney Institute for Brain
Science, Dpt. of Cognitive Linguistic & Psychological Sciences,
Brown University, Providence, RI 02912. 3 ELLIS Alicante, Spain.
Correspondence to: Victor Boutin <victor boutin@brown.edu>,
Thomas Serre <thomas serre@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
For each pair the human samples are (by row): right - left left; right - right - left; right - right - left.

1

