Diffusion Models for Black-Box Optimization

Siddarth Krishnamoorthy 1 Satvik Mashkaria 1 Aditya Grover 1

Abstract

sidestepping real-world interactions (Trabucco et al., 2021;
Kumar & Levine, 2020; Hansen, 2016). We refer to this
paradigm as offline black-box optimization (BBO).

The goal of offline black-box optimization (BBO)
is to optimize an expensive black-box function using a fixed dataset of function evaluations. Prior
works consider forward approaches that learn
surrogates to the black-box function and inverse
approaches that directly map function values to
corresponding points in the input domain of the
black-box function. These approaches are limited
by the quality of the offline dataset and the difficulty in learning one-to-many mappings in high
dimensions, respectively. We propose Denoising
Diffusion Optimization Models (DDOM), a new
inverse approach for offline black-box optimization based on diffusion models. Given an offline
dataset, DDOM learns a conditional generative
model over the domain of the black-box function
conditioned on the function values. We investigate several design choices in DDOM, such as
reweighting the dataset to focus on high function values and the use of classifier-free guidance at test-time to enable generalization to function values that can even exceed the dataset maxima. Empirically, we conduct experiments on the
Design-Bench benchmark (Trabucco et al., 2022)
and show that DDOM achieves results competitive with state-of-the-art baselines. Our implementation of DDOM can be found at https:
//github.com/siddarthk97/ddom.

The key challenge for offline BBO is the limited coverage of
the offline dataset. Accordingly, there are two broad classes
of approaches in prior works. Following the tradition of online BBO, many forward approaches learn a surrogate model
mapping inputs to their function values. Once learned, this
surrogate can be optimized with respect to its input using
a gradient-based optimizer or serve as a proxy oracle for a
standard online BBO surrogate e.g., BayesOpt using a Gaussian Process. Forward approaches are indirect, and learning
a surrogate that generalizes outside the offline dataset can
be challenging (Trabucco et al., 2021).
In contrast, inverse approaches directly learn a mapping
from function values to inputs in the domain of the blackbox function. This mapping is generally one-to-many as
many points can have the same function value. The key
advantage of an inverse model is that at test time, we can
simply condition the model on high/low function values to
obtain candidate optima. However, learning one-to-many
mappings is challenging, especially when the underlying
black-box function is defined over a high-dimensional domain. Prior works have found some success with generative approaches based on generative adversarial networks
(GAN) (Kumar & Levine, 2020; Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Mirza & Osindero, 2014). These approaches inherit the
problem of their base models, such as training instability
and mode collapse for GANs.
We develop a new approach called Denoising Diffusion Optimization Models (DDOM) that uses conditional diffusion
models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; 2021; Huang
et al., 2021) to parameterize and learn the inverse mapping. A diffusion model specifies an encoding-decoding
procedure based on adding small amounts of noise over
multiple timesteps during encoding and then reconstructing the original signal based on the noisy encodings during
the decoding stage (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). Diffusion
models have shown excellent success across a range of continuous data, such as images (Song et al., 2021; 2020; Ho
et al., 2020), videos (Ho et al., 2022), and speech (Kim et al.,
2022; Jeong et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2021). They also allow
for conditioning on other inputs, and as a result, they also

1. Introduction
Many fundamental problems in science and engineering involve optimization of an expensive black-box function, such
as optimal experimental design and product optimization.
Since evaluating the black-box function is expensive, recent works consider purely data-driven approaches that use
only offline logged datasets to optimize the target function
1
Department of Computer Science, UCLA. Correspondence to:
Siddarth Krishnamoorthy <siddarthk@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

