DeSRA: Detect and Delete the Artifacts of GAN-based Real-World
Super-Resolution Models

Liangbin Xie * 1 2 3 Xintao Wang * 3 Xiangyu Chen * 1 2 4 Gen Li 5 Ying Shan 3 Jiantao Zhou 1 Chao Dong 2 4

Abstract
Image super-resolution (SR) with generative adversarial networks (GAN) has achieved great success in restoring realistic details. However, it
is notorious that GAN-based SR models will inevitably produce unpleasant and undesirable artifacts, especially in practical scenarios. Previous works typically suppress artifacts with an extra loss penalty in the training phase. They only
work for in-distribution artifact types generated
during training. When applied in real-world scenarios, we observe that those improved methods
still generate obviously annoying artifacts during
inference. In this paper, we analyze the cause
and characteristics of the GAN artifacts produced
in unseen test data without ground-truths. We
then develop a novel method, namely, DeSRA,
to Detect and then “Delete” those SR Artifacts
in practice. Specifically, we propose to measure
a relative local variance distance from MSE-SR
results and GAN-SR results, and locate the problematic areas based on the above distance and
semantic-aware thresholds. After detecting the
artifact regions, we develop a finetune procedure
to improve GAN-based SR models with a few
samples, so that they can deal with similar types
of artifacts in more unseen real data. Equipped
with our DeSRA, we can successfully eliminate
artifacts from inference and improve the ability
of SR models to be applied in real-world scenarios. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/TencentARC/DeSRA.

Input

Real-ESRGAN

DeSRA-det

RealESRGAN-DeSRA

Input

LDL

DeSRA-det

LDL-DeSRA

Input

SwinIR

DeSRA-det

SwinIR-DeSRA

Figure 1. Visualization of GAN-SR artifacts, artifact detection results, and improved GAN-SR results by our proposed DeSRA.
Since these GAN-inference artifacts appear on unseen real test
data, existing methods that deal with GAN-SR artifacts by improving the training like LDL (Liang et al., 2022b) would still suffer
from these artifacts. Our DeSRA can effectively detect the artifact
regions and then improve the SR model to eliminate those artifacts
and restore visually-pleasant results. Zoom in for best view

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct
high-resolution (HR) images from their low-resolution(LR)
observations. Since the pioneering work of SRCNN (Dong
et al., 2014), numerous approaches (Lim et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018b; Liang et al., 2021) have been developed and
made great strides in this field. Among them, GAN-based
methods (Ledig et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018b) have
achieved great success in generating realistic SR results
with detailed textures. Recently, BSRGAN (Zhang et al.,
2021) and Real-ESRGAN (Wang et al., 2021c) extend GANbased models to real-world applications and obtain promising results, demonstrating their immense potential to restore
textures for real-world images. However, it is notorious that
GAN-SR methods often generate perceptually unpleasant
artifacts, which would seriously affect the user experience.
This problem is exacerbated in real-world scenarios, due to
the unknown and complex degradation of LR images.

*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things
for Smart City, University of Macau 2 Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 5 Platform
Technologies, Tencent Online Video. Correspondence to: Chao
Dong <chao.dong@siat.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Several works (Ma et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2022b) have
1

