Computational Asymmetries in Robust Classification

Samuele Marro 1 Michele Lombardi 1

Abstract

general case, while finding a parameter set that makes a
ReLU classifier robust on even a single input is ΣP
2 -hard. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first complexity bound
for general ReLU classifiers, and the main contribution of
this work. We also provide more general bounds for nonpolynomial classifiers, and show in particular that an A-time
classifier can be attacked in NP A time. Instead of using a
PAC-like formalization, we rely on a worst-case semantic
of robustness. This approach results in a formalization that
is both more easier to deal with and independent of data distribution assumptions, while still providing a rationale for
difficulties in training robust classifiers that are well-known
in the related literature. Our proofs also lay the ground work
for identifying tractable classes of defenses.

In the context of adversarial robustness, we make
three strongly related contributions. First, we
prove that while attacking ReLU classifiers is NP hard, ensuring their robustness at training time is
Σ2P -hard (even on a single example). This asymmetry provides a rationale for the fact that robust
classifications approaches are frequently fooled
in the literature. Second, we show that inferencetime robustness certificates are not affected by this
asymmetry, by introducing a proof-of-concept approach named Counter-Attack (CA). Indeed, CA
displays a reversed asymmetry: running the defense is NP -hard, while attacking it is ΣP
2 -hard.
Finally, motivated by our previous result, we argue that adversarial attacks can be used in the
context of robustness certification, and provide an
empirical evaluation of their effectiveness. As a
byproduct of this process, we also release UG100,
a benchmark dataset for adversarial attacks.

Second, we prove by means of an example that inferencetime defenses can sidestep the asymmetry. Our witness is
a proof-of-concept approach, referred to as Counter-Attack
(CA), that evaluates robustness on the fly for a specific input
(w.r.t. to a maximum distance ε) by running an adversarial
attack. Properties enjoyed by this technique are likely to
extend to other inference-time defense methods, if they
are based on similar principles. Notably, when built over
an exact attack, generating a certificate is NP -hard in the
worst case, ε-bounded attacks are impossible, and attacking
using perturbations of magnitude ε′ > ε is ΣP
2 -hard. On
the other hand, using a non-exact attack results in partial
guarantees (no false positives for heuristic attacks, no false
negatives for bounding techniques).

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks, i.e. algorithms designed to fool machine learning models, represent a significant threat to the
applicability of such models in real-world contexts (Brown
et al., 2017; Brendel et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020). Despite
years of research effort, countermeasures (i.e. “defenses”) to
adversarial attacks are frequently fooled by applying small
tweaks to existing techniques (Carlini & Wagner, 2016;
2017a; He et al., 2017; Hosseini et al., 2019; Tramer et al.,
2020; Croce et al., 2022). We argue that this pattern is
due to differences between the fundamental mathematical
problems that defenses and attacks need to tackle, and we
investigate this topic by providing three contributions.

Finally, since our results emphasize the connection between
verification and attack problems, we provide an empirical investigation of the use of heuristic attacks for verification. We
found heuristic attacks to be high-quality approximators for
exact decision boundary distances: a pool of seven heuristic
attacks provided an accurate (average over-estimate between
2.04% and 4.65%) and predictable (average R2 > 0.99) approximation of the true optimum for small-scale Neural
Networks trained on the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. We
release1 our benchmarks and adversarial examples (both
exact and heuristic) in a new dataset, named UG100.

First, we prove a set of theoretical results about the complexity of attack and training-time defense problems, including
the fact that attacking a ReLU classifier is NP -hard in the
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Bologna.
Correspondence to: Samuele Marro <samuele.marro@unibo.it>.

Overall, we hope our contributions can support future research by highlighting potential structural challenges, point-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

All our code, models, and data are available under MIT license
at https://github.com/samuelemarro/counter-attack.

1

