Weighted Tallying Bandits:
Overcoming Intractability via Repeated Exposure Optimality

Dhruv Malik 1 Conor Igoe 1 Yuanzhi Li 1 Aarti Singh 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
In human-interactive applications of online learning, a human’s preferences or abilities are often a
function of the algorithm’s recent actions. Motivated by this, a significant line of work has formalized settings where an action’s loss is a function
of the number of times it was played in the prior
m timesteps, where m corresponds to a bound
on human memory capacity. To more faithfully
capture decay of human memory with time, we
introduce the Weighted Tallying Bandit (WTB),
which generalizes this setting by requiring that an
action’s loss is a function of a weighted summation of the number of times it was played in the
last m timesteps. WTB is intractable without further assumption. So we study it under Repeated
Exposure Optimality (REO), a condition requiring
the existence of an action that when repetitively
played will eventually yield smaller loss than any
other action sequence. We study the minimization of complete policy regret (CPR), which is the
strongest notion of regret, in WTB under REO.
Since m is often unknown, we only assume access
to an upper bound M on m. We show that for
problems with K actions and horizon T , a simple
modificationof the successive elimination
algo
√
e
rithm has O
KT + (m + M )K CPR. Upto
an additive (in lieu of mutliplicative) factor in
(m + M )K, this recovers the classical guarantee
for the far simpler stochastic multi-armed bandit
with traditional regret. We additionally show that
in our setting, any algorithm will suffer additive
e (mK + M ), demonstrating our result
CPR of Ω
is near optimal. Our method is computationally
efficient, and we experimentally demonstrate its
practicality and superiority over various baselines.

When an online learning algorithm is deployed in an interactive application, its decisions impact the state of its
environment. In turn, this impacts the quality of subsequent
decisions made by the algorithm. This is especially true in
human-centered applications such as recommender systems
or crowdsourcing. For instance, consider a crowdsourcing
setting where at each timestep we want to select a worker
to perform a task, without prior knowledge of any worker’s
ability. The task may be complex or require some finetuning, and each worker might need a calibration period
where they repeatedly perform the task, before they start
exhibiting their true ability. The existence of such a calibration period has been extensively demonstrated in visuomotor
tasks (Adams, 1961), such as throwing darts (Wunderlich
et al., 2020) or shooting a basketball (Phatak et al., 2020).
Hence, an algorithm that asks workers to alternately perform
the task, without intelligently allowing each worker time
to calibrate themselves to the task, may bias its estimation
of each worker’s true ability. This interaction between an
algorithm and its environment distinguishes it from classical
non-interactive frameworks such as the multi-armed bandit.
To capture one aspect of this interactivity, a significant research thrust in online learning has studied settings where
an action’s loss is described by the number of times that
action was recently played in the prior m timesteps (Heidari
et al., 2016; Levine et al., 2017; Seznec et al., 2019; 2020;
Lindner et al., 2021; Awasthi et al., 2022; Malik et al., 2022).
The quantity m typically corresponds to a bound on human
memory capacity or capability. For example, in the aforementioned scenario m would be the number of timesteps
required by a worker to fine-tune and calibrate themselves
to the task, before revealing their true ability.
Of course, such settings are an approximation to reality.
For instance, psychological research shows that humans
typically have better memory for more recently occurring
events (Klatzky, 1980; Ricker et al., 2016). So if we play
an action once in the previous m timesteps, its impact on
the present may greatly differ depending on whether it was
played on the previous timestep or m timesteps ago. In
the context of the aforementioned crowdsourcing setting,
a worker may need a shorter calibration period if they per-

1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. Correspondence to: Dhruv Malik
<dhruvm@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

