Causal Structure Learning for Latent Intervened Non-stationary Data

Chenxi Liu 1 Kun Kuang 1

Abstract
Causal structure learning can reveal the causal
mechanism behind natural systems. It is well studied that the multiple domain data consisting of
observational and interventional samples benefit
causal identifiability. However, for non-stationary
time series data, domain indexes are often unavailable, making it difficult to distinguish observational samples from interventional samples. To
address these issues, we propose a novel Latent
Intervened Non-stationary learning (LIN) method
to make the domain indexes recovery process and
the causal structure learning process mutually
promote each other. We characterize and justify
a possible faithfulness condition to guarantee the
identifiability of the proposed LIN method. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms
the baselines on causal structure learning for latent intervened non-stationary data.

Figure 1. Comparison of input data in different settings. (a) the
multi-domain setting: Samples are partitioned according to their
provided domain indexes (solid borders); observational samples
are available and are distinguishable from interventional samples
(different colors). (b) latent-intervened setting. Samples are mixed
without domain indexes (dashed borders); observational samples
are not distinguishable and are technically possible to be absent
(same color).

1. Introduction

be violated in heterogeneous/non-stationary cases, resulting
in spurious correlation or non-independent noise. Recently,
a new line of research on the multi-domain methods shows
valuable information in such cases could aid causal structure
learning (Yang et al., 2018; Ghassami et al., 2018; Brouillard et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020; Perry et al., 2022).
They learned the consistent causal structure from data with
multiple different domains, instructed by domain indexes.
Formally, a domain index ei ∈ [K] indicates the domain
generating sample xi ∈ Rd .

Causal structure learning is one fundamental problem
in causal inference and aims to learn the causal mechanism/structure among variables from observational data.
The causal structure is often represented by a Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG). One benefit of the causal structure
is to help understand the complex mechanisms in the real
world, like diseases (Shen et al., 2020) or earth systems
(Runge et al., 2019a); and can also benefit downstream tasks
(Pearl, 2000; 2010).

Unfortunately, such domain indexes are usually unavailable
for non-stationary temporal data in reality, which limits
their applications. There are attempts to fill this gap. CDNOD (2020) assumed time indexes can approximate domain
indexes with smoothness assumption; Faria et al (2022) assumed the Dirichlet process (DP) over domain indexes to
treat ELBO instead. However, most of the existing methods
impose additional assumptions on the dynamic over domain
indexes, like smoothness or certain types of process; or require samples from observational distribution to be included
and can be distinguished from other domains, limiting their
applications in more general cases. Therefore, as illustrated

Traditional methods for causal structure learning include
constraint-based (Spirtes et al., 1995; 2000; Zhang, 2008) ,
score-based (Chickering, 2002) , and model-based (Shimizu
et al., 2006; Hoyer et al., 2008) approaches. They assume
data is independent and identically distributed, which could
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Zhejiang, China. Correspondence to: Kun Kuang
<kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

