NTK-approximating MLP Fusion for Efficient Language Model Fine-tuning

Tianxin Wei * 1 Zeming Guo * 1 Yifan Chen * 2 Jingrui He 1

Abstract
Fine-tuning a pre-trained language model (PLM)
emerges as the predominant strategy in many
natural language processing applications. However, even fine-tuning the PLMs and doing inference are expensive, especially on edge devices with low computing power. Some general approaches (e.g. quantization and distillation) have been widely studied to reduce the compute/memory of PLM fine-tuning, while very few
one-shot compression techniques are explored.
In this paper, we investigate the neural tangent
kernel (NTK)–which reveals the gradient descent
dynamics of neural networks–of the multilayer
perceptrons (MLP) modules in a PLM and propose to coin a lightweight PLM through NTKapproximating MLP fusion. To achieve this, we
reconsider the MLP as a bundle of sub-MLPs,
and cluster them into a given number of centroids, which can then be restored as a compressed
MLP and surprisingly shown to well approximate the NTK of the original PLM. Extensive
experiments of PLM fine-tuning on both natural
language understanding (NLU) and generation
(NLG) tasks are provided to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method MLP fusion. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
weitianxin/MLP_Fusion.

Figure 1: NTK matrix approximation error of compression
methods on the validation set of SST2.
cost, both on time and space, due to the huge size of a pretrained language model: the sizes of popular PLMs recently
increase from hundreds of millions (Brown et al., 2020) to
trillion (Fedus et al., 2021) parameters. Even for the smallest BERT model (Devlin et al., 2018), there are over 110
million parameters.
To harness the large-scale PLMs, efforts have been made in
various fields. A popular techniques in model compression is
knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015, KD), which train
a smaller student network with the information obtained
from the original teacher model. KD serves to compress the
pre-trained model and eases the subsequent fine-tuning on
downstream tasks, while the distillation procedure requires
comparable computational resources to pre-training. The
burden is sometimes unbearable for users who cannot afford
the cost of regular fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning a large pre-trained language models (PLMs)
has been the most common method to tackle downstream
natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Howard & Ruder,
2018; Kale & Rastogi, 2020). However, despite high prediction accuracy and scalability of fine-tuning (Peters et al.,
2018), the users have to suffer from a large computational

In addition to the directions above, there were some previous
attempts to establish one-shot model compression methods.
Single-shot pruning methods (Han et al., 2015; Lee et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2020a; Tanaka et al., 2020, sparsification)
identify sub-networks at initialization concerning certain
criteria of weight magnitude or gradient flow. However,
most works on (entry-wise) pruning focuses on reducing the
conceptual training or inference FLOPs, while sparse matrix
multiplication is not well supported on modern hardware
(e.g. GPUs) and even slows down the training in wall-clock
time (Dao et al., 2022). Meanwhile, truncated singular value
decomposition (SVD) on the weight matrices (Denton et al.,

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Hong Kong Baptist University. Correspondence to: Yifan Chen <yifanc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>, Jingrui He <jingrui@illinois.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

