Performative Recommendation: Diversifying Content via Strategic Incentives

Itay Eilat 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract

et al., 2012; Burke, 2017; Singh & Joachims, 2018; Abdollahpouri et al., 2019b; Mladenov et al., 2020; Wang &
Joachims, 2021). From the perspective of the recommendation platform, an inability to diversify content translates
into an inability to utilize the full potential that lies in the
natural variation of user preferences for promoting system
goals (Anderson, 2006; Yin et al., 2012). This has lead
to widespread interest in developing methods for making
recommendations more diverse (Kunaver & Požrl, 2017).

The primary goal in recommendation is to suggest relevant content to users, but optimizing for
accuracy often results in recommendations that
lack diversity. To remedy this, conventional approaches such as re-ranking improve diversity by
presenting more diverse items. Here we argue that
to promote inherent and prolonged diversity, the
system must encourage its creation. Towards this,
we harness the performative nature of recommendation, and show how learning can incentivize
strategic content creators to create diverse content.
Our approach relies on a novel form of regularization that anticipates strategic changes to content, and penalizes for content homogeneity. We
provide analytic and empirical results that demonstrate when and how diversity can be incentivized,
and experimentally demonstrate the utility of our
approach on synthetic and semi-synthetic data.

The common approach for diversifying recommendations is
to apply some post-processing procedure that re-ranks the
output of a conventionally-trained ranking model—which
is optimized for predicting user-item relevance—to be more
diverse, for example by traversing the ranked list and removing items which are similar to higher-ranked items (Carbonell & Goldstein, 1998; Ziegler et al., 2005; Sha et al.,
2016). This simple heuristic approach has been shown to be
quite effective—at least when considering a given ranked
list, and at one point in time. But recommendation is inherently a dynamic process: here we argue that post-hoc methods may not suffice for promoting diversity in the long run.

1. Introduction

To see why, consider that re-ranking (and similar approaches) are designed to diversify the presentation of
content—not content itself. Presenting diverse content may
help in the specific instance it targets, but does not change
the pool of available items, nor does it account for any
downstream affects of recommendation. Recent work has
shown that one drawback of using prediction as the basis for
recommendation is that it causes homogenization (Chaney
et al., 2018); here we argue that rearranging predicted items
to form the appearance of diversity does not remedy this.

Recommendation has become a key driving force in determining what content we are exposed to, and ultimately,
which we consume (MacKenzie et al., 2013; Ursu, 2018).
But despite the commercial success of modern recommendation systems, a known shortcoming is that recommendations
tend to be insufficiently diverse, with content homogeneity
becoming more pronounced over time; this has been a longstanding issue in the field for over two decades (Carbonell
& Goldstein, 1998; Bradley & Smyth, 2001). Diversity is
important in recommendation not only for improving recommendation quality (Vargas & Castells, 2014; Kaminskas &
Bridge, 2016) and user satisfaction (Herlocker et al., 2004;
Ziegler et al., 2005; McNee et al., 2006; Hu & Pu, 2011; Wu
et al., 2018; Dean et al., 2020), but also because a lack of
diversity can lead to inequity across content creators, which
often hurts the ‘long-tail’ of non-mainstream suppliers (Yin

As an alternative, we propose to encourage the creation of
diverse content, so that the set of available items becomes
inherently more diverse. In this way, we aim to target the
cause—rather than the symptom. Our main observation is
that content is shaped by content creators, who seek to maximize exposure to their items (Ben-Porat et al., 2020; Hron
et al., 2022), and hence likely to modify content in ways
which promote their item’s predicted relevance (or ‘score’).
Since the goal of learning is to infer such scores, this gives
the learning system leverage in shaping the incentives of
content creators. Here we propose to utilize this power to
incentivize for the creation of more diverse content.

1

Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Nir Rosenfeld
<nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

