Learning to Incentivize Information Acquisition:
Proper Scoring Rules Meet Principal-Agent Model

Siyu Chen 1 Jibang Wu 2 Yifan Wu 3 Zhuoran Yang 1

Abstract

whether to invest in its stock. The manager hires an analyst, who spends some effort to conduct the research, hands
in a report to the manager, and gets payment according to
the report she writes. Based on the report, the manager
makes the investment decision and earns profit if the stock
rises. The level of effort the analyst puts into the research
affects the quality of the information gathered, i.e., the report, and her own cost incurred in conducting the research.
As a result, a rational analyst would choose an effort level
that maximizes her own profit – the difference between the
payment and the cost. Whereas the manager also wants to
maximize its own profit in expectation, which is given by
the expected gain from the investment, subtracted by the
payment. Knowing that the analyst is rational, the goal of
the manager is to design a payment rule that incentivizes
the analyst to spend a proper amount of effort, such that the
acquired information leads to the investment decision that
maximizes the portfolio manager’s profit.

We study the incentivized information acquisition problem, where a principal hires an agent to
gather information on her behalf. Such a problem
is modeled as a Stackelberg game between the
principal and the agent, where the principal announces a scoring rule that specifies the payment,
and then the agent then chooses an effort level
that maximizes her own profit and reports the information. We study the online setting of such
a problem from the principal’s perspective, i.e.,
designing the optimal scoring rule by repeatedly
interacting with the strategic agent. We design
a provably sample efficient algorithm that tailors the UCB algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) to our
model, which achieves a sublinear T 2/3 -regret after T iterations. Our algorithm features a delicate
estimation procedure for the optimal profit of the
principal, and a conservative correction scheme
that ensures the desired agent’s actions are incentivized. Furthermore, a key feature of our regret
bound is that it is independent of the number of
states of the environment.

Mathematically, such a problem can be modeled under the
principal-agent model (Laffont & Martimort, 2009), where
the principal wants to know the state ω of a stochastic environment, and the information acquired by the agent is a
distribution σ
b over the state space Ω, also known as the
reported belief. The game between the principal and the
agent is as follows. At the beginning, the state is not realized and unknown to both parties. The principal chooses a
scoring rule S (Savage, 1971; Gneiting & Raftery, 2007)
as the payment rule and presents it to the agent. The
agent chooses among K effort levels by selecting an action bk ∈ {b1 , . . . , bK } at a cost ck . Then bk determines
the joint distribution p(ω, o | bk ) of the state ω and an observation o. Based on such a conditional distribution and
the realized value of o, the agent reports σ
b to the principal.
Based on such acquired information, the principal chooses
an action a ∈ A. Finally, the state ω is revealed, the principal receives utility u(a, ω) and pays the agent S(b
σ , ω).
Here, the payment to the agent is determined by the scoring rule S, which quantifies the value of the reported belief
by comparing it with the realized state.

1. Introduction
Delegated information acquisition is a widely popular situation where one party (known as the principal) wants to
acquire some information that assists decision-making, and
thus hires another party (known as the agent) to gather information on its behalf. Consider a portfolio manager who
aims to learn the potential of a company in order to decide
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
3
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University.
Correspondence to: Siyu Chen <siyu.chen.sc3226@yale.edu>,
Jibang Wu <wujibang@uchicago.edu>, Yifan Wu <yifan.wu@u.northwestern.edu>,
Zhuoran
Yang
<zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>.
2

More generally, our model is a general Stackelberg
game with information asymmetry (von Stackelberg, 1952;
Mas-Colell et al., 1995), where the agent knows the distri-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

