E(n) Equivariant Message Passing Simplicial Networks

Floor Eijkelboom 1 Rob Hesselink 1 Erik Bekkers 1

Abstract

useful descriptors for data that live on an irregular domain,
such as molecules, meshes, or social networks. One of the
most common types of GNNs is Message Passing Neural
Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017), where adjacent
nodes send messages to each other and update their hidden
representation accordingly.

This paper presents E(n) Equivariant Message
Passing Simplicial Networks (EMPSNs), a novel
approach to learning on geometric graphs and
point clouds that is equivariant to rotations, translations, and reflections. EMPSNs can learn highdimensional simplex features in graphs (e.g. triangles), and use the increase of geometric information of higher-dimensional simplices in an
E(n) equivariant fashion. EMPSNs simultaneously generalize E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural
Networks to a topologically more elaborate counterpart and provide an approach for including geometric information in Message Passing Simplicial
Networks, thereby serving as a proof of concept
for combining geometric and topological information in graph learning. The results indicate
that EMPSNs can leverage the benefits of both
approaches, leading to a general increase in performance when compared to either method individually, being on par with state-of-the-art approaches
for learning on geometric graphs. Moreover, the
results suggest that incorporating geometric information serves as an effective measure against
over-smoothing in message passing networks, especially when operating on high-dimensional simplicial structures.

MPNNs can be considered a differentiable and parameterized counterpart of the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman
test (1-WL) on graphs (Xu et al., 2018), where the features
of the nodes describe the colors and adjacency relations
are defined by the edges of the graph (see Kipf & Welling
(2016)). As a consequence, MPNNs are at most as expressive as the 1-WL and will give equal predictions to
non-isomorphic graphs that are not distinguished by 1-WL.
Therefore, such models are limited in learning higher dimensional graph structures such as cliques, as also explored
in Chen et al. (2020). One solution to this limitation is
considering higher-dimensional simplices in the graph as
learnable features (Bodnar et al., 2021), thereby considering a topologically more elaborate space. Allowing for
higher-dimensional features allows MPNNs to distinguish
more graph isomorphisms than can be distinguished with
the 1-WL test/standard MPNNs. The increased expressivity
using higher-dimensional simplicial structures has also been
explored in Morris et al. (2019).
Many real-life problems have a natural symmetry to translations, rotations, and reflections (that is, to the Euclidean
group E(n)), such as object recognition or predicting molecular properties (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014). Many approaches leveraging these extra symmetries have been proposed, such as Tensor Field Networks (Thomas et al., 2018),
SE(3) Transformers (Fuchs et al., 2020), E(n) Equivariant
Graph Neural Networks (Satorras et al., 2021), among others. In contrast to using a more elaborate topology, these
methods use the underlying geometry of the space in which
the graph is positioned to improve expressivity. Even though
these methods improve greatly from incorporating geometric information, they are still limited in their expressivity
by not being able to explicitly learn higher-dimensional
features explicitly present in the graph.

1. Introduction
The use of symmetry as an inductive bias in deep-learning
models has been critical for the recent developments in
areas such as drug repositioning (Zitnik et al., 2018), protein
biology (Gligorijević et al., 2021), healthcare (Cosmo et al.,
2020), and traffic forecasting (Derrow-Pinion et al., 2021),
among many others. One notable example of architectures
exploiting symmetry constraints are graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2008). Graphs lend themselves as
1
University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Floor Eijkelboom <eijkelboomfloor@gmail.com>.

We present E(n) Equivariant Message Passing Simplicial
Networks (EMPSNs), an E(n) equivariant formulation of
Simplicial Message Passing Networks as introduced by Bod-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

