BEAT S

: Audio Pre-Training with Acoustic Tokenizers

Sanyuan Chen 1 Yu Wu 2 Chengyi Wang 3 Shujie Liu 2 Daniel Tompkins 4 Zhuo Chen 4 Wanxiang Che 1
Xiangzhan Yu 1 Furu Wei 2

Abstract

processing tasks, especially in low-resource scenarios. Unlike speech, audio typically contains wide variations of environmental events, including human voices, nature sounds,
musical beats, etc, which brings great challenges to general
audio modeling. Existing work (Gong et al., 2022a) finds
that applying the speech SSL model directly to the audio
domain does not lead to satisfactory performance. Thus, it
is non-trivial to study general audio SSL methods.

We introduce a self-supervised learning (SSL)
framework BEAT S for general audio representation pre-training, where we optimize an acoustic tokenizer and an audio SSL model by iterations. Unlike the previous audio SSL models
that employ reconstruction loss for pre-training,
our audio SSL model is trained with the discrete
label prediction task, where the labels are generated by a semantic-rich acoustic tokenizer. We
propose an iterative pipeline to jointly optimize
the tokenizer and the pre-trained model, aiming
to abstract high-level semantics and discard the
redundant details for audio. The experimental
results demonstrate our acoustic tokenizers can
generate discrete labels with rich audio semantics
and our audio SSL models achieve state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results across various audio classification
benchmarks, even outperforming previous models
that use more training data and model parameters
significantly. Specifically, we set a new SOTA
mAP 50.6% on AudioSet-2M without using any
external data, and 98.1% accuracy on ESC-50.
The code and pre-trained models are available at
https://aka.ms/beats.

Until now, state-of-the-art (SOTA) audio SSL models (Xu
et al., 2022; Chong et al., 2022) employ an acoustic feature reconstruction loss as the pre-training objective instead
of the discrete label prediction pre-training task as in SSL
models of speech (Hsu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022b),
vision (Bao et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022b) and language (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019;
Lan et al., 2019). However, it was generally believed that
the reconstruction loss only accounts for the correctness of
low-level time-frequency features but neglects high-level
audio semantic abstraction (Ramesh et al., 2021; Bao et al.,
2021). The discrete label prediction would be a potentially
better audio pre-training objective than reconstruction for
the following reasons. Firstly, from the bionics aspect, humans understand audio by extracting and clustering the
high-level semantics instead of focusing on the low-level
time-frequency details (Patterson et al., 2007; Harb & Chen,
2007; Ma et al., 2018). By mimicking the semantics extracting and clustering through the discrete label prediction
pre-training objective, the audio SSL model is expected to
learn the same understanding and generalization skills as
humans. Secondly, the discrete label prediction objective
can improve the audio modeling efficiency by providing
semantic-rich tokens as the pre-training targets and encouraging the model to discard the redundant details, resulting
in a superior audio understanding capability with a lower
pre-training recourse cost (Bao et al., 2021; 2022; Peng
et al., 2022). Thirdly, the audio SSL pre-training with the
discrete label prediction objective advances the unification
of language, vision, speech, and audio pre-training, and enables the possibility of building a foundation model across
modalities with a single pre-training task, i.e. discrete label
prediction (Wang et al., 2022b).

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great success in self-supervised
learning (SSL) for speech and audio processing. The speech
SSL models, such as Wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020),
HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021), BigSSL (Zhang et al., 2022),
WavLM (Chen et al., 2022b), and data2vec (Baevski et al.,
2022), show prominent performance across various speech
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 3 Nankai University,
Tianjin, China 4 Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Sanyuan Chen <sychen@ir.hit.edu.cn>, Yu Wu
<yuwu1@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Despite these advantages and great successes in various
domains, the application of discrete label prediction in gen1

