Smart Initial Basis Selection for Linear Programs

Zhenan Fan * 1 Xinglu Wang * 1 2 Oleksandr Yakovenko * 1 Abdullah Ali Sivas 1 Owen Ren 1 Yong Zhang 1
Zirui Zhou 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Linear programming (LP) has been a fundamental aspect
of various industrial domains for decades. A pioneering
method for solving LP problems is the simplex method,
which searches for an optimal solution by traversing the
vertices of the polyhedron defined by the linear constraints.
Ever since its introduction by Gass & Vinjamuri (2004)
more than half a century ago, much progress has been made
in improving the practical efficiency and stability of the simplex method, including the revised simplex method (Dantzig
& Orchard-Hays, 1954), the Harris two-pass ratio test (Harris, 1973), anti-degeneracy techniques (Ryan & Osborne,
1988; Gill et al., 1989), crash methods (Bixby, 1992), pivoting rules (Forrest & Goldfarb, 1992), and parallel dual
simplex (Huangfu & Hall, 2018), just to name a few. To
date, the simplex method is still considered to be one of
the most efficient methods for computing a highly accurate
LP solution and is the workhorse of most commercial LP
solvers.

The simplex method, introduced by Dantzig more
than half a century ago, is still to date one of
the most efficient methods for solving large-scale
linear programming (LP) problems. While the
simplex method is known to have the finite termination property under mild assumptions, the number of iterations until optimality largely depends
on the choice of initial basis. Existing strategies
for selecting an advanced initial basis are mostly
rule-based. These rules usually require extensive
expert knowledge and empirical study to develop.
Yet, many of them fail to exhibit consistent improvement, even for LP problems that arise in a
single application scenario. In this paper, we propose a learning-based approach for initial basis
selection. We employ graph neural networks as a
building block and develop a model that attempts
to capture the relationship between LP problems
and their optimal bases. In addition, during the inference phase, we supplement the learning-based
prediction with linear algebra tricks to ensure the
validity of the generated initial basis. We validate
the effectiveness of our proposed strategy by extensively testing it with state-of-the-art simplex
solvers, including the open-source solver HiGHS
and the commercial solver OptVerse. Through
these rigorous experiments, we demonstrate that
our strategy achieves substantial speedup and consistently outperforms existing rule-based methods.
Furthermore, we extend the proposed approach
to generating restricted master problems for column generation methods and present encouraging
numerical results.

It is known that the simplex method has finite termination as
long as proper anti-degeneracy technique is adopted (Gass
& Vinjamuri, 2004). Thus, the efficiency of the simplex
method is mostly determined by the number of iterations
it takes until termination. Although in the worst case, the
number of iterations needed can be exponential in the input size (Klee & Minty, 1972), it is usually observed to be
polynomial in practice (Spielman & Teng, 2004). Moreover,
the initial basis of the simplex method has a considerable
impact on the number of iterations until termination. In particular, starting with a basis that is much closer to an optimal
one can often result in less number of iterations. Given this,
many works have proposed strategies for selecting advanced
initial bases for the simplex method; see, e.g., Bixby (1992),
Gould & Reid (1989), Junior & Lins (2005), Ploskas et al.
(2021), Galabova & Hall (2020). Most existing strategies
are rule-based. These rules are usually developed by carefully analyzing the structure of the problem at hand and
extensive empirical experience. Yet, most of them still fail
to exhibit consistent improvement over the canonical initial
basis.

*

Equal contribution 1 Huawei Technologies Canada, Burnaby,
Canada 2 Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada. Correspondence to: Zhenan Fan <zhenan.fan1@huawei.com>.

In practice, it is very common that we need to solve a set of
LP problems which share substantial similarities. Indeed, in

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

