Locally Regularized Neural Differential Equations:
Some Black Boxes Were Meant to Remain Closed!
Avik Pal 1 2 Alan Edelman 1 3 Christopher Rackauckas 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Implicit Models, such as Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Chen et al., 2018) and Deep Equilibrium Models (Bai
et al., 2019; Pal et al., 2022), have emerged as a promising
technique to determine the depth of neural networks automatically. To maximize performance on a dataset, explicit
models are tuned to the “hardest” training sample, which
hurts the inference timings for “easier” – more abundant –
samples. Using adaptive differential equation solvers allow
these implicit models to choose the number of steps they
need effectively. This idea of representing neural networks
as ODEs has since been generalized to Stochastic Differential Equations (Liu et al., 2019; Rackauckas et al., 2020)
and other architectures to improve robustness.

Implicit layer deep learning techniques, like Neural Differential Equations, have become an important modeling framework due to their ability
to adapt to new problems automatically. Training a neural differential equation is effectively a
search over a space of plausible dynamical systems. However, controlling the computational
cost for these models is difficult since it relies
on the number of steps the adaptive solver takes.
Most prior works have used higher-order methods to reduce prediction timings while greatly
increasing training time or reducing both training and prediction timings by relying on specific
training algorithms, which are harder to use as a
drop-in replacement due to strict requirements on
automatic differentiation. In this manuscript, we
use internal cost heuristics of adaptive differential
equation solvers at stochastic time-points to guide
the training towards learning a dynamical system
that is easier to integrate. We “close the blackbox” and allow the use of our method with any
adjoint technique for gradient calculations of the
differential equation solution. We perform experimental studies to compare our method to global
regularization to show that we attain similar performance numbers without compromising on the
flexibility of implementation on ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and stochastic differential equations (SDEs). We develop two sampling
strategies to trade-off between performance and
training time. Our method reduces the number of
function evaluations to 0 .556 × −0 .733 × and
accelerates predictions by 1 .3 × −2 ×.

Despite the rapid progress in these methods, the core problem of the scalability of these models is still persistent.
Several solutions to these have been proposed:
• Kelly et al. (2020); Finlay et al. (2020) use higher order
derivatives for regularization.
• Poli et al. (2020) learn neural solvers to solve Neural
ODEs faster.
• Pal et al. (2021) proposed a “zero-cost” global regularization scheme.
• Behl et al. (2020) randomize the integration stop time
to “smoothen” the dynamics.
All these methods have definite tradeoffs (See Section 5 for
more details).
This paper presents a generally applicable method to force
the neural differential equation training process to choose
the least expensive option. We build upon the global regularization scheme proposed in Pal et al. (2021) and “close”
the blackbox allowing our method to work across various
sensitivity algorithms. Our main contributions include the
following1 :

1

CSAIL MIT 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science MIT 3 Department of Mathematics MIT. Correspondence to: Avik Pal <avikpal@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/
avik-pal/LocalRegNeuralDE.jl

1

