Improved Learning-Augmented Algorithms for the Multi-Option Ski Rental
Problem via Best-Possible Competitive Analysis

Yongho Shin 1 Changyeol Lee 1 Gukryeol Lee 1 Hyung-Chan An 1

Abstract

tions are generated, keeping their black-box natures. The
recent success of learning-augmented algorithms is particularly remarkable in the field of online optimization, where
we are given the input in an online manner over multiple
timesteps and forced to make irrevocable decisions at each
timestep. It is not at all surprising that learning-augmented
algorithms are useful in this setting, because the challenge
in designing a classical competitive algorithm is usually
in avoiding the worst-case without any knowledge on the
future input, where ML predictions can serve as a substitute
for this knowledge. The success of learning-augmented algorithms in online optimization is evidenced by the seminal
work of Lykouris and Vassilvitskii (2021) and subsequent
studies including (Kumar et al., 2018; Bamas et al., 2020;
Lattanzi et al., 2020) for example.

In this paper, we present improved learningaugmented algorithms for the multi-option ski
rental problem. Learning-augmented algorithms
take ML predictions as an added part of the input and incorporates these predictions in solving
the given problem. Due to their unique strength
that combines the power of ML predictions with
rigorous performance guarantees, they have been
extensively studied in the context of online optimization problems. Even though ski rental problems are one of the canonical problems in the field
of online optimization, only deterministic algorithms were previously known for multi-option
ski rental, with or without learning augmentation. We present the first randomized learningaugmented algorithm for this problem, surpassing
previous performance guarantees given by deterministic algorithms. Our learning-augmented algorithm is based on a new, provably best-possible
randomized competitive algorithm for the problem. Our results are further complemented by
lower bounds for deterministic and randomized algorithms, and computational experiments evaluating our algorithms’ performance improvements.

Ski rental problems are one of the canonical problems in
online optimization that have been extensively studied, with
or without learning augmentation. They succinctly capture
the key nature of online optimization, and many algorithmic
techniques in online optimization have been devised from
their studies. For learning-augmented algorithms as well, ski
rental problems naturally have been serving as an important
testbed (Kumar et al., 2018; Gollapudi & Panigrahi, 2019;
Bamas et al., 2020; Wei & Zhang, 2020).
Whilst the ski rental problem emerges in a variety of applications (Fleischer, 2001; Karlin et al., 2001; Meyerson,
2005), it is perhaps easiest to state it as a simple problem
of renting skis (hence the name) as follows. In the multioption ski rental problem, we are given a set of n renting
options: for i = 1, · · · , n, we have the option of renting
skis for di ∈ Z+ ∪ {∞} days at cost ci ∈ Q+ . Let T be
the number of days we will go skiing, but it depends on,
say, the weather, so we do not know T in advance; we will
learn that a specific day was indeed the last day of skiing
only at the end of that day. The objective of this problem
is to ensure that we rent skis for the whole T days, while
minimizing the total renting cost. Traditionally, the rent-orbuy case, where we only have two options (d1 , c1 ) = (1, 1)
and (d2 , c2 ) = (∞, B), was extensively studied, both under
the classical competitive analysis setting without learning
augmentation (Karlin et al., 1988; 1994; Buchbinder et al.,
2007) and the learning-augmented settings (Kumar et al.,

1. Introduction
A learning-augmented algorithm takes an ML prediction as
an added part of the input and incorporates this prediction
in solving the given problem. One major advantage of these
algorithms is that they can benefit from the powerful ML
predictions while yielding provable performance guarantees at the same time. These guarantees often surpass those
given by classical algorithms without predictions, and they
are obtained with no assumptions on how the ML predic1

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul,
South Korea. Correspondence to: Hyung-Chan An <hyungchan.an@yonsei.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

