Efficiently predicting high resolution mass spectra with graph neural networks

Michael Murphy * 1 2 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Ernest Fraenkel 2 Tobias Kind 3 David Healey 3 Thomas Butler 3

Abstract

MS/MS generates an experimental signature – a mass spectrum – of an unknown molecule by breaking it into fragments. The spectrum contains a (mass-to-charge ratio,
height) tuple for each resulting fragment, reflecting its elemental composition, electric charge, and tendency to form.
The problem of inferring the 2D structure of a molecule
from its spectrum is known as structural elucidation. Structural elucidation is the primary computational bottleneck
in MS/MS, and is far from solved: typically only 2−4%
of spectra are identified in untargeted metabolomics experiments (da Silva et al., 2015). A recent competition –
the 2022 Critical Analysis of Small Molecule Identification (CASMI) challenge (Fiehn, 2022) – saw no more than
30% accuracy, with algorithmic approaches only marginally
outperforming manual annotation by expert chemists.

Identifying a small molecule from its mass spectrum is the primary open problem in computational metabolomics. This is typically cast as
information retrieval: an unknown spectrum is
matched against spectra predicted computationally from a large database of chemical structures.
However, current approaches to spectrum prediction model the output space in ways that force a
tradeoff between capturing high resolution mass
information and tractable learning. We resolve
this tradeoff by casting spectrum prediction as
a mapping from an input molecular graph to a
probability distribution over chemical formulas.
We further discover that a large corpus of mass
spectra can be closely approximated using a fixed
vocabulary constituting only 2% of all observed
formulas. This enables efficient spectrum prediction using an architecture similar to graph classification – G R AFF-MS – achieving significantly
lower prediction error and greater retrieval accuracy than previous approaches.

Because MS/MS is a lossy measurement, and available
training sets are small, direct prediction of structures from
spectra is particularly challenging. The approach for small
molecule identification preferred in practice by most users
of mass spectrometry is spectral library search, which casts
the problem as information retrieval (Stein, 2012): an observed spectrum is queried against a library of spectra with
known structures. This provides an informative prior, and
has the advantage of easy interpretability. But as there are
relatively few (104 ) small molecules with publicly known
experimental mass spectra, in spectral library search it is
necessary to augment libraries with spectra predicted from
large databases (106 − 109 ) of molecular graphs. This motivates the problem of spectrum prediction: the ability to
predict higher-quality spectra from large chemical structure
databases could greatly increase compound identification
rates in real experimental settings.

1. Introduction
The identification of unknown small molecules in complex
mixtures is a primary challenge in many areas of chemical and biological science. The standard high-throughput
approach to small molecule identification is tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS), with diverse applications including metabolomics (Dettmer et al., 2006), drug discovery
(Atanasov et al., 2021), clinical diagnostics (Evans et al.,
2020), forensics (Brown et al., 2020), and environmental
monitoring (Hernández et al., 2012).

Spectrum prediction is actively studied in metabolomics and
quantum chemistry (Krettler & Thallinger, 2021), yet has
historically received little attention from the machine learning community. A major challenge in spectrum prediction
is modelling the output space: a mass spectrum is a variablelength set of real-valued tuples, which is not straightforward
to represent as an output of a machine learning model. The
mass-to-charge (m/z) coordinate poses particular difficulty:
it must be predicted with high precision, as a key strength
of MS/MS is the ability to distinguish small fractional m/z
differences (on the order of 10−6 ) representative of different
elemental composition.

*The lead author carried out this work as an intern at
Enveda Biosciences. 1 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Department
of Biological Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Enveda Biosciences, Boulder, CO, USA. Correspondence
to: Michael Murphy <murphy17@mit.edu>, Thomas Butler
<tom.butler@envedabio.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

