Fast Online Value-Maximizing Prediction Sets with Conformal Cost Control

Zhen Lin 1 Shubhendu Trivedi 2 Cao Xiao 3 Jimeng Sun 1 4

Abstract

prediction set that adequately captures the co-occurrence
of such labels is a problem that goes well beyond the more
customary multi-class setting where one simply outputs the
most likely class. Much research effort has concentrated on
estimating the conditional probability P{Yk = 1|X}, where
X is the input, and Yk is the indicator of class k. However,
examining prediction set generation when tied to a concrete
downstream task has received considerably less attention.
This aspect is nonetheless significant in real-world decisionmaking pipelines where the notion of a good prediction set
is also dictated by how it is to be harnessed, by the concrete
cost associated with incorrect predictions, and what value
the predicted set brings. Stated differently, given a base
classifier p̂, we could measure metrics like mean average
precision (mAP) and quantify the quality of our classifier,
but when do we exactly predict Ŷk = 1?

Many real-world multi-label prediction problems
involve set-valued predictions that must satisfy
specific requirements dictated by downstream usage. We focus on a typical scenario where such
requirements, separately encoding value and cost,
compete with each other. For instance, a hospital
might expect a smart diagnosis system to capture as many severe, often co-morbid, diseases
as possible (the value), while maintaining strict
control over incorrect predictions (the cost). We
present a general pipeline, dubbed as FavMac,
to maximize the value while controlling the cost
in such scenarios. FavMac can be combined
with almost any multi-label classifier, affording
distribution-free theoretical guarantees on cost
control. Moreover, unlike prior works, it can handle real-world large-scale applications via a carefully designed online update mechanism, which is
of independent interest. Our methodological and
theoretical contributions are supported by experiments on several healthcare tasks and synthetic
datasets - FavMac furnishes higher value compared with several variants and baselines while
maintaining strict cost control. Our code is available at https://github.com/zlin7/FavMac

Disease Severity (wk)

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Metastatic Cancer and Acute Leukemia
Congestive Heart Failure
Specified Heart Arrhythmias
Acute Renal Failure
0.0

Diabetes without Complication
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Predicted Probability (pk(x))

Yk=0
Yk=1

0.5

Figure 1. Severity vs the predicted probability of various diseases.
Choosing a prediction set is a complex decision involving both.
More details in Section 3.1.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification, which aims to predict a set of
possible labels for a particular input, is an important task
in many domains such as computer vision and healthcare.
The possible set of output labels reflects some underlying
structure of the world. For instance, in healthcare contexts,
patients are likely to exhibit a set of (related) symptoms and
co-morbid conditions at the same time. Generating a good

The answer to this question depends on the goals and requirements of the specific downstream task under consideration.
Often, these goals could be conflicting, have an attendant
cost-value calculus, and thus could engender incurring necessary trade-offs. For example, in medical coding or disease
detection tasks, we would like the prediction set to cover
as many (true) disease diagnoses as possible for a patient,
while also wanting to control the total number of incorrect
diagnoses. Because the validation of any disease diagnosis
may incur additional costs (e.g., expensive reviews) and
(potentially invasive) unnecessary examinations. In such
a use-case, a prediction set with more disease codes could
possibly have higher value but also higher cost, which we

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 shubhendu@csail.mit.edu 3 Relativity
4
Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Zhen Lin <zhenlin4@illinois.edu>, Jimeng Sun <jimeng@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

