Theoretical Bounds on the Network Community Profile
from Low-rank Semi-definite Programming

Yufan Huang 1 C. Seshadhri 2 David Gleich 1

Abstract

derstanding these properties is critical to understanding the
limits of what is possible with rich empirical data in graphbased learning (Seshadhri et al., 2020).

We study a new connection between a technical
measure called 𝜇-conductance that arises in the
study of Markov chains for sampling convex bodies and the network community profile that characterizes size-resolved properties of clusters and
communities in social and information networks.
The idea of 𝜇-conductance is similar to the traditional graph conductance, but disregards sets with
small volume. We derive a sequence of optimization problems including a low-rank semi-definite
program from which we can derive a lower bound
on the optimal 𝜇-conductance value. These ideas
give the first theoretically sound bound on the
behavior of the network community profile for a
wide range of cluster sizes. The algorithm scales
up to graphs with hundreds of thousands of nodes
and we demonstrate how our framework validates
the predicted structures of real-world graphs.

But many important network quantities are computationally
intractable in the worst case and are only computed by
heuristics. It is of critical importance to have rigorous theory
that can guarantee the accuracy of these measurements.
We focus on one of the most significant network characteristics: the cluster structure (Flake et al., 2000; Newman,
2006; von Luxburg et al., 2012). Finding tightly connected
sets of vertices with few connections outside is a central
task in network analysis. This is often measured by the
conductance. The conductance of a set 𝑆 of vertices is the
normalized fraction of edges that leave the set (the normalization is more involved; we give a formal definition later).
An important development in the cluster structure of realworld networks was the discovery of set size versus conductance relationships (Leskovec et al., 2008; 2009; 2010;
Gleich & Seshadhri, 2012; Jeub et al., 2015). The key finding in these studies is counter-intuitive: in most real-world
datasets, we cannot find large sets of small conductance. An
example of this structure is shown in Figure 1. This finding
directly contradicts the behavior of conductance in graphs
that are derived from nearest neighbors in a geometry or
graphs commonly used in partitioning computational domains, where the smallest conductance values occur in large
sets. Moreover, the definition of minimum conductance is
typically biased towards large sets (see equation (1)), but
real-world networks exhibit the opposite behavior.

1. Introduction
One of the central themes of network science is the discovery of peculiar properties that are not exhibited by random
or geometric graphs. Over the past decade, network science
has built a rich repository of data sets derived from social
network, communication networks, biological data, internet
trace data, and more. Early measurements on these networks
demonstrated skewed degree distributions, high clustering
coefficients, and community structure (Barabási & Albert,
1999; Watts & Strogatz, 1998; Newman, 2003; 2006). These
measurements led to fundamentally new mechanisms that
explain the networks (Leskovec et al., 2007; Seshadhri et al.,
2012; Bonato et al., 2014). Accurately capturing and un-

The key finding is the behavior of the network community
profile (NCP). The NCP plots, for each 𝑠, the minimum conductance among sets of size (technically volume) 𝑠. (Refer
to Figure 1.) Observe how the plot (the blue line) slopes
upward after an initial dip. This trend is consistent across
many real-world networks. The NCP of a typical geometric
graph slopes downwards. Currently, the NCPs are generated
entirely through principled heuristic computations. Hence,
it is difficult to guarantee the characteristic real-world behavior of the NCP curve without appropriate theoretical bounds.
Our proposed algorithm is the first that can actually give a
lower bound on the minimum conductance at a fixed size 𝑠.

1 Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,

United States 2 Computer Science, University of California Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. Correspondence to: Yufan Huang <huan1754@purdue.edu>, David Gleich <dgleich@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

