Spurious Valleys and Clustering Behavior of Neural Networks

Samuele Pollaci 1 2

Abstract

In particular, we formalize a neural network as a function
sending a tuple A of parameters to a map N (A), defined as
an alternating composition of affine transformations with
a given activation function (Section 2.1). Intuitively, each
affine transformation expresses the behavior of a layer of
neurons, and the image of a tuple A of parameters via N is
the corresponding neural network with fixed parameters1 A.
As usual, we are going to use neural networks for approximating with a good representative η from the image of N an
unknown real target function ϕ : Rp → Rq . The choice of
η can be determined by gradient descent methods based on
a given finite sample T of points of the graph of ϕ, called a
training dataset, and a fixed, chosen error function. During
this process, a path on the graph of the error function, i.e.
the loss landscape, is defined, moving closer to points of
lower error and eventually ending in η. It is patent that the
geometry of the loss landscape can influence how good of
an approximation η is. In particular, the gradient descent
can get stuck in particular connected components of the loss
landscape, called spurious valleys (Definition 3.2), that do
not contain any global minimum of the error function, forcing the path to end in a sub-optimal point. The absence of
spurious valleys implies that all the local minima of the error
function are global, and thus it guarantees, under certain
assumptions, the success of gradient descent methods. Our
first result provides sufficient conditions for the absence of
spurious valleys:

Neural networks constitute a class of functions that are typically non-surjective, with highdimensional fibers and complicated image. We
prove two main results concerning the geometry
of the loss landscape of a neural network. First,
we provide an explicit effective bound on the sizes
of the hidden layers so that the loss landscape has
no spurious valleys, which guarantees the success
of gradient descent methods. Second, we present
a novel method for analyzing whether a given neural network architecture with monomial activation
function can represent a target function of interest. The core of our analysis method is the study
of a specific set of error values, and its behavior
depending on different training datasets.

1. Introduction
In various neural network applications, the need of analyzing high-dimensional datasets has prompted the use of
increasingly deep and complex neural network architectures.
Although the practical results are remarkable and promising, a complete theoretical understanding of the reason why
training methods, such as the Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD), work so well is yet to be reached. In this paper, we
study the geometrical properties of the loss landscapes of
neural networks to shed some light on this topic. In particular, we present two main results: the first one relates
the presence of spurious valleys in the loss landscape with
the architecture of the neural network (Section 3), and the
second one uses the geometry of the loss landscape to define
a novel criterion to determine whether the target function is
representable by the given neural network (Section 4).

Theorem 1.1. Let N be a neural network. If the error function has a global minimum, then there are explicit effective
bounds on the sizes of the hidden layers so that the loss
landscape of N has no spurious valleys.
The bounds mentioned in Theorem 1.1 depend only on the
sizes of the input and output layers, the number of hidden
layers, and the activation function. Hence, Theorem 1.1
can be used to choose the sizes of the hidden layers of N
to prevent the loss landscape from having spurious valleys.
We have precise formulations of Theorem 1.1 in the spurious valleys Theorems (Theorems 3.7 and 3.10) for neural
networks with and without bias. Our results generalize a theorem from (Venturi et al., 2019), denoted as Theorem 8, to
wider classes of neural networks in the context of empirical
risk minimization.

We view a neural network N as a family of functions indexed by the set of its parameters (weights and biases).
1
Department of Mathematics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Correspondence to: Samuele Pollaci
<Samuele.Pollaci@vub.be>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
We call N (A) a neural network function, to distinguish it from
our definition of neural network which does not fix the parameters.

1

