PAC Generalization via Invariant Representations

Advait Parulekar 1 Karthikeyan Shanmugam 2 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract

an indicative background, the species of the animal is annotated in the image itself. In this case, simply learning to
interpret what is annotated will lead to an excellent classifier.
However, such a classifier will perform poorly on a future
dataset with incorrect or missing annotations.

Invariant representations are transformations of
the covariates such that the best model on top
of the representation is invariant across training
environments. In the context of linear Structural
Equation Models (SEMs), invariant representations might allow us to learn models with outof-distribution guarantees, i.e., models that are
robust to interventions in the SEM. To address the
invariant representation problem in a finite sample
setting, we consider the notion of -approximate
invariance. We study the following question: If a
representation is approximately invariant with respect to a given number of training interventions,
will it continue to be approximately invariant on
a larger collection of unseen intervened SEMs?
Inspired by PAC learning, we obtain finite-sample
out-of-distribution generalization guarantees for
approximate invariance that holds probabilistically over a family of linear SEMs without faithfulness assumptions. We also show how to extend
our results to a linear indirect observation model
that incorporates latent variables.

In asking for such “out-of-distribution” (OOD) generalization (generalization to different distributions rather than
different samples from the same distribution), we are asking
for more than what is guaranteed by traditional PAC learning. For instance, we might have a covariate shift, meaning
the marginal on the covariates of the joint distributions of
our training and test data is different. We would like a classifier that is trained on training environments to generalize
to the test environments.
Recently, in the OOD generalization literature, the data for
the training and test environments have been modeled to
arise from a set of causal models that are intervened versions
of each other. The true causal relationship in causal models
between a target variable and its causal parents remains
invariant while other relationships could change (Peters
et al., 2016; Bareinboim et al., 2012). Building on this
observation, authors in (Arjovsky et al., 2019) proposed
to learn a representation across the training environments
such that the optimal classifier on top of it remains the same.
We refer to this as the invariant representation in this work.
Will this representation and the predictor generalize (remain
invariant) in unseen environments? Does such a formulation
result in improvements over other methods such as empirical
risk minimization or distributionally robust optimization?

1. Introduction
A common failure of empirical risk minimization in machine learning is that it is beneficial to exploit spurious
correlations to minimize training loss. A classic example
of this comes from (Beery et al., 2018) where we have a
dataset with pictures of cows and camels. In most cases,
the cows are in pastures and the camels are in deserts, and
a classifier that works well on such a dataset generalizes
poorly to classifying cows in deserts. How do we prevent a
classifier tasked with distinguishing pictures of cows from
pictures of camels from using the color of the images? Certainly doing so might actually help with the classification
- take an extreme example wherein rather than just having

There has been some debate about this matter. Some theoretical works (Rosenfeld et al., 2020), (Kamath et al., 2021)
describe regimes and settings in which either the convex
penalty suggested by (Arjovsky et al., 2019) or the invariance formulation in general are not sufficient to generalize
to new environments. On the other hand, there are also
settings described in (Arjovsky et al., 2019), (Ahuja et al.,
2020), (Kamath et al., 2021) in which IRM does provably
lead to OOD generalization guarantees that are not possible
using other methods. However, these prior studies require
strong conditions such as faithfulness (Yang et al., 2018),
(Pearl, 2009), that come from the structure learning community. Indeed, as noted in (Uhler et al., 2013), faithfulness
(that observed invariances imply structural constraints on the

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin 2 Google Research India. Correspondence
to: Advait Parulekar <advaitp@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

