On the Statistical Benefits of Temporal Difference Learning

David Cheikhi 1 Daniel Russo 1

Abstract

The direct approach has two significant drawbacks. The
first is delay: actions can only be evaluated after their full
long-term effects realize. The second is variance: long-term
outcomes can be extremely noisy and individual actions
often have a small impact on them.

Given a dataset on actions and resulting longterm rewards, a direct estimation approach fits
value functions that minimize prediction error on
the training data. Temporal difference learning
(TD) methods instead fit value functions by minimizing the degree of temporal inconsistency between estimates made at successive time-steps.
Focusing on finite state Markov chains, we provide a crisp asymptotic theory of the statistical
advantages of this approach. First, we show that
an intuitive inverse trajectory pooling coefficient
completely characterizes the percent reduction in
mean-squared error of value estimates. Depending on problem structure, the reduction could be
enormous or nonexistent. Next, we prove that
there can be dramatic improvements in estimates
of the difference in value-to-go for two states:
TD’s errors are bounded in terms of a novel measure — the problem’s trajectory crossing time —
which can be much smaller than the problem’s
time horizon.

TD aims to alleviate these challenges by leveraging data on
intermediate outcomes – those observed after the decision
but before final outcomes are realized. The availability of
such data is increasingly common. Robots collect regular
sensor measurements, recommendation systems log sequential user interactions, and digital devices can track patient’s
health metrics across time. Sutton (1988) observed that
successive predictions, updated as information is gathered,
should be temporally consistent. He proposed to fit maximally consistent value estimates by iteratively minimizing
‘temporal difference errors’. TD has since become an intellectual pillar of the reinforcement learning literature. It is
used in most successful applications.
Our Contributions. We aim to provide crisp insight into
the statistical benefits of TD. This paper focuses on the
simplest possible setting, where training data consists of a
batch of trajectories sampled independently from a finite
Markov reward process. We compare the asymptotic scaling
of mean squared error under TD and direct value estimation.
Two main findings, different in nature, emerge:

1. Introduction
Temporal difference learning is a distinctive approach to estimation in long-term optimization problems. Its importance
to reinforcement learning is hard to overstate. In their seminal book, Sutton & Barto (2018) write: If one had to identify
one idea as central and novel to reinforcement learning, it
would undoubtedly be temporal difference learning.

1. The relative benefits of TD are determined by a natural
‘inverse trajectory pooling coefficient.’ TD uses valueto-go at intermediate states as a surrogate (Athey et al.,
2019; Prentice, 1989). This is beneficial exactly when
trajectories that originate with distinct states/actions
tend to reach common intermediate states. We present
simple examples illustrating when the benefits of TD
are enormous and when they vanish entirely.

Competing with temporal difference (TD) learning is a
straightforward direct-estimation approach. There, one proceeds by collecting data on past decisions and the cumulative long-term ‘reward’ that followed them. If actions were
chosen with some experimental randomness, then regression
of long-term rewards on the draw of actions would – with
enough data – correctly identify actions’ causal impacts.

2. TD is especially beneficial for advantage estimation;
That is, when estimating the difference in value-to-go
from one state/action versus another. TD estimates of
the value-to-go at different states are not independent
and the coupling of errors leads to this improvement.
While the mean squared error of direct advantage estimation generally scales with the length of the problem
horizon, we show that TD’s errors are bounded by a
smaller trajectory crossing time. This novel notion of

*
Equal contribution 1 Columbia University. Correspondence to:
David Cheikhi <d.cheikhi@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

