Variational Mixture of HyperGenerators
for Learning Distributions over Functions

Batuhan Koyuncu 1 Pablo Sánchez-Martı́n 2 Ignacio Peis 3 Pablo M. Olmos 3 Isabel Valera 1
features. To name a few examples, INRs have been successfully applied in diverse fields such as image representation
(Stanley, 2007; Ha, 2016), shape and scene representation
(Mescheder et al., 2019; Genova et al., 2019; 2020; Chen &
Zhang, 2019; Zeng et al., 2022; Sitzmann et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2020; Mildenhall et al., 2021), audio (Sitzmann et al.,
2020), graphs (Grattarola & Vandergheynst, 2022), and data
manifolds (Dupont et al., 2022b;a).

Abstract
Recent approaches build on implicit neural representations (INRs) to propose generative models
over function spaces. However, they are computationally costly when dealing with inference
tasks, such as missing data imputation, or directly
cannot tackle them. In this work, we propose a
novel deep generative model, named VaMoH. VaMoH combines the capabilities of modeling continuous functions using INRs and the inference
capabilities of Variational Autoencoders (VAEs).
In addition, VaMoH relies on a normalizing flow
to define the prior, and a mixture of hypernetworks to parametrize the data log-likelihood. This
gives VaMoH a high expressive capability and
interpretability. Through experiments on a diverse range of data types, such as images, voxels,
and climate data, we show that VaMoH can effectively learn rich distributions over continuous
functions. Furthermore, it can perform inferencerelated tasks, such as conditional super-resolution
generation and in-painting, as well or better than
previous approaches, while being less computationally demanding.

A couple of recent works (Dupont et al., 2022b;a) have relied
on INRs to generate data at any continuous coordinate (e.g.,
to generate images of different resolutions). Dupont et al.
(2022a) disentangle the task of learning functions using
an INR from the data generation task; and, Dupont et al.
(2022b) proposes a hypergenerator based on generative
adversarial networks (GANs), where the parameters of its
generator are the outputs of another network. However,
they both suffer from limitations, especially with regard to
conditional generation tasks such as image in/out-painting.
The implicit nature of Dupont et al. (2022b) does not provide
straightforward ways for conditional generation, and Dupont
et al. (2022a) requires solving a computationally expensive
numerical optimization problem to generate the modulation
vector of each new data point (i.e., unseen during training).
In this paper, we propose a Variational Mixture of HyperGenerators for learning distributions over functions, referred
to as VaMoH. Our model relies on a mixture of hyper variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014; Nguyen et al., 2021), where:

1. Introduction
While many real-world applications lead to data over continuous coordinate systems, such data is often discretized, e.g.,
by fixing the resolution of images (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2014) or assuming a fixed sample frequency in time-series
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). In contrast, recent advances in Implicit Neural Representations (INR) have been
shown to be powerful approaches for directly parameterizing continuous functions by mapping coordinates into data

i) a planar normalizing flow (Rezende & Mohamed,
2015) is used as prior distribution over its latent variables to be able to fit and generate complex data;
ii) a hypernetwork is used to parameterize the mixture
of decoders that, in turn, partition the function space
into meaningful regions (e.g., into visual segmentation
maps as shown in Figure 9); and,
iii) analogous to Dupont et al. (2022b), a PointConv network (Wu et al., 2019) is used in the encoder to map
any cloud of points, i.e., any set of continuous coordinates and features, into a fixed-sized vector.

1
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Universidad
Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Correspondence to: Batuhan
Koyuncu <koyuncu@cs.uni-saarland.de>.

As demonstrated by our extensive experiments on several
benchmark datasets, VaMoH can accurately and efficiently

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

