Arithmetic Sampling: Parallel Diverse Decoding for Large Language Models

Luke Vilnis * 1 Yury Zemlyanskiy * 1 Patrick Murray 1 Alexandre Passos 1 Sumit Sanghai 1

Abstract
Decoding methods for large language models
often trade-off between diversity of outputs
and parallelism of computation. Methods such
as beam search and Gumbel top-k sampling
can guarantee a different output for each
element of the beam, but are not easy to
parallelize. Alternatively, methods such as
temperature sampling and its modifications (top-k
sampling, nucleus sampling, typical decoding,
and others), are embarrassingly parallel, but have
no guarantees about duplicate samples. We
present a framework for sampling according
to an arithmetic code book implicitly defined
by a large language model, compatible with
common sampling variations, with provable beam
diversity under certain conditions, as well as being
embarrassingly parallel and providing unbiased
and consistent expectations from the original
model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on WMT machine translation,
more than halving the standard deviation when
estimating expected BLEU score reward, and
closing the BLEU score gap between independent
sampling and beam search by up to 63%.

Figure 1: Sequence model over sequences of length two
and a vocabulary of three symbols mapping points in the
unit interval to each sequence. An even lattice of code
points parallelizes decoding into diverse high-probability
sequences.

1. Introduction

options for inference are limited.

Large language models (LLMs) based on transformers
are crucial to modern natural language processing. The
ability of LLMs to capture knowledge from massive
pretraining datasets is useful for applications such as
machine translation and predictive text (Raffel et al., 2020;
Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019) as well as for
automated speech recognition (Martinez et al., 2021) and
image captioning (Devlin et al., 2015). However, because
of the powerful nonlinear dependencies in the architecture,

While LLM inference can be performed exactly for the case
of drawing independent samples, practical systems often
use inexact search—often modifications to beam search—to
guarantee high-quality and diverse (either in n-gram overlap
or semantic difference) samples. Search-based approaches
including beam search, stochastic beam search (Gumbel
top-k) (Kool et al., 2019), determinantal beam search
(Meister et al., 2021b), and others, can produce diverse
samples by construction, at the cost of being difficult to
efficiently parallelize, as they must examine the entire set of
partial predictions (known as the beam) at each time step.

*
1
Equal contribution
Work done while all authors
were at Google Research..
Correspondence to: Luke
Vilnis
<lvilnis@google.com>,
Yury
Zemlyanskiy
<urikz@google.com>.

Intuitively, there seems to be a trade-off between
parallelizability of a sampling algorithm and ability
to guarantee non-duplicate samples. Methods based
on ancestral sampling parallelize very well as they
turn a random number generation seed into a sample

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

