Learning Unforeseen Robustness from Out-of-distribution Data
Using Equivariant Domain Translator

Sicheng Zhu 1 Bang An 1 Furong Huang 1 Sanghyun Hong 2

Abstract

is measured by robustness — a hallmark feature exhibited
by humans and numerous other creatures (Tacchetti et al.,
2018). Training a model to be robust not only improves
its trustworthiness but may also improve its in-distribution
(Zhou et al., 2022) and out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization (Hendrycks et al., 2020), potentially by expanding
the labeled region (Wei et al., 2021).

Current approaches for training robust models are
typically tailored to scenarios where data variations are accessible in the training set. While
shown effective in achieving robustness to these
foreseen variations, these approaches are ineffective in learning unforeseen robustness, i.e., robustness to data variations without known characterization or training examples reflecting them.
In this work, we learn unforeseen robustness by
harnessing the variations in the abundant out-ofdistribution data. To overcome the main challenge of using such data, the domain gap, we
use a domain translator to bridge it and bound
the unforeseen robustness on the target distribution. As implied by our analysis, we propose a
two-step algorithm that first trains an equivariant
domain translator to map out-of-distribution data
to the target distribution while preserving the considered variation, and then regularizes a model’s
output consistency on the domain-translated data
to improve its robustness. We empirically show
the effectiveness of our approach in improving
unforeseen and foreseen robustness compared to
existing approaches. Additionally, we show that
training the equivariant domain translator serves
as an effective criterion for source data selection.

Recognizing the importance of robustness, previous work
has proposed several methods to train robust models (a.k.a.
robustness interventions), including training on augmented
data (Sohn et al., 2020), consistency regularization (Xie
et al., 2020), adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018), and
architecture modifications (Zhang, 2019). These methods effectively improve robustness against foreseen data variations
— those that can be characterized by known transformation
functions or observable in pairs of training examples before and after the transformation, such as noise corruption
(Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019) and spatial transformations
(Engstrom et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, unforeseen robustness remains challenging to
achieve, with existing methods either unable or struggling
to learn it. This issue is particularly problematic given that
in many datasets, only specific synthetic data variations are
foreseen, while others, including most natural variations,
are not. As a result, models remain vulnerable to these
unforeseen data variations, such as changes in viewpoint
(Koh et al., 2021) or time (Shankar et al., 2021).
This work introduces a method to learn unforeseen robustness. Notably, the data variation unforeseen from a given
training set is often observable as pairs of transformed examples in the abundant out-of-distribution data, such as
simulations. Leveraging this observation, we propose to
learn unforeseen robustness from out-of-distribution data,
using an equivariant domain translator to bridge the domain
gap while preserving the variation, as illustrated in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
A trustworthy machine learning system should provide consistent output despite nuisance transformations in input. For
instance, a self-driving car should consistently recognize
road objects, regardless of viewpoint changes that do not
alter the object’s label. This desirable property of a model
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Oregon State University. Correspondence to: Sicheng Zhu <sczhu@umd.edu>, Bang
An <bangan@umd.edu>, Furong Huang <furongh@umd.edu>,
Sanghyun Hong <sanghyun.hong@oregonstate.edu>.

Contributions: First, we formulate the problem of learning
unforeseen robustness from out-of-distribution data (§3.1)
and identify the difficulties in extending existing approaches
to solve this problem (Figure 1).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Second, recognizing that the primary challenge of this problem stems from the domain gap, we analyze the problem
1

