Hypervolume Knowledge Gradient: A Lookahead Approach for Multi-Objective
Bayesian Optimization with Partial Information

Samuel Daulton 1 2 Maximilian Balandat 1 Eytan Bakshy 1

Abstract

Most MOBO algorithms assume that all objectives are evaluated jointly (i.e. the evaluations of the objectives are coupled). However, in practice there are many partial information settings in which this is not the case. For instance, we
may have the ability to evaluate objectives individually (the
decoupled evaluation setting, see Figure 1), or we may have
lower-fidelity proxies available (the multi-fidelity setting) in
order to save time and/or resources.

Bayesian optimization is a popular method for
sample efficient multi-objective optimization.
However, existing Bayesian optimization techniques fail to effectively exploit common and
often-neglected problem structure such as decoupled evaluations, where objectives can be queried
independently from one another and each may
consume different resources, or multi-fidelity evaluations, where lower fidelity-proxies of the objectives can be evaluated at lower cost. In this
work, we propose a general one-step lookahead
acquisition function based on the Knowledge Gradient that addresses the complex question of what
to evaluate when and at which design points in
a principled Bayesian decision-theoretic fashion.
Hence, our approach naturally addresses decoupled, multi-fidelity, and standard multi-objective
optimization settings in a unified Bayesian decision making framework. By construction, our
method is the one-step Bayes-optimal policy for
hypervolume maximization. Empirically, we
demonstrate that our method improves sample
efficiency in a wide variety of synthetic and realworld problems. Furthermore, we show that our
method is general-purpose and yields competitive performance in standard (potentially noisy)
multi-objective optimization.

Objective 1

Coupled

Objective 2
Objective 1

Non-Competitive Decoupled

Objective 2

Figure 1: Decoupled evaluation allows for multiple objectives to be evaluated in non-blocking fashion (bar lengths
correspond to evaluation time). With non-competitive decoupling, objectives have independent evaluation resources
and do not compare for a shared resource.

Consider for example the problem of neural architecture
search (NAS), in which we aim to identify optimal neural network architectures with respect to both model quality
(e.g. accuracy) and hardware-specific metrics such as prediction latency measured on-device (Janapa Reddi et al., 2022).
In general, neither metric can be computed analytically as a
function of the network architecture. Measuring accuracy
typically requires a substantial amount of computation time
as the NN must be trained and evaluated. Measuring latency
requires access to the specific hardware of interest (e.g. a
particular mobile device type) and often few devices may
be tested simultaneously (Ignatov et al., 2019). However,
device-specific latency can be evaluated on untrained NNs
with reasonable accuracy with a short benchmark, making
evaluation less time-consuming. This setting is illustrated
in Figure 2, where we consider the scenario where we have
access to a number of compute nodes—each of which can
be used to train and evaluated a model—and a small number
of mobile devices that can be used for measuring latency.
The time for training models and evaluating accuracy will
typically be much longer than the time required to measure
on-device latency, but can happen asynchronously.

1. Introduction
Black-box optimization is a ubiquitous problem in scientific
and engineering applications. In many scenarios, there are
multiple objective functions that a decision maker seeks
to optimize simultaneously. Multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) is a powerful technique to achieve this
with high sample efficiency (Hernandez-Lobato et al., 2016).
1
Meta, USA 2 University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Samuel Daulton <sdaulton@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

