Improving Statistical Fidelity for Neural Image Compression
with Implicit Local Likelihood Models

Matthew Muckley 1 Alaaeldin El-Nouby 1 2 Karen Ullrich 1 Hervé Jégou 1 Jakob Verbeek 1

Abstract

MS-ILLM (Ours)
MS-PatchGAN (HiFiC*)

Lossy image compression aims to represent images in as few bits as possible while maintaining
fidelity to the original. Theoretical results indicate
that optimizing distortion metrics such as PSNR
or MS-SSIM necessarily leads to a discrepancy
in the statistics of original images from those of
reconstructions, in particular at low bitrates, often manifested by the blurring of the compressed
images. Previous work has leveraged adversarial discriminators to improve statistical fidelity.
Yet these binary discriminators adopted from generative modeling tasks may not be ideal for image compression. In this paper, we introduce a
non-binary discriminator that is conditioned on
quantized local image representations obtained
via VQ-VAE autoencoders. Our evaluations on
the CLIC2020, DIV2K and Kodak datasets show
that our discriminator is more effective for jointly
optimizing distortion (e.g., PSNR) and statistical
fidelity (e.g., FID) than the PatchGAN of the stateof-the-art HiFiC model. On CLIC2020, we obtain
the same FID as HiFiC with 30-40% fewer bits.

bpp=0.035

FID ↓

23
22

bpp=0.231

21
bpp=0.332
1.4
1.6

bpp=0.121
1.8
2.0
Log-MSE ↓

2.2

Figure 1. Comparison of distortion vs. statistical fidelity tradeoff
across different bitrates. As the bitrate decreases, both distortion
(as measured by MSE) and statistical fidelity (as measured by FID)
degrade. Throughout all compression regimes, our discriminator
achieves better trade-offs between distortion and statistical fidelity
than the competing PatchGAN discriminator, as used in HiFiC.

achieving theoretical bounds (Shannon, 1948) for lossless
compression. For the autoencoding transform in (1), handcrafted transforms such as DCT or wavelets (Antonini et al.,
1992; Le Gall & Tabatabai, 1988) can be used. Combinations of these with carefully-designed quantization tables
for step (2) form the backbone of compression standards
such as JPEG and JPEG2000.

1. Introduction
The principal task for designing digital image compression
systems is to build functions that transform images into the
fewest amount of bits while maintaining a fixed, predefined
distortion level. For much of digital compression history,
efforts involved designing three components: (1) an autoencoding transformation function, such as the discrete cosine
transform (DCT) (Ahmed et al., 1974), (2) a scheme for
lossy quantization of the transform coefficients, and (3) a
lossless entropy coder for the quantized coefficients. Arithmetic coding (Rissanen, 1976; Pasco, 1976) solves (3) by

Much of the benefit of JPEG2000 over JPEG was acquired
by improving the quality of the autoencoding transform. In
this respect, there is great potential for neural networks to obtain further improvements as end-to-end image compression
systems, as has been actively explored, see e.g. (Ballé et al.,
2018; Minnen et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2020; Mentzer et al.,
2020). Deep learning methods have now surpassed both old
standards (e.g., JPEG and JPEG2000) and new standards
(e.g., BPG (Bellard)) in rate-distortion performance.

1
Meta AI 2 Inria. Correspondence to: Matthew Muckley
<mmuckley@meta.com>.

A common thread in the design of both traditional image compressors as well as deep learning ones is the ratedistortion optimization objective. In most cases, methods
utilize a handcrafted definition of distortion such as peak-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

