AbODE: Ab Initio Antibody Design using Conjoined ODEs

Yogesh Verma 1 Markus Heinonen 1 Vikas Garg 1 2

Abstract

the versatile Y-shaped proteins that guard against pathogens
such as bacteria and viruses, are essential to our adaptive
immune mechanism. Typically, an antibody acts by binding
to a specific molecule of the pathogen, namely, the antigen.
Each antibody recognizes a unique antigen, and the socalled Complementarity Determining Regions (CDRs) at
the tip of the antibody determines this specificity (Figure 1).
Thus, automating the design of antibodies against specific
pathogens (e.g., the SARS-CoV-2 virus) can revolutionize
drug discovery (Pinto et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2022b).

Antibodies are Y-shaped proteins that neutralize
pathogens and constitute the core of our adaptive
immune system. De novo generation of new antibodies that target specific antigens holds the key
to accelerating vaccine discovery. However, this
co-design of the amino acid sequence and the 3D
structure subsumes and accentuates, some central
challenges from multiple tasks including protein
folding (sequence to structure), inverse folding
(structure to sequence), and docking (binding).

Our objective is to co-design the CDR sequence and structure from scratch, conditioned on an antigen. However,
significant challenges must be overcome in this pursuit.
While recent generative methods for protein sequence design have been successful (Ingraham et al., 2019b), they
crucially utilize that the long term dependencies in sequence
are local in the 3D space. However, the CDR structures
are seldom known a priori, thereby limiting the scope of
such approaches (Jin et al., 2022b). In principle, one could
segregate the design of sequence from structure. Indeed,
once a CDR sequence is generated, folding methods such
as AlphaFold that exploit alignment with a family of protein sequences (Jumper et al., 2021) can be employed to
estimate the 3D structure of the CDR. However, generating
sequence without conditioning on the structure (Alley et al.,
2019; Shin et al., 2021a) is known to produce sub-optimal
sequences. Moreover, related sequences may be unavailable
for scenarios that diverge considerably from naturally occurring antibodies (Ingraham et al., 2019b). Finally, finding
antibodies that have a good binding affinity with the target
antigens (Raybould et al., 2019) requires search in a huge
space (∼ 2060 possible CDR sequences).

We strive to surmount these challenges with a
new generative model AbODE that extends graph
PDEs to accommodate both contextual information and external interactions. Unlike existing approaches, AbODE uses a single round of full-shot
decoding, and elicits continuous differential attention that encapsulates, and evolves with, latent
interactions within the antibody as well as those
involving the antigen. We unravel fundamental
connections between AbODE and temporal networks as well as graph-matching networks. The
proposed model significantly outperforms existing methods on standard metrics across benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning methods have recently enabled exciting
developments for computational drug design, including, on
tasks such as protein folding (Jumper et al., 2021), i.e., predicting the 3D structure of a given protein from its amino
acid sequence; sequence design or inverse folding (Ingraham et al., 2019b), i.e., generating new sequences that fold
into a given 3D structure; and docking (Ganea et al., 2021),
i.e., predicting the complex when two proteins bind together.

Initial approaches for antibody design (Pantazes & Maranas,
2010; Li et al., 2014; Lapidoth et al., 2015; Adolf-Bryfogle
et al., 2018) relied on hand-crafted energy functions that
entailed expensive simulation, and could not sufficiently
capture complex interactions (Graves et al., 2020). Going
beyond 1D sequence prediction (Alley et al., 2019; Shin
et al., 2021a; Saka et al., 2021a; Akbar et al., 2022), recent
generative methods co-design structure and sequence (Jin
et al., 2022b) and can incorporate information about antigen
directly in the model (Jin et al., 2022a; Kong et al., 2023).

We focus on the problem of antibody design. Antibodies,
1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 2 YaiYai Ltd. Correspondence to: Yogesh Verma <yogesh.verma@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Certain shortcomings, however, accompany these advances.

1

