Bidirectional Learning for Offline Model-based Biological Sequence Design

Can (Sam) Chen 1 2 Yingxue Zhang 3 Xue Liu 1 Mark Coates 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Offline model-based optimization aims to maximize a blackbox objective function with a static dataset of designs and
their scores. This offline setting is realistic since in many
real-world scenarios we do not have interactive access to
the ground-truth evaluation. The design tasks of interest
include material, aircraft, and biological sequence (Trabucco
et al., 2021). In this paper, we focus on biological sequence
design, including DNA/protein sequence, with the goal of
maximizing some specified property of these sequences.

Offline model-based optimization aims to maximize a black-box objective function with a static
dataset of designs and their scores. In this paper,
we focus on biological sequence design to maximize some sequence score. A recent approach employs bidirectional learning, combining a forward
mapping for exploitation and a backward mapping
for constraint, and it relies on the neural tangent
kernel (NTK) of an infinitely wide network to
build a proxy model. Though effective, the NTK
cannot learn features because of its parametrization, and its use prevents the incorporation of powerful pre-trained Language Models (LMs) that can
capture the rich biophysical information in millions of biological sequences. We adopt an alternative proxy model, adding a linear head to a pretrained LM, and propose a linearization scheme.
This yields a closed-form loss and also takes into
account the biophysical information in the pretrained LM. In addition, the forward mapping and
the backward mapping play different roles and
thus deserve different weights during sequence
optimization. To achieve this, we train an auxiliary model and leverage its weak supervision
signal via a bi-level optimization framework to
effectively learn how to balance the two mappings.
Further, by extending the framework, we develop
the first learning rate adaptation module Adaptiveη, which is compatible with all gradient-based
algorithms for offline model-based optimization.
Experimental results on DNA/protein sequence
design tasks verify the effectiveness of our algorithm. Our code is available here.

A wide variety of methods have been proposed for biological
sequence design, including evolutionary algorithms (Sinai
et al., 2020; Ren et al., 2022), reinforcement learning
methods (Angermueller et al., 2019), Bayesian optimization (Terayama et al., 2021), search/sampling using generative models (Brookes et al., 2019; Chan et al., 2021), and
GFlowNets (Jain et al., 2022). Recently, gradient-based
techniques have emerged as an effective alternative (Trabucco et al., 2021). These approaches first train a deep neural network (DNN) on the static dataset as a proxy and then
obtain the new designs by directly performing gradient ascent steps on the existing designs. Such methods have been
widely used in biological sequence design (Norn et al., 2021;
Tischer et al., 2020; Linder & Seelig, 2020). One obstacle is
the out-of-distribution issue, where the trained proxy model
is inaccurate for the newly generated sequences.
To mitigate the out-of-distribution issue, recent work proposes regularization of the model (Trabucco et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2021; Fu & Levine, 2021) or the design itself (Chen
et al., 2022c). The first category focuses on training a better
proxy by introducing inductive biases such as robustness (Yu
et al., 2021). The second category introduces bidirectional
learning (Chen et al., 2022c), which consists of a forward
mapping and a backward mapping, to optimize the design
directly. Specifically, the backward mapping leverages the
high-scoring design to predict the static dataset and vice
versa for the forward mapping, which distills the information of the static dataset into the high-scoring design. This
approach achieves state-of-the-art performances on a variety of tasks. Though effective, the proposed bidirectional
learning relies on the neural tangent kernel (NTK) of an
infinite-width model to yield a closed-form loss, which is a
key component of its successful operation. The NTK can-

1

McGill University 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 3 Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Can (Sam) Chen
<can.chen@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

