Global Optimization with Parametric Function Approximation

Chong Liu 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 1

Abstract

...) that one needs to maximize (Kandasamy et al., 2020).
Also in material design, researchers want to synthesize ceramic materials, e.g., titanium dioxide (TiO2 ) thin films,
using microwave radiation (Nakamura et al., 2017) where
the film property is a non-convex function of parameters
including temperature, solution concentration, pressure, and
processing time. Efficiently solving such non-convex optimization problems could significantly reduce energy cost.

We consider the problem of global optimization with noisy zeroth order oracles — a wellmotivated problem useful for various applications ranging from hyper-parameter tuning for
deep learning to new material design. Existing
work relies on Gaussian processes or other nonparametric family, which suffers from the curse
of dimensionality. In this paper, we propose a
new algorithm GO-UCB that leverages a parametric family of functions (e.g., neural networks)
instead. Under a realizable assumption and a few
other mild geometric conditions, we show √
that
GO-UCB achieves a cumulative regret of Õ( T )
where T is the time horizon. At the core of GOUCB is a carefully designed uncertainty set over
parameters based on gradients that allows optimistic exploration. Synthetic and real-world experiments illustrate GO-UCB works better than
popular Bayesian optimization approaches, even
if the model is misspecified.

We assume having access to only noisy function evaluations,
i.e., at round t, we select a point xt and receive a noisy
function value yt ,
yt = f (xt ) + ηt ,

(1)

where ηt for t = 1, ..., T are independent, zero-mean, σsub-Gaussian noise. This is known as the noisy zeroth-order
oracle setting in optimization literature. Let f ∗ be the optimal function value, following the tradition of Bayesian
optimization (see e.g., Frazier (2018) for a review), throughout this paper, we use cumulative regret as the evaluation
criterion, defined as
RT =

T
X
t=1

1. Introduction

rt =

T
X

f ∗ − f (xt ),

t=1

where rt is called instantaneous regret at round t. An
algorithm A is said to be a no-regret algorithm if
limT →∞ RT (A)/T = 0.

We consider the problem of finding a global optimal solution
to the following optimization problem

Generally speaking, solving a global non-convex optimization is NP-hard (Jain et al., 2017) and we need additional
assumptions to efficiently proceed. Bayesian optimization
usually assumes the objective function f is drawn from a
Gaussian process prior. Srinivas et al. (2010) proposed the
GP-UCB approach, which iteratively queries the argmax of
an upper confidence bound of the current posterior belief,
before updating the posterior belief using the new data point.
However, Gaussian process relies on kernels, e.g., squared
error kernel or Matérn kernel, which suffer from the curse
of dimensionality. A folklore rule-of-thumb is that GP-UCB
becomes unwieldy when the dimension is larger than 10.

max f (x),
x∈X

where f : X → R is an unknown non-convex function that
is not necessarily differentiable in x.
This problem is well-motivated by many real-world applications. For example, the accuracy of a trained neural network
on a validation set is complex non-convex function of a set
of hyper-parameters (e.g., learning rate, momentum, weight
decay, dropout, depth, width, choice of activation functions
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. Correspondence to:
Chong Liu <chongliu@cs.ucsb.edu>, Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu>.

A naive approach is to passively query T data points uniformly at random, estimate f by fˆ using supervised learning, then return the maximizer of the plug-in estimator
x̂ = argmaxx∈X fˆ(x). This may side-step the curse-ofdimensionality depending on which supervised learning

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

