Harmonic Neural Networks
Atiyo Ghosh 1 Antonio A. Gentile 1 Mario Dagrada 1 Chul Lee 2 Seong-Hyok Kim 2 Hyukgeun Cha 2
Yunjun Choi 2 Dongho Kim 2 3 Jeong-Il Kye 2 4 Vincent Elfving 1

Abstract

Finite element methods (FEM) often represent the state-ofart approach in solving the corresponding equations, with
attempts specifically targeting harmonic functions (Galybin & Irša, 2010). In contrast to FEM, machine learning
based approaches offer the chance to assist with data-driven
modelling (analagous to (Raissi et al., 2019)), handle noisydata/boundary conditions, solve inverse problems for design
optimization (Lu et al., 2021), perform transfer learning and
model discovery (Both et al., 2021). Effective learnable and
differentiable representations of harmonic functions could
therefore be key in multiple fields.

Harmonic functions are abundant in nature, appearing in limiting cases of Maxwell’s, NavierStokes equations, the heat and the wave equation.
Consequently, there are many applications of harmonic functions from industrial process optimisation to robotic path planning and the calculation
of first exit times of random walks. Despite their
ubiquity and relevance, there have been few attempts to incorporate inductive biases towards
harmonic functions in machine learning contexts.
In this work, we demonstrate effective means of
representing harmonic functions in neural networks and extend such results also to quantum
neural networks to demonstrate the generality of
our approach. We benchmark our approaches
against (quantum) physics-informed neural networks, where we show favourable performance.

Physical Inductive Biases in Conventional Machine
Learning Of particular relevance to our work on harmonic functions are physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019), which use derivatives of neural
networks (NNs) with respect to their inputs as a regularisation term to provide an inductive bias towards a given differential equation, including potentially towards harmonic
functions. Even though this concept was introduced decades
ago (Lagaris et al., 1998), PINNs have only recently garnered much attention. For a wider overview of PINNs, we
direct the interested reader to a recent review (Karniadakis
et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Harmonic functions can be defined as the solutions to
Laplace’s equation ∇2 ϕ = 0, though there are alternative mathematically-equivalent definitions. Such functions
are ubiquitous in nature, appearing in limiting cases of
Maxwell’s equations (Griffiths, 2005), the heat (or diffusion) equation, the wave equation, irrotational flow in
fluid dynamics (Anderson, 2011) and first-hitting times of
random walks (Redner, 2001). Consequently, harmonic
functions are relevant in many practical settings, including
navigation in robots (Prestes e Silva et al., 2002), electrostatic imaging (Akduman & Kress, 2002) and heat transport (Sharma et al., 2018), to name but a few examples.

Related to PINNs, there has been a growing recent interest
in applying machine learning towards differential equation
problems, such as the solution of families of differential
equations (Li et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2019), or facilitating
the solution via dimensionality reduction (Gunzburger et al.,
2007). Finding NNs which directly obey a given (linear)
differential operator as a hard constraint has attracted some
recent attention (Hendriks et al., 2020). Divergence-free
vector fields were also used recently to represent continuity
equations (Richter-Powell et al., 2022). We also leverage
divergence-free fields in parts of our exposition. In addition
to physical inductive biases encodable via differentiable
equations, there have also been recently developed methods
to effectively impose energy conservation on learnt representations (Greydanus et al., 2019; Cranmer et al., 2020).

1

PASQAL SAS, 2 av. Augustin Fresnel, Palaiseau, 91220,
France 2 LG Electronics, AI Lab, CTO Div, 19, Yangjae-daero
11-gil, Seocho-gu, Seoul, 06772, Republic of Korea 3 POSCO
Holdings, AI R&D Laboratories, 440, Tehera-ro, Gangam-gu,
Seoul, 06194, Republic of Korea 4 Pinostory Inc., 1-905 IT Castle,
Seoul, 08506, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Atiyo Ghosh
<atiyo.ghosh@pasqal.com>.

Physical Inductive Biases in Quantum Machine Learning A promising avenue for achieving practically-relevant
quantum advantage within currently available and near-term
noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers consists of

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

