Fast Algorithms for Distributed k-Clustering with Outliers

Junyu Huang 1 2 Qilong Feng 1 2 Ziyun Huang 3 Jinhui Xu 4 Jianxin Wang 1 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction

In this paper, we study the k-clustering problems
with outliers in distributed setting. The current
best results for the distributed k-center problem
with outliers have quadratic local running time
with communication cost dependent on the aspect
ratio ∆ of the given instance, which may constraint the scalability of the algorithms for handling large-scale datasets. To achieve better communication cost for the problem with faster local
running time, we propose an inliers-recalling sampling method, which avoids guessing the optimal
radius of the given instance, and can achieve a 4round bi-criteria (14(1 + ), 1 + )-approximation
with linear local running time in the data size and
communication cost independent of the aspect
ratio. To obtain a more practical algorithm for
the problem, we propose another space-narrowing
sampling method, which automatically adjusts the
sample size to adapt to different outliers distributions on each machine, and can achieve a 2-round
bi-criteria (14(1 + ), 1 + )-approximation with
communication cost independent of the number
of outliers. We show that, if the data points are
randomly partitioned across machines, our proposed sampling-based methods can be extended
to the k-median/means problems with outliers,
and can achieve (O( 12 ), 1 + )-approximation
with communication cost independent of the number of outliers. Empirical experiments suggest
that the proposed 2-round distributed algorithms
outperform other state-of-the-art algorithms.

Clustering is a fundamental problem that has been extensively studied in the past few decades. Different types of
clustering problems have been widely used in applications.
Since clustering is well known to be sensitive to outliers,
one of the major challenges for clustering is how to deal
with data noises. Charikar et al. (2001) formulated and
studied the clustering problem with outliers, in which a
given number z of data points could be discarded as outliers when trying to minimize the clustering cost. For the
k-median/means problems with outliers, Chawla and Gionis
(2013) modified the Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982) to iteratively label the furthest z data points as outliers and adjust
the centers according to the labels. By randomized rounding
techniques, the k-median/means problems with outliers can
be approximated up to a constant factor (Chen, 2008; Krishnaswamy et al., 2018). However, these algorithms have
polynomial running time. In order to obtain fast approximation, lots of bi-criteria approximation algorithms have been
proposed (Charikar et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2021; Gupta
et al., 2017; Bhaskara et al., 2019; Deshpande et al., 2020;
Im et al., 2020). As for the k-center problem with outliers,
Charikar et al. (2001) gave a 3-approximation algorithm
with running time O(n2 k). Ding et al. (2019) proposed
a 2-approximation algorithm with running time O( nk
 ) using sampling-based method, which opens O(k) centers and
discards (1 + )z outliers. Recently, Chakrabarty et al.
(2016) proposed a reduction-based method that achieves a
2-approximation in polynomial time.
Clustering in distributed setting has also attracted much attention in recent years (Chen et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2016;
Dandolo et al., 2022; Guha et al., 2017; Malkomes et al.,
2015; Li & Guo, 2018). In this setting, the data points are
partitioned among m machines, and a subset Pi ⊆ P of data
points with |Pi | = ni is assigned to machine i. Communications happen in rounds between the coordinator and the
machines, where the communication cost is defined as the
total number of words sent by the coordinator and machines.
In this paper, we study the k-center/median/means problems
with outliers in distributed setting, called the distributed
(k, z)-center/median/means problems. For the distributed
(k, z)-center problem, Malkomes et al. (2015) proposed a
(13 + )-approximation algorithm with communication cost
O(m(k + z)), where the local running time is O(ni (k + z))

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China 2 Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China 3 Department of Computer
Science and Software Engineering, Penn State Erie, the
Behrend College 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, NY, USA
5
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China. Correspondence
to: Qilong Feng <csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn>, Jianxin Wang
<jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

