Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect?

Shibani Santurkar 1 Esin Durmus 1 Faisal Ladhak 2 Cinoo Lee 1 Percy Liang 1 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1

Abstract

improving the model, to the model designers themselves.
This motivates the central question of our work:

Language models (LMs) are increasingly being
used in open-ended contexts, where the opinions
they reflect in response to subjective queries can
have a profound impact, both on user satisfaction, and shaping the views of society at large.
We put forth a quantitative framework to investigate the opinions reflected by LMs – by leveraging high-quality public opinion polls. Using
this framework, we create OpinionQA, a dataset
for evaluating the alignment of LM opinions with
those of 60 US demographic groups over topics
ranging from abortion to automation. Across topics, we find substantial misalignment between the
views reflected by current LMs and those of US
demographic groups: on par with the DemocratRepublican divide on climate change. Notably,
this misalignment persists even after explicitly
steering the LMs towards particular groups. Our
analysis not only confirms prior observations
about the left-leaning tendencies of some human
feedback-tuned LMs, but also surfaces groups
whose opinions are poorly reflected by current
LMs (e.g., 65+ and widowed individuals).

Whose opinions (if any) do language models reflect?
Note that the answer to this question is an important factor
in the success of LMs in open-ended applications. After
all, unlike typical benchmark tasks, subjective queries do
not have “correct” responses that we can direct the model
towards. Instead, any response from the model (including
refusal) encodes an opinion – which can affect the user’s
experience and shape their subsequent beliefs. This suggests
that a key evaluation for LMs in open-ended tasks will
be not only to assess whether models are human-aligned
broadly (Askell et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022) but also
to identify whose opinions are reflected by LMs.
Prior works hint at the types of human viewpoints that current LMs reflect. For instance, Perez et al. (2022b) and Hartmann et al. (2023) show that in certain contexts (e.g., gun
rights and the compass test), LMs express views typically
associated with the political left. Another line of recent
works (Jiang et al., 2022; Argyle et al., 2022; Simmons,
2022; Hartmann et al., 2023) has shown that with conditioning on demographic attributes (e.g., party affiliation), LMs
can mimic certain tendencies of the corresponding groups—
e.g., the Presidential candidate they might vote. However,
systematically answering our motivating question requires
an expansive and quantitative framework for projecting the
opinions expressed by LMs onto the space of human opinions. Specifically: (i) identifying topics of public interest to
probe models on, and (ii) defining methods for measuring
the alignment between LM’s responses on these topics to
the spectrum of views held by people.

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) are becoming ubiquitous in openended applications such as dialogue agents and writing assistants. In these settings, LMs have been observed to offer
opinions in response to subjective queries: e.g., DeepMind’s
Sparrow says that the death penalty shouldn’t exist (Glaese
et al., 2022) while Anthropic’s models claim that AI is not
an existential threat to humanity (Bai et al., 2022). A priori, it is hard to predict how LMs will respond to such
subjective queries. After all, many humans, with myriad
opinions, shape these models: from internet users producing
the training data, crowdworkers who provide feedback for

Our contributions. We develop a framework to study the
opinions reflected by LMs and their alignment with different human populations. Our approach is built on a simple
observation: to characterize LM opinions1 , we can repurpose well-established tools for studying human opinions.
Concretely, the tool we rely on is public opinion surveys,
which offers several unique advantages over ad-hoc probing
of LMs. The survey topics are chosen by experts; the ques-

*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Columbia University.
Correspondence to: Shibani Santurkar <shibani1@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

While we use the term “LM opinions” for brevity, we do not
view LMs as having their own opinions, but instead as reflecting
those of humans involved in their design process.

1

