Efficient Rate Optimal Regret for Adversarial Contextual MDPs Using Online
Function Approximation

Orin Levy 1 Alon Cohen 2 3 Asaf Cassel 1 Yishay Mansour 1 3

Abstract

is to choose actions as to maximize the cumulative return.
This model characterizes many applications including online advertising, robotics, games and healthcare, and has
been extensively studied over the past three decades (see
e.g., Sutton & Barto, 2018; Mannor et al., 2022).

We present the OMG-CMDP! algorithm for regret
minimization in adversarial Contextual MDPs.
The algorithm operates under the minimal assumptions of realizable function class and access to online least squares and log loss regression oracles. Our algorithm is efficient (assuming efficient online regression oracles), simple
and robust p
to approximation errors. It enjoys
e 2.5 T |S||A|(RT H (O) + H log(δ −1 )))
an O(H
regret guarantee, with T being the number of
episodes, S the state space, A the action space,
F
H the horizon and RT H (O) = RT H (Osq
)+
P
RT H (Olog ) is the sum of the square and log-loss
regression oracles’ regret, used to approximate
the context-dependent rewards and dynamics, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, our
algorithm is the first efficient rate optimal regret
minimization algorithm for adversarial CMDPs
that operates under the minimal standard assumption of online function approximation.

However, the classical MDP model cannot efficiently capture the influence of additional side information on the environment. Consider, for example, a medical trial that tests
the effect of a new medication for a disease. The reaction of
a patient to the treatment, which is modeled by the environment, is deeply influenced by the patient’s medical history,
which includes age, weight and background diseases she
or he might have. We refer to such external information,
which is unaffected by the agent’s decisions, i.e., treatment
choice, as the patient’s context. A standard MDP can encode the context as part of the state. However, as no two
patients are identical, this can significantly increase the size
of the state space, and hence the complexity of learning and
even the complexity of representing a single policy. Instead,
Contextual MDPs (CMDPs), keep the state space small and
treat the context as side information, revealed to the agent at
the start of each episode. Additionally, there is an unknown
mapping from each context to an MDP, thus an optimal
policy maps each context to an optimal policy of the related
MDP.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a framework for sequential decision making in unknown environments. A Markov
Decision Process (MDP) is the mathematical model behind
RL environments. In the classical episodic RL setting, in
each episode an agent repeatedly interacts with the MDP
for H steps, observing the current state and then choosing
an action. Subsequently, the agent receives a reward and
the process transitions to the next state. The agent’s goal

As previously alluded to, the context space is often prohibitively large, prompting the use of function approximation. This has previously been studied in the context of Contextual Multi Armed Bandits (CMAB; Foster & Rakhlin,
2020; Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2021), and more recently in
CMDPs (Foster et al., 2021b; Levy & Mansour, 2022b).
Concretely, realizable function approximation implies that
the agent is provided with a function class of mappings
from contexts to MDPs, and the goal is to obtain learning
guarantees in terms of the class’ complexity rather than the
size of the context space. Realizability further implies that
the true mapping resides in the class.

1

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 2 School of Electrical Engineering,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 3 Google Research,
Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Orin Levy <orinlevy@mail.tau.ac.il>, Alon Cohen <alonco@tauex.tau.ac.il>,
Asaf Cassel <acassel@mail.tau.ac.il>, Yishay Mansour <mansour.yishay@gmail.com>.

In recent years, CMDPs have gained much interest. There
are two major lines of works. The distinctive feature between these two lines is whether the context is stochastic
or adversarially chosen. Hallak et al. (2015) were the first
to study CMDPs assuming an adversarial context. Modi &

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

