On the Estimation of Gaussian Mixture Copula Models

Ashutosh Tewari * 1

Abstract

the marginal behaviors of the random variables while being
able to separately capture the dependencies between them.
See (Durante & Sempi, 2010) and references therein for a
survey on this subject. This decoupling induced by a copula
can be especially significant when the true data-generating
process imposes strict constraints over the marginal distributions of some or all random variables. Ideally, any effort
to model such data should adhere to these constraints. However, in the pursuit of finding a joint model of the random
variables, one typically ends up with inconsistent marginal
models. Given the ability of copulas to overcome such inconsistencies, they have been applied in many scientific
fields though particularly in finance (Genest et al., 2009;
Cherubini et al., 2004), reliability analysis (Rychlik, 2010)
and molecular biology (Bilgrau et al., 2012; Li et al., 2011;
Kim et al., 2008; Ma & Wang, 2012). There have also been
attempts to find synergies between copula theory and machine learning to build high-fidelity data-driven models (see
Elidan, 2013, for a survey on the applications of copulas in
machine learning approaches).

This paper revisits Gaussian Mixture Copula
Model (GMCM), a more expressive alternative to
the widely used Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM),
with the goal to make its parameter estimation
tractable. Both the Expectation Maximization and
the direct Likelihood Maximization frameworks
for GMCM have to grapple with a likelihood function that lacks a closed-form. This has led to a few
approximation schemes that alleviate the problem, nonetheless leaving the issue still unresolved.
Additionally, past works have alluded to an additional challenge of parameter non-identifiability,
but none has offered a rigorous treatment and a
commensurate solution framework to overcome
the same. This work offers solutions to each of
these issues in an attempt to help GMCM realize
its full potential. The source of non-identifiability
is not only proven but also suitable priors are proposed that eliminate the problem. Additionally,
an efficient numerical framework is proposed to
evaluate the intractable likelihood function, while
also providing its analytical derivatives. Finally,
a view of GMCM as a series of bijective mappings from a base distribution is presented, which
paves the way to synthesize GMCM using modern, probabilistic programming languages (PPLs).
The main claims of this work are supported by
empirical evidence gathered on synthetic and realworld datasets.

The focus of this paper is on the multivariate modeling
of continuous random variables, exhibiting multimodal behavior in their joint (and/or marginal) distribution. Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) (Bilmes, 1997) have been
prolifically used to model such datasets, thanks to their
simplicity and an efficient Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm for parameter estimation. However, the assumption of jointly normally distributed components is frequently
violated in real-world applications, with unintended practical ramifications. The Gaussian Mixture Copula Model
(GMCM) (Tewari et al., 2011; Bilgrau et al., 2016; Bhattacharya & Rajan, 2014; Kasa & Rajan, 2018) offers a more
expressive alternative to GMM while keeping the same parameterization to capture multimodal dependence structure.
Figure 1 illustrates the expressivity endowed by the GMCM
via a synthetic two-dimensional dataset with 100 samples
(Figure 1a) that appears to have a bimodal distribution with
non-Gaussian modes. The best-fit GMCM and a GMM are
obtained on this dataset, wherein the optimal number of
components is determined via the widely used Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC). A quick look at the density
contours (Figure 1b-1c) and the generated random samples
(Figure 1d-1e), suggests that the GMCM is a more faithful
model of the underlying data, with a noticeable tighter fit.

1. Introduction
Modeling multivariate data is of fundamental interest, in several domains, to solve myriad of practical problems. From a
probabilistic viewpoint, it amounts to defining a generative
process that best explains the observed data when seen as
random variables. Copulas provide a unique framework to
model multivariate data that allows for complete control on
1
Amazon Mechatronics, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to:
Ashutosh Tewari <ashutosh80@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

