Phase Transitions in the Detection of Correlated Databases
Dor Elimelech * 1 Wasim Huleihel * 2

Abstract

An example of such an inference task between, say, two
databases, formulated as an hypothesis testing problem, is
the following: under the null hypothesis, the databases are
statistically uncorrelated, while under the alternative, there
exists a permutation which scrambles one database, and for
which the two databases are correlated. Then, observing
the databases, under what conditions can we tell if they are
correlated or not?

We study the problem of detecting the correlation
between two Gaussian databases X ∈ Rn×d and
Yn×d , each composed of n users with d features.
This problem is relevant in the analysis of social
media, computational biology, etc. We formulate
this as a hypothesis testing problem: under the
null hypothesis, these two databases are statistically independent. Under the alternative, however,
there exists an unknown permutation σ over the
set of n users (or, row permutation), such that X
is ρ-correlated with Yσ , a permuted version of Y.
We determine sharp thresholds at which optimal
testing exhibits a phase transition, depending on
the asymptotic regime of n and d. Specifically,
we prove that if ρ2 d → 0, as d → ∞, then weak
detection (performing slightly better than random
guessing) is statistically impossible, irrespectively
of the value of n. This compliments the performance of a simple test that thresholds the sum
all entries of XT Y. Furthermore, when d is fixed,
we prove that strong detection (vanishing error
probability) is impossible for any ρ < ρ⋆ , where
ρ⋆ is an explicit function of d, while weak detection is again impossible as long as ρ2 d = o(1), as
n → ∞. These results close significant gaps in
current recent related studies.

It turns out that the above general inference formulation
is relevant in many fields, such as, computational biology
(Singh et al., 2008; Kang et al., 2012), social network analysis (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; 2009), computer vision
(Berg et al., 2005; Cour et al., 2006), and data anonymization/privacy based systems. A concrete classical example
is: consider two data sources (e.g., Netflix and IMDb), each
supplying lists of features for a set of entities, say, users.
Those features might be various characteristics of those
users, such as, names, user identifications, ratings. In many
cases, reliable labeling for features is either not available or
deleted (so as to hide sensitive unique identifying information) due to privacy concerns. In general, this precludes trivial identification of feature pairs from the two sources that
correspond to the same user. Nonetheless, the hope is that
if the correlation between the two databases is sufficiently
large, then it is possible to identify correspondences between
the two databases, and generate an alignment between the
feature lists (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; 2009).
Quite recently, the data alignment problem, a seemingly simple probabilistic model which captures the scenario above,
was introduced and investigated in (Cullina et al., 2018; Dai
et al., 2019). Specifically, there are two databases X ∈ Rn×d
and Yn×d , each composed of n users with d features. There
exist an unknown permutation/correspondence which match
users in X to users in Y. For a pair of matched database
entries, the features are dependent according to a known
distribution, and, for unmatched entries, the features are independent. The goal is to recover the unknown permutation,
and derive statistical guarantees for which recovery is possible and impossible, as a function of the correlation level,
n, and d. Roughly speaking, this recovery problem is wellunderstood for a wide family of probability distributions.
For example, in the Gaussian case, denoting the correlation
coefficient by ρ, it was shown in (Dai et al., 2019) that if
ρ2 = 1 − o(n−4/d ) then perfect recovery is possible, while

1. Introduction
Database alignment and the quantification of the relation between different databases are among the most fundamental
tasks in modern applications of statistics. In many cases, the
observed databases are high-dimensional, unlabeled, noisy,
and scrambled, making the task of inference challenging.
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Ben-Gurion university, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. 2 Department of Electrical Engineering-Systems, Tel
Aviv university, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.. Correspondence
to: Dor Elimelech <doreli@post.bgu.ac.il>, Wasim Huleihel
<wasimh@tauex.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

