Deep Anomaly Detection under Labeling Budget Constraints

Aodong Li * 1 Chen Qiu * 2 Marius Kloft 3 Padhraic Smyth 1 Stephan Mandt † 1 Maja Rudolph † 2

Abstract

approaches either assume that the unlabeled anomalies are
too rarely encountered during training to affect learning
(Wang et al., 2019) or try to detect and exploit the anomalies
in the training data (e.g., Qiu et al. (2022a)).

Selecting informative data points for expert feedback can significantly improve the performance
of anomaly detection (AD) in various contexts,
such as medical diagnostics or fraud detection. In
this paper, we determine a set of theoretical conditions under which anomaly scores generalize
from labeled queries to unlabeled data. Motivated
by these results, we propose a data labeling strategy with optimal data coverage under labeling
budget constraints. In addition, we propose a new
learning framework for semi-supervised AD. Extensive experiments on image, tabular, and video
data sets show that our approach results in stateof-the-art semi-supervised AD performance under
labeling budget constraints.

While AD is typically an unsupervised training task, sometimes expert feedback is available to check if individual
samples are normal or not. For example, in a medical setting, one may ask a medical doctor to confirm whether
a given image reflects normal or abnormal cellular tissue.
Other application areas include detecting network intrusions
or machine failures. Anomaly labels are usually expensive
to obtain but are very valuable to guide an anomaly detector
during training. For example, in Fig. 1, we can see that our
method, with only one labeled query (Fig. 1 d) is almost on
par with supervised AD (Fig. 1 a). However, the supervised
setting is unrealistic, since expert feedback is typically expensive. Instead, it is essential to develop effective strategies
for querying informative data points.

1. Introduction

Previous work on AD under a labeling budget primarily involves domain-specific applications and/or ad hoc architectures, making it hard to disentangle modeling choices from
querying strategies (Trittenbach et al., 2021). In contrast,
this paper theoretically and empirically studies generalization performance using various labeling budgets, querying
strategies, and losses.

Detecting anomalies in data is a fundamental task in machine learning with applications across multiple domains,
from industrial fault detection to medical diagnosis. The
main idea is to train a model (such as a neural network) on
a data set of “normal” samples to minimize the loss of an
auxiliary (e.g., self-supervised) task. Using the loss function
to score test data, one hopes to obtain low scores for normal
data and high scores for anomalies (Ruff et al., 2021).

In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
1. We prove that the ranking of anomaly scores generalizes
from labeled queries to unlabeled data under certain conditions that characterize how well the queries cover the
data. Based on this theory, we propose a diverse querying
strategy for deep AD under labeling budget constraints.

In practice, the training data is often contaminated with
unlabeled anomalies that differ in unknown ways from the
i.i.d. samples of normal data. No access to a binary anomaly
label (indicating whether a sample is normal or not) makes
learning the anomaly scoring function from contaminated
data challenging; the training signal has to come exclusively
from the input features (typically real-valued vectors). Many

2. We propose semi-supervised outlier exposure with a
limited labeling budget (SOEL), a semi-supervised learning framework compatible with a large number of deep
AD losses. We show how all major hyperparameters can
be eliminated, making SOEL easy to use. To this end,
we provide an estimate for the anomaly ratio in the data.

1
Equal contribution † Joint supervision
Department
of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine,
USA 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Pittsburgh,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science, TU Kaiserslautern, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Aodong Li
<aodongl1@uci.edu>, Stephan Mandt <mandt@uci.edu>,
Maja Rudolph <Maja.Rudolph@us.bosch.com>.
*

3. We provide an extensive benchmark for deep AD with
a limited labeling budget. Our experiments on image,
tabular, and video data provide evidence that SOEL outperforms existing methods significantly. Comprehensive
ablations disentangle the benefits of each component.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

