Long Horizon Temperature Scaling

Andy Shih 1 Dorsa Sadigh 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract

In generative tasks, temperature scaling also serves as a
method for controlling the randomness of model outputs,
and has shown to be useful for many natural language generation tasks such as summarization and question answering (Liang et al., 2022). Many current models in deployment (Brown et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021) even
expose the model temperature as a user-controllable parameter in their API. These autoregressive language models
execute temperature scaling one token at a time, rescaling the probability of the next token to be proportional to
log p(xi |x<i )/T . However, this mechanism is myopic, optimizing for the next token instead of the full sequence.

Temperature scaling is a popular technique for
tuning the sharpness of a model distribution. It is
used extensively for sampling likely generations
and calibrating model uncertainty, and even features as a controllable parameter to many large
language models in deployment. However, autoregressive models rely on myopic temperature
scaling that greedily optimizes the next token.
To address this, we propose Long Horizon Temperature Scaling (LHTS), a novel approach for
sampling from temperature-scaled joint distributions. LHTS is compatible with all likelihoodbased models, and optimizes for the long horizon
likelihood of samples. We derive a temperaturedependent LHTS objective, and show that finetuning a model on a range of temperatures produces
a single model capable of generation with a controllable long horizon temperature parameter. We
experiment with LHTS on image diffusion models and character/language autoregressive models,
demonstrating advantages over myopic temperature scaling in likelihood and sample quality, and
showing improvements in accuracy on a multiple
choice analogy task by 10%. Our code is available
at https://github.com/AndyShih12/
LongHorizonTemperatureScaling.

We reexamine the current practice of temperature scaling for
generative models. Unlike discriminative tasks, generative
tasks produce high-dimensional outputs. In other words,
rescaling the model outputs should, in principle, rescale
joint probabilities according to log p(x)/T . Lowering the
temperature of a language model should ideally bias the
model towards generation of full text sequences with high
joint likelihood, not just greedy generation of the next likely
tokens. However, due to the intractability of joint temperature scaling, existing model families rely on various ad-hoc
approximations such as myopic temperature scaling. This
perspective highlights the following concerns.
A) Current temperature scaling for autoregressive models
is a myopic approximation to temperature scaling of
joint probabilities.
Many other model families do not support myopic approximations, and are left with the intractable problem of joint
temperature scaling. Some sidestep the problem by defining
various notions of pseudo-temperatures (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020).

1. Introduction
Temperature scaling is a simple yet effective technique for
rescaling model outputs: lowering the temperature to increase the probability of high-likelihood outcomes, or vice
versa. In discriminative settings, tuning the temperature has
shown success as a calibration method (Guo et al., 2017;
Nixon et al., 2019; Desai & Durrett, 2020). The model outputs a small set of class probabilities, which can be tractably
rescaled to match the desired calibration metric.

B) Many non-autoregressive generative models either rely
on pseudo-temperatures or do not use temperature scaling altogether.

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Andy Shih <andyshih@cs.stanford.edu>.

To address these concerns, we aim head-on for the goal
of joint temperature scaling. Instead of handling various
model-specific temperature scaling techniques, we set out
to develop a practical and general mechanism for sampling
from temperature-scaled joint distributions. We propose

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

