Blossom: an Anytime Algorithm for Computing Optimal Decision Trees

Emir Demirović * 1 Emmanuel Hebrard * 2 Louis Jean * 3

Abstract

confirm a significant gain in test accuracy, for the objective
criterion considered in this paper and in (Bertsimas & Dunn,
2017; Bertsimas & Shioda, 2007; Demirović et al., 2022;
Hu et al., 2020; Nijssen & Fromont, 2007): maximizing the
training accuracy given an upper bound on the depth. Other
criteria have been considered. For instance, OSDT (Hu
et al., 2019), GOSDT (Lin et al., 2020) optimize a linear
combination of accuracy and number of leaves. However
maximizing the accuracy under a constrained depth has
is easier to tackle algorithmically, and the predictions of
shallower trees are easier to explain.

We propose a simple algorithm to learn optimal
decision trees of bounded depth. This algorithm
is essentially an anytime version of the state-ofthe-art dynamic programming approach. It has
virtually no overhead compared to heuristic methods and is comparable to the best exact methods to
prove optimality on most data sets. Experiments
show that whereas existing exact methods hardly
scale to deep trees, this algorithm learns trees
comparable to standard heuristics without computational overhead, and can significantly improve
their accuracy when given more computation time,
even for deep trees.

Despite these desirable features, exact methods have not
yet been widely adopted because they do not scale. Exact methods made significant progress lately, and the most
recent approaches show very promising results. However,
no exact method can replace heuristics in all contexts. For
SAT (Avellaneda, 2020; Narodytska et al., 2018) and Integer Programming (Aghaei et al., 2020; Bertsimas & Dunn,
2017; Bertsimas & Shioda, 2007; Verwer & Zhang, 2019),
the size of the encoding is a first hurdle. These models
require a number of variables proportional to the size of the
tree and to the number of datapoints and hence scaling beyond a few thousands datapoints is hard. On the other hand,
dynamic programming algorithms DL8 (Nijssen & Fromont,
2007) and DL8.5 (Aglin et al., 2020) scale very well to
large data sets. Moreover, these algorithms leverage branch
independence: sibling subtrees can be optimized independently, which has a significant impact on the computational
complexity. However, DL8.5 tends to be memory hungry
and is not anytime. The constraint programming approach
of Verhaeghe et al. emulates these positive features using
propagation algorithms and search strategies (Verhaeghe
et al., 2020), while being potentially anytime, although it
does not quite match DL8.5’s efficiency. Recently, some
approaches aiming at improving the anytime aspect have
been proposed. For instance, LDS-DL8.5 (Kiossou et al.,
2022) uses DL8.5 within a limited discrepancy search
method (Harvey & Ginsberg, 1995) thus prioritizing solutions with small deviation from an initial heuristic tree.
Similarly to the dynamic programming approaches, the algorithm Murtree (Demirović et al., 2022) optimizes one
subtree before moving to the other. However, this choice
is dynamic. Moreover, it improves on these approaches
in several ways. In particular, it optimizes with respect to

1. Introduction
In their paper proving that computing decision trees of maximum accuracy is NP-hard, Hyafil and Rivest write: “it is
to be expected that good heuristics for constructing nearoptimal binary decision trees will be the best solution to
this problem in the near future.” (Laurent & Rivest, 1976).1
Indeed, heuristics such as CART (Breiman et al., 1984),
ID3 (Quinlan, 1986) or C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993) have been
prevalent long afterward, and are still vastly more commonly used in practice than exact methods. We propose
a new algorithm (Blossom) which, while being effective
at proving optimality, has no computational nor memory
overhead compared to heuristics.
There has been some experiments indicating that optimal
trees (for some combination of accuracy, depth and size)
generalize better to unseen data (Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017).
However, these experiments were of limited scope because
of the poor scalability of exact algorithms. Our experiments
*

1
Equal contribution
TU DELFT, The Netherlands
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, France
3
Jolibrain, Toulouse, France.
Correspondence to: Emir
Demirović <e.demirovic@tudelft.nl>, Emmanuel Hebrard
<hebrard@laas.fr>, Louis Jean <louis.jean@jolibrain.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Their proof does not consider the exact same problem as in
the present paper, however it does apply with trivial changes.

1

