Regret-Minimizing Double Oracle for Extensive-Form Games

Xiaohang Tang 1 Le Cong Dinh 2 Stephen Marcus McAleer 3 Yaodong Yang 4

Abstract

sequence-form LP (Koller & Megiddo, 1992) can be used
to compute the Nash equilibrium (NE) of EFGs (Nash Jr,
1950), direct calculation of the exact NE via LP can become infeasible for large real-world games due to memory
constraints and the high cost of matrix inversion. Therefore, more efficient methods are required to solve EFGs for
real-world applications.

By incorporating regret minimization, double oracle methods have demonstrated rapid convergence to Nash Equilibrium (NE) in normal-form
games and extensive-form games, through algorithms such as online double oracle (ODO) and
extensive-form double oracle (XDO), respectively.
In this study, we further examine the theoretical
convergence rate and sample complexity of such
regret minimization-based double oracle methods, utilizing a unified framework called RegretMinimizing Double Oracle. Based on this framework, we extend ODO to extensive-form games
and determine its sample complexity. Moreover,
we demonstrate that the sample complexity of
XDO can be exponential in the number of information sets |S|, owing to the exponentially decaying
stopping threshold of restricted games. To solve
this problem, we propose the Periodic Double
Oracle (PDO) method, which has the lowest sample complexity among regret minimization-based
double oracle methods, being only polynomial
in |S|. Empirical evaluations on multiple poker
and board games show that PDO achieves significantly faster convergence than previous double
oracle algorithms and reaches a competitive level
with state-of-the-art regret minimization methods.

The Double Oracle (DO) (McMahan et al., 2003) algorithm
family has been developed to address the complexity of
solving large Extensive-Form Games (EFGs) by solving a
sequence of restricted games, where players can only select
actions from a subset of pure strategies in the original game.
These restricted games are typically much smaller than the
original EFG, especially when the support of the Nash equilibrium (NE) is small (Wilson, 1972; Koller & Megiddo,
1996; Bosansky et al., 2014). For instance, in symmetric
normal-form games with random entries, the NE’s support
size is only half of the game size (Jonasson et al., 2004).
By constructing a solution to the large game using only a
small subset of pure strategies, the DO algorithm can effectively solve large EFGs. The DO algorithms can also
be combined with deep reinforcement learning (Lanctot
et al., 2017; Muller et al., 2019; McAleer et al., 2022b;a)
to achieve state-of-the-art performance on large games like
Stratego (McAleer et al., 2020) and Starcraft (Vinyals et al.,
2019).
Recent advances in game theory have led to the development of methods that integrate the Double Oracle (DO)
algorithm with regret minimization techniques. For example, in large normal-form games, the Online Double Oracle
(ODO) algorithm combines the DO approach with the Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) (Freund & Schapire,
1999) regret minimizer for restricted games (Dinh et al.,
2022). In extensive-form games, the Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) algorithm has been successfully
used to achieve superhuman performance in Texas Hold’em
Poker and other games (Zinkevich et al., 2007; Brown et al.,
2019; Lanctot et al., 2009; Farina et al., 2020; McAleer
et al., 2023). To further improve the performance of DO
in this setting, the Extensive-Form DO (XDO) algorithm
applies CFR to the DO framework and can support games
with high-dimensional continuous action spaces (McAleer
et al., 2021). However, theoretical questions regarding the
convergence speed, expected iterations, and sample com-

1. Introduction
Extensive-form games (EFGs) have been extensively employed in modeling sequential decision-making problems,
including auctions, security games, and poker. However,
solving such games remains challenging in real-world applications due to various complexities, including the game’s
large size and imperfect information. While linear programming (LP) (Von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947) and
1
Department of Statistical Science, University College London 2 University of Southampton 3 Carnegie Mellon University
4
Institute for AI, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yaodong
Yang <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

