On Investigating the Conservative Property of
Score-Based Generative Models
Chen-Hao Chao 1 Wei-Fang Sun 1 2 Bo-Wun Cheng 1 Chun-Yi Lee 1

Abstract

Constrained SBMs (CSBMs), also known as Energy-Based
Models (EBMs), model probability density functions as
Boltzmann distributions, and assign their predictions as
the negative gradients of some scalar-valued energy functions (Salimans & Ho, 2021). CSBMs are able to ensure the
conservativeness of their output vector fields. This property
is essential in guaranteeing that each updates in the sampling process are determined based on the probability ratio
between two consecutive sampling steps (Salimans & Ho,
2021). This, in turn, is necessary to ensure that the sample
distribution converges to the true data distribution. Such
a concept has been explored by the researchers of (Chen
et al., 2014; Alain & Bengio, 2014; Nguyen et al., 2017;
Salimans & Ho, 2021). However, the parameterization of
CSBMs requires specific designs, limiting the choices of
model architectures for SBMs. For example, the authors of
(Vincent, 2011; Kamyshanska & Memisevic, 2013; Saremi,
2019) proposed to construct an SBM as a neural network
with symmetric weights in its linear layer, which hinders its
ability to be extended to more sophisticated architectures.
On the other hand, the authors of (Salimans & Ho, 2021;
Saremi et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019) divided an SBM into
two halves: the first half explicitly parameterizes the negative energy function, while the second half is generated
by automatic differentiation tools (Martens et al., 2012) to
output the estimated scores. Nevertheless, these methods
require that the output of the first half can only be a scalar,
and the second half has to be generated using automatic
differentiation tools.

Existing Score-Based Models (SBMs) can be categorized into constrained SBMs (CSBMs) or unconstrained SBMs (USBMs) according to their parameterization approaches. CSBMs model probability density functions as Boltzmann distributions, and assign their predictions as the negative
gradients of some scalar-valued energy functions.
On the other hand, USBMs employ flexible architectures capable of directly estimating scores
without the need to explicitly model energy functions. In this paper, we demonstrate that the architectural constraints of CSBMs may limit their
modeling ability. In addition, we show that USBMs’ inability to preserve the property of conservativeness may lead to degraded performance in
practice. To address the above issues, we propose
Quasi-Conservative Score-Based Models (QCSBMs) for keeping the advantages of both CSBMs
and USBMs. Our theoretical derivations demonstrate that the training objective of QCSBMs can
be efficiently integrated into the training processes
by leveraging the Hutchinson’s trace estimator. In
addition, our experimental results on the CIFAR10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet, and SVHN datasets
validate the effectiveness of QCSBMs. Finally,
we justify the advantage of QCSBMs using an
example of a one-layered autoencoder.

In contrast, unconstrained SBMs (USBMs) employ flexible architectures capable of directly estimating the scores
without explicitly modeling the energy functions. Due to
their architectural flexibility, USBMs have been extensively
utilized in contemporary machine learning tasks such as image generation (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song
& Ermon, 2020; Song et al., 2021b; Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021). Among these works, Song et al. (2021b) proposed
a unified framework based on a USBM, which achieved
superior performance on several benchmarks. Their success
demonstrated that architectural flexibility can be beneficial
for SBMs. However, in spite of the empirical benefit of employing USBMs, recent research (Karras et al., 2022) suggests that the non-conservativeness of a USBM can cause

1. Introduction
Score-Based Models (SBMs) are parameterized functions
for estimating scores, which are vector fields corresponding
to the gradients of log probability density functions. Based
on their parameterization, SBMs can be categorized into
constrained or unconstrained SBMs (Salimans & Ho, 2021).
1
Elsa Lab, Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan. 2 NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA Corporation. Correspondence to: Chun-Yi Lee
<cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

