Nearly-Linear Time and Streaming Algorithms for Outlier-Robust PCA

Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Daniel M. Kane 2 Ankit Pensia 1 Thanasis Pittas 1

Abstract

the strong adversary operates as follows: The algorithm
specifies a number of samples n, then the adversary draws a
set of n i.i.d. samples from some D ∈ D and after inspecting
them, removes up to ϵn of them and replaces them with
arbitrary points. The resulting set is given as input to the
learning algorithm. We call a set ϵ-corrupted if it has been
generated by the above process.

We study principal component analysis (PCA),
where given a dataset in Rd from a distribution,
the task is to find a unit vector v that approximately maximizes the variance of the distribution
after being projected along v. Despite being a classical task, standard estimators fail drastically if
the data contains even a small fraction of outliers,
motivating the problem of robust PCA. Recent
work has developed computationally-efficient algorithms for robust PCA that either take superlinear time or have sub-optimal error guarantees.
Our main contribution is to develop a nearly linear
time algorithm for robust PCA with near-optimal
error guarantees. We also develop a single-pass
streaming algorithm for robust PCA with memory
usage nearly-linear in the dimension.

Unfortunately, outliers can skew the results of classical estimators, by artificially increasing the variance along lowvariance directions, which renders the output of these estimators unreliable.2 To address this, a robust algorithm must
be able to effectively remove outliers from the data, while
still being computationally efficient in high dimensions.
Recent works have developed computationally-efficient algorithms for robust PCA (Jambulapati et al., 2020; Kong
et al., 2020). However, these polynomial-time algorithms
either (i) achieve near-optimal error but take super-linear
time (scaling with nd2 ) or (ii) run in nearly linear time but
achieve sub-optimal error and require additional assumptions. As modern datasets continue to expand in both sample size and dimension, there is a growing need for nearly
linear time algorithms and streaming algorithms with nearoptimal error guarantees. Our work addresses this need by
developing robust PCA algorithms that meet these demands.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a central subroutine
in dimension reduction and data visualization. It is used to
identify directions of large variance, which are considered
to be the most informative aspects of the data. In the classical setting, we observe a set S of n i.i.d. points in Rd from a
(subgaussian) distribution with covariance Σ. Then, classical estimators, for e.g., the leading eigenvector of the empirical covariance of S, output a direction v with the property
that v ⊤ Σv approaches ∥Σ∥op as n increases. Importantly,
these estimators are fast and have nearly linear runtime.1

1.1. Our Results
The main result of our paper is a nearly linear time algorithm
to identify a direction of large variance from a corrupted
set. We state our results below for subgaussian distributions
(Definition B.1), but these results hold for a more general
class of “stable” distributions (Definition 2.4).

However, access to i.i.d. samples is often an unrealistic
assumption, and data may contain a small number of outliers
as formalized below:
Definition 1.1 (Strong Contamination Model). Given a
parameter 0 < ϵ < 1/2 and a class of distributions D,

Theorem 1.2. Let ϵ ∈ (0, c) for a small constant c > 0. Let
D be a subgaussian distribution with mean zero and (unknown) covariance matrix Σ. For a sufficiently large C > 0,
let S be an ϵ-corrupted set of n ≥ Cd/ϵ2 samples from D
in the strong contamination model (Definition 1.1). There
exists an algorithm that takes as inputs S and ϵ, runs in
2
e
O(nd/ϵ
) time and with probability at least 0.99 outputs a
unit vector u such that u⊤ Σu ≥ (1−O(ϵ log(1/ϵ)))∥Σ∥op .

Authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 University of
Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Ankit Pensia <ankitp@cs.wisc.edu>, Thanasis Pittas <pittas@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
By nearly linear time algorithms, we mean runtime scaling
linearly with (up to logarithmic factors) the size of input, nd.

We note that the error guarantee of our algorithm is near2
Naive techniques such as naive pruning and random projection
are also susceptible to outliers.

1

