Learning Globally Smooth Functions on Manifolds

Juan Cerviño 1 Luiz F.O. Chamon 2 Benjamin D. Haeffele 3 Rene Vidal 3 4 Alejandro Ribeiro 1

Abstract

To learn smooth functions one can require the parameterization to be smooth. Such is the idea, e.g., of spectral
normalization of weights in neural networks (Miyato et al.,
2018; Zhao & Liu, 2020). Smooth parameterizations have
the advantage of being globally smooth, but they may be
restrictive because they impose smoothness for inputs that
are not necessarily realized in the data. This drawback motivates the use of Lipschitz penalties in risk minimization
(Oberman & Calder, 2018; Finlay et al., 2018b; Couellan,
2021; Pauli et al., 2021; Bungert et al., 2021), which offers
the opposite tradeoff. Since penalties encourage but do not
enforce small Lipschitz constants, we may learn functions
that are smooth on average, but with no global guarantees of
smoothness at every point in the support of the data (Bubeck
& Sellke, 2021; Bubeck et al., 2021). Formulations that
guarantee global smoothness can be obtained if the risk minimization problem is modified by the addition of a Lipschitz
constant constraint (Krishnan et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019;
Lindemann et al., 2021; Arghal et al., 2021). This yields
formulations that guarantee Lipschitz smoothness in all possible inputs without the drawback of enforcing smoothness
outside of the input data distribution. Several empirical studies (Krishnan et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Lindemann et al.,
2021; Arghal et al., 2021) demonstrated the advantage of
imposing global smoothness constraints on observed inputs.

Smoothness and low dimensional structures play
central roles in improving generalization and stability in learning and statistics. This work combines techniques from semi-infinite constrained
learning and manifold regularization to learn representations that are globally smooth on a manifold. To do so, it shows that under typical conditions the problem of learning a Lipschitz continuous function on a manifold is equivalent to
a dynamically weighted manifold regularization
problem. This observation leads to a practical
algorithm based on a weighted Laplacian penalty
whose weights are adapted using stochastic gradient techniques. It is shown that under mild conditions, this method estimates the Lipschitz constant of the solution, learning a globally smooth
solution as a byproduct. Experiments on real
world data illustrate the advantages of the proposed method relative to existing alternatives. Our
code is available here.

1. Introduction
Learning smooth functions has been shown to be advantageous in general and is of particular interest in physical
systems. This is because of the general observation that
close input features tend to be associated with close outputs
and of the particular fact that in physical systems, Lipschitz continuity of input-output maps translates to stability
and safety (Oberman & Calder, 2018; Finlay et al., 2018b;
Couellan, 2021; Finlay et al., 2018a; Pauli et al., 2021; Krishnan et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Lindemann et al., 2021;
Arghal et al., 2021).

In this paper we exploit the fact that data can be often modeled as points in a low-dimensional manifold. We therefore
consider manifold Lipschitz constants in which function
smoothness is assessed with respect to distances measured
over the data manifold (Definition 1). Although this looks
like a minor difference, controlling Lipschitz constants over
data manifolds is quite different from controlling Lipschitz
constants in the ambient space. In Figure 1, we look at a
classification problem with classes arranged in two separate
half moons. Constraining Lipschitz constants in the ambient
space effectively assumes the underlying data is uniformly
distributed in space [cf. Figure 1(d)]. Constraining Lipschitz constants in the data manifold, however, properly
accounts for the data distribution [cf. Figure 1(a)].

1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA 2 Excellence Cluster for Simulation Technology, University of Stuttgart, Germany
3
Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 4 Innovation in Data Engineering and Science
(IDEAS), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Juan Cerviño <jcervino@seas.upenn.edu>.

This example also illustrates how constraining manifold Lipschitz constants is related to manifold regularization (Belkin
et al., 2005; Niyogi, 2013; Li et al., 2022). The difference is
that manifold regularization penalizes the average norm of
the manifold gradient. This distinction is significant because

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

