M OCCASIN: Efficient Tensor Rematerialization for Neural Networks
Burak Bartan 1 Haoming Li 2 Harris Teague 1 Christopher Lott 1 Bistra Dilkina 2

Total duration increase %

Abstract
The deployment and training of neural networks
on edge computing devices pose many challenges.
The low memory nature of edge devices is often
one of the biggest limiting factors encountered in
the deployment of large neural network models.
Tensor rematerialization or recompute is a way to
address high memory requirements for neural network training and inference. In this paper we consider the problem of execution time minimization
of compute graphs subject to a memory budget. In
particular, we develop a new constraint programming formulation called M OCCASIN with only
O(n) integer variables, where n is the number
of nodes in the compute graph. This is a significant improvement over the works in the recent
literature that propose formulations with O(n2 )
Boolean variables. We present numerical studies
that show that our approach is up to an order of
magnitude faster than recent work especially for
large-scale graphs.

Checkmate
Moccasin (C=2)

10
8
6
4
0

500 1000 1500 2000
Solve time (sec)

Figure 1. Percentage of total duration increase against solve time in
seconds for our proposed method (M OCCASIN) and C HECKMATE
(Jain et al., 2020) on a real-world graph with n = 442 nodes and
m = 1247 edges. The memory budget is set to 80% of the peak
memory for the initial topological order without rematerialization.
The time until the first data point in each curve is spent on presolve.

Effective optimization of the local memory footprint during
the computation can make a difference in meeting latency
targets for computations since global memory accesses can
be too slow (Sze et al., 2017, Sec. V). In addition, the
trend toward on-device training will further stress the limited resources due to the need to store intermediate data for
gradient back-propagation (tinyML Foundation, 2022).

1. Introduction

There are several techniques for DNN computation sequencing that can be used to manage the local memory footprint,
and a well-developed toolchain for this purpose is likely to
employ multiple methods working together. For example,
operation sequencing is a technique studied in (Gagrani
et al., 2022) and its references. Our paper focuses on another technique called rematerialization. When input data
is needed for a compute operation, it can be read from local
memory, or alternatively be recomputed (rematerialized).
In some cases the extra compute can prove to be advantageous relative to occupying valuable local memory with
the data until it is ready to be used, with the latter leaving a larger memory footprint. Deciding what operations
to rematerialize (or not) in order to optimize latency and
memory-use is a PSPACE-complete problem (Gilbert et al.,
1979). Further, we often need a method that can tackle large
computation graphs with acceptable “compile time”, thus
need an approach that scales well with graph size.

The need for efficient deep neural network (DNN) computations for both training and inference continues to grow.
Most compute architectures for DNNs make use of a limited
amount of fast, local memory in conjunction with a much
larger amount of global memory that is significantly slower
to access. For example, accelerators for mobile devices
today will dedicate several MB of local memory (per core)
for storage of intermediate output tensors before resorting to
the devices’ main memory; training of large DNNs are done
primarily on GPU’s local GDDR memory before offloading tensors to DDR memory on the motherboard. However,
there are many DNNs in practice for which the local memory
is not enough to store all the required intermediate outputs.
1
Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2 University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Burak Bartan
<bbartan AT qti.qualcomm.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

While there is a history of rematerialization research for
managing register use by compilers (Kubota, 1998; Briggs
1

