H-Consistency Bounds for Pairwise Misranking Loss Surrogates

Anqi Mao 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Yutao Zhong 1

Abstract

guish two general formulations of the problem: the scorebased setting and the preference-based setting. In the scorebased setting, a real-valued function over the input space
is learned, whose values determine a total ordering of all
input points. In the preference-based setting, a pairwise
preference function is first learned, typically by training a
classifier over a sample of labeled pairs; next, that function
is used to derive an ordering, potentially randomized, of any
subset of points.

We present a detailed study of H-consistency
bounds for score-based ranking. These are upper
bounds on the target loss estimation error of a predictor in a hypothesis set H, expressed in terms
of the surrogate loss estimation error of that predictor. We will show that both in the general pairwise ranking scenario and in the bipartite ranking
scenario, there are no meaningful H-consistency
bounds for most hypothesis sets used in practice
including the family of linear models and that of
the neural networks, which satisfy the equicontinuous property with respect to the input. To come
up with ranking surrogate losses with theoretical
guarantees, we show that a natural solution consists of resorting to a pairwise abstention loss in
the general pairwise ranking scenario, and similarly, a bipartite abstention loss in the bipartite
ranking scenario, to abstain from making predictions at some limited cost c. For surrogate losses
of these abstention loss functions, we give a series
of H-consistency bounds for both the family of
linear functions and that of neural networks with
one hidden-layer. Our experimental results illustrate the effectiveness of ranking with abstention.

This paper deals with the score-based ranking formulation
both in the general ranking setting, where items are not assigned any specific category, and the bipartite setting, where
they are labeled with one of two classes. The evaluation of
a ranking solution in this context is based on the average
pairwise misranking metric. In the bipartite setting, this
metric is directly related to the AUC (Area Under the ROC
Curve), which coincides with the average correct pairwise
ranking (Hanley & McNeil, 1982; Cortes & Mohri, 2003),
also known as the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney statistic.
For most hypothesis sets, directly optimizing the pairwise
misranking loss is intractable. Instead, ranking algorithms
resort to a surrogate loss. As an example, the surrogate loss
for RankBoost (Freund et al., 2003; Rudin et al., 2005) is
based on the exponential function and that of SVM ranking
(Joachims, 2002) on the hinge loss. But, what guarantees
can we rely on when minimizing a surrogate loss instead of
the original pairwise misranking loss?

1. Introduction

The property often invoked in this context is Bayes consistency, which has been extensively studied for classification
(Zhang, 2004; Bartlett et al., 2006; Tewari & Bartlett, 2007).
The Bayes consistency of ranking surrogate losses has been
studied in the special case of bipartite ranking: in particular, Uematsu & Lee (2017) proved the inconsistency of
the pairwise ranking loss based on the hinge loss and Gao
& Zhou (2015) gave excess loss bounds for pairwise ranking losses based on the exponential or the logistic loss (see
also (Menon & Williamson, 2014)). A related but distinct
consistency question has been studied in several publications (Agarwal et al., 2005; Kotlowski et al., 2011; Agarwal,
2014). It is one with respect to binary classification, that
is whether a near minimizer of the surrogate loss of the
binary classification loss is a near minimizer of the bipartite
misranking loss (Cortes & Mohri, 2003).

In many applications, ranking is a more appropriate formulation of the learning task than classification, given the crucial
significance of the ordering of the items. As an example, for
movie recommendation systems, an ordered list of movies
is preferable to a comprehensive list of recommended titles,
since users are more likely to watch those ranked highest.
The problem of learning to rank has been studied in a large
number of publications. Ailon & Mohri (2008; 2010) distin1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY;
Google Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Anqi Mao
<aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>, Mehryar Mohri <mohri@google.com>,
Yutao Zhong <yutao@cims.nyu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

