Robust Weak Supervision with Variational Auto-Encoders

Francesco Tonolini 1 Nikolaos Aletras 1 2 Yunlong Jiao 1 Gabriella Kazai 1

Abstract

2016a; 2017), where supervised learning models are trained
without manual annotations, but using weak labels obtained
from manually constructed (i.e. programmatic) rules instead. In a WS framework, domain experts do not need to
label each training example individually, but just define a
series of general rules, i.e., labelling functions (LFs). LFs
are subsequently applied to the training data in bulk and
combined to obtain estimates of the underlying true labels
(Zhang et al., 2022; Ratner et al., 2017; Bach et al., 2019;
Fu et al., 2020).

Recent advances in programmatic weak supervision (WS) techniques allow to mitigate the enormous cost and effort of human data annotation
for supervised machine learning by automating it
using simple rule-based labelling functions (LFs).
However, LFs need to be carefully designed, often requiring expert domain knowledge and extensive validation for existing WS methods to be
effective. To tackle this, we propose the Weak Supervision Variational Auto-Encoder (WS-VAE), a
novel framework that combines unsupervised representation learning and weak labelling to reduce
the dependence of WS on expert and manual engineering of LFs. Our technique learns from inputs
and weak labels jointly to capture the input signals distribution with a latent space. The unsupervised representation component of the WS-VAE
regularises the inference of weak labels, while a
specifically designed decoder allows the model to
learn the relevance of LFs for each input. These
unique features lead to considerably improved
robustness to the quality of LFs, compared to existing methods. An extensive empirical evaluation
on a standard WS benchmark shows that our WSVAE is competitive to state-of-the-art methods
and substantially more robust to LF engineering.

Despite their success, current programmatic WS techniques
require high quality LFs and large amounts of data to perform comparably to supervised models trained on relatively
smaller manually annotated datasets (Bach et al., 2019; Ratner et al., 2016b). In particular, most approaches make
strong LF independence assumptions and require them to
combine high coverage and accuracy over the training set
(Ratner et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2020). This reliance on careful engineering of LFs introduces a new bottleneck to the
application of deep learning at scale as designing and testing
programmatic rules can become cumbersome and costly.
To mitigate these issues, we introduce the Weak Supervision
Variational Auto-Encoder (WS-VAE); a new WS framework based on VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014; Pu et al., 2016). Instead of inferring labels,
the WS-VAE models the distribution of weak labels and
inputs with an auto-encoder architecture. A neural network
encodes input features into representation vectors where one
dimension of these representation vectors is modelled as a
continuous relaxation of the true hidden label. Differently
from how semi-supervised VAEs handle labels (Kingma
et al., 2014), we design a novel weak labels decoder, which
learns to assign a different weight to each LF in each training
example, based on representation consistency. This architecture results in a weak labels-guided representation of the
data, where one dimension captures the task of interest.

1. Introduction
One of the most severe bottlenecks in the successful development of supervised learning methods, including deep
learning, is the cost of manual annotation of data. This
task is often extremely expensive and time consuming, especially for applications where labelling requires specific
domain expertise (Zhou et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2022).
To overcome this limitation, the paradigm of programmatic
weak supervision (WS) has been proposed (Ratner et al.,

The WS-VAE is more robust to LF design compared to
existing weak supervision approaches, mainly for two reasons. Firstly, because it has to reconstruct input features,
it is encouraged to maintain mutual information between
features and inferred labels, which helps to ignore noise and
infer accurately where weak labels are scarce. Secondly,
the specifically designed weak labels decoder learns to give

1

Amazon 2 Computer Science Department, University of
Sheffield. Correspondence to: Francesco Tonolini <tonolini@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

