Infusing Lattice Symmetry Priors in Attention Mechanisms
for Sample-Efficient Abstract Geometric Reasoning

Mattia Atzeni 1 Mrinmaya Sachan 2 Andreas Loukas 3

Abstract

been studied extensively in developmental science (Spelke
& Kinzler, 2007), following the theory that humans are endowed with a small number of separable systems of core
knowledge, so that new flexible skills and belief systems
can build on these core foundations. Recent research in
artificial intelligence (AI) has postulated the idea that the
same priors should be incorporated in AI systems (Chollet,
2019), but it is an open question how to incorporate these
priors in neural networks.

The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC)
(Chollet, 2019) and its most recent languagecomplete instantiation (LARC) has been postulated as an important step towards general AI.
Yet, even state-of-the-art machine learning models struggle to achieve meaningful performance
on these problems, falling behind non-learning
based approaches. We argue that solving these
tasks requires extreme generalization that can only
be achieved by proper accounting for core knowledge priors. As a step towards this goal, we focus
on geometry priors and introduce L AT F ORMER, a
model that incorporates lattice symmetry priors in
attention masks. We show that, for any transformation of the hypercubic lattice, there exists a binary attention mask that implements that group action. Hence, our study motivates a modification to
the standard attention mechanism, where attention
weights are scaled using soft masks generated by a
convolutional network. Experiments on synthetic
geometric reasoning show that L AT F ORMER requires 2 orders of magnitude fewer data than standard attention and transformers. Moreover, our
results on ARC and LARC tasks that incorporate
geometric priors provide preliminary evidence
that these complex datasets do not lie out of the
reach of deep learning models.

Following this chain of thought, the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) (Chollet, 2019) was proposed as an
AI benchmark built on top of the Core Knowledge priors
from developmental science. Chollet (2019) posits that
developing a domain-specific approach based on the Core
Knowledge priors is a challenging first step and that “solving
this specific subproblem is critical to general AI progress”.
Further, he argues that ARC “cannot be meaningfully approached by current machine learning techniques, including
Deep Learning”.
An important category of Core Knowledge priors includes
geometry and topology priors. Indeed, significant attention
has been devoted to incorporating such priors in deep learning architectures by rendering neural networks invariant (or
equivariant) to transformations represented through group
actions (Bronstein et al., 2021). However, group-invariant
learning helps to build models that systematically ignore
specific transformations applied to the input (such as translations or rotations).
We take a complementary perspective and aim to help neural
networks to learn functions that incorporate geometric transformations of their input (rather than to be invariant to such
transformations). In particular, we focus on group actions
that belong to the symmetry group of a lattice. These transformations are pervasive in machine learning applications,
as basic transformations of sequences, images, and other
higher-dimensional regular grids fall in this category. While
attention and transformers can in principle learn these kind
of group actions, we show that they require a significant
amount of training data to do so.

1. Introduction
Infusing inductive biases and knowledge priors in neural
networks is regarded as a critical step to improve their sample efficiency (Battaglia et al., 2018; Bengio, 2017; Lake
et al., 2017; Lake & Baroni, 2018; Bahdanau et al., 2019).
The Core Knowledge priors for human intelligence have
1

EPFL, Switzerland 2 ETH Zurich, Switzerland 3 Prescient Design, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Mattia Atzeni <mattia.atzeni@outlook.it>.

To address this sample complexity issue, we introduce L ATF ORMER, a model that relies on attention masks in order to

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

