Q ASA: Advanced Question Answering on Scientific Articles

Yoonjoo Lee * 1 Kyungjae Lee * 2 Sunghyun Park 2 Dasol Hwang 2 Jaehyeon Kim 2 Hong-in Lee 3
Moontae Lee 2 4

Abstract
Reasoning is the crux of intellectual thinking.
While question answering (QA) tasks are prolific
with various computational models and benchmark datasets, they mostly tackle factoid or shallow QA without asking deeper understanding.
Dual process theory asserts that human reasoning consists of associative thinking to collect relevant pieces of knowledge and logical reasoning to
consciously conclude grounding on evidential rationale. Based on our intensive think-aloud study
that revealed the three types of questions: surface, testing, and deep questions, we first propose the Q ASA benchmark that consists of 1798
novel question answering pairs that require fullstack reasoning on scientific articles in AI and
ML fields. Then we propose the Q ASA approach
that tackles the full-stack reasoning with large language models via associative selection, evidential
rationale-generation, and systematic composition.
Our experimental results show that Q ASA’s fullstack inference outperforms the state-of-the-art
I NSTRUCT GPT by a big margin. We also find
that rationale-generation is critical for the performance gain, claiming how we should rethink
advanced question answering. The dataset is available at https://github.com/lgresearch/QASA.

Figure 1. An example of Q ASA. A question that the reader/author
asks about the paper while reading the paper. To formulate the
answer, one classifies whether the paragraph contains evidence
to answer the question. Evidential rationales are written for each
evidential paragraph and are systematically composed into a comprehensive answer.

1. Introduction
text of Question Answering (QA), the first stage extracts
associative pieces of knowledge based on lexical matching
and other cognitive heuristics, inductively expanding potential evidences. Then the second stage consciously finds
evidential rationales, deductively converging to the answer
via systematic compositions of the evidences. This process
uniquely characterizes advanced human reasoning, posing a
non-trivial challenge to machine learning QA systems.

Reasoning differentiates human intellectual capabilities
from low-level intelligence. Dual process models theorize
that cognitive reasoning is a two-stage process where the
first stage performs associative thinking and the second
stage performs logical reasoning (Wason & Evans, 1974;
Tsujii & Watanabe, 2009; Evans, 2012). Within the con*
Equal contribution 1 KAIST (Work done at LG AI Research) 2 LG AI Research 3 Yonsei University 4 University of
Illinois Chicago. Correspondence to: Mootae Lee <moontae.lee@lgresearch.ai>.

Reading Comprehension (RC) is one type of reasoning
task that can formulate various questions and answers.
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), NewsQA (Trischler et al.,
2017), DROP (Dua et al., 2019), and Natural Questions
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2019a) have been proposed. While com-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

