Escaping Saddle Points in Zeroth-order Optimization:
The Power of Two-point Estimators

Zhaolin Ren 1 Yujie Tang 2 Na Li 1

Abstract

(Li et al., 2022), wind farms (Tang et al., 2020a), power
systems (Chen et al., 2020), online (time-varying) optimization (Shamir, 2017), learning-based control (Malik et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2021), and improving adversarial robustness to black-box attacks in deep neural networks (Chen
et al., 2017), it may be costly or impractical to wait for Ω(d)
(where d denotes the problem dimension) function evaluations per iteration to make a step. This is especially true
for high-dimensional and problems with time-varying noise.
See Appendix A for more discussion.

Two-point zeroth order methods are important in
many applications of zeroth-order optimization,
such as robotics, wind farms, power systems, online optimization, and adversarial robustness to
black-box attacks in deep neural networks, where
the problem may be high-dimensional and/or timevarying. Most problems in these applications are
nonconvex and contain saddle points. While existing works have shown that zeroth-order methods utilizing Ω(d) function valuations per iteration (with d denoting the problem dimension)
can escape saddle points efficiently, it remains
an open question if zeroth-order methods based
on two-point estimators can escape saddle points.
In this paper, we show that by adding an appropriate isotropic perturbation at each iteration,
a zeroth-order algorithm based on 2m (for any
1 ≤ m ≤ d) function evaluations per iteration
can not only find -second order stationary points
polynomially fast, but do so using only√Õ(d/m2 ψ̄)
function evaluations, where ψ̄ ≥ Ω̃( ) is a parameter capturing the extent to which the function
of interest exhibits the strict saddle property.

However, despite the advantages of zeroth-order methods
with two-point estimators, there has been a lack of existing
work studying the ability of two-point estimators to escape
saddle points in nonconvex optimization problems. Since
nonconvex problems arise often in practice, it is crucial to
know if two-point algorithms can efficiently escape saddle
points of nonconvex functions and converge to second-order
stationary points (see Definition 1 for a definition).
To motivate the challenges of escaping saddle points using
two-point zeroth-order methods, we begin with a review of
escaping saddle points using first-order methods. The problem of efficiently escaping saddle points in deterministic
first-order optimization (with exact gradients) has been carefully studied in several earlier works (Jin et al., 2017; 2018b).
A key idea in these works is the injection of an isotropic
perturbation whenever the gradient is small, facilitating escape from a saddle if a negative curvature direction exists
even without actively identifying the direction. However,
the analysis of efficient saddle point escape for stochastic
gradient methods is often more complicated. In general,
the behavior of the stochastic gradient near the saddle point
can be difficult to characterize. Hence, strong concentration
assumptions are typically made on the stochastic gradients
being used, such as subGaussianity, boundedness of the
variance or a bounded gradient estimator (Ge et al., 2015;
Daneshmand et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2019;
Roy et al., 2020; Vlaski & Sayed, 2021b), creating an analytical issue when such idealized assumptions fail to hold.

1. Introduction
Two-point estimators, which approximate the gradient using
two function evaluations per iteration, have been widely
studied by researchers in the zeroth-order optimization literature, in convex (Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017; Duchi et al.,
2015; Shamir, 2017), nonconvex (Nesterov & Spokoiny,
2017), online (Shamir, 2017), as well as distributed settings
(Tang et al., 2019). A key reason for doing so is that for
applications of zeroth-order optimization arising in robotics
1
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University 2 Department of Industrial Engineering & Management at Peking University. Correspondence to: Zhaolin Ren
<zhaolinren@g.harvard.edu>, Na Li <nali@seas.harvard.edu>.

Indeed, though zeroth-order methods can be viewed as
stochastic gradient methods, common zeroth order estimators, such as two-point estimators (Nesterov & Spokoiny,
2017), are not subGaussian, and can have unbounded vari-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

