Speeding Up Bellman Ford via Minimum Violation Permutations

Silvio Lattanzi 1 Ola Svensson 2 Sergei Vassilvitskii 1

Abstract

source allocation (Lattanzi et al., 2020; Dinitz et al., 2021;
Gollapudi & Panigrahi, 2019), online-learning (Bhaskara
et al., 2020) and many others, see the overview by Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii (2021) for more details. In many
of the settings learning the best advice for a sequence of
examples is relatively easy, and the main challenge lies in
using it. For instance, for scheduling (Lattanzi et al., 2020)
and matching (Dinitz et al., 2021) the best advice is obtained
by averaging the optimal solution on each instance.

The Bellman-Ford algorithm is a basic primitive for computing single source shortest paths
in graphs with negative edge-weights. Its running
time is governed by the order the algorithm examines vertices for iterative updates on the value
of their shortest path. In this work we study this
problem through the lens of ‘Algorithms with Predictions,’ and show how to leverage auxiliary information from similar instances to improve the
running time. We do this by identifying the key
problem of Minimum Violation Permutations, and
give algorithms with strong approximation guarantees as well as formal lower bounds. We complement the theoretical analysis with an empirical
evaluation, showing that this approach can lead to
a significant speed up in practice.

In this work we give an example of the opposite problem.
We consider a basic computer science primitive, finding
single source shortest paths in a graph G = (V, E) with
negative weight edges. The Algorithms 101 solution for
this problem is to use the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which
repeatedly iterates through all of the vertices, updating the
best estimate for the distance from the source every time.
The algorithm terminates when no more updates are made.
An unspecified parameter of the algorithm is the order in
which the vertices should be processed. It is easy to see
that there is an ordering (that of increasing distance from s)
so that the algorithm terminates after a single pass through
the data. On the other hand, in the worst case, one may
require |V | iterations. Since each pass through the data
takes O(|E|) time, the choice of the ordering is critical – it
is the difference between a linear time O(|E|) algorithm,
and much higher running time of O(|E||V |).

1. Introduction
Traditionally, worst-case analysis has been the main tool
for understanding algorithms’ performance, as it gives insight into both the complexity and practicality of algorithms.
There are however, numerous examples where worst-case
analysis is overly pessimistic, as the “typical” instances
seen by the algorithm are far from those generating worstcase bounds. A recent line of work attempts to rigorously
analyze this setting by developing algorithms that get the
best of both worlds — they are consistent, performing nearoptimally on such ‘typical’ examples, but are also robust,
doing not much worse than their classical counterparts on
atypical instances.

From a worst case standpoint, there is almost nothing that
can be done. However suppose that you have access to
graphs G1 , G2 , . . . , Gk that arise from related shortest path
instances. A natural arising question is whether one can
exploit this “statistical” knowledge by computing the best
ordering for the collection of graphs, i.e. one that minimizes
the total running time of Bellman-Ford on G1 , G2 , . . . , Gk .
As we will see, this problem will turn out to have connections to the Feedback Arc Set problem, and is computationally non-trivial. Nonetheless, we will design effective
algorithms and show that this approach can beat traditional
Bellman-Ford on real world data.

Formally, these algorithms are parameterized by some “advice” that can be efficiently learned from past data. Examples in this area include efficient data structures (Kraska
et al., 2018; Mitzenmacher, 2018), algorithms for online re1
Google Research 2 EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Silvio Lattanzi <silviol@google.com>, Ola
Svensson <ola.svensson@epfl.ch>, Sergei Vassilvitskii
<sergeiv@google.com>.

1.1. Our Contributions
Our main goal is to improve the running time of the BellmanFord algorithm in the setting when the examples are not
worst case. To do so, we introduce a pre-processing step

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

