Statistical Inference and A/B Testing for First-Price Pacing Equilibria

Luofeng Liao 1 Christian Kroer 1

Abstract

in group B is higher than in group A with statistical significance. As of 2017, large internet companies such as
Google and Microsoft each conduct more than 10,000 A/B
tests annually (Kohavi & Thomke, 2017).

We initiate the study of statistical inference
and A/B testing for first-price pacing equilibria
(FPPE). The FPPE model captures the dynamics
resulting from large-scale first-price auction markets where buyers use pacing-based budget management. Such markets arise in the context of internet advertising, where budgets are prevalent.

However, now consider a setting where advertisers also bid
on their ads being shown to users. If we randomly assign
users to groups A and B, then we get interference because
an advertiser’s outcomes in group A affect their behavior
when buying ads in group B. This is especially problematic
if we are trying to measure something that directly pertains
to ads (e.g. revenue changes, or user interest in the ads they
are shown). In practice, a popular solution to this issue is
to create two separate markets, one for group A and one for
group B. Then, each advertiser participates in both markets,
with half of their budget assigned to each market, and those
budgets are then treated as separate budget constraints. We
will refer to this as budget splitting. Despite the practical
popularity of budget splitting, its statistical properties are
not well-understood. A major obstacle to statistical inference with budget splitting is that we can no longer think of
the mean user behavior as a sum of independent samples.
Instead, we essentially have only two samples: a sample
of a market under condition A, and a sample of a market
under condition B. Thus, we need to understand when randomized assignment of users (which act as the supply of
impressions) into separate markets can be used to make statistical inferences about market outcomes, given the effects
of competition.

We propose a statistical framework for the FPPE
model, in which a limit FPPE with a continuum
of items models the long-run steady-state behavior of the auction platform, and an observable
FPPE consisting of a finite number of items provides the data to estimate primitives of the limit
FPPE, such as revenue, Nash social welfare (a
fair metric of efficiency), and other parameters of
interest. We develop central limit theorems and
asymptotically valid confidence intervals. Furthermore, we establish the asymptotic local minimax optimality of our estimators. We then show
that the theory can be used for conducting statistically valid A/B testing on auction platforms. Numerical simulations verify our central limit theorems, and empirical coverage rates for our confidence intervals agree with our theory.

1. Introduction

As stated at the beginning, we study this phenomenon
in two important contexts: first-price pacing equilibria
(FPPE), and Fisher markets. We will focus the majority
of our writing on FPPE, because FPPE model the advertising auction setting faced by large internet companies. All
our results carry over to Fisher markets, except results on
revenue, which are not meaningful in the standard Fisher
market model.

A/B testing is a form of randomized controlled experiment,
where each sample is assigned to one of two groups: the
‘A’ group or ‘B’ group, and a different treatment is applied to each group. For example, say a social media site
wants to test whether a new layout will increase user engagement. A subset of users are sampled, and each user in
the subset is randomly assigned the current layout (group
A), or the new layout (group B). Now, if we ignore network
effects, then we can measure whether the new layout increases user engagement by checking whether engagement

In an FPPE, a set of buyers compete in a set of first-price
auctions, and each buyer has a budget. This models how
impressions are sold in practice, where first or second-price
auction generalizations are used: When a user shows up, an
auction is run in order to determine which ads to show, before the page is returned to the user. This auction must run
extremely fast. This is typically achieved by having each

1
IEOR, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Luofeng
Liao <ll3530@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

