Linearly Constrained Bilevel Optimization: A Smoothed
Implicit Gradient Approach

Prashant Khanduri * 1 Ioannis Tsaknakis * 2 Yihua Zhang 3 Jia Liu 4 Sijia Liu 3 Jiawei Zhang 5 Mingyi Hong 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Bilevel optimization problems (Colson et al., 2005; Dempe
& Zemkoho, 2020) can be used to model an important class
of hierarchical optimization tasks with two levels of hierarchy, the upper-level (UL) and the lower-level (LL). The
key characteristics of bilevel problems are: 1) the solution
of the UL problem requires access to the solution of the
LL problem and, 2) the LL problem is parametrized by
the UL variable. Bilevel optimization problems arise in a
wide range of machine learning applications, such as metalearning (Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Franceschi et al., 2018),
data hypercleaning (Shaban et al., 2019), hyperparameter optimization (Sinha et al., 2020; Franceschi et al., 2018; 2017;
Pedregosa, 2016), adversarial learning (Li et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2022), as well as in other application domains such as network optimization (Migdalas,
1995), economics (Cecchini et al., 2013), and transport research (Didi-Biha et al., 2006; Kalashnikov et al., 2010). In
this work, we focus on a special class of stochastic bilevel
optimization problems, where the LL problem involves the
minimization of a strongly convex objective over a set of
linear inequality constraints. More precisely, we consider
the following formulation:

This work develops analysis and algorithms for
solving a class of bilevel optimization problems where the lower-level (LL) problems have
linear constraints. Most of the existing approaches for constrained bilevel problems rely on
value function-based approximate reformulations,
which suffer from issues such as non-convex and
non-differentiable constraints. In contrast, in this
work, we develop an implicit gradient-based approach, which is easy to implement, and is suitable for machine learning applications. We first
provide an in-depth understanding of the problem,
by showing that the implicit objective for such
problems is in general non-differentiable. However, if we add some small (linear) perturbation to
the LL objective, the resulting implicit objective
becomes differentiable almost surely. This key
observation opens the door for developing (deterministic and stochastic) gradient-based algorithms
similar to the state-of-the-art ones for unconstrained bi-level problems. We show that when
the implicit function is assumed to be stronglyconvex, convex, and weakly-convex, the resulting
algorithms converge with guaranteed rate. Finally,
we experimentally corroborate the theoretical findings and evaluate the performance of the proposed
framework on numerical and adversarial learning
problems.

n
o
min G(x) := f (x, y∗ (x)) := Eξ [fe(x, y∗ (x); ξ)] ,
x∈X
n
o
s.t. y∗ (x) ∈ arg min h(x, y) Ay ≤ b ,

(1a)
(1b)

y∈Rdℓ

where ξ ∼ D represents a stochastic sample of the objective
f (·, ·), X ⊆ Rdu is a convex and closed set, f : X × Rdℓ →
R is the UL objective, h : X × Rdℓ → R is the LL objective,
and f, h are smooth functions; note that the UL objective
is stochastic, while the LL one is not. We focus on the
problems where h(x, y) is strongly convex with respect
to y. The matrices A ∈ Rk×dℓ , B ∈ Rk×du and vector
b ∈ Rk define the linear constraints. In the following, we
refer to (1a) as the UL problem, and to (1b) as the LL one.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of CS, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA 2 Department of ECE,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
3
Department of CSE, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI 48824, USA 4 Department of ECE, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 5 Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Correspondence to: Ioannis Tsaknakis <tsakn001@umn.edu>, Prashant Khanduri <khanduri.prashant@wayne.edu>.

The success of the bilevel formulation and its algorithms
in many machine learning applications can be attributed to
the use of the efficient (stochastic) gradient-based methods
(Liu et al., 2021a). These methods take the following form,
in which an (approximate) gradient direction of the UL

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

