A Modern Look at the Relationship between Sharpness and Generalization

Maksym Andriushchenko 1 Francesco Croce 2 3 Maximilian Müller 2 3 Matthias Hein 2 3 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract

perturbed due to a train vs. test or out-of-distribution (OOD)
discrepancy, flat minima of deep networks should still have
low loss (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1995; Keskar et al.,
2016). On the theoretical side, sharpness appears in generalization bounds (Neyshabur et al., 2017; Dziugaite & Roy,
2018; Foret et al., 2021) but this fact alone is not necessarily
informative for practical settings. For example, quantities
like the VC-dimension typically correlate negatively with
generalization contrary to what the generalization bound
might suggest (Jiang et al., 2020). Importantly, it has been
shown empirically that sharpness can also correlate well
with generalization in common deep learning setups (Keskar
et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2020) which makes it a promising
generalization measure that can potentially distinguish wellgeneralizing solutions. Additionally, empirical success of
training methods that minimize sharpness such as sharpnessaware minimization (SAM) (Zheng et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2020; Foret et al., 2021) further suggests that sharpness can
be an important quantity for generalization.

Sharpness of minima is a promising quantity
that can positively correlate with test error
for deep networks and, when optimized during training, can improve generalization. However, standard sharpness is not invariant under
reparametrizations of neural networks, and, to fix
this, reparametrization-invariant sharpness definitions have been proposed, most prominently
adaptive sharpness (Kwon et al., 2021). But does
it really capture generalization in modern practical settings? We comprehensively explore this
question in a detailed study of various definitions
of adaptive sharpness in settings ranging from
training from scratch on ImageNet and CIFAR10 to fine-tuning CLIP on ImageNet and BERT
on MNLI. We focus mostly on transformers for
which little is known in terms of sharpness despite
their widespread usage. Overall, we observe that
sharpness does not correlate well with generalization but rather with some training parameters
like the learning rate that can be positively or
negatively correlated with generalization depending on the setup. Interestingly, in multiple cases,
we observe a consistent negative correlation of
sharpness with out-of-distribution error implying
that sharper minima can generalize better. Finally, we illustrate on a simple model that the
right sharpness measure is highly data-dependent,
and that we do not understand well this aspect
for realistic data distributions. Our code is available at https://github.com/tml-epfl/
sharpness-vs-generalization.

Motivation: why revisiting sharpness? Many works imply
or conjecture that flatter minima should generalize better
(Xing et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2020; Cha et al., 2021; Park
& Kim, 2022; Lyu et al., 2022) for standard or OOD data.
However, standard sharpness definitions do not correlate
well with generalization (Jiang et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2022)
which can be partially due to their lack of invariance under
reparametrizations that leave the model unchanged (Dinh
et al., 2017; Granziol, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021). Adaptive
sharpness appears to be more promising since it fixes the
reparametrization issue and is shown to empirically correlate
better with generalization (Kwon et al., 2021). However, the
empirical evidence in Kwon et al. (2021) and other works
that discuss sharpness (Keskar et al., 2016; Jiang et al.,
2020; Dziugaite et al., 2020; Bisla et al., 2022) is restricted
to small datasets like CIFAR-10 or SVHN. In addition, SAM
appears to be particularly useful for new architectures like
vision transformers (Chen et al., 2022) for which there has
been no systematic studies of sharpness vs. generalization.
Moreover, transfer learning is becoming the default option
for vision and language tasks but not much is known about
sharpness there. Finally, the relationship between sharpness
and OOD generalization is also underexplored. These new
developments motivate us to revisit the role of sharpness in
these new settings.

1. Introduction
Considering the sharpness of the training objective at a minimum has intuitive appeal: if the loss surface is slightly
1

EPFL 2 Tübingen AI Center 3 University of
Tübingen.
Correspondence to: Maksym Andriushchenko
<maksym.andriushchenko@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

