Forward-Backward Gaussian Variational Inference
via JKO in the Bures–Wasserstein Space

Michael Diao 1 Krishnakumar Balasubramanian 2 Sinho Chewi 1 Adil Salim 3

Abstract

has shown superior performance in practice, especially in
the presence of large datasets, see, for example, Barber &
Bishop (1997); Seeger (1999); Honkela & Valpola (2004);
Opper & Archambeau (2009); Quiroz et al. (2022).

Variational inference (VI) seeks to approximate a
target distribution π by an element of a tractable
family of distributions. Of key interest in statistics and machine learning is Gaussian VI, which
approximates π by minimizing the Kullback–
Leibler (KL) divergence to π over the space of
Gaussians. In this work, we develop the (Stochastic) Forward-Backward Gaussian Variational Inference (FB–GVI) algorithm to solve Gaussian
VI. Our approach exploits the composite structure of the KL divergence, which can be written as the sum of a smooth term (the potential)
and a non-smooth term (the entropy) over the
Bures–Wasserstein (BW) space of Gaussians endowed with the Wasserstein distance. For our proposed algorithm, we obtain state-of-the-art convergence guarantees when π is log-smooth and
log-concave, as well as the first convergence guarantees to first-order stationary solutions when π
is only log-smooth.

In the literature on Gaussian VI, strong statistical properties have been shown for the solutions to Problem (1),
see, for example, Chérief-Abdellatif et al. (2019); Alquier
& Ridgway (2020); Katsevich & Rigollet (2023). For instance, Katsevich & Rigollet (2023) showed that Gaussian
VI outperforms Laplace approximation for the estimation
of the mean of π. Besides, consider the case where π is
the posterior distribution of a sufficiently regular Bayesian
model. Then, the Bernstein–von Mises theorem (see Van der
Vaart (2000, Chapter 10) and recent non-asymptotic results (Kasprzak et al., 2022; Spokoiny, 2022) state that π
is well-approximated by a Gaussian distribution, with the
mean given by any asymptotically efficient estimator of the
true parameter, and covariance matrix given by the inverse
Fisher information matrix. These results collectively provide abundant motivation for efficiently computing the best
Gaussian approximation of the target π (Problem (1)).
We hence focus on the optimization aspect of Gaussian VI,
i.e., solving Problem (1). Several approaches have been proposed which we summarize in the related works (Section 7).
In particular, Lambert et al. (2022b) recently proposed an
algorithm for Gaussian VI that can be seen as an analog of
stochastic gradient descent for Problem (1) over the space
BW(Rd ) endowed with the Wasserstein distance, called
the Bures–Wasserstein (BW) space. This viewpoint was
inspired from the theory of gradient flows over the Wasserstein space, i.e., the space of distributions endowed with the
Wasserstein distance (Jordan et al., 1998; Ambrosio et al.,
2008). Moreover, this viewpoint has been instrumental for
many problems in probabilistic inference (see the related
works in Section 7). However, from an optimization standpoint, the approach of Lambert et al. (2022b) relying on
the BW gradient of the objective is not the most natural
one. Indeed, over the BW space, the objective functional
KL(· ∥ π) is composite: it can be canonically decomposed
as the sum of a “smooth” term called the potential and a
“non-smooth” term called the entropy.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) (Blei et al., 2017; Knoblauch et al.,
2022) has emerged as a tractable alternative to computationally demanding Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) methods. Of particular interest is the problem of Gaussian VI, in
which we approximate a given distribution π ∝ exp(−V ),
where V is a smooth function, by the solution to
arg min KL(µ ∥ π) ,

(1)

µ∈BW(Rd )

where KL denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence and
BW(Rd ) the set of Gaussian distributions over Rd (see
Section 4.1 for formal definitions). Indeed, Gaussian VI
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of California, Davis 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Michael Diao
<diao@mit.edu>, Sinho Chewi <schewi@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The composite nature of the KL divergence has inspired
1

