Model-agnostic Measure of Generalization Difficulty

Akhilan Boopathy 1 Kevin Liu 1 Jaedong Hwang 1 Shu Ge 1 Asaad Mohammedsaleh 1 Ila Fiete 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Researchers have proposed many benchmarks to train machine learning models and test their generalization abilities,
from ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) for image recognition to Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013) for reinforcement learning (RL). More complex benchmarks promote
the development of more sophisticated learning algorithms
and architectures that can generalize better.

The measure of a machine learning algorithm is
the difficulty of the tasks it can perform, and sufficiently difficult tasks are critical drivers of strong
machine learning models. However, quantifying
the generalization difficulty of machine learning
benchmarks has remained challenging. We propose what is to our knowledge the first modelagnostic measure of the inherent generalization
difficulty of tasks. Our inductive bias complexity
measure quantifies the total information required
to generalize well on a task minus the information
provided by the data. It does so by measuring the
fractional volume occupied by hypotheses that
generalize on a task given that they fit the training
data. It scales exponentially with the intrinsic dimensionality of the space over which the model
must generalize but only polynomially in resolution per dimension, showing that tasks which require generalizing over many dimensions are drastically more difficult than tasks involving more
detail in fewer dimensions. Our measure can be
applied to compute and compare supervised learning, reinforcement learning and meta-learning
generalization difficulties against each other. We
show that applied empirically, it formally quantifies intuitively expected trends, e.g. that in terms
of required inductive bias, MNIST < CIFAR10 <
Imagenet and fully observable Markov decision
processes (MDPs) < partially observable MDPs.
Further, we show that classification of complex
images < few-shot meta-learning with simple images. Our measure provides a quantitative metric
to guide the construction of more complex tasks
requiring greater inductive bias, and thereby encourages the development of more sophisticated
architectures and learning algorithms with more
powerful generalization capabilities.

However, we lack rigorous and quantitative measures of the
generalization difficulty of these benchmarks. Generalizing
on a task requires both training data and a model’s inductive
biases, which are any constraints on a model class enabling
generalization. Inductive biases can be provided by a model
designer, including the choice of architecture, learning rule
or hyperparameters defining a model class. While prior
work has quantified the training data needed to generalize
on a task (sample complexity), analysis of the required inductive biases has been limited. Indeed, while the concept
of inductive bias is widely used, it has not been thoroughly
and quantitatively defined in general learning settings.
In this paper, we develop a novel information-theoretic
framework to measure a task’s inductive bias complexity,
the information content of the inductive biases. Just as
sample complexity is a property inherent to a model class
(without reference to a specific training set), inductive bias
complexity is a property inherent to a training set (without
reference to a specific model class). To our knowledge, our
measure is the first quantification of inductive bias complexity. As we will describe, our measure quantifies the
fraction of the entire hypothesis space that is consistent with
inductive biases for a task given that hypotheses interpolate
the training data; see Figure 1 for an illustration and Definition 3.1 for a formal definition. We use this inductive bias
complexity quantification to assess a task’s generalization
difficulty; we hope our measure can guide the development
of tasks requiring greater inductive bias. As one concrete,
but widely-applicable, suggestion, we find that adding Gaussian noise to the inputs of a task can dramatically increase
its required inductive bias. We summarize our contributions
as 1 :

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Akhilan Boopathy <akhilan@mit.edu>.

1
Our code is released at: https://github.com/
FieteLab/inductive-bias-complexity

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

