Sequence Modeling with Multiresolution Convolutional Memory

Jiaxin Shi 1 Ke Alexander Wang 1 Emily B. Fox 1 2

Abstract

cur at multiple levels, corresponding to different timescales.
For example, in studying energy consumption, patterned
variations may occur within a day, between days, and quarterly. Similar salient multiscale trends appear in physiological time series such as dysfunctional glucose patterns in
diabetic patients and anomalous heart beats in arrhythmic
patients. Audio signals of speech may be described in terms
of utterances, phonemes, and subphonemes. And, the multiscale structure of images and video has been well-studied.
Even for data sources without an explicit multiscale interpretation, multiscale modeling approaches can provide an
efficient mechanism for capturing long-range patterns.

Efficiently capturing the long-range patterns in sequential data sources salient to a given task—such
as classification and generative modeling—poses
a fundamental challenge. Popular approaches
in the space tradeoff between the memory burden of brute-force enumeration and comparison,
as in transformers, the computational burden of
complicated sequential dependencies, as in recurrent neural networks, or the parameter burden of
convolutional networks with many or large filters. We instead take inspiration from waveletbased multiresolution analysis to define a new
building block for sequence modeling, which we
call a M ULTIRES L AYER. The key component
of our model is the multiresolution convolution,
capturing multiscale trends in the input sequence.
Our M ULTIRES C ONV can be implemented with
shared filters across a dilated causal convolution
tree. Thus it garners the computational advantages
of convolutional networks and the principled theoretical motivation of wavelet decompositions. Our
M ULTIRES L AYER is straightforward to implement, requires significantly fewer parameters, and
maintains at most a O(N log N ) memory footprint for a length N sequence. Yet, by stacking
such layers, our model yields state-of-the-art performance on a number of sequence classification
and autoregressive density estimation tasks using
CIFAR-10, ListOps, and PTB-XL datasets.

In this paper, we propose a general and reusable building block for sequence modeling—M ULTIRES L AYER—
leveraging a multiscale approach to memorize past data.
We view memory through the lens of multiresolution analysis (MRA) (Willsky, 2002), with a particular emphasis on
wavelet analysis, a powerful tool from signal processing for
compression, denoising, feature extraction, and more (Jawerth & Sweldens, 1994; Akansu et al., 2001). As discussed
in Sec. 2, wavelet analyses can be computed in a computationally efficient manner and interpreted as a series of convolutions. However, our use of wavelets is a design choice
and other MRA techniques could likewise be considered for
memorizing patterns at different timescales.
Taking inspiration from wavelets, the key component of
M ULTIRES L AYER is a multiresolution convolution operation (M ULTIRES C ONV) that retains the overall tree-structure
of MRA. We show that constructing a memory of the past at
each timestep of the sequence using M ULTIRES C ONV can
be collectively implemented as a stack of carefully-placed
dilated causal convolutions with filters shared between levelsW. In contrast to traditional wavelet analysis, however,
we learn the filters and do so end-to-end. When we fix the
filters to pre-defined wavelet filters, the M ULTIRES C ONV
reduces to a traditional discrete wavelet transform, though
we show the benefits of learning the filters in Sec. 5.5. The
basic M ULTIRES C ONV building block can be stacked in a
multitude of ways that are common in deep learning models
(e.g., across multiple channels, vertically as multiple layers,
etc.). Our model resembles WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016a) in
the use of tree-structured dilated convolutions. However, our
principle-guided design has distinct skip-connection structures and filter sharing patterns, resulting in significantly

1. Introduction
A key challenge in sequence modeling is summarizing, or
memorizing, long-term patterns in data informative for a particular task, such as classification, forecasting, or clustering.
By definition, patterns are higher-level structures in the data
that arise from multiple timesteps. However, patterns can oc1
Stanford University 2 CZ Biohub SF. Correspondence to: Jiaxin Shi <jiaxins@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

