Hierarchical Imitation Learning with Vector Quantized Models

Kalle Kujanpää 1 2 Joni Pajarinen 3 2 Alexander Ilin 1 2

Abstract

(Hafner et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2021; Schrittwieser et al.,
2020). Learning models for planning in the offline setting
is possible as well (Argenson & Dulac-Arnold, 2021), but
these model-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods
assume access to environment rewards and are not directly
applicable to the IL setting. Hierarchical RL with decisionmaking at multiple time scales has succeeded in tasks where
flat RL struggles (Hafner et al., 2022; Nachum et al., 2019).
A hierarchy should also be useful in the IL setting as many
real-world problems have a natural hierarchical structure
(Sharma et al., 2019b; Jing et al., 2021). Moreover, planning
with a hierarchy may shorten the effective planning horizon
and avoid compounding model errors also in the IL setting
(Nair & Finn, 2020).

The ability to plan actions on multiple levels of abstraction enables intelligent agents to solve complex tasks effectively. However, learning the models for both low and high-level planning from
demonstrations has proven challenging, especially
with higher-dimensional inputs. To address this
issue, we propose to use reinforcement learning
to identify subgoals in expert trajectories by associating the magnitude of the rewards with the predictability of low-level actions given the state and
the chosen subgoal. We build a vector-quantized
generative model for the identified subgoals to
perform subgoal-level planning. In experiments,
the algorithm excels at solving complex, longhorizon decision-making problems outperforming
state-of-the-art. Because of its ability to plan, our
algorithm can find better trajectories than the ones
in the training set.

We propose a method for hierarchical planning in the IL
setting that relies on segmenting expert trajectories into subtasks without any high-level supervision. Unlike prior work
that assumes a fixed number of subgoals (Pertsch et al.,
2020b), fixed-length subtasks (Czechowski et al., 2021),
or trains multiple models to deal with subtasks of different lengths (Zawalski et al., 2022), our algorithm segments
the trajectories into a variable number of variable-length
subtasks. We use the segmentation to learn a generative
model over the subgoals and a subgoal-conditioned lowlevel policy to execute the subtasks. To perform high-level
planning, we use standard search methods such as PolicyGuided Heuristic Search (Orseau & Lelis, 2021), Monte
Carlo Tree Search (Coulom, 2006), or A* (Hart et al., 1968)
in which our generative model is used for node expansion.
Our method outperforms strong search, hierarchical IL, and
offline RL algorithms at complex long-horizon decisionmaking problems. Our experiments also show that our
algorithm can handle suboptimal expert trajectories and
self-improve. In summary, the main contributions of this
work are:

1. Introduction
Learning from expert demonstrations has proven successful
in many sequential decision-making settings that can be
modeled with Markov decision processes (Abbeel & Ng,
2004). Imitation learning (IL) is a technique for learning to
imitate the behavior of an expert by discovering the mapping
between states and actions without access to information
such as rewards (Osa et al., 2018). IL has proven useful in
aviation (Sammut et al., 1992), autonomous driving (Chen &
Krähenbühl, 2022), robotics (Kober & Peters, 2008), video
games (Vinyals et al., 2019) and even healthcare (Mayer
et al., 2008).
Recent advances in planning with learned dynamics models
have improved our ability to solve complex long-horizon
problems when interacting with the environment is possible

1. A novel yet conceptually simple RL approach for identifying subgoals from trajectories based on the prediction performance of a low-level policy.
2. A VQVAE generative model for proposing subgoals
for planning with temporal abstraction.
3. In experiments, our generative model combined with
the learned low-level policy and a suitable high-level
search algorithm solves complex problems with sparse
rewards better and with fewer node expansions than

1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence FCAI 3 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University, Finland.
Correspondence to: Kalle Kujanpää <kalle.kujanpaa@aalto.fi>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

