End-to-end Differentiable Clustering with Associative Memories

Bishwajit Saha 1 Dmitry Krotov 2 Mohammed J. Zaki 1 Parikshit Ram 2 3

Abstract

for example, exact k-means is NP-hard (Dasgupta, 2008),
though approximations can be efficient. Spectral, hierarchical and density-based clustering are computationally very
expensive with a naive complexity between quadratic and
cubic in the number of data points. One challenge of these
formulations is the inability to leverage a differentiable algorithm – they are inherently discrete.

Clustering is a widely used unsupervised learning technique involving an intensive discrete optimization problem. Associative Memory models
or AMs are differentiable neural networks defining a recursive dynamical system, which have
been integrated with various deep learning architectures. We uncover a novel connection between
the AM dynamics and the inherent discrete assignment necessary in clustering to propose a novel
unconstrained continuous relaxation of the discrete clustering problem, enabling end-to-end differentiable clustering with AM, dubbed ClAM.
Leveraging the pattern completion ability of AMs,
we further develop a novel self-supervised clustering loss. Our evaluations on varied datasets
demonstrate that ClAM benefits from the selfsupervision, and significantly improves upon both
the traditional Lloyd’s k-means algorithm, and
more recent continuous clustering relaxations (by
upto 60% in terms of the Silhouette Coefficient).

There has been recent interest in clustering in an end-to-end
differentiable manner. Deep clustering techniques combine representation learning and clustering and try to learn
in a differentiable manner by leveraging some continuous
relaxation of the discrete assignment necessary in clustering (Ren et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022). This relaxation
replaces the discrete assignment with partial cluster assignments, which violates a fundamental premise of clustering – each point belongs to only one cluster. With this
in mind, the “sum-of-norms” form of the k-means objective allows differentiable clustering, but requires quadratic
time (in the number of points) to perform the final cluster
assignments (Panahi et al., 2017). Non-negative matrix factorization with structured sparsity has also been considered
but requires the repeated alternating solution of two large
constrained least squares problems (Kim & Park, 2008). To
the best of our knowledge, there is no differentiable clustering scheme that can seamlessly leverage the stochastic
gradient descent or SGD (Nemirovski et al., 2009) based
optimization frameworks (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba,
2014) for unconstrained optimization and yet maintain the
inherent discrete nature of clustering. There is also a problem with multiple local minima, which lead to suboptimal
solutions with discrete algorithms. Beyond efficiency, SGD
is known to be capable of escaping local minima and can
lead to models with better generalization (Hardt et al., 2016),
and we believe that the problem of clustering can benefit
from utilizing SGD based solutions. To that end, we look
for ideas in a very distant field of associative memories.

1. Introduction
Clustering is considered one of the most fundamental unsupervised techniques to identify the structure of large volumes of data. Based on the similarity characteristics, clustering performs a structured division of data into groups (Xu
& Wunsch, 2005). This is often considered the very first
step in exploratory data analysis (Saxena et al., 2017; Bijuraj, 2013). Various formulations and algorithms have been
studied to identify an efficient clustering of the data. Among
them k-means (MacQueen, 1967), Spectral Clustering (Donath & Hoffman, 1973), Hierarchical Clustering (Johnson,
1967), Density-based Clustering (Ester et al., 1996), and Expectation Maximization (Dempster et al., 1977) have been
widely used. However, these formulations are computationally expensive involving an intensive combinatorial task:

Recently, traditional associative memory or AM models (Hopfield, 1982; 1984) have been reformulated to significantly increase their memory storage capacity and integrated with modern deep learning techniques (Krotov &
Hopfield, 2016; Ramsauer et al., 2020; Krotov & Hopfield,
2021; Krotov, 2021). These novel models, called Dense
Associative Memories, are fully differentiable systems capable of storing a large number of multi-dimensional vectors,

1
CS Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY,
USA 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA,
USA 3 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Bishwajit Saha <sahab@rpi.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

