Generalized Disparate Impact for Configurable Fairness Solutions in ML

Luca Giuliani * 1 Eleonora Misino * 1 Michele Lombardi 1

Abstract

Regarding available solutions, the case of categorical protected attributes is well covered by multiple indicators (see
Section 2). Conversely, a single approach works with continuous protected attributes at the moment of writing; this
is the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Renyi (HGR) correlation coefficient (Rényi, 1959), which has two viable implementations
for Machine Learning (ML) systems (Mary et al., 2019;
Grari et al., 2020).

We make two contributions in the field of AI fairness over continuous protected attributes. First,
we show that the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Renyi
(HGR) indicator (the only one currently available for such a case) is valuable but subject to a
few crucial limitations regarding semantics, interpretability, and robustness. Second, we introduce
a family of indicators that are: 1) complementary to HGR in terms of semantics; 2) fully interpretable and transparent; 3) robust over finite
samples; 4) configurable to suit specific applications. Our approach also allows us to define
fine-grained constraints to permit certain types
of dependence and forbid others selectively. By
expanding the available options for continuous
protected attributes, our approach represents a significant contribution to the area of fair artificial
intelligence.

We view the lack of diverse techniques for continuous protected groups as a major issue. We contribute to this area by
1) identifying a few critical limitations in the HGR approach,
and 2) introducing a family of indicators that complement
HGR semantics and have technical advantages.
In terms of limitations, we highlight how the theoretical
HGR formulation is prone to pathological behavior for finite
samples, leading to the oversized importance of implementation details and limited interpretability. Moreover, the generality of the HGR formulation makes the indicator unsuitable
for exclusively measuring the functional dependency between the protected attribute and the target. Finally, the
HGR indicator cannot account for scale effects on fairness
since it is based on the scale-invariant Pearson’s correlation
coefficient.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the social impact of data-driven AI systems and its ethical implications have become widely recognized. For example, models may discriminate over population groups (Julia et al., 2016; Gianfrancesco et al., 2018),
spurring extensive research on AI fairness. Typical approaches in this area involve quantitative indicators defined
over a “protected attribute”, which can be used to measure
discrimination or enforce fairness constraints. On the one
hand, such metrics are arguably the most viable solution for
mitigating fairness issues; on the other hand, the nuances of
ethics can hardly be reduced to simple rules. From this point
of view, the availability of multiple and diverse metrics is a
significant asset since it enables choosing the best indicator
depending on the application.

We introduce the Generalized Disparate Impact (GeDI), a
family of indicators inspired by the HGR approach and by
the Disparate Impact Discrimination Index (Aghaei et al.,
2019). GeDI indicators measure the dependency based on
how well a user-specified function of the protected attribute
can approximate the target variable. Our indicators support
both discrete and continuous protected attributes and 1)
complement the HGR semantics, 2) are fully interpretable,
3) are robust for finite samples, and 4) can be extensively
configured. Indicators in the family share a core technical
structure that allows for a uniform interpretation and unified
techniques for stating fairness constraints. Moreover, the
GeDI formulation supports fine-grained constraints in order
to permit only certain types of dependency while ruling out
others. By introducing GeDI, we aim to improve metrics
diversity while limiting complexity.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Correspondence
to: Luca Giuliani <luca.giuliani13@unibo.it>, Eleonora Misino
<eleonora.misino2@unibo.it>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

