A Gromov–Wasserstein Geometric View of Spectrum-Preserving
Graph Coarsening

Yifan Chen 1 Rentian Yao 2 Yun Yang 2 Jie Chen 3

Abstract
Graph coarsening is a technique for solving
large-scale graph problems by working on a
smaller version of the original graph, and possibly
interpolating the results back to the original graph.
It has a long history in scientific computing
and has recently gained popularity in machine
learning, particularly in methods that preserve
the graph spectrum. This work studies graph
coarsening from a different perspective, developing a theory for preserving graph distances
and proposing a method to achieve this. The
geometric approach is useful when working with
a collection of graphs, such as in graph classification and regression. In this study, we consider a
graph as an element on a metric space equipped
with the Gromov–Wasserstein (GW) distance,
and bound the difference between the distance
of two graphs and their coarsened versions.
Minimizing this difference can be done using
the popular weighted kernel K-means method,
which improves existing spectrum-preserving
methods with the proper choice of the kernel. The
study includes a set of experiments to support
the theory and method, including approximating
the GW distance, preserving the graph spectrum,
classifying graphs using spectral information, and
performing regression using graph convolutional
networks.
Code is available at https:
//github.com/ychen-stat-ml/
GW-Graph-Coarsening.

Figure 1: An example of graph coarsening. Three nodes
v1 , v2 , and v3 are merged to a supernode v1′ in the coarsened
graph, while each of the other nodes (v4 , v5 , and v6 ) is a
separate supernode.

tions (Morris et al., 2020). Examples range from analysis
of chemical and biological networks (Debnath et al., 1991;
Helma et al., 2001; Dobson & Doig, 2003; Irwin et al.,
2012; Sorkun et al., 2019), learning and inference with
social interactions (Oettershagen et al., 2020), to image understanding (Dwivedi et al., 2020). Many of these tasks are
faced with large graphs, the computational costs of which
can be rather high even when the graph is sparse (e.g., computing a few extreme eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the
graph Laplacian can be done with a linear cost by using the
Lanczos method, while computing the round-trip commute
times requiring the pesudoinverse of the Laplacian, which
admits a cubic cost). Therefore, it is practically important to
develop methods that can efficiently handle graphs as their
size grows. In this work, we consider one type of methods,
which resolve the scalability challenge through working on
a smaller version of the graph. The production of the smaller
surrogate is called graph coarsening.
Graph coarsening is a methodology for solving large-scale
graph problems. Depending on the problem itself, one may
develop a solution based on the coarsened graph, or interpolate the solution back to the original one. Figure 1 illustrates
a toy example of graph coarsening, whereby a cluster of
nodes (v1 , v2 , and v3 ) in the original graph are merged to
a so-called supernode (v1′ ) in the coarsened graph. If the
problem is graph classification (predicting classes of multiple graphs in a dataset), one may train a classifier by using
these smaller surrogates, if it is believed that they inherit the
characteristics of the original graphs necessary for classifica-

1. Introduction
Modeling the complex relationship among objects by using graphs and networks is ubiquitous in scientific applica1

Hong Kong Baptist University 2 University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to: Yifan Chen <yifanc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

