Mitigating Memorization of Noisy Labels
by Clipping the Model Prediction

Hongxin Wei 1 Huiping Zhuang 2 Renchunzi Xie 3 Lei Feng 3 Gang Niu 4 Bo An 3 Yixuan Li 5

Abstract

on such data containing noisy labels suffer from poor generalization performance (Arpit et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2016). This gives rise to the importance of noise-robust
learning, where the goal is to train a robust classifier in the
presence of noisy and erroneous labels. The learning task
thus provides stronger flexibility and practicality than the
standard supervised learning, where each training example
is provided with clean ground truth.

In the presence of noisy labels, designing robust
loss functions is critical for securing the generalization performance of deep neural networks.
Cross Entropy (CE) loss has been shown to be
not robust to noisy labels due to its unboundedness. To alleviate this issue, existing works typically design specialized robust losses with the
symmetric condition, which usually lead to the
underfitting issue. In this paper, our key idea is to
induce a loss bound at the logit level, thus universally enhancing the noise robustness of existing
losses. Specifically, we propose logit clipping
(LogitClip), which clamps the norm of the logit
vector to ensure that it is upper bounded by a constant. In this manner, CE loss equipped with our
LogitClip method is effectively bounded, mitigating the overfitting to examples with noisy labels.
Moreover, we present theoretical analyses to certify the noise-tolerant ability of LogitClip. Extensive experiments show that LogitClip not only
significantly improves the noise robustness of CE
loss, but also broadly enhances the generalization
performance of popular robust losses.

Despite the most popular loss in classification tasks, CE
loss has shown to be non-robust in the presence of label
noise (Ghosh et al., 2017; Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018), due
to its unboundedness. Concerningly, the loss could approach infinity when the observed noisy label mismatches
the model’s prediction. Consequently, the model would
attempt to counteract the large loss by overfitting the label noise, leading to poor generalization performance. To
bound the loss value, previous methods typically design
robust losses with principal constraint, e.g., symmetric condition (Ghosh et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2020). Despite their
theoretical robustness, these specialized losses can cause
difficulty in optimization, leading to underfitting issues on
complex datasets (Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018; Zhou et al.,
2021). This motivates our method, which mitigates the undesirable influence of unbounded loss without modifying
the loss function.
In this paper, our key idea is to induce the loss bound at the
logit level, which universally enhances the noise robustness
of existing losses. Specifically, we propose logit clipping
(LogitClip), which clamps the norm of the logit vector to
ensure that it is upper bounded by a constant. Our method
can be interpreted as a constrained optimization with an inequality constraint placed on the logit vector. Theoretically,
we show that CE loss equipped with our LogitClip method
is always bounded. Consequently, the difference between
the risks caused by the derived hypotheses under noisy and
clean labels is always bounded. More importantly, the two
bounds (Theorem 2.2 and Theorem 2.3) depend on the logit
norm threshold, where a smaller threshold induces tighter
bounds. In this way, our theoretical analyses demonstrate
the noise-tolerant ability of LogitClip.

1. Introduction
The success of supervised learning relies heavily on a massive amount of data, where each training instance is labeled
by a human annotator. However, labels solicited from humans can often be subject to label noise. The issue of noisy
labels has been commonly observed in many real-world scenarios, such as crowdsourcing (Yan et al., 2014) and online
queries (Blum et al., 2003). As a result, models trained
1

Southern University of Science and Technology. Work done
while working at UW-Madison as a visiting scholar. 2 South China
University of Technology 3 Nanyang Technological University
4
RIKEN AIP 5 University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence
to: Hongxin Wei <weihx@sustech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To verify the effectiveness of our method, we conduct
thorough empirical evaluations on both simulated and
1

