ContraBAR: Contrastive Bayes-Adaptive Deep RL

Era Choshen 1 Aviv Tamar 1

Abstract

In contrast to the single MDP setting, where an optimal policy can be Markovian – taking as input the current state and
outputting the next action, the Bayes-optimal policy must
take as input the whole history of past states, actions, and rewards, or some sufficient statistic of it (Bertsekas, 1995). A
popular sufficient statistic is the belief – the posterior probability of the MDP parameters given the observed history.
For small MDPs, the belief may be inferred by directly applying Bayes rule, and approximate dynamic programming
can be used to calculate an approximately Bayes-optimal
policy (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2016). However, this approach
quickly becomes intractable for large or continuous MDPs.
Recently, several studies proposed to scale up belief inference using deep learning, where the key idea is to leverage a variational autoencoder (VAE, Kingma & Welling
2013) formulation of the problem, in which the posterior
is approximated using a recurrent neural network (Zintgraf
et al., 2020; Humplik et al., 2019). While this approach
has demonstrated impressive results on continuous control
benchmarks (Zintgraf et al., 2020; Humplik et al., 2019;
Dorfman et al., 2021), it also has some limitations. Training a VAE is based on a reconstruction loss, in this case,
predicting the future observations given the current history,
which can be difficult to optimize for visually rich observations such as images. Furthermore, variational algorithms
such as VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2020) reconstruct entire
trajectories, restricting application to image-based domains
due to memory limitations.

In meta reinforcement learning (meta RL), an
agent seeks a Bayes-optimal policy – the optimal
policy when facing an unknown task that is sampled from some known task distribution. Previous
approaches tackled this problem by inferring a
belief over task parameters, using variational inference methods. Motivated by recent successes
of contrastive learning approaches in RL, such as
contrastive predictive coding (CPC), we investigate whether contrastive methods can be used for
learning Bayes-optimal behavior. We begin by
proving that representations learned by CPC are
indeed sufficient for Bayes optimality. Based on
this observation, we propose a simple meta RL
algorithm that uses CPC in lieu of variational belief inference. Our method, ContraBAR, achieves
comparable performance to state-of-the-art in domains with state-based observation and circumvents the computational toll of future observation
reconstruction, enabling learning in domains with
image-based observations. It can also be combined with image augmentations for domain randomization and used seamlessly in both online
and offline meta RL settings.

1. Introduction

As an alternative to VAEs, contrastive learning has shown
remarkable success in learning representations for various
domains, including image recognition and speech processing (Chen et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2021b; Han et al., 2021).
Rather than using a reconstruction loss, these approaches
learn features that discriminate between similar observations and dissimilar ones, using a contrastive loss such as
the InfoNCE in contrastive predictive coding (CPC, Oord
et al. 2018). Indeed, several recent studies showed that contrastive learning can learn useful representations for image
based RL (Laskin et al., 2020; 2022), outperforming representations learned using VAEs. Furthermore, Guo et al.
(2018) showed empirically that in partially observed MDPs,
representations learned using CPC (Oord et al., 2018) are
correlated with the belief. In this work, we further investigate contrastive learning for meta RL, henceforth termed

In meta reinforcement learning (meta RL), an agent learns
from a set of training tasks how to quickly solve a new
task, sampled from a similar distribution as the training
set (Finn et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2016). A formal setting for meta RL is based on the Bayesian RL formulation,
where a task corresponds to a particular Markov decision
process (MDP), and there exists some prior distribution over
MDPs (Humplik et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020; Rakelly
et al., 2019). Under this setting, the optimal meta RL policy
is well defined, and is often referred to as a Bayes-optimal
policy (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2016).
1
Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Era Choshen
<erachoshen@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

