Emergent Agentic Transformer from Chain of Hindsight Experience

Hao Liu Pieter Abbeel
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

Train N Traj. = 4

Large transformer models powered by diverse
data and model scale have dominated natural language modeling and computer vision and pushed
the frontier of multiple AI areas. In reinforcement learning (RL), despite many efforts into
transformer-based policies, a key limitation, however, is that current transformer-based policies
cannot learn by directly combining information
from multiple sub-optimal trials. In this work, we
address this issue using recently proposed chain
of hindsight to relabel experience, where we train
a transformer on a sequence of trajectory experience ascending sorted according to their total
rewards. Our method consists of relabelling target
return of each trajectory to the maximum total reward among in sequence of trajectories and training an autoregressive model to predict actions conditioning on past states, actions, rewards, target
returns, and task completion tokens, the resulting
model, Agentic Transformer (AT), can learn to
improve upon itself both at training and test time.
As we show on D4RL and ExoRL benchmarks,
to the best our knowledge, this is the first time
that a simple transformer-based model performs
competitively with both temporal-difference and
imitation-learning-based approaches, even from
sub-optimal data. Our Agentic Transformer also
shows a promising scaling trend that bigger models consistently improve results.

Train N Traj. = 3

Train N Traj. = 2

Train N Traj. = 1

90

80

ExoRL Avg Score

70

60

50

40

30
1

2

3

4

Test N Trajectories per rollout

Figure 1. Agentic Transformer can automatically improve its performance at evaluation time by rollouting more trajectories in a
trial-and-error manner. The scaling improves with both more chain
of hindsight training sequences.

and code generation (Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2021c).
Despite the successes, a key limitation is that these models
are not agentic, i.e. they cannot interact with the real world
to accomplish tasks like a robot. Reinforcement learning
(RL), on the other hand, in principle is designed for building
interactive agents. However, conventional RL algorithms
are limited to small models (e.g., an MLP with two layers)
and are difficult to train and scale (see e.g. Andrychowicz
et al., 2020). The difficulty of scaling the model size in conventional RL algorithms make it difficult to take advantage
of large Transformer models.

1. Introduction
Large transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) models have substantially advanced the state-of-the-art across a variety of
domains, including natural language processing tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Alayrac et al., 2022),

In order to combine Transformer with decision-making,
there have been lots of efforts in attempting to cast RL from
offline data as a sequence modeling problem (Chen et al.,
2021a; Laskin et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). For instance,
DT (Chen et al., 2021a) proposes to train a Transformer
to autoregressively predict action sequences based on sequences of returns-to-go and states.

Correspondence to: Hao Liu <hao.liu@cs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Despite the progress made, existing Transformer based
1

