Understanding Self-Predictive Learning for Reinforcement Learning

Yunhao Tang 1 Zhaohan Daniel Guo 1 Pierre Harvey Richemond 1 Bernardo Ávila Pires 1 Yash Chandak 2
Rémi Munos 1 Mark Rowland 1 Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar 1 Charline Le Lan 3 Clare Lyle 1
András György 1 Shantanu Thakoor 1 Will Dabney 1 Bilal Piot 1 Daniele Calandriello 1 Michal Valko 1

Abstract

procedure also known as bootstrapping. We can understand
TD-learning as self-prediction specialized to value learning,
where the value function makes predictions about targets
constructed from itself.

We study the learning dynamics of self-predictive
learning for reinforcement learning, a family of algorithms that learn representations by minimizing
the prediction error of their own future latent representations. Despite its recent empirical success,
such algorithms have an apparent defect: trivial
representations (such as constants) minimize the
prediction error, yet it is obviously undesirable to
converge to such solutions. Our central insight is
that careful designs of the optimization dynamics
are critical to learning meaningful representations.
We identify that a faster paced optimization of
the predictor and semi-gradient updates on the
representation, are crucial to preventing the representation collapse. Then in an idealized setup,
we show self-predictive learning dynamics carries
out spectral decomposition on the state transition
matrix, effectively capturing information of the
transition dynamics. Building on the theoretical
insights, we propose bidirectional self-predictive
learning, a novel self-predictive algorithm that
learns two representations simultaneously. We
examine the robustness of our theoretical insights
with a number of small-scale experiments and
showcase the promise of the novel representation
learning algorithm with large-scale experiments.

Recently, the idea of self-prediction has been extended
to representation learning with much empirical success (Schwarzer et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2020; 2022). In selfpredictive learning, the aim is to learn a representation Φ
jointly with a transition function P which models the transition of representations in the latent space Φ(xt ) → Φ(xt+1 ),
by minimizing the prediction error
2

∥P (Φ(xt )) − Φ(xt+1 )∥2 .
Intuitively, minimizing the prediction error should encourage the algorithm to learn a compressed latent representation
Φ(x) of the state x. However, despite the intuitive construct
of the prediction error, there is no obvious theoretical justification why minimizing the error leads to meaningful
representations at all. Indeed, the trivial solution Φ(xt ) ≡ c
for any constant vector c minimizes the error but retains
no information at all. Comparing self-predictive learning
with value learning, the key difference lies in that the value
function is grounded in the immediate reward R(xt ). In
contrast, the prediction error that motivates self-predictive
learning is apparently not grounded in concrete quantities
in the environment.
A number of natural questions ensue: how do we reconcile
the apparent defect of the prediction error objective, with
the empirical success of practical algorithms built on such
an objective? What are the representations obtained by selfpredictive learning, and are they useful for downstream RL?
With obvious theory-practice conflicts in place, it is difficult
to establish self-predictive learning as a principled approach
to representation learning in general.

1. Introduction
Self-prediction is one of the fundamental concepts in reinforcement learning (RL). In value-based RL, temporal
difference (TD) learning (Sutton, 1988) uses the value function prediction at the next time step as the prediction target
for the current time step V (xt ) ← R(xt ) + γV (xt+1 ), a
1

Google DeepMind 2 University of Massachusetts 3 University
of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Yunhao Tang <robintyh@deepmind.com>.

We present the first attempt at understanding self-predictive
learning for RL, through a theoretical lens. In an idealized
setting, we identify key elements to ensure that the selfpredictive algorithm avoids collapse and learns meaningful
representations. We make the following theoretical and
algorithmic contributions.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

