Fast Rates for Maximum Entropy Exploration

Daniil Tiapkin 1 2 Denis Belomestny 3 1 Daniele Calandriello 4 Éric Moulines 5 6 Rémi Munos 4
Alexey Naumov 1 Pierre Perrault 7 Yunhao Tang 4 Michal Valko 4 Pierre Ménard 8

Abstract

This work studies the problem of efficient exploration in the
absence of rewards. Approaches to solve this problem can
be roughly cast into three main groups: The bonus-based
exploration where the agent maximizes self-defined bonuses
or intrinsic rewards collected along trajectory (Schmidhuber, 1991; Oudeyer et al., 2007; Bellemare et al., 2016).
Typically these bonuses are related to the variances of errorsignals from some auxiliary tasks, such as learning the transition probability distributions (Schmidhuber, 1991; Chentanez et al., 2004; Pathak et al., 2017; Savas et al., 2019),
learning the optimal value function for all the possible rewards (Jin et al., 2020; Kaufmann et al., 2021; Ménard et al.,
2021), learning random generated features (Burda et al.,
2019). A second approach is the goal-conditioned exploration where the agent learns to navigate to self-assigned
states (or goals). A common goal-selection rule for this
class of algorithms is to select as goals the states at the frontier of the visited states (Lim & Auer, 2012; Tarbouriech
et al., 2020a; Ecoffet et al., 2019). Other selection-goal rules
include reaching each state a fixed number of times (Tarbouriech et al., 2021) or going to states where the estimation
error for the transition probabilities is large (Tarbouriech
et al., 2020b). The third approach, which has received relatively less attention thus far, is the maximum entropy exploration (Hazan et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Mutti & Restelli,
2020; Mutti et al., 2021). This approach involves learning
a policy that aims to achieve a visitation distribution over
state-action pairs that is as uniform as possible. One specific
application of this approach is in unsupervised pretraining,
where it helps to obtain a better initial policy (Seo et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Mutti et al., 2022). To achieve
this goal, the approach focuses on maximizing entropy-like
functionals, which is the main focus of our study.

We address the challenge of exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) when the agent operates
in an unknown environment with sparse or no
rewards. In this work, we study the maximum entropy exploration problem of two different types.
The first type is visitation entropy maximization
previously considered by Hazan et al. (2019) in
the discounted setting. For this type of exploration, we propose a game-theoretic algorithm
e 3 S 2 A/ε2 ) sample complexity thus
that has O(H
improving the ε-dependence upon existing results,
where S is a number of states, A is a number of
actions, H is an episode length, and ε is a desired
accuracy. The second type of entropy we study is
the trajectory entropy. This objective function is
closely related to the entropy-regularized MDPs,
and we propose a simple algorithm that has a
e
sample complexity of order O(poly(S,
A, H)/ε).
Interestingly, it is the first theoretical result in RL
literature that establishes the potential statistical
advantage of regularized MDPs for exploration.
Finally, we apply developed regularization techniques to reduce sample complexity of visitation
e 2 SA/ε2 ), yielding
entropy maximization to O(H
a statistical separation between maximum entropy
exploration and reward-free exploration.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with an
environment aiming to maximize the sum of rewards returned by the environment. When the reward signal is very
sparse or completely absent, the agent may experience long
periods without any feedback. In these periods exploration
is the main challenge.

In this work, we focus on environments modeled by an
episodic, finite, reward-free Markov Decision Process
(MDP) with S states, A actions, horizon H and stepdependent transitions. We consider two types of entropy:
the visitation entropy and the trajectory entropy. The visitation entropy of a policy is defined as the sum of the entropies
of the visitation distributions induced by the given policy
at each step. The trajectory entropy of a policy is given
by the entropy of a trajectory, generated when one follows
the given policy and seen as one random variable on the

1
HSE University 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Duisburg-Essen University 4 Google DeepMind 5 École Polytechnique 6 Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI 7 IDEMIA 8 ENS
Lyon. Correspondence to: Daniil Tiapkin <dtyapkin@hse.ru>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

