Continual Task Allocation in Meta-Policy Network via Sparse Prompting

Yijun Yang 1 2 Tianyi Zhou 3 Jing Jiang 2 Guodong Long 2 Yuhui Shi 1

Abstract

Push and close a window

How to train a generalizable meta-policy by
continually learning a sequence of tasks? It is
a natural human skill yet challenging to achieve
by current reinforcement learning: the agent is
expected to quickly adapt to new tasks (plasticity)
meanwhile retaining the common knowledge
from previous tasks (stability). We address it by
“Continual Task Allocation via Sparse Prompting
(CoTASP)”, which learns over-complete dictionaries to produce sparse masks as prompts
extracting a sub-network for each task from a
meta-policy network. CoTASP trains a policy for
each task by optimizing the prompts and the subnetwork weights alternatively. The dictionary is
then updated to align the optimized prompts with
tasks’ embedding, thereby capturing tasks’ semantic correlations. Hence, relevant tasks share more
neurons in the meta-policy network due to similar
prompts while cross-task interference causing
forgetting is effectively restrained. Given a metapolicy and dictionaries trained on previous tasks,
new task adaptation reduces to highly efficient
sparse prompting and sub-network finetuning.
In experiments, CoTASP achieves a promising
plasticity-stability trade-off without storing or
replaying any past tasks’ experiences. It outperforms existing continual and multi-task RL methods on all seen tasks, forgetting reduction, and
generalization to unseen tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/stevenyangyj/CoTASP

Pretrained
Language
Model

Task

(Sentence-BERT)

Task embedding
Sparse coding of

Sparse prompts

State

Action

Output Layer

Meta-Policy Network
RL on Task : Alternately optimize
Reward

Dictionary learning

and

Environment of Task
Activated neuron
Deactivated neuron
Element-wise product

Figure 1: Main steps and components of CoTASP.

et al., 2017; Degrave et al., 2022), and offline policy optimization (Yu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022), it still suffers
from catastrophic forgetting and cross-task interference
when learning a stream of tasks on the fly (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989; Bengio et al., 2020) or a curated curriculum
of tasks (Fang et al., 2019; Ao et al., 2021; 2022). So it
is challenging to train a meta-policy that can generalize to
all learned tasks or even unseen ones with fast adaptation,
which however is an inherent skill of human learning.
This problem has been recognized as continual or lifelong
RL (Mendez & Eaton, 2022) and attracted growing interest
in recent RL research.

1. Introduction
Although reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated
excellent performance on learning a single task, e.g.,
playing Go (Silver et al., 2016), robotic control (Schulman

A primary and long-standing challenge in continual RL is
the plasticity-stability trade-off (Khetarpal et al., 2022): the
RL policy on the one hand needs to retain and reuse the
knowledge shared across different tasks in history (stability)
while on the other hand can be quickly adapted to new tasks
without interference from previous tasks (plasticity). Addressing this challenge is vital to improving the efficiency of

1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 University
of Technology Sydney 3 University of Maryland, College Park.
Correspondence to: Tianyi Zhou <tianyi@umd.edu>, Jing Jiang
<jing.jiang@uts.edu.au>, Yuhui Shi <shiyh@sustech.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

