User-level Private Stochastic Convex Optimization with Optimal Rates

Raef Bassily 1 Ziteng Sun 2

Abstract

differentially private SCO (DP-SCO) (Bassily et al., 2019;
Feldman et al., 2020; Bassily et al., 2021b; Asi et al., 2021;
Kulkarni et al., 2021; Bassily et al., 2021a; Song et al., 2021;
Arora et al., 2022).

We study the problem of differentially private
(DP) stochastic convex optimization (SCO) under the notion of user-level differential privacy. In
this problem, there are n users, each contributing
m > 1 samples to the input dataset of the private
SCO algorithm, and the notion of indistinguishability embedded in DP is w.r.t. replacing the entire
local dataset of any given user.

However, most of the existing works on DP-SCO study a
basic setting, where there are n individuals (users) and each
user contributes a single data point to the input dataset of
the algorithm, and hence the privacy guarantee of the proposed algorithms is item-level DP. A more general setting
of substantial practical importance is when each user contributes a local dataset of m data points to the input dataset,
where m > 1. In such scenarios, item-level DP does not
provide sufficient privacy protection for each user. Instead,
user-level DP would offer a more meaningful and stronger
privacy protection in these scenarios. In user-level DP, the
output of the differentially private (DP) algorithm needs to
be insensitive to replacing the entire local dataset of any user.
Under item-level DP, optimal rates for DP-SCO (optimal excess population risk bounds) are known in the central model
of DP (Bassily et al., 2014) and the local model (Duchi et al.,
2013) (see the first row of Table 1).

Under smoothness conditions of the loss, we establish the optimal rates for user-level DP-SCO
in both the central and local models of DP. In particular, we√show, roughly, that the optimal rate
is
√
√1
√d in the central setting and is √ d
+
nm
εn m
ε nm
in the local setting, where d is the dimensionality
of the problem and ε is the privacy parameter. Our
algorithms combine new user-level DP mean estimation techniques with carefully designed firstorder stochastic optimization methods. For the
central DP setting, our optimal rate improves over
the rate attained
for the same setting in Levy et al.
√
(2021) by d factor. One of the main ingredients
that enabled such an improvement is a novel application of the generalization properties of DP
in the context of multi-pass stochastic gradient
methods.

A fundamental question is: what are the optimal rates for
DP-SCO under user-level DP? In particular, can we attain
better rates for user-level DP than those rates implied directly from the optimal algorithms for item-level DP? That
is, can we devise new algorithms that exploit the fact that
each user contributes multiple samples to the input dataset?
Note that a naive baseline would be using the existing algorithms designed for item-level DP while only modifying the
notion of privacy to user-level DP. However, this yields rates
that are essentially the same as in the case where m = 1
(Levy et al., 2021). Related to this question, the work of
Levy et al. (2021) gives an upper bound on the DP-SCO
rate in the central model of DP when the loss function is sufficiently smooth. Under the Lipschitz condition, their rate
1
d
scales as ≈ √nm
+ εn√
in the worst case. Although their
m
bound shows an improvement in terms of the dependence
on m compared to the naive baseline mentioned above, it is
worse than such naive baseline√
in terms of its dependence
on d, particularly by a factor of d. The picture in the local
model is even less clear as there are no known DP-SCO
rates better than what can be implied via the naive approach.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) has become
the gold standard for rigorous privacy protection in machine
learning. Given the fundamental importance of stochastic convex optimization (SCO) in machine learning, many
works studied stochastic optimization algorithms under the
constraint of differential privacy, a problem referred to as
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science Engineering and the Translational Data Analytics Institute (TDAI), The
Ohio State University 2 Google Research, New York. Correspondence to: Ziteng Sun <zitengsun@google.com>, Raef Bassily
<bassily.1@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

