Two Losses Are Better Than One: Faster Optimization Using a Cheaper Proxy

Blake Woodworth 1 Konstantin Mishchenko 2 Francis Bach 1

Abstract

easier-to-access “proxy” function that can be used in place
of the real objective. When few samples are available, synthetic data could be used to approximate the objective, or in
applications with sensitive data, we could train a generative
model using a privacy-preserving algorithm and define the
proxy using synthetic samples. To mitigate the cost and risk
of operating a physical robot, one could use a simulator that
is faster, cheaper, and safer.

We present an algorithm for minimizing an objective with hard-to-compute gradients by using
a related, easier-to-access function as a proxy.
Our algorithm is based on approximate proximalpoint iterations on the proxy combined with relatively few stochastic gradients from the objective.
When the difference between the objective and
the proxy is δ-smooth, our algorithm guarantees
convergence at a rate matching stochastic gradient descent on a δ-smooth objective, which can
lead to substantially better sample efficiency. Our
algorithm has many potential applications in machine learning, and provides a principled means
of leveraging synthetic data, physics simulators,
mixed public and private data, and more.

Unfortunately, directly optimizing a hand-crafted proxy objective might not improve performance on the original problem, because the surrogate loss can introduce a bias. We
aim to remedy this in our work, and our main contribution
is a general algorithm that exploits curvature information
from the proxy loss in order to better optimize the objective
that we care about.
1.1. The problem

1. Introduction

Our ultimate aim is to solve unconstrained convex optimization problems of the form

In many machine learning problems, it is difficult to access
the objective function, e.g., to compute its gradients for use
in training. This difficulty can come from a wide range of
sources. For example, it might be costly or time consuming
to collect labelled training examples, leading to a small
training set. In some applications, computing the gradient
of the loss might require waiting for an actual robot to
execute a policy in a physical environment, which could be
very slow. Moreover, physical execution can risk damage to
the robot or its surroundings. Finally, individuals’ data may
be subject to privacy or legal constraints, limiting access
for gradient computations. In all of these cases, we face
challenges that complicate training, and can lead to poor
performance using off-the-shelf algorithms like stochastic
gradient descent (SGD).

minw∈Rd L(w) .

(1)

Here, L could represent the population loss of a machine
learning model parametrized by weights w; it could also
be the training loss, or any other objective function to be
minimized. To solve (1), we use a proxy function L̂ and
stochastic gradients gk approximating ∇L(wk ) and update
n
wk+1 ≈ arg min L̂(w) + ⟨gk − ∇L̂(wk ), w − wk ⟩
| {z } |
{z
}
w
Proxy loss

Bias correction

o
1
+ ∥w − wk ∥2 . (2)
2η
|
{z
}
Regularization

Thus, each iteration uses just a single stochastic gradient
from L, but requires a heavier computation based on L̂. If
we take L̂ ≡ 0 , we note that the update (2) is equivalent to
one stochastic gradient descent step

A natural solution to the problems above is to find a second,
1
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University,
Paris France 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK. Work done
while at CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Inria. Correspondence
to: Blake Woodworth <blakewoodworth@gmail.com>, Konstantin Mishchenko <konsta.mish@gmail.com>, Francis Bach
<francis.bach@inria.fr>.

wk+1 = wk − ηgk .

(3)

Therefore, SGD is a natural point of comparison for our
algorithm, and the main question is to what extent updating
using (2) (with non-zero L̂) rather than (3) is worth the
additional computational cost. We will show that when L̂

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

