Identifiability of Label Noise Transition Matrix

Yang Liu 1 2 Hao Cheng 1 Kun Zhang 3 4

Abstract

a central role in both defining and solving this problem.
Among many other benefits, the knowledge of T (X) has
demonstrated its use in performing risk correction (Natarajan et al., 2013; Patrini et al., 2017), label correction (Patrini
et al., 2017), and constraint corrections (Wang et al., 2021a;
Wei et al., 2023). In beyond, it also finds applications in
ranking small loss samples (Han et al., 2020) and detecting corrupted samples (Zhu et al., 2021a). Applying the
wrong transition matrix T (X) can lead to a number of issues. The literature has well-documented evidence that a
wrongly inferred transition matrix can lead to decline of
model performance (Natarajan et al., 2013; Liu & Wang;
Xia et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2021c), and false sense of fairness (Wang et al., 2021a; Liu & Wang; Zhu et al., 2022b).
Prior works have also documented challenges in estimating
the noise transition matrices when the quality of available
training information remains unclear. For instance, in (Zhu
et al., 2022a) the authors show that when the quality of
representations dropped, the estimation error in T (X) increases significantly (Figure 1 therein). Other references
have observed these challenges too (Xia et al., 2019).1

The noise transition matrix plays a central role in
the problem of learning with noisy labels. Among
many other reasons, a large number of existing
solutions rely on the knowledge of it. Identifying and estimating the transition matrix without ground truth labels is a critical and challenging task. When label noise transition depends on each instance, the problem of identifying the instance-dependent noise transition
matrix becomes substantially more challenging.
Despite recently proposed solutions for learning from instance-dependent noisy labels, the literature lacks a unified understanding of when
such a problem remains identifiable. The goal
of this paper is to characterize the identifiability of the label noise transition matrix. Building
on Kruskal’s identifiability results, we are able
to show the necessity of multiple noisy labels in
identifying the noise transition matrix at the instance level. We further instantiate the results
to explain the successes of the state-of-the-art
solutions and how additional assumptions alleviated the requirement of multiple noisy labels.
Our result reveals that disentangled features improve identification. This discovery led us to an
approach that improves the estimation of the transition matrix using properly disentangled features.
Code is available at https://github.com/
UCSC-REAL/Identifiability.

Knowing whether a T (X) is identifiable or not is crucial and informs us if T (X) and the underlying noisy
learning problem are indeed learnable. The earlier results have focused on class-dependent transition matrix
T (X) ≡ T := [P(Ỹ = j|Y = i)]i,j , ∀X, that is different Xs observe the same transition matrix. The literature
has provided discussions of the identifiability of this classdependent T (Scott, 2015), and has identified a reducibility
condition for inferring the inverse noise rate, which closely
relates to T . Later works have developed a sequence of
solutions to estimate T under a variety of assumptions, including irreducibility (Scott, 2015), anchor points (?Xia
et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020a), separability (Cheng et al.,
2020), rankability (Northcutt et al., 2017; 2021), redundant
labels/tensor (Liu et al., 2020; Traganitis et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2014), clusterability (Zhu et al., 2021c), among others
(Zhang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The literature of learning with noisy labels concerns the scenario when the observed training labels Ỹ can differ from
the true one Y . The noise transition matrix T (X), defined
as the transition probability from Y to Ỹ given X, plays
1
University of California, Santa Cruz 2 ByteDance Research
Carnegie Mellon University 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Yang liu <yangliu@ucsc.edu>.

Nonetheless, recent study (Wei et al., 2021) has shown
that the above class-dependent model fails to capture the
real-world noise patterns, but rather real human-level noise
follows an instance-dependent model. Intuitively, the in-

3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

We provide experiments to validate this in Appendix C.4.

