Probabilistic Categorical Adversarial Attack and Adversarial Training

Han Xu 1 Pengfei He 1 Jie Ren 1 Yuxuan Wan 1 Zitao Liu 2 Hui Liu 1 Jiliang Tang 1

Abstract

However, there are also many machine learning tasks where
the input data is categorical. For example, data in ML-based
intrusion detection systems (Khraisat et al., 2019) contains
records of the type of system operations; in financial transaction systems, data includes categorical features such as
the region and card information of transactions; and in NLP
tasks, the words in a sentence can only be chosen from a
given vocabulary, which is categorical. To generate categorical adversarial examples, there are recent search-based
approaches such as (Yang et al., 2020; Lei et al., 2019; Bao
et al., 2022). For example, the method (Yang et al., 2020)
first finds top-K features of a given sample that have the
maximal influence on the model output, and then a greedy
search is applied to obtain the optimal perturbation in these
K features. However, these search-based attack methods
usually suffer from a poor trade-off between efficiency and
optimality (attack success rate) to find strong adversarial
examples. Moreover, if these attack methods are applied in
defenses like adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018), they
can only search for adversarial examples for each training
sample at each time, instead of efficiently producing adversarial examples in batches. In a nutshell, these drawbacks
of existing categorical attack methods dramatically prohibit
the possibility of applying recent advances of attack and
defense established in continuous data to categorical data.

The studies on adversarial attacks and defenses
have greatly improved the robustness of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs). Most advanced approaches have been overwhelmingly designed for
continuous data such as images. However, these
achievements are still hard to be generalized to
categorical data. To bridge this gap, we propose
a novel framework, Probabilistic Categorical Adversarial Attack (or PCAA). It transfers the discrete optimization problem of finding categorical
adversarial examples to a continuous problem that
can be solved via gradient-based methods. We analyze the optimality (attack success rate) and time
complexity of PCAA to demonstrate its significant advantage over current search-based attacks.
More importantly, through extensive empirical
studies, we demonstrate that the well-established
defenses for continuous data, such as adversarial
training and TRADES, can be easily accommodated to defend DNNs for categorical data.

1. Introduction

Therefore, a natural question is can we generalize the wellstudied methods of continuous data to categorical data? We
face tremendous challenges to answer this question. First,
the input data space are categorical, thus the gradient methods of adversarial attacks and defenses (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Madry et al., 2018) for continuous data are not directly applicable. Second, most attacks for categorical data
desire to constrain the number of perturbed features (Yang
et al., 2020; Bao et al., 2022), which is different from the
commonly considered l2 , l∞ norm constraints in continuous data. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
framework: Probabilistic Categorical Adversarial Attack
(PCAA). Overall, it transforms the discrete optimization
problem of finding categorical adversarial examples into a
continuous problem by estimating the probabilistic distribution of categorical adversarial examples. In detail, given
a clean data sample, we assume that (each feature of) its
adversarial example follows a categorical distribution, and
satisfies: (1) the samples following this distribution have

Adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2015) have raised
great concerns for the applications of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) in many security-critical domains (Cui et al., 2019;
Stringhini et al., 2010; Cao & Tay, 2001). Recent years
have witnessed an increasing number of adversarial attack
and defense methods (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al.,
2018; Ilyas et al., 2019). These studies have not only greatly
deepened our understanding on the vulnerabilities of DNNs
but also tremendously advanced the robustness of DNNs.
Until now, the majority of existing accomplishments have
been achieved in continuous data such as images, where
gradient-based approaches can be leveraged.
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 2 Guangdong Institute of
Smart Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Zitao Liu <liuzitao@jnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

