Learning Dense Correspondences between Photos and Sketches
Xuanchen Lu 1 Xiaolong Wang 1 Judith E. Fan 1 2

Figure 1: We propose a self-supervised method for learning the dense correspondence between sketches and photos. For
each photo-sketch pair, we show the annotated keypoints from our benchmark dataset PSC6K (first column), the predicted
correspondences (second column), and the result of warping the photo to the sketch (third column).

Abstract

loy et al., 2016) with fine-grained correspondence
metadata. Second, we propose a self-supervised
method for learning dense correspondences
between sketch-photo pairs, building upon
recent advances in correspondence learning
for pairs of photos. Our model uses a spatial
transformer network to estimate the warp flow
between latent representations of a sketch and
photo extracted by a contrastive learning-based
ConvNet backbone. We found that this approach
outperformed several strong baselines and
produced predictions that were quantitatively
consistent with other warp-based methods. However, our benchmark also revealed systematic
differences between predictions of the suite of
models we tested and those of humans. Taken
together, our work suggests a promising path
towards developing artificial systems that achieve
more human-like understanding of visual images
at different levels of abstraction. Project page:

Humans effortlessly grasp the connection
between sketches and real-world objects, even
when these sketches are far from realistic.
Moreover, human sketch understanding goes
beyond categorization — critically, it also
entails understanding how individual elements
within a sketch correspond to parts of the
physical world it represents. What are the
computational ingredients needed to support this
ability? Towards answering this question, we
make two contributions: first, we introduce a
new sketch-photo correspondence benchmark,
PSC6k, containing 150K annotations of 6250
sketch-photo pairs across 125 object categories,
augmenting the existing Sketchy dataset (Sangk1
University of California, San Diego 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Judith Fan <jefan@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

https://photo-sketch-correspondence.
github.io

1

