How Jellyfish Characterise Alternating Group Equivariant Neural Networks

Edward Pearce–Crump 1

Abstract

In this paper, we look instead at how to construct neural
networks that are equivariant to the alternating group. The
alternating group is an index two subgroup of the symmetric group consisting solely of all of the even permutations.
Alternating group symmetry has proven to be particularly
useful when learning from spherical image data that has
been discretely represented on an icosahedron (Zhang et al.,
2019); in constructing convolutional neural networks on an
icosahedron (Cohen et al., 2019); and in estimating polynomials that are invariant to the action of the alternating group
(Kicki et al., 2020).

We provide a full characterisation of all of the
possible alternating group (An ) equivariant neural networks whose layers are some tensor power
of Rn . In particular, we find a basis of matrices for the learnable, linear, An –equivariant layer
functions between such tensor power spaces in the
standard basis of Rn . We also describe how our
approach generalises to the construction of neural
networks that are equivariant to local symmetries.

Specifically, we give a full characterisation of all of the possible alternating group equivariant neural networks whose
layers are some tensor power of Rn by finding a basis of
matrices for the learnable, linear, alternating group equivariant layer functions between such tensor power spaces in the
standard basis of Rn .

1. Introduction
There has been a growing research effort in deep learning
to develop neural network architectures that can be used
to learn efficiently from data that possesses an underlying
symmetry. These architectures guarantee that the functions
that are learned are subject to a geometric property, known
as equivariance, that is connected with the symmetry group.
Group equivariant neural networks are important due to the
additional advantages that they offer over traditional multilayer perceptron models. For example, they commonly
display high levels of parameter sharing within each layer,
resulting in significantly fewer parameters overall. This
often leads to models that show improved prediction performance on new data.

Our approach is similar the one presented in the papers
written by Pearce–Crump (2022a; 2022b). They used different sets of set partition diagrams to characterise all of the
learnable, linear, group equivariant layer functions between
tensor power spaces in the standard basis of Rn for the following groups: the symmetric group Sn ; the orthogonal
group O(n); the symplectic group Sp(n); and the special
orthogonal group SO(n). We will show that in the case of
the alternating group An , the layer functions can also be
characterised by certain sets of set partition diagrams.

The symmetry group that has received the most attention,
in terms of it being explicitly incorporated into neural network architectures, is the group of all permutations on some
fixed number of objects, called the symmetric group. Creating neural networks that are equivariant to permutations is
highly desirable as many data structures, such as sets and
graphs, exhibit natural permutation symmetry. It is easily
understood that the labelling of the elements of a set or the
vertices of a graph is arbitrary; hence, it is crucial to ensure
that the functions that are learned from such data do not
depend on how the data is labelled.

To do this, we use a concept that was first introduced by
Comes (2020), namely, so-called jellyfish. In their paper,
they largely determined the theory of alternating group
equivariance; however, they relied heavily on the language
of category theory in their exposition. We simplify their
approach, and provide proofs that are more accessible to the
machine learning community.
The main contributions of this paper, which appear in Section 6 onwards, are as follows:

1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Edward Pearce–Crump
<ep1011@ic.ac.uk>.

1. We are the first to show how the combinatorics underlying set partition diagrams, together with some jellyfish,
serves as the theoretical foundation for constructing
neural networks that are equivariant to the alternating
group when the layers are some tensor power of Rn .

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

