Evaluating Unsupervised Denoising
Requires Unsupervised Metrics

Adrià Marcos Morales 1 2 3 Matan Leibovich 4 Sreyas Mohan 1 Joshua Lawrence Vincent 5 Piyush Haluai 5
Mai Tan 5 Peter Crozier 5 Carlos Fernandez-Granda 1 4

Abstract

computer vision tasks. Convolutional neural networks
achieve state-of-the-art performance for this problem, when
trained using databases of clean images corrupted with simulated noise (Zhang et al., 2017a). However, in real-world
imaging applications such as microscopy, noiseless ground
truth videos are often not available. This has motivated the
development of unsupervised denoising approaches that can
be trained using only noisy measurements (Lehtinen et al.,
2018; Xie et al., 2020; Laine et al., 2019; Sheth et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2021). These methods have demonstrated
impressive performance on natural-image benchmarks, essentially on par with the supervised state of the art. However,
to the best of our knowledge, no unsupervised metrics are
currently available to evaluate them using only noisy data.

Unsupervised denoising is a crucial challenge in
real-world imaging applications. Unsupervised
deep-learning methods have demonstrated impressive performance on benchmarks based on synthetic noise. However, no metrics exist to evaluate these methods in an unsupervised fashion.
This is highly problematic for the many practical applications where ground-truth clean images
are not available. In this work, we propose two
novel metrics: the unsupervised mean squared
error (MSE) and the unsupervised peak signalto-noise ratio (PSNR), which are computed using only noisy data. We provide a theoretical
analysis of these metrics, showing that they are
asymptotically consistent estimators of the supervised MSE and PSNR. Controlled numerical experiments with synthetic noise confirm that they
provide accurate approximations in practice. We
validate our approach on real-world data from
two imaging modalities: videos in raw format and
transmission electron microscopy. Our results
demonstrate that the proposed metrics enable unsupervised evaluation of denoising methods based
exclusively on noisy data.

Reliance on supervised metrics makes it very challenging to
create benchmark datasets using real-world measurements,
because obtaining the ground-truth clean images required by
these metrics is often either impossible or very constraining.
In practice, clean images are typically estimated through
temporal averaging, which suppresses dynamic information
that is often crucial in scientific applications. Consequently,
quantitative evaluation of unsupervised denoising methods
is currently almost completely dominated by natural image
benchmark datasets with simulated noise (Lehtinen et al.,
2018; Xie et al., 2020; Laine et al., 2019; Sheth et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2021), which are not always representative of
the signal and noise characteristics that arise in real-world
imaging applications.

1. Introduction

The lack of unsupervised metrics also limits the application of unsupervised denoising techniques in practice. In
the absence of quantitative metrics, domain scientists must
often rely on visual inspection to evaluate performance on
real measurements. This is particularly restrictive for deeplearning approaches, because it makes it impossible to perform systematic hyperparameter optimization and model
selection on the data of interest.

Image denoising is a fundamental challenge in image and
signal processing, as well as a key preprocessing step for
1

Center for Data Science, New York University, New York,
NY 2 Centre de Formació Interdisciplinària Superior, Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 3 Radiomics Group,
Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Vall d’Hebron Barcelona
Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain 4 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY 5 School
for Engineering of Matter, Transport & Energy, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ. Correspondence to: Adrià Marcos Morales
<adriamm98@gmail.com>.

In this work, we propose two novel unsupervised metrics
to address these issues: the unsupervised mean-squared error (uMSE) and the unsupervised peak signal-to-noise ratio
(uPSNR), which are computed exclusively from noisy data.
These metrics build upon existing unsupervised denoising

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

