The Benefits of Mixup for Feature Learning

Difan Zou 1 Yuan Cao 2 Yuanzhi Li 3 Quanquan Gu 4

Abstract

1

Introduction

The Mixup method (Zhang et al., 2018) is a popular data
augmentation technique in deep learning, known to yield notable improvements in generalization and robustness across
multiple domains, such as image recognition (Berthelot
et al., 2019), natural language processing (Guo et al., 2019b;
Chen et al., 2020a), and graph learning (Han et al., 2022a).
Unlike traditional data augmentation approaches that require
domain knowledge of the dataset (e.g., random rotation and
cropping for image data, and randomly modifying edges for
graph data), Mixup relies on convex combinations of both
features and labels from a pair of randomly selected training
data points. As a result, this technique does not require any
specialized knowledge or expertise to be performed.

Mixup, a simple data augmentation method that
randomly mixes two data points via linear interpolation, has been extensively applied in various
deep learning applications to gain better generalization. However, the theoretical underpinnings of
its efficacy are not yet fully understood. In this paper, we aim to seek a fundamental understanding
of the benefits of Mixup. We first show that Mixup
using different linear interpolation parameters for
features and labels can still achieve similar performance to the standard Mixup. This indicates
that the intuitive linearity explanation in Zhang
et al. (2018) may not fully explain the success of
Mixup. Then we perform a theoretical study of
Mixup from the feature learning perspective. We
consider a feature-noise data model and show that
Mixup training can effectively learn the rare features (appearing in a small fraction of data) from
its mixture with the common features (appearing
in a large fraction of data). In contrast, standard
training can only learn the common features but
fails to learn the rare features, thus suffering from
bad generalization performance. Moreover, our
theoretical analysis also shows that the benefits
of Mixup for feature learning are mostly gained
in the early training phase, based on which we
propose to apply early stopping in Mixup. Experimental results verify our theoretical findings and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the early-stopped
Mixup training.

Despite the remarkable empirical success of Mixup, there
is a considerable gap in the theoretical understanding of
this technique. In the original work of Mixup (Zhang et al.,
2018), it has been argued that the efficacy of Mixup can
be attributed to its inductive bias, which encourages the
trained model to behave linearly, leading to (relatively) simple decision boundaries. This inductive bias has been further supported by a series of works (Guo et al., 2019a;
Zhang et al., 2020; 2022; Chidambaram et al., 2021), which
prove that the Mixup behaves similarly to standard training for linear models. In particular, Mixup applies the
same linear interpolation on the features and labels of a
pair of training data points (x1 , y1 ) and (x2 , y2 ): denoted
by λx1 + (1 − λ)x2 and labels λy1 + (1 − λ)y2 , where
λ ∈ [0.5, 1] is randomly chosen. Then, the trained neural
network (NN) model F is naturally encouraged to conduct
the mapping F (λx1 +(1−λ)x2 ) → λy1 +(1−λ)y2 for all
λ ∈ [0.5, 1], (x1 , y1 ) and (x2 , y2 ), implying that F tends to
behave linearly at least within the line segments between all
training data pairs.
Although linearity is a nice inductive bias that tends to
learn the models with low complexities, we are not clear
about whether such an intuition from the algorithm design
(i.e., performing the same linear interpolation for features
and labels) can indeed explain the improvement in generalization. To examine this, we conduct a proof-of-concept
experiment on CIFAR-10 dataset. Instead of using the same
linear interpolation in the feature and label space, we implement the interpolations using different λ’s for features

1

Department of Computer Science & Institute of Data Science,
The University of Hong Kong 2 Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science & Department of Mathematics, The University of
Hong Kong 3 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 4 Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Difan Zou <dzou@cs.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

