Regret Bounds for Markov Decision Processes with Recursive Optimized
Certainty Equivalents

Wenhao Xu 1 Xuefeng Gao 1 Xuedong He 1

Abstract

Fei et al. (2020) and the references therein.
In this paper we study risk-sensitive RL for tabular MDPs
with unknown transition probabilities in the finite-horizon,
episodic setting, where an agent interacts with the MDP in
episodes of a fixed length with finite state and action spaces.
To incorporate risk sensitivity, we consider a broad and important class of risk measures known as Optimized Certainty
Equivalent (OCE, (Ben-Tal & Teboulle, 1986; 2007)). The
OCE is a (nonlinear) risk function which assigns a random
variable X to a real value, and it depends on a concave
utility function, see Equation (1) for the definition. With
an appropriate choice of the utility function, OCE covers
important examples of risk measures, including the entropic
risk, CVaR and mean-variance models, as special cases, so
it is popular in financial applications, such as portfolio optimization, and in the machine learning literature. See Section 2.1 for details. Using this unified framework, we aim to
develop efficient learning algorithms for risk-sensitive RL
with OCEs and provide worst-case regret bounds, where the
regret measures the sub-optimality of the learning algorithm
compared to an optimal policy should the model parameters
be completely known.

The optimized certainty equivalent (OCE) is a
family of risk measures that cover important examples such as entropic risk, conditional value-atrisk and mean-variance models. In this paper,
we propose a new episodic risk-sensitive reinforcement learning formulation based on tabular
Markov decision processes with recursive OCEs.
We design an efficient learning algorithm for this
problem based on value iteration and upper confidence bound. We derive an upper bound on the
regret of the proposed algorithm, and also establish a minimax lower bound. Our bounds show
that the regret rate achieved by our proposed algorithm has optimal dependence on the number
of episodes and the number of actions.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the problem of sequential decision making in an unknown environment by
carefully balancing between exploration and exploitation
(Sutton & Barto, 2018). In the classical setting, it describes
how an agent takes actions to maximize expected cumulative rewards in an environment typically modeled by a
Markov decision process (MDP, (Puterman, 2014)). However, optimizing the expected cumulative rewards alone is
often not sufficient in many practical applications such as
finance, healthcare and robotics. Hence, it may be necessary
to take into account of the risk preferences of the agent in
the dynamic decision process. Indeed, a rich body of literature has studied risk-sensitive (and safe) RL, incorporating
risk measures such as the entropic risk measure and conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) in the decision criterion, see,
e.g., Shen et al. (2014); Garcıa & Fernández (2015); Tamar
et al. (2016); Chow et al. (2017); Prashanth L & Fu (2018);

We formulate a new risk-sensitive episodic RL problem
with recursive OCEs. The conventional objective in risksensitive MDPs (when the model is known) is to optimize
a static risk measure/functional applied to the (possibly
discounted) cumulative rewards over the decision horizon
(Howard & Matheson, 1972; Marcus et al., 1997). Except
for the entropic risk measure, this approach typically suffers from the time-inconsistency issue, which prevents one
from directly applying the dynamic programming principle (Artzner et al., 2007). In addition, the optimal policies
can be non-Markovian, and are often difficult to compute
(Mannor & Tsitsiklis, 2011; Du et al., 2022). In view of the
time-inconsistency issue and the computational difficulty,
we consider an alternative approach, which is to consider
MDPs with recursive risk measures (Ruszczyński, 2010;
Shen et al., 2013; Bäuerle & Glauner, 2022). In this approach, instead of optimizing a static risk measure of the
cumulative rewards, one optimizes the value function defined by a recursive application of a risk measure at each
period, which essentially replaces the expectation operator

1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Xuefeng Gao <xfgao@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

