Hierarchical Neural Coding for Controllable CAD Model Generation

Xiang Xu 1 2 * Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman 2 Joseph G. Lambourne 2 Karl D.D. Willis 2 Yasutaka Furukawa 1

Abstract
This paper presents a novel generative model for
Computer Aided Design (CAD) that 1) represents
high-level design concepts of a CAD model as a
three-level hierarchical tree of neural codes, from
global part arrangement down to local curve geometry; and 2) controls the generation or completion of CAD models by specifying the target
design using a code tree. Concretely, a novel
variant of a vector quantized VAE with “masked
skip connection” extracts design variations as
neural codebooks at three levels. Two-stage cascaded auto-regressive transformers learn to generate code trees from incomplete CAD models
and then complete CAD models following the
intended design. Extensive experiments demonstrate superior performance on conventional tasks
such as unconditional generation while enabling
novel interaction capabilities on conditional generation tasks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/samxuxiang/hnc-cad.

RANDOM GENERATION

User Edit

Before

1. Introduction

Before

From automobiles to airplanes, excavators to elevators, manmade objects are created using Computer Aided Design
(CAD) software. Most modern CAD design tools employ
the “Sketch and Extrude” style workflow (Camba et al.,
2016; Shahin, 2008), where designers 1) draw loops of 2D
curves as outer and inner boundaries to create 2D profiles; 2)
extrude the 2D profiles to 3D shapes; and 3) add or subtract
3D shapes to build complex CAD models.

Input

After

User Edit

USER EDITING

After

Input

AUTOCOMPLETE

Figure 1: We propose three-level hierarchical neural coding
for controllable CAD model generation. Our system learns
high-level design concepts as discrete codes at different
levels, enabling more diverse and higher-quality generation
(top); novel user controls while specifying design intent
(bottom-left); and autocompleting a partial CAD model
under construction (bottom-right).

CAD models created in this way have a natural tree structure
which supports local edits. The curves at the leaves of the
tree can be adjusted and the extrusions regenerated to update
the final shape. For designers, it is also important that edits
preserve “design intent”. Otey et al (Otey et al., 2018) de-

fines design intent as “a CAD model’s anticipated behavior
when altered” while Martin (Martin, 2023) describe it as
“relationships between objects, so that a change to one can
propagate automatically to others”. Although “Sketch and
Extrude” allows local changes, it does not provide the relationships required to give the anticipated behavior when the
model is edited. A computational system with understanding of design intent would revolutionize the practice of CAD.
The system would help designers in 1) generating a diverse
set of CAD models given high-level design concepts; 2)

*Work partially done while interning at Autodesk. 1 Simon
Fraser University, Canada 2 Autodesk Research. Correspondence
to: Xiang Xu <xuxiangx@sfu.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

