In or Out? Fixing ImageNet Out-of-Distribution Detection Evaluation

Julian Bitterwolf * 1 Maximilian M Èuller * 1 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract

is a serious obstacle when applying classifiers in real world
applications. The purpose of OOD detectors is to reject
OOD inputs, which depending on the application can mean
requesting human intervention, steering towards a safe state,
or simply abstaining from making a prediction, while at the
same time letting ID inputs pass through.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is the problem of identifying inputs which are unrelated
to the in-distribution task. The OOD detection performance when the in-distribution (ID)
is ImageNet-1K is commonly being tested on a
small range of test OOD datasets. We find that
most of the currently used test OOD datasets, including datasets from the open set recognition
(OSR) literature, have severe issues: In some
cases more than 50% of the dataset contains objects belonging to one of the ID classes. These erroneous samples heavily distort the evaluation of
OOD detectors. As a solution, we introduce with
NINCO a novel test OOD dataset, each sample
checked to be ID free, which with its fine-grained
range of OOD classes allows for a detailed analysis of an OOD detector’s strengths and failure
modes, particularly when paired with a number
of synthetic ªOOD unit-testsº. We provide detailed evaluations across a large set of architectures and OOD detection methods on NINCO and
the unit-tests, revealing new insights about model
weaknesses and the effects of pretraining on OOD
detection performance. We provide code and data
at https://github.com/j-cb/NINCO.

Current OOD detection evaluations in image classification
rely on the assumption that there is no ID class present
in an OOD test image, not even in the background. We
follow this definition and consider an input to be out-ofdistribution (OOD) if it does not contain any of the indistribution classes. However, we show that this assumption
is not fulfilled for most of the current test OOD datasets for
ImageNet-1K (IN-1K) of Russakovsky et al. (2015). The
closely related task of open set recognition (OSR), which
simultaneously demands detection of OOD data and high
classification accuracy on the ID data, is evaluated on OOD
datasets which have the same requirements as in OOD detection. We also examine the test OOD datasets that have been
used in the OSR literature for IN-1K and find similar issues
there. We demonstrate that occurrences of objects from ID
classes in test OOD datasets are often correctly recognized
by state-of-the-art OOD detectors, but as an unwarranted
consequence held against them as mistakes in OOD detection evaluations (false ªfalse positiveº). Even in cases where
current models struggle to identify ID content, e.g. if ID
objects are partially occluded or in the background, OOD
datasets containing ID objects are not future proof: when
evaluating on them, one would not realize if a future model
correctly predicts the class of a visible ID object.

1. Introduction
While deep learning based models have shown impressive
performance on many real world tasks, they often exhibit
unforeseen behaviour when confronted with unknown situations like receiving an input that is not related to the task it
has been trained on. Such samples are regarded as out-ofdistribution (OOD) and deep neural network classifiers are
known to make very confident predictions that those belong
to one of the in-distribution (ID) classes (Hendrycks &
Gimpel, 2017; Hein et al., 2019). This unwanted behaviour

The erroneous occurrences of ID objects in existing OOD
datasets can be characterized into two failure modes, which
we illustrate in Figure 1 and define as follows. Categorical
ID contaminations show objects from ID classes which
already are classes in a base dataset from which the test
OOD dataset has been built. Their label coincides with an
ID class or semantically designates a subset of an ID class,
e.g. the class hayfield from the P LACES datset and the IN-1k
class hay. Incidental ID contaminations on the other hand
occur in images which are supposed to belong to an OOD
category but which contain an ID object. The object can be
in the background or an aspect of the specific instance of the
shown main object, e.g. the IN-1k class plane in an image
of the OOD category sky. We show that ID contaminations

*

1
Equal contribution
University of TÈubingen and
TÈubingen AI Center. Correspondence to: Julian Bitterwolf
<julian.bitterwolf@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

