Uncertainty Estimation for Molecules: Desiderata and Methods

Tom Wollschläger 1 Nicholas Gao 1 Bertrand Charpentier 1 Mohamed Amine Ketata 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract

are computationally demanding. In order to reduce this
computational burden, graph neural networks (GNNs) fitted
to QM data have been proposed as a means to accelerate
MD simulations (Chmiela et al., 2017; Schütt et al., 2018).
While such surrogates have recently achieved exceptional
reproduction of the dataset they have been trained on, they
tend to perform poorly on out-of-distribution (OOD) data
(Li et al., 2022). In practical applications, having access to
the full-dimensional potential energy surface of molecules
is rare. For example, in MD simulations, one typically starts
with an initial structure and iteratively applies molecular
forces (Hoja et al., 2021). These simulations may cause
the structure to step out of the training domain, rendering
the network’s predictions unreliable (Stocker et al., 2022).
Uncertainty estimation (UE) is a promising direction for
detecting such unforeseen events.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are promising
surrogates for quantum mechanical calculations
as they establish unprecedented low errors on collections of molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories.
Thanks to their fast inference times they promise
to accelerate computational chemistry applications. Unfortunately, despite low in-distribution
(ID) errors, such GNNs might be horribly wrong
for out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. Uncertainty estimation (UE) may aid in such situations
by communicating the model’s certainty about
its prediction. Here, we take a closer look at the
problem and identify six key desiderata for UE in
molecular force fields, three ‘physics-informed’
and three ‘application-focused’ ones. To overview
the field, we survey existing methods from the
field of UE and analyze how they fit to the set
desiderata. By our analysis, we conclude that
none of the previous works satisfies all criteria.
To fill this gap, we propose Localized Neural Kernel (LNK) a Gaussian Process (GP)-based extension to existing GNNs satisfying the desiderata.
In our extensive experimental evaluation, we test
four different UE with three different backbones
and two datasets. In out-of-equilibrium detection,
we find LNK yielding up to 2.5 and 2.1 times
lower errors in terms of AUC-ROC score than
dropout or evidential regression-based methods
while maintaing high predictive performance.

In the context of molecular force fields, UE comes with a
unique and more stringent set of requirements compared
to other fields. We categorize these requirements into
‘physical-informed’ and ‘application-focused’ desiderata.
In a survey, we then analyze existing works in UE for
molecular force fields on these desiderata. Our analysis
reveals that none of the previous work completely satisfies
all desiderata. To fill the gap, we present Localized Neural
Kernel (LNK), a Gaussian Process (GP)-based extension
to existing GNN-based force fields that reliably estimates
uncertainty with a single forward pass while not harming
the predictive performance fulfilling all desiderata. When
testing out-of-equilibrium detection, we find LNK yielding
up to 2.5 and 2.1 times lower errors in terms of AUC-ROC
score than dropout-based or evidential-based UE (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016; Soleimany et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

To summarize, our contributions are:1

In recent years, access to molecular forces has become
an essential aspect in various applications such as geometry optimization, and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Jensen, 2010). However, the underlying quantum
mechanical (QM) calculations required for these predictions

• We derive physics-informed and application-focused
desiderata for uncertainty-aware molecular force fields.
• We survey previous UE methods based on our desiderata and conclude that existing methods fail on at least
one of our desiderata.
• We present Localized Neural Kernel (LNK), a GPbased extension to existing GNN-based force fields
satisfying all desiderata.

1

Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science
Institute, Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Tom Wollschläger <tom.wollschlaeger@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Find our code at cs.cit.tum.de/daml/uncertainty-for-molecules

