Scalable Set Encoding with Universal Mini-Batch Consistency and
Unbiased Full Set Gradient Approximation

Jeffrey Willette * 1 Seanie Lee * 1 Bruno Andreis 1 Kenji Kawaguchi 2 Juho Lee 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1

Abstract

ously proposed set encoding functions (Zaheer et al., 2017;
Lee et al., 2019) have implicitly assumed that the whole
set can fit into memory and be accessed in a single chunk.
However, this is not a realistic assumption if it is necessary
to process large sets or streaming data. As shown in Figure 2a, Set Transformer (Lee et al., 2019) cannot properly
handle streaming data and suffers performance degradation.
Please see Figure 8 for more qualitative examples. Bruno
et al. (2021) identified this problem, and introduced the
mini-batch consistency (MBC) property which dictates that
an MBC set encoding model must be able to sequentially
process subsets from a partition of a set while guaranteeing
the same output over any partitioning scheme, as illustrated
in Figure 1. In order to satisfy the MBC property, they devised an attention-based MBC model, the Slot Set Encoder
(SSE).

Recent work on mini-batch consistency (MBC)
for set functions has brought attention to the
need for sequentially processing and aggregating
chunks of a partitioned set while guaranteeing the
same output for all partitions. However, existing
constraints on MBC architectures lead to models
with limited expressive power. Additionally, prior
work has not addressed how to deal with large
sets during training when the full set gradient is
required. To address these issues, we propose a
Universally MBC (UMBC) class of set functions
which can be used in conjunction with arbitrary
non-MBC components while still satisfying MBC,
enabling a wider range of function classes to be
used in MBC settings. Furthermore, we propose
an efficient MBC training algorithm which gives
an unbiased approximation of the full set gradient
and has a constant memory overhead for any set
size for both train- and test-time. We conduct
extensive experiments including image completion, text classification, unsupervised clustering,
and cancer detection on high-resolution images to
verify the efficiency and efficacy of our scalable
set encoding framework. Our code is available at
github.com/jeffwillette/umbc

Although SSE satisfies MBC, there are several limitations.
First, it has limited expressive power due to the constraints
imposed on its architecture. Instead of the conventional
softmax attention (Vaswani et al., 2017), the attention of
SSE is restricted to using a sigmoid for attention without
normalization over the rows of the attention matrix, which
may be undesirable for applications requiring convex combinations of inputs. Moreover, the Hierarchical SSE is a
composition of pure MBC functions and thus cannot utilize
more expressive non-MBC models, such as those utilizing
self-attention. Another crucial limitation of the SSE is its
limited scalability during training. Training models with
large sets requires computing gradients over the full set
which can be computationally prohibitive. SSE proposes to
randomly sample a small subset for gradient computation,
which is a biased estimator of the full set gradient as we
show in Appendix A.8.

1. Introduction
For a variety of problems for which deep models can be
applied, unordered sets naturally arise as an input. For example, a set of words in a document (Jurafsky & Martin, 2008)
and sets of patches within an image for multiple instance
learning (Quellec et al., 2017). Functions which encode
sets are commonly known as set encoders, and most previ-

To tackle these limitations of SSE, we propose Universal
MBC (UMBC) set functions which enable utilizing a broader
range of functions while still satisfying the MBC property.
Firstly, we relax the restriction to the sigmoid on the activation functions for attention and show that cross-attention
with a wider class of activation functions, including the softmax, is MBC. Moreover, we re-interpret UMBC’s output as
a set, which as we show in Figure 1 and Section 3, universally allows for the application of non-MBC set encoders

*
Equal contribution 1 KAIST 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Jeffrey Willete <jwillette@kaist.ac.kr>,
Seanie Lee <lsnfamily02@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

