A Closer Look at Self-Supervised Lightweight Vision Transformers

Shaoru Wang 1 2 Jin Gao 1 2 Zeming Li 3 Xiaoqin Zhang 4 Weiming Hu 1 2 5

Abstract

sive labeled data. SSL focuses on various pretext tasks for
pre-training. Among them, several works (He et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021a; Caron et al., 2021) based on contrastive
learning (CL) have achieved comparable or even better accuracy than supervised pre-training when transferring the
learned representations to downstream tasks. Recently, another trend focuses on masked image modeling (MIM) (Bao
et al., 2021; He et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022), which perfectly fits Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020) for vision tasks, and achieves improved generalization performance. Most of these works, however, involve
large networks with little attention paid to smaller ones.
Some works (Fang et al., 2020; Abbasi Koohpayegani et al.,
2020; Choi et al., 2021) focus on CL on small convolutional
networks (ConvNets) and improve the performance by distillation. However, the pre-training of lightweight ViTs is
considerably less studied.

Self-supervised learning on large-scale Vision
Transformers (ViTs) as pre-training methods has
achieved promising downstream performance.
Yet, how much these pre-training paradigms promote lightweight ViTs’ performance is considerably less studied. In this work, we develop and
benchmark several self-supervised pre-training
methods on image classification tasks and some
downstream dense prediction tasks. We surprisingly find that if proper pre-training is adopted,
even vanilla lightweight ViTs show comparable performance to previous SOTA networks
with delicate architecture design. It breaks the
recently popular conception that vanilla ViTs
are not suitable for vision tasks in lightweight
regimes. We also point out some defects of
such pre-training, e.g., failing to benefit from
large-scale pre-training data and showing inferior performance on data-insufficient downstream
tasks. Furthermore, we analyze and clearly show
the effect of such pre-training by analyzing the
properties of the layer representation and attention maps for related models. Finally, based on
the above analyses, a distillation strategy during pre-training is developed, which leads to further downstream performance improvement for
MAE-based pre-training. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangsr126/mae-lite.

Efficient neural networks are essential for modern ondevice computer vision. Recent studies on achieving topperforming lightweight models mainly focus on designing
network architectures (Sandler et al., 2018; Howard et al.,
2019; Graham et al., 2021; Ali et al., 2021; Heo et al., 2021;
Touvron et al., 2021b; Mehta & Rastegari, 2022; Chen et al.,
2021b; Pan et al., 2022), while little attention is paid to how
to optimize the training strategies for these models. We believe the latter is also of vital importance, and the utilization
of pre-training is one of the most hopeful approaches along
this way, since it has achieved great progress on large models. To this end, we develop and benchmark recently popular self-supervised pre-training methods, e.g., CL-based
MoCo-v3 (Chen et al., 2021a) and MIM-based MAE (He
et al., 2021), along with fully-supervised pre-training for
lightweight ViTs as the baselines on ImageNet and other
classification tasks, as well as some dense prediction tasks,
e.g., object detection and segmentation. We surprisingly
find that if proper pre-training is adopted, even vanilla
lightweight ViTs show comparable performance to previous SOTA networks with delicate design, e.g., we achieve
79.0% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with vanilla ViT-Tiny
(5.7M). The finding is intriguing since the result indicates
that proper pre-training could bridge the performance gap
between naive network architectures and delicately designed
ones to a great extent, while naive architectures usually have

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has shown great progress
in representation learning without heavy reliance on expen1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence
Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 Megvii Research 4 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Informatics for Safety & Emergency of Zhejiang Province, Wenzhou University 5 School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University. Correspondence to: Jin Gao
<jin.gao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

