Adversarially Robust PAC Learnability of Real-Valued Functions

Idan Attias 1 Steve Hanneke 2

Abstract

ing binary function classes was studied by Montasser et al.
(2019). They showed that uniform convergence does not
hold in this setting, and as a result, robust empirical risk
minimization is not sufficient to ensure learnability. Yet,
they showed that VC classes are learnable, by considering
an improper learning rule; the learning algorithm outputs
a function that is not in the function class that we aim to
learn.

We study robustness to test-time adversarial attacks in the regression setting with ℓp losses and
arbitrary perturbation sets. We address the question of which function classes are PAC learnable
in this setting. We show that classes of finite fatshattering dimension are learnable in both realizable and agnostic settings. Moreover, for convex
function classes, they are even properly learnable.
In contrast, some non-convex function classes
provably require improper learning algorithms.
Our main technique is based on a construction
of an adversarially robust sample compression
scheme of a size determined by the fat-shattering
dimension. Along the way, we introduce a novel
agnostic sample compression scheme for realvalued functions, which may be of independent
interest.

In this work, we provide a theoretical understanding of the
robustness of real-valued predictors in the PAC learning
model, with arbitrary perturbation sets. The work of Attias
et al. (2019) considered this question for finite perturbation
sets, they obtained sample complexity guarantees based on
uniform convergence, which is no longer true for arbitrary
perturbation sets. We address the fundamental question,
which real-valued function classes are robustly learnable?
Furthermore, we study the robust learnability of convex
classes, a natural and commonly studied subcategory for
regression. We address the question, are real-valued convex classes properly robustly learnable? On the one hand,
some non-convex function classes provably require improper learning due to Montasser et al. (2019). On the other
hand, Mendelson (2019) showed that non-robust regression
with the mean squared error is properly learnable.

1. Introduction
Learning a predictor that is resilient to test-time adversarial
attacks is a fundamental problem in contemporary machine
learning. A long line of research has studied the vulnerability of deep learning-based models to small perturbations of
their inputs (e.g., Szegedy et al. (2013); Biggio et al. (2013);
Goodfellow et al. (2014); Madry et al. (2017)). From the
theoretical standpoint, there has been a lot of effort to provide provable guarantees of such methods (e.g., Feige et al.
(2015); Schmidt et al. (2018); Khim & Loh (2018); Yin et al.
(2019); Cullina et al. (2018); Attias et al. (2019; 2022); Montasser et al. (2021b; 2020a;b; 2021a); Ashtiani et al. (2020);
Dan et al. (2020); Awasthi et al. (2020; 2021b;a; 2022a;b;
2023); Bhattacharjee et al. (2021); Xing et al. (2021); Mao
et al. (2023)), which is the focus of this work.

We study the following learning models for real-valued functions. An adversarial attack is formalized by a perturbation
function U : X → 2X , where U(x) is the set of possible
perturbations (attacks) on x. In practice, we usually consider U(x) to be the ℓ1 ball centered at x. In this work, we
have no restriction on U, besides x ∈ U(x). Let D be an
unknown distribution over X × [0, 1] and let H ⊆ [0, 1]X
be a concept class. In our first model, the robust error of
concept h is defined as
"
#
Errℓp (h; D) = E(x,y)∼D

p

sup |h(z) − y|

, 1 ≤ p < ∞.

In the robust PAC learning framework, the problem of learn-

z∈U (x)

1
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University,
Israel 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA.
Correspondence to: Idan Attias <idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il>, Steve
Hanneke <steve.hanneke@gmail.com>.

The learner gets an i.i.d. sample from D, and would like to
output function ĥ, such that with high probability,
Errℓp (ĥ; D) ≤ inf Errℓp (h; D) + ϵ.
h∈H

(1)

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The sample complexity for learning H is the minimal i.i.d.
sample from D such that there exists a learning algorithm
1

