On the Training Instability of Shuffling SGD with Batch Normalization

David X. Wu 1 Chulhee Yun 2 Suvrit Sra 3

Abstract

without-replacement sampling, leading to two main variants of SGD: single-shuffle (SS) and random-reshuffle. SS
randomly samples and fixes a permutation at the beginning
of training, while RR randomly resamples permutations at
each epoch. These shuffling algorithms are often more practical and can have improved convergence rates (Haochen &
Sra, 2019; Safran & Shamir, 2020; Yun et al., 2021b; 2022;
Cho & Yun, 2023; Cha et al., 2023).

We uncover how SGD interacts with batch normalization and can exhibit undesirable training
dynamics such as divergence. More precisely,
we study how Single Shuffle (SS) and Random
Reshuffle (RR)—two widely used variants of
SGD—interact surprisingly differently in the presence of batch normalization: RR leads to much
more stable evolution of training loss than SS.
As a concrete example, for regression using a
linear network with batch normalized inputs, we
prove that SS and RR converge to distinct global
optima that are “distorted” away from gradient
descent. Thereafter, for classification we characterize conditions under which training divergence
for SS and RR can, and cannot occur. We present
explicit constructions to show how SS leads to
distorted optima in regression and divergence for
classification, whereas RR avoids both distortion
and divergence. We validate our results empirically in realistic settings, and conclude that the
separation between SS and RR used with batch
normalization is relevant in practice.

Architecture design offers another avenue for practitioners
to train networks more efficiently and encode salient inductive biases. Normalizing layers such as BatchNorm (BN)
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016), or InstanceNorm (Ulyanov et al., 2016) are often used with SGD
to accelerate convergence and stabilize training. Recent
work studies how these scale-invariant layers affect training
through the effective learning rate (Li & Arora, 2019; Li
et al., 2020; Wan et al., 2021; Lyu et al., 2022).
Motivated by these practical choices, we study how SS and
RR interact with batch normalization at training time. Our
experiments (Fig. 1) suggest that combining SS and BN can
lead to surprising and undesirable training phenomena:
(i) The training risk often diverges when using SS+BN
to train linear networks (i.e. without nonlinear activations) on real datasets (see Figure 1a), while using SS
without BN does not cause divergence (see Figure 10).

1. Introduction

(ii) Divergence persists after tuning the learning rate and
other hyperparameters (Section 4.3) and also manifests
more quickly in deeper linear networks (Figure 1a).

Recent work in deep learning theory attempts to uncover
how the choice of optimization algorithm and architecture
influence training stability and efficiency. On the optimization front, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the de facto
workhorse, and its importance has correspondingly led to
the development of many different variants that aim to increase the ease and speed of training, such as AdaGrad
(Duchi et al., 2011) and Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014).

(iii) SS+BN usually converges slower than RR+BN in nonlinear architectures such as ResNet18 (see Figure 1b).
1.1. Summary of our contributions
In light of these experimental findings, we seek to develop a
theoretical and experimental understanding of how shuffling
SGD and BN collude to create divergence and other undesirable training behavior. Since these phenomena manifest
themselves on the training risk, our results are not strictly
coupled with generalization.

In reality, practitioners often do not use with-replacement
sampling of gradients as required by SGD. Instead they use
1
Department of EECS, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 2 Kim
Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, Korea 3 Department
of EECS, LIDS, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
David X. Wu <david wu@berkeley.edu>.

Put simply, the aberrant training dynamics stem from BN
not being permutation invariant across epochs. This simple
property interacts with SS undesirably, although a priori
it is not obvious whether it should. More concretely, one
expects SGD+BN to optimize the gradient descent (GD)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

