Infinite Action Contextual Bandits with Reusable Data Exhaust
Mark Rucker 1 Yinglun Zhu 2 Paul Mineiro 3

Abstract

In this paper, we describe an alternative approach to infinite action spaces which not only enjoys similar smooth
regret guarantee (and empirical performance), but also utilizes sampling distributions with well defined importanceweights. In exchange, we pay an increased computational
cost. However, the computational cost only scales with the
smoothness of the regret guarantee, rather than the cardinality or dimensionality of the action space per se. Furthermore
the new approach does not require an arg min oracle, which
plays a critical role in the work of Zhu & Mineiro (2022).

For infinite action contextual bandits, smoothed
regret and reduction to regression results in stateof-the-art online performance with computational
cost independent of the action set: unfortunately,
the resulting data exhaust does not have welldefined importance-weights. This frustrates the
execution of downstream data science processes
such as offline model selection. In this paper we
describe an online algorithm with an equivalent
smoothed regret guarantee, but which generates
well-defined importance weights: in exchange,
the online computational cost increases, but only
to order smoothness (i.e., still independent of the
action set). This removes a key obstacle to adoption of smoothed regret in production scenarios.

Contributions. We highlight our main contributions:
1. In Section 3.2, we present CappedIGW, an algorithm
that achieves near-optimal smooth regret guarantees
with (i) a sampling distribution that generates reusable
data exhaust, and (ii) no dependence on an expansive
arg min oracle (which is used by previous algorithms).

1. Introduction

2. In Section 3.3, we develop algorithms to efficiently
implement the algorithm CappedIGW. Our computational complexity only scales with the smoothness
parameter, but otherwise has no explicit dependence
on the cardinality or dimensionality of the action space.
Our implementation leverages techniques from betting
martingales (Waudby-Smith & Ramdas, 2020) and is
of independent interest for Monte-Carlo integration.

Those who ignore history are doomed to repeat it. A modern
variant of this truth arises in controlled experimentation platforms, where offline procedures are a critical complement
to online tests, e.g., supporting counterfactual evaluation
strategies (Agarwal et al., 2016), offline model selection (Li
et al., 2015), and prioritization of scarce online experimental
resources (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). Consequently, the
utility of a learning algorithm is not solely determined by
online performance, but also by the post-hoc utility of the
data exhaust.

In Section 4, we provide experimental demonstrations exhibiting a combination of equivalent online performance to
Zhu & Mineiro (2022) and superior offline utility.

The recent contribution of Zhu & Mineiro (2022) exemplifies this: an online contextual bandit algorithm for infinite
action spaces with O(1) space and time complexity with
respect to the action set. Unfortunately, this performance
is achieved by sampling from a distribution which is not
absolutely continuous with the reference measure. Therefore, a variety of post-hoc evaluation procedures that rely on
importance-weighting cannot be applied, limiting adoption.

2. Problem Setting
Unfortunately several unusual aspects of our approach demand a tedious exposition: we operate via reduction to regression; we use a nonstandard (smoothed) regret criterion;
and our computational complexity claims require careful
specification of oracles in the infinite action setting. The
impatient reader can skip directly to Section 3 and use this
section as reference.

1

University of Virginia 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison
Microsoft Research NYC. Correspondence to: Mark Rucker
<mr2an@virginia.edu>.
3

Notation. For functions f, g : Z → R+ , we write f =
O(g) (resp. f = Ω(g)) if there exists a constant C > 0 such
that f (z) ≤ Cg(z) (resp. f (z) ≥ Cg(z)) for all z ∈ Z.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

