Understanding Oversquashing in GNNs through the Lens of Effective Resistance

Mitchell Black 1 Zhengchao Wan 2 Amir Nayyeri 1 Yusu Wang 2

Abstract

information will be aggregated. When the number of layers is too small, the message passing will only be done
locally, and the GNN will not be able to capture information from nodes outside this neighborhood. This problem
is known as underreaching. On the other hand, choosing
a large number of layers can lead to oversmoothing, where
node features might be smoothed out and become indistinguishable (Cai & Wang, 2020; Oono & Suzuki, 2020). A
third issue is oversquashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021), where as
larger neighborhoods are considered, information from longrange interactions passing through certain bottlenecks of the
graph will have negligible impact on the training of GNNs.
This behaviour was named oversquashing as information
from potentially exponentially many (with respect to the
number of layers) nodes will be squashed into fixed-sized
node vectors.

Message passing graph neural networks (GNNs)
are a popular learning architectures for graphstructured data. However, one problem GNNs experience is oversquashing, where a GNN has difficulty sending information between distant nodes.
Understanding and mitigating oversquashing has
recently received significant attention from the research community. In this paper, we continue this
line of work by analyzing oversquashing through
the lens of the effective resistance between nodes
in the input graph. Effective resistance intuitively
captures the “strength” of connection between
two nodes by paths in the graph, and has a rich
literature spanning many areas of graph theory.
We propose to use total effective resistance as a
bound of the total amount of oversquashing in a
graph and provide theoretical justification for its
use. We further develop an algorithm to identify
edges to be added to an input graph to minimize
the total effective resistance, thereby alleviating
oversquashing. We provide empirical evidence
of the effectiveness of our total effective resistance based rewiring strategies for improving the
performance of GNNs.

Understanding when oversquashing occurs is an active area
of research. Recently, oversquashing has been analyzed
using different techniques such as graph curvature (Topping
et al., 2021) and information theory (Banerjee et al., 2022).
Moreover, various rewiring techniques have been proposed
to alleviate oversquashing, where edges are added or removed or edge weights are changed to decrease bottlenecks
in the graph before applying GNNs (Arnaiz-Rodrı́guez et al.,
2022; Deac et al., 2022; Karhadkar et al., 2022; Topping
et al., 2021).
In this paper, we propose to analyze oversquashing through
the lens of effective resistance. The concept of effective resistance originates from Electrical Engineering (Kirchhoff,
1847), where the effective resistance between two nodes u
and v in an electrical network is the difference in voltage
between u and v when a unit of current is inserted at u and
removed at v. Since then, effective resistance has taken
on a new life in Graph Theory, where effective resistance
has been shown to be tied to many properties of the graph
underlying the electrical network (Doyle & Snell, 1984;
Lyons & Peres, 2017). For example, the effective resistance
between a pair of vertices is proportional to the commute
time between two vertices—the expected number of steps in
a random walk from one vertex to the other and back (Chandra et al., 1996). The effective resistance between the end
points of an edge is proportional to the probability of the
edge being included in a random spanning tree of the graph
(Biggs, 1997). Furthermore, effective resistance is closely

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are powerful tools for graph
learning and optimization tasks (Scarselli et al., 2008). One
major framework for GNNs is message passing, where node
and edge features are repeatedly aggregated locally through
node neighborhoods. While it has proven successful, message passing also suffers from several problem related to
the topology of the graph. The number of layers of a GNN
defines the radius of the neighborhood of a node from which
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA 2 Halıcıoǧlu Data
Science Institute, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA. Correspondence to: Mitchell Black <blackmit@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

