Cluster Explanation via Polyhedral Descriptions

Connor Lawless * 1 Oktay Günlük * 1

Abstract

into groups (Xu & Wunsch, 2005). Clustering is often used
in industry as a tool to find sub-populations in a dataset such
as customer segments (Kansal et al., 2018), different media
genres (Daudpota et al., 2019), or even patient subgroups in
clinical studies (Wang et al., 2020). In these settings, practitioners often care less about the actual cluster assignments
(i.e. which user is in which group) but rather a description
of the groups found (i.e. a segment of users that consistently
buy certain kinds of products). Unfortunately, many clustering algorithms only output cluster assignments, forcing
users to work backwards to construct cluster descriptions.

This paper focuses on the cluster description problem where, given a dataset and its partition into
clusters, the task is to explain the clusters. We introduce a new approach to explain clusters by constructing a polyhedron around each cluster while
minimizing either the complexity of the resulting
polyhedra or the number of features used in the
description. We formulate the cluster description
problem as an integer program and present a column generation approach to search over an exponential number of candidate half-spaces that can
be used to build the polyhedra. To deal with large
datasets, we introduce a novel grouping scheme
that first forms smaller groups of data points and
then builds the polyhedra around the grouped data,
a strategy which out-performs the common approach of sub-sampling data. Compared to state
of the art cluster description algorithms, our approach is able to achieve competitive interpretability with improved description accuracy.

This paper focuses on the cluster description problem, where
a fixed clustering partition of a set of data points with real or
integer coordinates is given and the goal is to find a compact
description of the clusters. This problem occurs naturally
in a number of settings where a clustering has already been
performed either by a black-box system, or on unseen or
complex data (for example a graph structure) and needs to
be subsequently explained using features that may not have
even been used in the initial cluster assignment.
In this paper we introduce a new method for cluster description that treats each data point as a vector in Rn and works
by constructing a polyhedron around each cluster to act as
its explanation, henceforth referred to as polyhedral descriptions. Each polyhedron is obtained by intersecting a (small)
number of half spaces. We measure the interpretability of
these polyhedra using two different notions: complexity,
which is defined to be the number of half-spaces used plus
the sum of the number of nonzero coefficients used to define each half-space, or sparsity, which is defined to be the
number of features used across all half-spaces defining the
polyhedra. If the convex hulls of the data points in each
cluster do not intersect, then the half spaces defining the
convex hull of the points in a cluster gives a polyhedral
description for the cluster. However, such polyhedra may
not have desirable interpretability characteristics as it might
require a large number of half-spaces or involve many features. In this case a simpler explanation with some error
might be more desirable. Furthermore, if the convex hulls of
the clusters intersect then no error-free polyhedral description exists. Figures 1 and 2 show examples of the polyhedra
associated with both cases.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is becoming an omnipresent aspect
of the digital world. While ML systems are increasingly automating tasks such as image tagging or recommendations,
there is increasing demand to use them as decision support
tools in a number of settings such as criminal justice (Rudin
& Ustun, 2018; Završnik, 2021; Berk, 2012), medicine (Rajkomar et al., 2019; Ustun & Rudin, 2016; Varol et al., 2017),
and marketing (Ma & Sun, 2020; Hair Jr & Sarstedt, 2021;
Dzyabura & Yoganarasimhan, 2018). Thus it is becoming
increasingly critical that human users leveraging these ML
tools understand and critique the outputs of the ML models
to trust and act upon the recommendations. This is especially true for clustering, an unsupervised machine learning
task, where a set of unlabelled data points are partitioned
*

Equal contribution 1 Operations Research and Information
Engineering, Cornell University, USA. Correspondence to: Connor
Lawless <cal379@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In our setting, the accuracy of a cluster explanation is mea-

1

