Adversarial robustness of amortized Bayesian inference

Manuel Gloeckler 1 Michael Deistler 1 Jakob H. Macke 1 2

Abstract

fore, require a new set of likelihood evaluations for each
observation. In contrast, the idea of amortized Bayesian
inference is to approximate the mapping from observation
to posterior distribution by a conditional density estimator,
often parameterized as a neural network. Once this density
estimation network has been trained, inference on a particular observation can be performed very efficiently, requiring
only a single forward-pass through the network. This amortization can be achieved by training conditional density estimators on simulated data and framing Bayesian inference
as a prediction problem: For any observation, the neural
network is trained to predict either the posterior directly
(Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Greenberg et al., 2019;
Gonçalves et al., 2020; Radev et al., 2020) or a quantity
that allows to infer the posterior without further simulations
(Papamakarios et al., 2019; Hermans et al., 2020). This
approach has several advantages over MCMC methods: It
can be used to perform ‘simulation-based inference’, i.e.,
applied to models which are only implicitly given as simulators (models which allow to sample the likelihood but
not to evaluate it), it does not require the model to be differentiable (as compared to, e.g., Hamiltonian Monte Carlo),
and it allows application in high-throughput scenarios (Dax
et al., 2021; von Krause et al., 2022; Boelts et al., 2022;
Arnst et al., 2022).

Bayesian inference usually requires running potentially costly inference procedures separately
for every new observation. In contrast, the idea of
amortized Bayesian inference is to initially invest
computational cost in training an inference network on simulated data, which can subsequently
be used to rapidly perform inference (i.e., to return
estimates of posterior distributions) for new observations. This approach has been applied to many
real-world models in the sciences and engineering,
but it is unclear how robust the approach is to adversarial perturbations in the observed data. Here,
we study the adversarial robustness of amortized
Bayesian inference, focusing on simulation-based
estimation of multi-dimensional posterior distributions. We show that almost unrecognizable, targeted perturbations of the observations can lead
to drastic changes in the predicted posterior and
highly unrealistic posterior predictive samples,
across several benchmark tasks and a real-world
example from neuroscience. We propose a computationally efficient regularization scheme based
on penalizing the Fisher information of the conditional density estimator, and show how it improves the adversarial robustness of amortized
Bayesian inference.

However, these benefits come at a cost: the posterior predicted by the neural network will not be exact (Lueckmann
et al., 2021), can be overconfident (Hermans et al., 2022),
and can be sensitive to misspecified models (Cannon et al.,
2022; Schmitt et al., 2022). Here, we study another possible limitation of neural network-based amortized Bayesian
inference: It is well known that neural networks can be
susceptible to adversarial attacks, i.e., tiny but targeted perturbations to the inputs can lead to vastly different outputs
(Szegedy et al., 2014). For amortized Bayesian inference,
this would indicate that even minor perturbations in the
observed data could lead to entirely different posterior estimates.

1. Introduction
Bayesian inference is a commonly used approach for identifying model parameters that are compatible with empirical
observations and prior knowledge. Classical Bayesian inference methods such as Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
can be computationally expensive at test-time, as they rely
on repeated evaluations of the likelihood function and, there1

Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen and
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Department Empirical Inference,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Manuel Gloeckler
<manuel.gloeckler@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Adversarial attacks have become a common technique to
evaluate the robustness of ML algorithms. Attacks can
be used to assess performance in the presence of small
worst-case perturbations, offering valuable insights into how
models perform when faced with model misspecification.
Furthermore, amortized inference is increasingly used in

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

