GFlowOut: Dropout with Generative Flow Networks

Dianbo Liu 1 2 Moksh Jain 1 3 Bonaventure F. P. Dossou 1 4 5 Qianli Shen 6 Salem Lahlou 1 3 Anirudh Goyal 7
Nikolay Malkin 1 3 Chris C. Emezue 1 8 Dinghuai Zhang 1 3
Nadhir Hassen 1 3 Xu Ji 1 3 Kenji Kawaguchi 6 Yoshua Bengio 1 3 9

1. Introduction

Abstract

A key shortcoming of modern deep neural networks is that
they are often overconfident about their predictions, especially when there is a distributional shift between train and
test dataset (Daxberger et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2015;
Guo et al., 2017). In risk-sensitive scenarios such as clinical practice and drug discovery, where mistakes can be
extremely costly, it is important that models provide predictions with reliable uncertainty estimates (Bhatt et al., 2021).
Bayesian inference offers principled tools to model the parameters of neural networks as random variables, placing
a prior on them and inferring their posterior given some
observed data (MacKay, 1992; Neal, 2012). The posterior
captures the uncertainty in the predictions of the model and
also serves as an effective regularization strategy resulting
in improved generalization (Wilson & Izmailov, 2020; Lotfi
et al., 2022). In practice, exact Bayesian inference is often
intractable and existing Bayesian deep learning methods
rely on assumptions that result in posteriors that are less
expressive and can provide poorly calibrated uncertainty
estimates (Ovadia et al., 2019; Fort et al., 2019; Foong et al.,
2020; Daxberger et al., 2021). In addition, even with several
approximations, Bayesian deep learning methods are often
significantly more computationally expensive and slower to
train compared to non-Bayesian methods (Kuleshov et al.,
2018; Boluki et al., 2020).

Bayesian inference offers principled tools to
tackle many critical problems with modern neural
networks such as poor calibration and generalization, and data inefficiency. However, scaling
Bayesian inference to large architectures is challenging and requires restrictive approximations.
Monte Carlo Dropout has been widely used as a
relatively cheap way to approximate inference and
estimate uncertainty with deep neural networks.
Traditionally, the dropout mask is sampled independently from a fixed distribution. Recent research shows that the dropout mask can be seen
as a latent variable, which can be inferred with
variational inference. These methods face two important challenges: (a) the posterior distribution
over masks can be highly multi-modal which can
be difficult to approximate with standard variational inference and (b) it is not trivial to fully
utilize sample-dependent information and correlation among dropout masks to improve posterior
estimation. In this work, we propose GFlowOut
to address these issues. GFlowOut leverages the
recently proposed probabilistic framework of Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) to learn the
posterior distribution over dropout masks. We
empirically demonstrate that GFlowOut results in
predictive distributions that generalize better to
out-of-distribution data and provide uncertainty
estimates which lead to better performance in
downstream tasks.

Gal and Ghahramani (2016) show that deep neural networks
with dropout perform approximate Bayesian inference and
approximate the posterior of a deep Gaussian process (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013). One can obtain samples from this
predictive distribution by taking multiple forward passes
through the neural network with independently sampled
dropout masks. Due to its simplicity and minimal computational overhead, dropout has since been used as a method to
estimate uncertainty and improve robustness in neural networks. Different variants of dropout have been proposed and
can be interpreted as different variational approximations to
model the posterior over the neural network parameters (Ba
& Frey, 2013; Kingma et al., 2015; Gal et al., 2017; Ghiasi
et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2021; Pham & Le, 2021).

1
Mila Quebec AI Institute 2 Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard 3 University of Montreal 4 McGill University 5 Lelapa
AI 6 National University of Singapore 7 Google DeepMind
8
Technical University of Munich 9 CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Dianbo Liu <dianbo.liu@mila.quebec>, Moksh Jain
<moksh.jain@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

There are a few major challenges in approximating the
1

