Learning to Initiate and Reason in Event-Driven Cascading Processes

Yuval Atzmon * 1 Eli A. Meirom * 1 Shie Mannor 1 2 Gal Chechik 1 3

Abstract

event that later enables other chemical reactions. Cascading processes are also prevalent in man-made systems: In
assembly lines, when one task is completed, e.g., construction of gears, it may trigger another task, e.g. building the
transmission system.

Training agents to control a dynamic environment
is a fundamental task in AI. In many environments, the dynamics can be summarized by a
small set of events that capture the semantic behavior of the system. Typically, these events form
chains or cascades. We often wish to change the
system behavior using a single intervention that
propagates through the cascade. For instance,
one may trigger a biochemical cascade to switch
the state of a cell or, in logistics, reroute a truck
to meet an unexpected, urgent delivery. We introduce a new supervised learning setup called
Cascade. An agent observes a system with known
dynamics evolving from some initial state. The
agent is given a structured semantic instruction
and needs to make an intervention that triggers a
cascade of events, such that the system reaches an
alternative (counterfactual) behavior. We provide
a test-bed for this problem, consisting of physical objects. We combine semantic tree search
with an event-driven forward model and devise
an algorithm that learns to efficiently search in exponentially large semantic trees. We demonstrate
that our approach learns to follow instructions to
intervene in new complex scenes. When provided
with an observed cascade of events, it can also
reason about alternative outcomes.

Cascading processes are abundant in many environments,
from natural processes like chemical reactions, through managing crisis situations for natural disasters (Zuccaro et al.,
2018; Nakano et al., 2022) to logistic chains or water treatment plants (Cong et al., 2010). A major goal with cascading
processes is to intervene and steer them towards a desired
goal. For example, in biochemical cascades, one tries to
control chemical cascades in a cell by providing chemical
signals; in logistics, a cargo dispatch plan may be completely modified by assigning a cargo plane to a different
location.
This paper addresses the problem of reasoning about a cascading process and controlling its qualitative behavior. We
describe a new counterfactual reasoning setup called “Cascade”, which is trained via supervised learning. At inference time, an agent observes a dynamical system, evolving
through a cascading process that was triggered from some
initial state. We refer to it as the “unsatisfied” or “observed”
cascade. The goal of the agent is to steer the system toward
a different, counterfactual, configuration. That target configuration is given as a set of qualitative constraints about the
end results and the intermediate properties of the cascade.
We call these constraints the “instruction”. To satisfy that
instruction, the agent may intervene with the system at a
single, specific point in time by changing the state of one
specific element (the “pivot”).

1. Introduction
Teaching agents to understand and control their dynamic
environments is a fundamental problem in AI. It becomes
extremely challenging when events trigger other events. We
denote such processes as cascading processes. As an example, consider a set of chemical reactions in a cellular
pathway. The synthesis of a new molecule is a discrete

To solve the Cascade learning problem, we train an agent
to select an intervention given a state of a system and an
instruction. Importantly, we operate in a counterfactual
setup (See Pearl, 2000). During training, the agent only
sees scenarios that are “satisfied”, in the sense that the system dynamics obey the constraints given in the instruction.
The reason is that in the real world it is not possible to
rewind time and simultaneously obtain both a satisfied and
an unsatisfied sequence of events.

*
Equal contribution 1 NVIDIA Research, Israel 2 Technion, Israel institute of technology 3 Bar Ilan University, Israel. Correspondence to: Yuval Atzmon <yatzmon@nvidia.com>, Eli Meirom
<emeirom@nvidia.com>.

Steering a cascading process is hard. In many cascading
processes, a slight change in one part of the system can
make a qualitative effect on the outcome. This may lead to

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

