Multi-Modal Classifiers for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection

Prannay Kaul 1 Weidi Xie 1 2 3 Andrew Zisserman 1
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/vgg/research/mm-ovod/
K Image exemplars of falcon

Abstract

Text Completion LLM
❆

The goal of this paper is open-vocabulary object
detection (OVOD) — building a model that can
detect objects beyond the set of categories seen
at training, thus enabling the user to specify categories of interest at inference without the need
for model retraining. We adopt a standard twostage object detector architecture, and explore
three ways for specifying novel categories: via
language descriptions, via image exemplars, or
via a combination of the two. We make three
contributions: first, we prompt a large language
model (LLM) to generate informative language
descriptions for object classes, and construct powerful text-based classifiers; second, we employ
a visual aggregator on image exemplars that can
ingest any number of images as input, forming
vision-based classifiers; and third, we provide
a simple method to fuse information from language descriptions and image exemplars, yielding a multi-modal classifier. When evaluating
on the challenging LVIS open-vocabulary benchmark we demonstrate that: (i) our text-based classifiers outperform all previous OVOD works; (ii)
our vision-based classifiers perform as well as
text-based classifiers in prior work; (iii) using
multi-modal classifiers perform better than either
modality alone; and finally, (iv) our text-based and
multi-modal classifiers yield better performance
than a fully-supervised detector.

A falcon is
a bird of
prey with a
hooked beak
and sharp
talons.

Visual Encoder
❆

A falcon
A falcon is a
usually has a medium-sized bird
dark upper
of prey with a
body and light long tail, pointed
coloured
wings, and a
hooked beak.
underside.

Text Encoder
❆
Visual Aggregator
Vector Mean Operator

+

Vision-based Classifier

Text-based Classifier

Multi-Modal
Classifier

Test Image

Correct falcon detection

OpenVocabulary
Detector

Multi-Modal Classifier used for OVD

Figure 1. Overview of the architecture for generating text-based,
vision-based, or multi-modal classifiers for OVOD. Vision (top
left): A frozen visual encoder ingests image exemplars of falcon
producing an embedding per exemplar. A trained aggregator takes
these embeddings as input and produces a vision-based classifier.
Text (top right): A text completion LLM is prompted to give descriptions of a falcon which are then encoded by a text encoder and
averaged yielding a text-based classifier. Multi-Modal (middle):
Multi-Modal classifiers are generated by adding the vision-based
and text-based classifiers together. OVOD (bottom): The multimodal classifier is used to detect the falcon in a standard model.
Note, all three types of classifier: vision-based, text-based and
multi-modal, can be used on the detector head for OVOD.

tive of online inference, when users want to freely specify
categories of interest at inference time without the need or
ability to re-train models. To specify categories of interest,
three obvious ways exist, namely: (1) text-based, e.g. name
the category or describe it in text form; (2) vision-based,
e.g. give image examples; (3) multi-modal, e.g. indicate the
category jointly with text and image.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of open-vocabulary
object detection (OVOD), which aims to localise and classify visual objects beyond the categories seen at training
time. One may consider its usefulness from the perspec1

What does a falcon look like?

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford 2 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai AI Lab. Correspondence to:
Prannay Kaul <prannay@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Existing works (Bansal et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2022; Zareian
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2022) have explored replacing the learnt classifiers in a traditional detector
with text embeddings, that are computed by passing the class
name into a pre-trained text encoder with manual prompts,
such as “a photo of a dalmatian”, however, this design can

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

