Gradient Descent Finds the Global Optima of Two-Layer
Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Yihang Gao 1 Yiqi Gu 2 Michael K. Ng 1

Abstract

where u is the unknown solution; D and B are differential
operators in the interior and on the boundary respectively;
f and g are given smooth functions; Γ is an open bounded
domain of our interest and ∂Γ is its boundary. In PINNs, we
adopt a neural network ϕ(x; w) parameterized by w, as a
surrogate to the solution u(x), and then solve the following
optimization problem

The main aim of this paper is to conduct the convergence analysis of the gradient descent for twolayer physics-informed neural networks (PINNs).
Here, the loss function involves derivatives of neural network outputs with respect to its inputs, so
the interaction between the trainable parameters
is more complicated compared with simple regression and classification tasks. We first develop the
positive definiteness of Gram matrices and prove
that the gradient flow finds the global optima of
the empirical loss under over-parameterization.
Then, we demonstrate that the standard gradient descent converges to the global optima of the
loss with proper choices of learning rates. The
framework of our analysis works for various categories of PDEs (e.g., linear second-order PDEs)
and common types of network initialization (LecunUniform etc.). Our theoretical results do not
need a very strict hypothesis for training samples
and have a looser requirement on the network
width compared with some previous works.

n

1
1 X
1
2
|D[ϕ(xp ; w), xp ] − f (xp )|
w n1
2
p=1

min

n

2
1 X
1
2
+ν·
|B[ϕ(x̃k ; w), x̃k ] − g(x̃k )| ,
n2
2

(2)

k=1

where ν is the hyperparameter to balance the interior and
boundary conditions; n1 and n2 are numbers of samples in
1
the interior and on the boundary, respective; {xp }np=1
and
n2
{x̃k }k=1 are the training datasets sampled from Γ and ∂Γ,
respectively. We aim to find the optimal neural network
ϕ(x; w) as an approximate solution by solving (2). Raissi
et al. (Raissi et al., 2019) recommended using L-BFGS
(Liu & Nocedal, 1989), which is a quasi-Newton method.
However, first-order methods (i.e., gradient descent and
its variants) are more popular and perform really well in
implementations, see for instance (Gu et al., 2021; Cai et al.,
2021; Meng et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2020).

1. Introduction

Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Sichuan 611731, China. Correspondence to: Michael K. Ng
<mng@maths.hku.hk>.

Numerical examples of PINNs can be widely found in recent literature, including linear elliptic/parabolic/hyperbolic
equations (Gu et al., 2021), Schrodinger equation (Raissi
et al., 2019), Allen–Cahn equation (Raissi et al., 2019),
compressible/incompressible flows (Cai et al., 2022; Mao
et al., 2020), Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation (Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018), Burgers’ equation (Sirignano
& Spiliopoulos, 2018), etc. Although losses as small as
O(10−4 ) can be achieved in these experiments, optimization
errors caused by the algorithms prevent the losses from being reduced to the machine precision. In theory, however, it
is conjectured that the training loss of PINNs can be reduced
to zero by gradient descent under the over-parameterization
setting.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Existing analysis of the gradient descent usually depends
on the smoothness (Carmon et al., 2018; Li & Orabona,
2019), the Lipschitzness of the Hessian (Carmon et al., 2018;

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have attracted
significant attention in solving high-dimensional and nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) due to their evasion
of the curse of dimensionality and friendly implementation
(Raissi et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2022). For
a given PDE
D[u, x] = f (x),

x ∈ Γ ⊂ Rd ,

B[u, x] = g(x),

x ∈ ∂Γ,

(1)

1

1

