A Deep Conjugate Direction Method for Iteratively Solving Linear Systems

Ayano Kaneda* 1 Osman Akar* 2 Jingyu Chen 2 Victoria Alicia Trevino Kala 2 David Hyde 3 Joseph Teran 4

Abstract

from these diverse applications, we use the notation
Ax = b,

We present a novel deep learning approach to approximate the solution of large, sparse, symmetric,
positive-definite linear systems of equations. Motivated by the conjugate gradients algorithm that
iteratively selects search directions for minimizing the matrix norm of the approximation error,
we design an approach that utilizes a deep neural
network to accelerate convergence via data-driven
improvement of the search direction at each iteration. Our method leverages a carefully chosen
convolutional network to approximate the action
of the inverse of the linear operator up to an arbitrary constant. We demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach on spatially discretized Poisson equations, which arise in computational fluid dynamics
applications, with millions of degrees of freedom.
Unlike state-of-the-art learning approaches, our
algorithm is capable of reducing the linear system residual to a given tolerance in a small number of iterations, independent of the problem size.
Moreover, our method generalizes effectively to
various systems beyond those encountered during
training.

(1)

where the dimension n of the matrix A ∈ Rn×n and the
vector b ∈ Rn correlates with spatial fidelity of the computational domain. Quality and realism of a simulation are
proportional to this spatial fidelity; typical modern applications of numerical PDEs require solving linear systems
with millions of unknowns. In such applications, numerical approximation to the solution of these linear systems
is typically the bottleneck in overall performance; accordingly, practitioners have spent decades devising specialized
algorithms for their efficient solution (Golub & Loan, 2012;
Saad, 2003).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Physics, Waseda
University, Tokyo, Japan 2 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA 4 Department of
Mathematics, University of California, Davis, USA. Correspondence to: Ayano Kaneda <dizzy-miss-lizzy@moegi.waseda.jp>.

The appropriate numerical linear algebra technique depends
on the nature of the problem. Direct solvers that utilize
matrix factorizations (QR, Cholesky, etc. (Trefethen & Bau,
1997)) have optimal approximation error, but their computational cost is O(n3 ), and they typically require dense
storage, even for sparse A. Although Fast Fourier Transforms (Nussbaumer, 1981) can be used in limited instances
(periodic boundary conditions, etc.), iterative techniques
are most commonly adopted for sparse systems, which are
typical for discretized PDEs. Many applications with strict
performance constraints (e.g., real-time fluid simulation) utilize basic iterations (Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel, successive over
relaxation (SOR), etc.) given limited computational budget
(Saad, 2003). However, large approximation errors must
be tolerated since iteration counts are limited by the performance constraints. This is particularly problematic since the
wide elliptic spectrum of these matrices (a condition that
worsens with increased spatial fidelity/matrix dimension)
leads to poor conditioning and iteration counts. Iterative
techniques can achieve sub-quadratic convergence if their
iteration count does not grow excessively with problem
size n since each iteration generally requires O(n) floating
point operations for sparse matrices. Discrete elliptic operators are typically symmetric positive (semi) definite, which
means that the preconditioned conjugate gradients method
(PCG) can be used to minimize iteration counts (Saad, 2003;
Hestenes & Stiefel, 1952; Stiefel, 1952).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In the present work, we consider sparse linear systems that
arise from discrete Poisson equations in incompressible flow
applications (Chorin, 1967; Fedkiw et al., 2001; Bridson,

1. Introduction
The solution of large, sparse systems of linear equations is
ubiquitous when partial differential equations (PDEs) are
discretized to computationally simulate complex natural
phenomena such as fluid flow (Losasso et al., 2006), thermodynamics (Chen et al., 2021), or mechanical fracture
(Paluszny & Zimmerman, 2011). For linear systems arising

1

