Geometric Autoencoders – What You See is What You Decode
Philipp Nazari 1 Sebastian Damrich 1 2 Fred A. Hamprecht 1

Abstract

great unfolding power, at the expense of rendering global
structure faithfully (see Figure 1a).

Visualization is a crucial step in exploratory data
analysis. One possible approach is to train an
autoencoder with low-dimensional latent space.
Large network depth and width can help unfolding the data. However, such expressive networks
can achieve low reconstruction error even when
the latent representation is distorted. To avoid
such misleading visualizations, we propose first a
differential geometric perspective on the decoder,
leading to insightful diagnostics for an embedding’s distortion, and second a new regularizer
mitigating such distortion. Our “Geometric Autoencoder” avoids stretching the embedding spuriously, so that the visualization captures the data
structure more faithfully. It also flags areas where
little distortion could not be achieved, thus guarding against misinterpretation.

In contrast to standard UMAP and t-SNE, autoencoders (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006) find representations
that afford approximate reconstruction of the original, highdimensional dataset. They also allow the embedding of
additional measurements after training. If the autoencoder
is linear, it reduces to PCA (Pearson, 1901; Kramer, 1991;
Plaut, 2018), see also Appendix B.1. Non-linear autoencoders have much greater representational power. In Figure 1a we show that autoencoders can produce meaningful
maps of the globe where PCA (projecting New Zealand onto
Italy) and t-SNE (distorting land mass beyond recognition)
both fail.
While non-linearity enables autoencoders to unfold the data,
it can also hinder the interpretability of an autoencoder’s
latent representation. Powerful encoders can introduce distortions that equally powerful decoders can resolve, leaving
the reconstruction loss unaffected. The result is a misleading embedding with near perfect reconstruction, subverting
the idea that a 2D latent space forces only the most salient
features to be visualized. In deep networks this defect can
be amplified to the point that even a simple dataset, such
as the Earth dataset (see Appendix D.1) in Figure 1a, can
become hardly recognizable. In the vanilla autoencoder’s
embedding, South and North America each seem to be bigger than Eurasia and Africa combined. Nevertheless, the
autoencoder achieves low reconstruction loss, because the
decoder contracts the Americas while expanding the rest of
the world, so that the reconstruction accurately reflects the
continents’ actual sizes.

1. Introduction
The acquisition of larger and more complex datasets – with
a dimensionality of a few thousand, for example in bioinformatics (Zheng et al., 2017; Zilionis et al., 2019; Packer
et al., 2019) – has boosted the development of recent machine learning algorithms. While such high dimensionality
allows for encoding an increasing amount of information, it
also makes human interpretation more difficult. A common
method for exploring high-dimensional datasets is two- or
three-dimensional visualization.
Today’s state-of-the-art algorithms for dimensionality reduction are UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018; Damrich & Hamprecht, 2021) and t-SNE (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008;
van der Maaten, 2014; Kobak & Berens, 2019). Both UMAP
and t-SNE tend to preserve local structure, which gives them

We take an intuitive geometric approach to different methods
of measuring how encoder and decoder introduce distortion
in the embedding, which assist the practitioner in understanding a given embedding. To make sure that what we see
in the embedding is closer to what the decoder reconstructs,
and thus to the structure of the dataset, we propose taming
the decoder’s geometric properties by constructing a regularizer that pushes the decoder towards being area-preserving.
This approach is similar to the one in Lee et al. (2022) which
encourages the decoder to be a scaled isometry – a more
restrictive property than area-preservation.

1

HCI/IWR at University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany 2 University of Tübingen, 72074 Tübingen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Philipp Nazari <philipp.nazari@gmail.com>,
Sebastian Damrich <sebastian.damrich@uni-tuebingen.de>, Fred
Hamprecht <fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The decoder maps the low-dimensional latent space to the
1

