Polynomial Preconditioning for Gradient Methods

Nikita Doikov 1 Anton Rodomanov 2

Abstract

the new system. Some notable examples include Jacobi or
the diagonal preconditioners, symmetric successive overrelaxation, the incomplete Cholesky factorization (Golub
& Van Loan, 2013), Laplacian preconditioning for graph
problems (Vaidya, 1991; Spielman & Teng, 2004), preconditioners for discretizations of system of partial differential
equations (Mardal & Winther, 2011).

We study first-order methods with preconditioning for solving structured nonlinear convex optimization problems. We propose a new family
of preconditioners generated by symmetric polynomials. They provide first-order optimization
methods with a provable improvement of the condition number, cutting the gaps between highest
eigenvalues, without explicit knowledge of the actual spectrum. We give a stochastic interpretation
of this preconditioning in terms of coordinate volume sampling and compare it with other classical
approaches, including the Chebyshev polynomials. We show how to incorporate a polynomial
preconditioning into the Gradient and Fast Gradient Methods and establish the corresponding
global complexity bounds. Finally, we propose
a simple adaptive search procedure that automatically chooses the best possible polynomial preconditioning for the Gradient Method, minimizing the objective along a low-dimensional Krylov
subspace. Numerical experiments confirm the
efficiency of our preconditioning strategies for
solving various machine learning problems.

Another important class of numerical algorithms are the
second-order methods or Newton’s Method (see, e.g. (Nesterov, 2018)), that aims to solve difficult ill-conditioned
problems by using local curvature information (the Hessian
matrix) as a preconditioner at every step. However, being
a powerful algorithm, each iteration of Newton’s Method
is very expensive. It requires to solve a system of linear
equations with the Hessian matrix, and in case of quadratic
objective it is equivalent to solving the original problem.
In this paper, our goal is to solve a general nonlinear optimization problem with a structured convex objective by
the efficient first-order methods. Thus, in the case of unconstrained minimization of a smooth function: minx f (x),
the simplest method that we study is as follows, for k ≥ 0:
xk+1

=

xk − αk P ∇f (xk ),

(1)

where αk > 0 is a stepsize and P is a fixed preconditioning matrix. P := I corresponds to the classical gradient
descent. Another natural choice is P := B −1 , where B is
a curvature matrix of our problem1 , which is directly available for the algorithm. That resembles the Newton-type
direction, and the method with this preconditioner tends to
converge much faster in practice (see Figure 1). However,
computing B −1 (or solving the corresponding linear system with B) is a very expensive operation in the large scale
setting.

1. Introduction
Motivation. Preconditioning is an important tool for improving the performance of numerical algorithms. The classical example is the preconditioned Conjugate Gradient
Method (Hestenes & Stiefel, 1952) for solving a system of
linear equations. It proposes to modify the initial system
in a way to improve its eigenvalue distribution and thus to
accelerate the convergence of the method. The question of
choosing the right preconditioner heavily depends on the
problem structure, and there exist many problem-specific
recommendations which provide us with a good trade-off
between computational cost and the spectrum properties of

Instead of using B −1 , we propose a new family of Symmetric Polynomial Preconditioners, that provably improve the
spectrum of the objective. The first member of our family is
P

1

EPFL, Switzerland 2 UCLouvain, Belgium. Correspondence
to: Nikita Doikov <nikita.doikov@epfl.ch>, Anton Rodomanov
<anton.rodomanov@uclouvain.be>.

:=

tr (B)I − B.

(2)

We prove that using preconditioner (2) within method (1),
makes the condition number insensitive to the gap between

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
See the definition of B in our Assumption 2.1 and the corresponding Examples 2.2, 2.3, 2.4 of different problems.

1

