Total Variation Graph Neural Networks

Jonas Berg Hansen * 1 Filippo Maria Bianchi * 1 2

Abstract
Recently proposed Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) for vertex clustering are trained with an
unsupervised minimum cut objective, approximated by a Spectral Clustering (SC) relaxation.
However, the SC relaxation is loose and, while it
offers a closed-form solution, it also yields overly
smooth cluster assignments that poorly separate
the vertices. In this paper, we propose a GNN
model that computes cluster assignments by optimizing a tighter relaxation of the minimum cut
based on graph total variation (GTV). The cluster assignments can be used directly to perform
vertex clustering or to implement graph pooling
in a graph classification framework. Our model
consists of two core components: i) a messagepassing layer that minimizes the ℓ1 distance in
the features of adjacent vertices, which is key to
achieving sharp transitions between clusters; ii)
an unsupervised loss function that minimizes the
GTV of the cluster assignments while ensuring
balanced partitions. Experimental results show
that our model outperforms other GNNs for vertex
clustering and graph classification.

Features-only

Topology-only

Features + Topology

(a)
0.8 0.2
1

0

0.8 0.2
1

0.6 0.4

0.4 0.6

0.2 0.8

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

Smooth assignment

Sharp assignment

(b)

Figure 1: a) Most clustering methods partition the data only based
on the features (■). SC partitions the vertices of the graph based
on its topology (■). GNNs account both for the vertex features
and the graph topology(■). b) Difference between smooth and
sharp cluster assignments. Especially at the edge of a cluster, the
smooth assignments give large weights to more than one cluster.

both the relationships among samples and their features.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are deep learning architectures specifically designed to process and make inference
on such data (Hamilton, 2020). Therefore, contrarily to
traditional clustering methods, a GNN-based approach for
clustering can account for both the features and the relationships among samples to generate partitions (see Fig.1a).

1. Introduction
Traditional clustering techniques partition samples based
on their features or on suitable data representations computed, for example, with deep learning models (Tian et al.,
2014; Min et al., 2018; Su et al., 2022). Spectral clustering (SC) (Von Luxburg, 2007) is a popular technique that
first encodes the similarity of the data features into a graph
and then creates a partition based on the graph topology.
Such a graph is just a convenient representation of the similarity among the samples and has no attributes on its vertices. On the other hand, an attributed graph can represent

Similarly to other deep learning architectures for clustering (Shaham et al., 2018; Kampffmeyer et al., 2019), GNNs
can be trained end-to-end and return soft cluster assignments as part of the output. Several existing GNN clustering
approaches compute cluster assignments from the vertex
representations generated by message passing (MP) layers
and, then, optimize the assignments with an unsupervised
loss inspired by SC (Bianchi et al., 2020; Tsitsulin et al.,
2020; Duval & Malliaros, 2022). The SC objective benefits
from the smoothing operations performed by the MP layers,
which minimize the local quadratic variation of adjacent
vertex features. However, this approach produces smooth
cluster assignment vectors that are less informative as they

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
UiT the Arctic University of Norway 2 NORCE, The Norwegian
Research Centre AS. Correspondence to: Filippo Maria Bianchi
<filippo.m.bianchi@uit.no>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

