Neural Inverse Operators for Solving PDE Inverse Problems

Roberto Molinaro 1 Yunan Yang 2 Björn Engquist 3 Siddhartha Mishra 1 4

Abstract

2009) that arises in electrical impedance tomography (EIT)
in medical imaging. Here, the observable is the Dirichletto-Neumann (DtN) operator that maps the voltage on the
boundary to the current, and one is interested in inferring the
underlying conductivity field. A related example is inverse
wave scattering for geophysical applications. Other examples include optical tomography (Lai et al., 2019) where
the observable is the so-called Albedo operator, and one
needs to infer the scattering and absorption coefficients of
the underlying medium. Another prominent example arises
in seismic imaging in geophysics (Yilmaz, 2011) where the
observable is the source-to-receiver (StR) operator, and the
task at hand is to infer the underlying sub-surface properties
such as wave velocity or material density. In many of these
examples, the solution to the resulting inverse problem is
unique and stable if and only if the inverse problem is posed
as a mapping from operators to functions.

A large class of inverse problems for PDEs are
only well-defined as mappings from operators to
functions. Existing operator learning frameworks
map functions to functions and need to be modified to learn inverse maps from data. We propose
a novel architecture termed Neural Inverse Operators (NIOs) to solve these PDE inverse problems.
Motivated by the underlying mathematical structure, NIO is based on a suitable composition of
DeepONets and FNOs to approximate mappings
from operators to functions. A variety of experiments are presented to demonstrate that NIOs
significantly outperform baselines and solve PDE
inverse problems robustly, accurately and are several orders of magnitude faster than existing direct
and PDE-constrained optimization methods.

Given the nonlinear nature of most of these inverse problems, analytical solution formulas are not available except in
some simple cases. Instead, iterative numerical algorithms
based on the PDE-constrained optimization are commonly
used to approximate the solution (Chavent, 2010). These
algorithms repeatedly apply the forward and adjoint PDE
solvers to converge to the unknown coefficient. However, a
large number of iterations might be necessary, which leads
to prohibitively high computational costs as numerous calls
to PDE solvers are very expensive, particularly in two and
three space dimensions. Moreover, these iterative algorithms can be sensitive to the choice of initial coefficient.
Given these factors, the design of alternative approaches to
solving inverse problems is imperative.

1. Introduction.
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are ubiquitous as mathematical models in the sciences and engineering (Evans,
2010). Often, solving PDEs entails solving the so-called
forward problem. That is, given inputs such as initial and
boundary conditions, coefficients, and sources, compute
(observables of) the solution of the PDE. However, in many
important contexts in applications, one is instead interested
in solving the so-called inverse problem (Isakov, 2017).
That is, given measurements of (observables of) the solution
of a PDE, infer the underlying inputs.

Data-driven approximation of PDEs is rapidly emerging as
a powerful paradigm. Most of the available results pertain to
forward problems for PDEs. A particularly popular framework is operator learning, where one seeks to learn the
underlying forward solution operator of the PDE from data.
Existing approaches to operator learning include Deep operator networks (DeepONet) (Lu et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2020;
Cai et al., 2021) and their variants, as well as the so-called
neural operators (Kovachki et al., 2021b), which include
the widely used Fourier Neural Operators (FNO) and its
variants (Li et al., 2021b; Pathak et al., 2022). Graph neural
network-based algorithms (Boussif et al., 2022; Brandstetter
et al., 2022) are also emerging as an alternative.

A large class of such inverse problems takes the following
abstract form: given observables as operators (mappings
between function spaces), infer the underlying input coefficient (functions) of the associated PDE. A prototypical
example is the well-studied Calderón Problem (Uhlmann,
1

Seminar for Applied Mathematics (SAM), ETH, Zürich.
Institute for Theoretical Studies (ITS), ETH Zürich. 3 Department
of Mathematics and the Oden Institute, The University of Texas at
Austin, USA. 4 ETH AI Center, ETH, Zürich. Correspondence to:
Roberto Molinaro <roberto.molinaro@sam.math.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

