Adaptive Coordination in Social Embodied Rearrangement

Andrew Szot 1 2 Unnat Jain 1 Dhruv Batra 1 2 Zsolt Kira 2 Ruta Desai 1 Akshara Rai 1

Abstract

be able to reason about its embodiment to avoid getting in
the way of its partner while acting to effectively assist them.
There are several challenges in building such a collaborative
system. (1) The robot needs to adapt to preferences of its
partner, which might be unobserved, and change over time.
For example, its partner might do a different part of the
task in different situations, and the robot must adapt to such
changes. (2) The environment and the partner are partially
observed through the robot’s egocentric cameras, making
both inferring the state of the partner and the environment
challenging. (3) The tasks are complex and long-horizon,
with feasibility constraints that affect both the robot’s and
its partner’s actions. For example, once the robot infers
that its partner is loading dishes, it must bring dishes to the
kitchen to enable its partner to succeed. All of these challenges make multi-agent collaboration in visually-realistic,
long-horizon tasks challenging.

We present the task of “Social Rearrangement”,
consisting of cooperative everyday tasks like
setting up the dinner table, tidying a house or
unpacking groceries in a simulated multi-agent
environment. In Social Rearrangement, two
robots coordinate to complete a long-horizon
task, using onboard sensing and egocentric observations, and no privileged information about the
environment. We study zero-shot coordination
(ZSC) in this task, where an agent collaborates
with a new partner, emulating a scenario where
a robot collaborates with a new human partner.
Prior ZSC approaches struggle to generalize in
our complex and visually rich setting, and on
further analysis, we find that they fail to generate
diverse coordination behaviors at training time.
To counter this, we propose Behavior Diversity
Play (BDP), a novel ZSC approach that encourages diversity through a discriminability objective.
Our results demonstrate that BDP learns adaptive
agents that can tackle visual coordination, and
zero-shot generalize to new partners in unseen
environments, achieving 35% higher success and
32% higher efficiency compared to baselines.

Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) (Lanctot et al., 2017; Strouse
et al., 2021) – a two-stage learning framework that first trains
a diverse population of agents (typically enforced through
random policy initializations), and then trains a coordination
agent to collaborate with this population – has been used to
study such problems. However, so far ZSC approaches have
only been applied to simplistic environments and tasks, with
complete (privileged) information, like Overcooked (Carroll
et al., 2019). Instead, real-world coordination requires dealing with partial information, and high-dimensional, continuous observations like images. Such a visually-rich setting
requires bulky policy architectures, and the naive strategy
of random policy initializations for generating different behaviors (Strouse et al., 2021) is not enough. As a result, we
observe that most agents in the population exhibit similar
behaviors, like always reaching for the bowl when setting
the dinner table. A coordination agent trained with such a
population is not adaptive to other partner preferences, like
reaching for the fruit. To solve this problem, we propose a
novel approach for ZSC – Behavior Diversity Play (BDP) –
which uses a shared policy architecture and a discriminability objective to encourage behavioral diversity. Specifically,
we train a discriminator network to distinguish the population behaviors given a history of states, encouraging the
population behaviors to be distinct. For example, when
setting a dinner table, different agents in the population attempt to do different parts of the task, like reach for the

1. Introduction
Consider a human-robot or robot-robot team, collaborating
at everyday tasks like unloading groceries, preparing dinner
or cleaning the house. Such an assistive robot should coordinate with its partner to efficiently complete the task, without
getting in their way. For example, while tidying the house,
if its partner starts cleaning the kitchen, the robot could
start cleaning the living room to maximize efficiency. If the
robot notices its partner loading the dishwasher, it should
prioritize bringing dirty dishes from the living room to the
kitchen, instead of rearranging cushions. The robot should
1
Meta AI 2 Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence
to: Andrew Szot <aszot3@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

