PFGM++: Unlocking the Potential of Physics-Inspired Generative Models

Yilun Xu 1 Ziming Liu 1 Yonglong Tian 1 Shangyuan Tong 1 Max Tegmark 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract

on thermodynamics (Jarzynski, 1997) or Poisson flow generative models (PFGM) (Xu et al., 2022) derived from electrostatics (Griffiths, 2005). The associated generative processes
involve iteratively de-noising samples by following physically meaningful trajectories. Diffusion models learn a
noise-level dependent score function so as to reverse the effects of forward diffusion, progressively reducing the noise
level σ along the generation trajectory. PFGMs in turn augment N -dimensional data points with an extra dimension
and evolve samples drawn from a uniform distribution over
a large N +1-dimensional hemisphere back to the z=0 hyperplane where the clean data (as charges) reside by tracing
learned electric field lines. Diffusion models in particular
have been demonstrated across image (Song et al., 2021b;
Nichol et al., 2022a; Ramesh et al., 2022), 3D (Zeng et al.,
2022; Poole et al., 2022), audio (Kong et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020) and biological data (Shi et al., 2021; Watson
et al., 2022) generation, and have more stable training objectives compared to GANs (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Brock et al.,
2019). More recent PFGM (Xu et al., 2022) rival diffusion
models on image generation.

We introduce a new family of physics-inspired
generative models termed PFGM++ that unifies
diffusion models and Poisson Flow Generative
Models (PFGM). These models realize generative
trajectories for N dimensional data by embedding paths in N +D dimensional space while still
controlling the progression with a simple scalar
norm of the D additional variables. The new models reduce to PFGM when D=1 and to diffusion
models when D→∞. The flexibility of choosing D allows us to trade off robustness against
rigidity as increasing D results in more concentrated coupling between the data and the additional variable norms. We dispense with the biased large batch field targets used in PFGM and
instead provide an unbiased perturbation-based
objective similar to diffusion models. To explore
different choices of D, we provide a direct alignment method for transferring well-tuned hyperparameters from diffusion models (D→∞) to any
finite D values. Our experiments show that models with finite D can be superior to previous stateof-the-art diffusion models on CIFAR-10/FFHQ
64×64 datasets/LSUN Churches 256×256, with
median Ds. In class-conditional setting, D=2048
yields current state-of-the-art FID of 1.74 on
CIFAR-10 without additional training. Furthermore, we demonstrate that models with smaller
D exhibit improved robustness against modeling
errors. Code is available at https://github.
com/Newbeeer/pfgmpp

In this paper, we introduce a broader family of physicsinspired generative models that we call PFGM++. These
models extend the electrostatic view into higher dimensions through multi-dimensional z ∈ RD augmentations.
When interpreting N -dimensional data points x as positive charges, the electric field lines define a surjection from
a uniform distribution on an infinite N +D-dimensional
hemisphere to the data distribution located on the z=0 hyperplane. We can therefore draw generative samples by
following the electric field lines, evolving points from the
hemisphere back to the z=0 hyperplane. We leverage the
symmetry of z to reduce the vector to a scalar ∥z∥2 = r, simplifying the sampling process. The use of symmetry turns
the aforementioned surjection into a bijection between an
easy-to-sample prior on a large r = rmax hyper-cylinder to
the data distribution. The symmetry reduction also permits
D to take any positive values, including reals. We derive a
new perturbation-based training objective akin to denoising
score matching (Vincent, 2011) that avoids the need to use
large batches to construct electric field line targets in PFGM.
The perturbation-based objective is more efficient, unbiased,
and compatible with paired sample training of conditional
generation models.

1. Introduction
Physics continues to inspire new deep generative models
such as diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b; Karras et al., 2022) based
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT, Cambridge, MA,
USA. Correspondence to: Yilun Xu <ylxu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

