Learnability and Algorithm for Continual Learning

Gyuhak Kim * 1 Changnan Xiao * 2 Tatsuya Konishi 3 Bing Liu 1

Abstract

time, the task-id of each test instance is provided to locate
the task-specific model to classify the test instance.

This paper studies the challenging continual learning (CL) setting of Class Incremental Learning
(CIL). CIL learns a sequence of tasks consisting
of disjoint sets of concepts or classes. At any time,
a single model is built that can be applied to predict/classify test instances of any classes learned
thus far without providing any task related information for each test instance. Although many
techniques have been proposed for CIL, they are
mostly empirical. It has been shown recently that
a strong CIL system needs a strong within-task
prediction (WP) and a strong out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection for each task. However, it is still
not known whether CIL is actually learnable. This
paper shows that CIL is learnable. Based on the
theory, a new CIL algorithm is also proposed. Experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness.

Definition 1.1 (Task Incremental Learning (TIL)). TIL
learns a sequence of tasks, 1, 2, ..., T . The training set of
k
task k is Dk = {((xik , k), yki )ni=1
}, where nk is the number
of samples in task k ∈ T = {1, 2, ..., T }, and xik ∈ X is an
ST
input sample and yki ∈ Yk ⊆ Y (= k=1 Yk ) is its label. A
TIL system learns a function f : X × T → Y to assign a
class label y ∈ Yk to (x, k) (a test instance x from task k).
For CIL, a single model is built for all tasks/classes learned
thus far (the classes in each task are distinct). At test time,
no task-id is provided for a test instance.
Definition 1.2 (Class Incremental Learning (CIL)). CIL
learns a sequence of tasks, 1, 2, ..., T . The training set of
k
task k is Dk = {(xik , yki )ni=1
}, where nk is the number of
samples in task k ∈ T = {1, 2, ..., T }, and xik ∈ X is an
ST
input sample and yki ∈ Yk ⊂ Y (= k=1 Yk ) is its label.
All Yk ’s are disjoint (Yk ∩Yk′ = ∅, ∀k ̸= k ′ ). A CIL system
learns a function (predictor or classifier) f : X → Y that
assigns a class label y to a test instance x.

1. Introduction

CIL is a more challenging setting because in addition to
CF, it has the inter-task class separation (ICS) (Kim et al.,
2022b) problem. ICS refers to the situation that since the
learner has no access to the training data of the old tasks
when learning a new task, then the learner has no way to
establish the decision boundaries between the classes of the
old tasks and the classes of the new task, which results in
poor classification accuracy. Kim et al. (2022b) showed
that a good within-task prediction (WP) and a good out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection for each task are necessary
and sufficient conditions for a strong CIL model.

Learning a sequence of tasks incrementally, called continual learning, has attracted a great deal of attention recently (Chen & Liu, 2018). In the supervised learning context, each task consists of a set of concepts or classes to be
learned. It is assumed that all tasks are learned in one neural
network, which results in the key challenge of catastrophic
forgetting (CF) because when learning a new task, the system has to modify the network parameters learned from
old tasks in order to learn the new task, which may cause
performance degradation for the old tasks (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989). Two continual learning settings have been
popularly studied: task incremental learning (TIL) (van de
Ven & Tolias, 2019) and class incremental learning (CIL).

Definition 1.3 (out-of-distribution (OOD) detection). Given
the training set D = {(xi , y i )ni=1 }, where n is the number
of data samples, xi ∈ X is an input sample and y i ∈ Y is
its class label. Y is the set of all classes in D and called the
in-distribution (IND) classes. Our goal is to learn a function
f : X → Y ∪ {O} that can detect test instances that do not
belong to any classes in Y (OOD)), which are assigned to
class O, denoting out-of-distribution (OOD).

In TIL, each task is an independent classification problem
and has a separate model (the tasks may overlap). At test
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago. 2 Work done at ByteDance. 3 KDDI
Research (work done when this author was visiting Bing Liu’s
group). Correspondence to: Bing Liu <liub@uic.edu>.

The intuition of the theory in (Kim et al., 2022b) is that if
OOD detection is perfect for each task, then a test instance
will be assigned to the correct task model to which the test

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

