Effectively Using Public Data in Privacy Preserving Machine Learning

Milad Nasr 1 Saeed Mahloujifar 2 Xinyu Tang 2 Prateek Mittal 2 Amir Houmansadr 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning is becoming an essential part of many
technological advancements in various fields. One major
concern with using machine learning is the privacy of individuals whose data is used to develop the machine learning
models. To tackle this concern, recent works (De et al.,
2022; Kurakin et al., 2022; Abadi et al., 2016; Yu et al.,
2021; Amid et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a) suggest to train
ML models with differential privacy (DP) ((Dwork et al.,
2014)) guarantees. However, existing DP techniques for
ML impose large degradation to the utility of the trained
models in comparison to non-private models. Recent works
have used various techniques to improve the utility-privacy
trade-off of such private ML techniques (e.g., by scaling the
hyper-parameters ((De et al., 2022))); however, there still
exists a huge gap between the accuracy of DP-guaranteeing
ML mechanisms and their non-private alternatives, e.g., the
SOTA technique of (De et al., 2022) achieves an accuracy
of 65% on CIFAR10 (for ε = 2.0 and δ = 10−5 ) compared
to the > 90% accuracy of non-private models.

Differentially private (DP) machine learning techniques are notorious for their degradation of
model utility (e.g., they degrade classification
accuracy). A recent line of work has demonstrated that leveraging public data can improve
the trade-off between privacy and utility when
training models with DP guarantee. In this work,
we further explore the potential of using public
data in DP models, showing that utility gains can
in fact be significantly higher than what shown
in prior works. Specifically, we introduce DOPESGD, a modified DP-SGD algorithm that leverages public data during its training. DOPE-SGD
uses public data in two complementary ways:
(1) it uses advance augmentation techniques that
leverages public data to generate synthetic data
that is effectively embedded in multiple steps of
the training pipeline; (2) it uses a modified gradient clipping mechanism in DP-SGD to change
the origin of gradient vectors using the information inferred from available public data, therefore
boosting utility. We also introduce a technique
to ensemble intermediate DP models by leveraging the post processing property of differential
privacy to further improve the accuracy of the predictions. Our experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in improving
the state-of-the-art in DP machine learning across
multiple datasets, network architectures, and application domains. For instance, assuming access
to 2, 000 public images, and for a privacy budget of ε = 2, δ = 10−5 , our technique achieves
an accuracy of 75.1% on CIFAR10, significantly
higher than 68.1% achieved by the state of the art.

In this work, we explore an emerging approach to close the
utility gap between private and non-private models. Specifically, recent works ((De et al., 2022; Kurakin et al., 2022;
Abadi et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b)) show
that leveraging publicly available (therefore, non-private)
data can enhance the utility of DP-trained models without impacting their privacy guarantees. In such works, the
public data is used to pre-train the model, and then the
pre-trained model is fine-tuned with the private data while
applying DP protections.
In this work, we show that public data can be leveraged
significantly more effectively in boosting the utility of DP
models. Specifically, we design a generic method to utilize
public data in differentially private machine learning, an
approach we call Differentially Private Origin Estimation
Stochastic Gradient Descent (DOPE-SGD). DOPE-SGD
uses two complementary techniques to enhance the utility
of differentially private models using public data. First,
DOPE-SGD uses advanced data augmentation techniques
to enhance the quality of the data used for training, therefore reducing overfitting to the public data and improving
generalization. Second, it improves the quality of the noisy
gradients by taking advantage of the available (augmented)

1

Google Deepmind 2 Princeton University 3 University of
Massachusetts Amherst. Correspondence to: Milad Nasr
<srxzr@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

