Partial Optimality in Cubic Correlation Clustering

David Stein 1 Silvia Di Gregorio 1 Bjoern Andres 1
a)

Abstract
The higher-order correlation clustering problem
is an expressive model, and recently, local search
heuristics have been proposed for several applications. Certifying optimality, however, is NP-hard
and practically hampered already by the complexity of the problem statement. Here, we focus on
establishing partial optimality conditions for the
special case of complete graphs and cubic objective functions. In addition, we define and implement algorithms for testing these conditions and
examine their effect numerically, on two datasets.

Figure 1. In order to examine the effectiveness of partial optimality
conditions numerically, we implement algorithms for testing these
conditions and measure the fraction of fixed variables as a function
of an amount of noise, for (a) synthetic instances with four clusters
and noisy costs, and (b) instances for the task of finding equilateral
triangles in a noisy point cloud.

1. Introduction

some pairs or triples whether their elements are in the same
set or distinct sets of an optimal partition. In order to find
such partial optimality, we characterize improving maps and
state efficiently verifiable sufficient conditions of their improvingness, a technique introduced by Shekhovtsov (2013);
see also (Shekhovtsov, 2014; Shekhovtsov et al., 2015). In
order to examine the effectiveness of these partial optimality
conditions numerically, we implement algorithms for testing
these. Moreover, we conduct experiments, cf. Figure 1. For
conciseness, all proofs are deferred to the appendix.

We study an optimization problem whose feasible solutions
are all partitions of a finite set S. Given a cost cp ∈ R for
every (unordered) pair p ∈ S2 and a cost ct ∈ R for every

(unordered) triple t ∈ S3 , the objective is to find a partition
Π of S so as to minimize the sum of the costs of those pairs
and triples whose elements all belong to the same set in Π:
Definition 1.1. The instance of the cubic set partition problem with respect to a finiteset S,the set PS of all partitions
of S, and a function c : S3 ∪ S2 ∪ {∅} → R is:
X X
X X
min
ct +
cp + c∅
Π∈PS


R∈Π
R
R∈Π
R
t∈ 3

b)

Related Work. We choose to state the cubic set partition
problem (Definition 1.1) in the form of a non-linear binary
program (Proposition 2.1), a special case of the higherorder correlation clustering problem introduced by Kim
et al. (2014). Combinatorial optimization problems like this
involving higher-order objective functions have interesting
application as accurate models of intrinsically non-linear
tasks (Agarwal et al., 2005; Kappes et al., 2016; Kim et al.,
2014; Levinkov et al., 2022; Ochs & Brox, 2012; Purkait
et al., 2017). In particular, higher-order correlation clustering has been used for subspace clustering in (Levinkov
et al., 2022, Section 5.1) by introducing negative costs for
points sufficiently close to a subspace.

p∈ 2

The cubic set partition problem is NP-hard, as it generalizes
the NP-hard clique partitioning problem for complete graphs
(Grötschel & Wakabayashi, 1989), specializing
to the latter

in the case that ct = 0 for all t ∈ S3 . Applications of
cubic set partitioning include the task of fitting equilateral
triangles to points in a plane (cf. Figure 1 and Section 6) and
subspace clustering as discussed by Levinkov et al. (2022).
In this article, we ask whether we can compute a partial solution to the problem efficiently, i.e. to decide efficiently for

Being able to efficiently fix some variables to an optimal
value and thus reducing the size of the problem can be
valuable in practice. Consequently, much effort has been
devoted to studying partial optimality for non-convex problems (Adams et al., 1998; Billionnet & Sutter, 1992; Hammer et al., 1984; Kappes et al., 2013; Kohli et al., 2008;
Shekhovtsov, 2014; Shekhovtsov et al., 2015). Particularly

1
Faculty of Computer Science, TU Dresden, Germany. Correspondence to: Bjoern Andres <bjoern.andres@tu-dresden.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

