Regularization-free Diffeomorphic Temporal Alignment Nets

Ron Shapira Weber 1 Oren Freifeld 1

Abstract

u1

u1

u5
u3

In time-series analysis, nonlinear temporal misalignment is a major problem that forestalls even
simple averaging. An effective learning-based
solution for this problem is the Diffeomorphic
Temporal Alignment Net (DTAN) (Shapira Weber
et al., 2019), that, by relying on a diffeomorphic
temporal transformer net and the amortization of
the joint-alignment task, eliminates drawbacks of
traditional alignment methods. Unfortunately, existing DTAN formulations crucially depend on a
regularization term whose optimal hyperparameters are dataset-specific and usually searched via
a large number of experiments. Here we propose a regularization-free DTAN that obviates the
need to perform such an expensive, and often impractical, search. Concretely, we propose a new
well-behaved loss that we call the Inverse Consistency Averaging Error (ICAE), as well as a
related new triplet loss. Extensive experiments on
128 UCR datasets show that the proposed method
outperforms contemporary methods despite not
using a regularization. Moreover, ICAE also
gives rise to the first DTAN that supports variablelength signals. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/BGU-CS-VIL/RF-DTAN.

θ1

µc

u4

u2
T θ4

T θ2 T θ3
T

T

u4

u2

u5
u3

θ5

T

µc′

−θ1

T −θ2 T
µc

(a) Centroids computed using
forward warps

T −θ5

T −θ4

−θ3

µc′

(b) The ICAE loss computed
using backward warps

Figure 1. The Inverse Consistency Averaging Error loss in a twoclass example. (a) The signals u1 , u2 , and u3 are in class c; u4
and u5 are in class c′ . Within each class, the centroid (µc or µc′ )
is obtained by averaging the warped signals ((ui ◦ T θi )i∈{1,2,3}
or (ui ◦ T θi )i∈{4,5} ) using the forward warps. (b) The loss is
computed using the backward warps; i.e., we measure dissimilarity
between each ui and its class centroid, where the latter is first
warped backward (“unwarped”) using T −θi (the inverse of T θi ).

alignments. Let ui = (ui (t))nt=1 and uj = (uj (t))m
t=1 be
two real-valued discrete-time signals of lengths n and m,
respectively. The optimal pairwise alignment of uj towards
ui , under some dissimilarity measure D, is defined by
T ∗ = arg min D(ui , uj ◦ T )

(1)

T ∈T

where ◦ denotes function composition and T is a family of
warps (or warping functions); namely, every T ∈ T is a
function T : Ω → R where Ω ⊂ R is an interval containing
{1, . . . , m}. For instance, Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)
provides the optimal discrete warping path between the
time indices of ui and uj via dynamic programming, where
D is (usually) a Euclidean distance (Sakoe, 1971). More
generally, while ui and uj are defined over discrete domains
(i.e., {1, . . . , n} and {1, . . . , m}), the notation uj ◦ T in
Equation 1 implicitly assumes that the value of uj (t′ ) at
every t′ ∈ R is determined, using interpolation techniques,
from (possibly a subset of) the m given values, (uj (t))m
t=1 .

1. Introduction
Nonlinear temporal misalignment between different signals
is a major obstacle to time-series statistical analysis. For example, physicians may be interested in the average Electrocardiogram (ECG) signal from a few minutes of recording,
but the temporal misalignment across the patient’s different heartbeats implies that naively averaging the data will
distort the true underlying signal.
A popular attempt to solve the problem relies on pairwise
1

Ben-Gurion University.
Correspondence to: Ron
Shapira Weber <ronsha@post.bgu.ac.il>, Oren Freifeld
<orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il>.

In this paper we focus on continuously-defined warps that
are order-preserving diffeomorphisms. A diffeomorphism
(namely, a differentiable invertible function whose inverse
is differentiable), is a natural choice for representing time
warping (Mumford & Desolneux, 2010). Since spaces of

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

