When Sparsity Meets Contrastive Models:
Less Graph Data Can Bring Better Class-Balanced Representations

Chunhui Zhang 1 Chao Huang 2 Yijun Tian 3 Qianlong Wen 3
Zhongyu Ouyang 3 Youhuan Li 4 Yanfang Ye 3 Chuxu Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Non-Euclidean structured data extensively exists in a wide
range of applicable domains, and a considerable amount
of them are naturally abstracted into graphs (e.g., social
networks, biochemical molecules, etc). Such extensiveness
further calls for the development of graph representation
learning (GRL). Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2022), as the current stateof-the-art of GRL, have become essential in various graph
mining applications.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful
models for non-Euclidean data, but their training is often accentuated by massive unnecessary
computation: On the one hand, training on nonEuclidean data has relatively high computational
cost due to its irregular density properties; on the
other hand, the class imbalance property often associated with non-Euclidean data cannot be alleviated by the massiveness of the data, thus hindering
the generalisation of the models. To address the
above issues, theoretically, we start with a hypothesis about the effectiveness of using a subset of
training data for GNNs, which is guaranteed by
the gradient distance between the subset and the
full set. Empirically, we also observe that a subset
of the data can provide informative gradients for
model optimization and which changes over time
dynamically. We name this phenomenon dynamic
data sparsity. Additionally, we find that pruned
sparse contrastive models may “miss” valuable
information, leading to a large loss value on the informative subset. Motivated by the above findings,
we develop a unified data model dynamic sparsity
framework called Data Decantation (DataDec) to
address the above challenges. The key idea of
DataDec is to identify the informative subset dynamically during the training process by applying
sparse graph contrastive learning. The effectiveness of DataDec is comprehensively evaluated on
graph benchmark datasets and we also verify its
generalizability on image data.

However, in many real-world scenarios, the training of deep
models, including GNNs often encounters two difficulties:
class imbalance (Park et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023) and massive data usage (Thakoor et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020). First,
class imbalance naturally exists in datasets from diverse
practical domains. Deep models are sensitive to this property and can be biased toward the dominant classes. This
bias may mislead the models’ learning process, resulting in
underfitting samples that are critical to the downstream tasks,
and poor test performance at last. Second, the massive data
required to train the model brings about heavy computation
burdens, some of which are redundant regarding learning
the task-related embeddings. For example, message-passing
over high-degree nodes in graphs introduces the redundancy
when only a few neighbors are informative. Unlike regular
data such as images or texts, the connectivity of irregular
data invokes random memory access, which further slows
down the efficiency of data readout.
Accordingly, recent studies (Chen et al., 2021; Zhao et al.,
2021; Park et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2022) arise to address the
issues of class imbalance or massive data usage specifically
for graphs: (i) On one hand, to deal with the class imbalance
issue in node classification, Gr-aphSMOTE (Zhao et al.,
2021) tries to generate new nodes for the minority classes
to balance the training data. Improved upon GraphSMOTE,
GraphENS (Park et al., 2022) further proposes a new augmentation method by constructing an ego network to learn
the representations of the minority classes. (ii) On the other
hand, to alleviate the massive data usage, (Eden et al., 2018;
Chen et al., 2018) explore efficient data sampling policies

1

Brandeis University 2 University of Hong Kong 3 University
of Notre Dame 4 Hunan University. Correspondence to: Chuxu
Zhang <chuxuzhang@brandeis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

