Minimum Width of Leaky-ReLU Neural Networks
for Uniform Universal Approximation

Li’ang Li * 1 Yifei Duan * 1 Guanghua Ji 1 Yongqiang Cai 1

Abstract

architecture rather than the choice of an activation function.
Then, (Leshno et al., 1993) show that for a continuous activation function f : X → Rdy defined on a compact set
X ⊆ Rdx can be approximated by a single hidden layer
neural network, if and only if, the activation function is a
nonpolynomial function.

The study of universal approximation properties
(UAP) for neural networks (NN) has a long history. When the network width is unlimited, only
a single hidden layer is sufficient for UAP. In contrast, when the depth is unlimited, the width for
UAP needs to be not less than the critical width
∗
wmin
= max(dx , dy ), where dx and dy are the dimensions of the input and output, respectively. Recently, (Cai, 2022) shows that a leaky-ReLU NN
with this critical width can achieve UAP for Lp
functions on a compact domain K, i.e., the UAP
for Lp (K, Rdy ). This paper examines a uniform
UAP for the function class C(K, Rdy ) and gives
the exact minimum width of the leaky-ReLU NN
as wmin = max(dx + 1, dy ) + 1dy =dx +1 , which
involves the effects of the output dimensions. To
obtain this result, we propose a novel lift-flowdiscretization approach that shows that the uniform UAP has a deep connection with topological
theory.

After solving the activation function’s theoretical problem,
the field of vision naturally shifted to a consideration of the
width and depth of the neural network. With the gradual development of deep neural networks, researchers have begun
to pay attention to how to theoretically analyze the expressiveness of networks. (Daniely, 2017) simplifies the proof
that the expressive ability of the three-layer neural network
is superior to that of the two-layer neural network. For any
positive integer k, (Telgarsky, 2016) shows that there are
neural networks with Θ(k 3 ) layers and fixed widths that
cannot be approximated by networks with O(k) layers unless they have Ω(2k ) nodes 1 . The universal approximation
theorem explains that deep–bounded neural networks with
suitable activation functions are universal approximators.
(Lu et al., 2017) explained that a neural network with a
bounded width can also be a universal approximator, such
as the width-(dx + 4) ReLU networks, where dx is the input
dimension. (Lu et al., 2017) also shows that a ReLU network
of width dx cannot be used for universal approximation.

1. Introduction
The universal approximation theorem is important for the
development of artificial neural networks. Artificial neural
networks can approximate functions with arbitrary precision, this fact reveals the great potential of neural networks,
and provides important guarantees for its development. (Cybenko, 1989) produces the original universal approximation
theorem, stating that an arbitrarily wide feedforward neural
network with a single hidden layer and sigmoid activation
function can arbitrarily approximate continuous function.
(Hornik, 1991) later demonstrated that the key to the universal approximation property lies in the multilayer and neuron

Many studies, such as (Beise & Da Cruz, 2020; Hanin &
Sellke, 2018; Park et al., 2021), have shown that for a narrow neural network (the width is not greater than the input dimension), it is difficult to attain the UAP. (Nguyen
et al., 2018) noted that deep neural networks with a specific
type of activation function generally need to have a width
larger than the input dimension to guarantee that the network can produce disconnected decision regions. For ReLU
networks, (Park et al., 2021) proved that the minimum width
for Lp -UAP is wmin = max(dx + 1, dy ) and summarized
the known upper/lower bounds on the minimum width for
universal approximation. Furthermore, conclusions related
to the UAP of continuous functions have yet to be studied.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences, Laboratory of Mathematics and Complex Systems, MOE, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China. Correspondence to:
Yongqiang Cai <caiyq.math@bnu.edu.cn>.

1
Θ(k3 ) means that it is bound both above and below by k3
asymptotically; O(k) means that it is bounded above by k asymptotically; Ω(2k ) means that it is bounded below by 2k asymptotically.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

