Adaptive Identification of Populations with Treatment Benefit in Clinical Trials:
Machine Learning Challenges and Solutions

Alicia Curth 1 Alihan Hüyük 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract

erogeneity are ubiquituous in practice and include differences in treatment responses in cancer patients with specific
mutations [4], pyschiatric patients with different forms of
depression [5] and stroke patients [6]. Motivated by this, the
problem of discovering treatment effect heterogeneity using logged experimental or observational data has received
much attention in the recent machine learning (ML) literature [7], resulting in the adaptation of many supervised ML
methods for post-hoc effect estimation [8–12]. The active
counterpart to this problem, i.e. designing experiments (clinical trials) to actively discover subpopulations that respond
well to a treatment, has received only limited attention in
the ML literature thus far but is the focus of this paper.

We study the problem of adaptively identifying
patient subpopulations that benefit from a given
treatment during a confirmatory clinical trial. This
type of adaptive clinical trial has been thoroughly
studied in biostatistics, but has been allowed only
limited adaptivity so far. Here, we aim to relax
classical restrictions on such designs and investigate how to incorporate ideas from the recent
machine learning literature on adaptive and online experimentation to make trials more flexible
and efficient. We find that the unique characteristics of the subpopulation selection problem
– most importantly that (i) one is usually interested in finding subpopulations with any treatment benefit (and not necessarily the single subgroup with largest effect) given a limited budget
and that (ii) effectiveness only has to be demonstrated across the subpopulation on average – give
rise to interesting challenges and new desiderata when designing algorithmic solutions. Building on these findings, we propose AdaGGI and
AdaGCPI, two meta-algorithms for subpopulation construction. We empirically investigate their
performance across a range of simulation scenarios and derive insights into their (dis)advantages
across different settings.

The biostatistics literature on adaptive clinical trials, on the
other hand, has proposed and extensively studied the use
of so-called adaptive enrichment designs, which allow to
change both enrolment criteria and the null hypothesis to be
tested in a clinical trial based on interim data (see e.g. [1, 2]
and Appendix A.1 for an overview). In such designs, the
degree of adaptivity and flexibility is usually quite limited
as the ability to adapt features is commonly restricted to a
few pre-specified interim analysis points and the number of
subgroups is often very small (most often set to exactly two).
In this paper, we consider a new approach to designing such
adaptive enrichment trials and investigate whether and how
it is possible to make them more flexible and efficient by
adapting tools that were originally developed to solve pure
exploration1 multi-armed bandits [13] and other adaptive
experiments problems in the recent ML literature. We find
that the problem of constructing subpopulations from subgroups in which a treatment has any positive effect most
closely resembles the good arm identification (or thresholding bandit) problem studied in e.g. [14–19] as there is no
need to limit treatment prescription to the single subgroup
with largest effect [20]. Nonetheless, we argue that there
are additional unique characteristics of our problem that
may change how algorithmic solutions should be designed:
(i) clinical trials operate under constraints on both budget

1. Introduction
The existence of treatment effect heterogeneity across subgroups of patients poses a challenge to both the success
of clinical trials testing the effectiveness of treatments and
the quality of treatment decisions in clinical practice when
prescribing a drug that has been proven to be effective only
for the average population [1–3]. Examples for such het1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Alicia Curth <amc253@cam.ac.uk>.

1
Note that, as further discussed in Appendix A.2, we focus on
adapting ideas from the literature on purely explorative bandits,
which do not trade off exploration with exploitation and are thus
very different from prototypical explore-exploit bandit problems.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

