ClusterFuG: Clustering Fully connected Graphs by Multicut

Ahmed Abbas 1 Paul Swoboda 1 2

Abstract

As a drawback, graph-based clustering approaches need
specification of the underlying graph topology. In practice,
this means an additional engineering effort as well as the
possibility to not get it right, which would decrease the
downstream task performance. Naively circumventing this
challenge by using the complete graph is not scalable – the
number of edges grows quadratically. One approach to resolve this conundrum is graph structure learning e.g., by
extending (Kazi et al., 2022), but adds considerable additional complexity.

We propose a graph clustering formulation based
on multicut (a.k.a. weighted correlation clustering) on the complete graph. Our formulation does
not need specification of the graph topology as in
the original sparse formulation of multicut, making our approach simpler and potentially better
performing. In contrast to unweighted correlation clustering we allow for a more expressive
weighted cost structure. In dense multicut, the
clustering objective is given in a factorized form
as inner products of node feature vectors. This
allows for an efficient formulation and inference
in contrast to multicut/weighted correlation clustering, which has at least quadratic representation
and computation complexity when working on the
complete graph. We show how to rewrite classical
greedy algorithms for multicut in our dense setting and how to modify them for greater efficiency
and solution quality. In particular, our algorithms
scale to graphs with tens of thousands of nodes.
Empirical evidence on instance segmentation on
Cityscapes and clustering of ImageNet datasets
shows the merits of our approach.

We propose a method to solve graph clustering efficiently on
complete graphs. Our formulation will use the well-known
edge-based multicut formulation and only restrict the way
edge costs can be computed: they need to be based on inner
products of node features. This has two advantages: First,
it reduces storage requirements. Instead of storing a full
adjacency matrix of edge costs as in multicut, which grows
quadratically with the number of nodes, we only need to
store a linear number of node features and can compute
edge costs on demand. Second, operations needed in multicut algorithms can be made scalable. Instead of operating
on the complete graph we can sparsify it adaptively during
the solving process. This allows to simulate the workings
of multicut algorithms on complete graphs by working on
a small subset of it. The key technical ingredient to obtain these sparse subgraphs will be fast nearest neighbor
search, for which efficient and scalable implementations
exist (Johnson et al., 2019). In effect, this allows us to solve
large dense multicut instances in moderate time, which is
not possible with existing solvers. In detail, our contribution
is as follows:

1. Introduction
Graph-based clustering approaches, primarily among them
multicut (Chopra & Rao, 1993), are theoretically appealing:
They do not need specification of the number of clusters,
but infer them as part of the optimization process. They
allow for a flexible clustering objective with attractive and
repulsive costs between pairs of nodes. They are also theoretically well-understood as optimization problems with
intensively studied polyhedral descriptions. Efficient solvers
that scale well and give high quality solutions have also been
developed.

Formulation: We propose multicut on complete graphs
with factorized edge costs as an efficiently representable graph clustering formalism.
Algorithm: We propose scalable algorithms for solving the
dense multicut problems, one mimicking exactly the
original greedy additive edge constraction (GAEC) algorithm (Keuper et al., 2015), the other a more efficient
variant in the spirit of the balanced edge contraction
heuristic (Kardoost & Keuper, 2018).

1

MPI for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
University of Mannheim, Germany. Correspondence to: Ahmed
Abbas <ahmed.abbas@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Empirical: We show efficacy in terms of memory and runtime of our solvers and show the merit of using them
1

