DoMo-AC: Doubly Multi-step Off-policy Actor-Critic Algorithm

Yunhao Tang* 1 Tadashi Kozuno* 2 Mark Rowland 1 Anna Harutyunyan 1
Rémi Munos 1 Bernardo Ávila Pires 1 Michal Valko 1

Abstract

In the meantime, multi-step learning has provided a robust
and consistent improvement to policy evaluation. Unlike
one-step bootstrapping methods such as TD(0), multi-step
learning bootstraps from predictions across multiple time
steps along the trajectory, usually allowing for a much faster
propagation of reward information across time. Empirically,
this often helps the algorithm converge faster to the target
value. In off-policy learning, notable examples include
the Retrace and V-trace algorithms (Munos et al., 2016;
Espeholt et al., 2018), which reduce to the celebrated TD(λ)
algorithm in the on-policy case (Sutton and Barto, 1998).

Multi-step learning applies lookahead over multiple time steps and has proved valuable in policy evaluation settings. However, in the optimal
control case, the impact of multi-step learning
has been relatively limited despite a number of
prior efforts. Fundamentally, this might be because multi-step policy improvements require operations that cannot be approximated by stochastic
samples, hence hindering the widespread adoption of such methods in practice. To address such
limitations, we introduce doubly multi-step offpolicy VI (DoMo-VI), a novel oracle algorithm
that combines multi-step policy improvements
and policy evaluations. DoMo-VI enjoys guaranteed convergence speed-up to the optimal policy
and is applicable in general off-policy learning
settings. We then propose doubly multi-step offpolicy actor-critic (DoMo-AC), a practical instantiation of the DoMo-VI algorithm. DoMo-AC
introduces a bias-variance trade-off that ensures
improved policy gradient estimates. When combined with the IMPALA architecture, DoMo-AC
has showed improvements over the baseline algorithm on Atari-57 game benchmarks.

In the control case, the most common approach is to find
an improved policy by being greedy with respect to the current value function (Sutton and Barto, 1998). The greedy
improvement effectively looks ahead for a single time step,
and intuitively should also benefit from multi-step learning
as TD(0). On the theory front, prior work has extended the
one-step greedy improvement to the multi-step case (Efroni
et al., 2018; Tomar et al., 2020). However, a fundamental
challenge is that since multi-step control consists of solving a optimal control problem in the inner loop (Efroni
et al., 2018), it is not straightforward to combine such an
approach with sample-based learning and incremental learning. As a result, this hinders the widespread adoption of
multi-step learning, as it cannot be directly applied to policy
improvement and optimal control. In this work, we aim to
address the key question: how to make multi-step off-policy
learning practical and theoretically sound for the control
case? To this end, we make a few theoretical and practical
contributions.

1. Introduction
Off-policy learning plays a central role in modern reinforcement learning (RL), where the algorithm learns from offpolicy data such as exploratory actions, expert demonstrations and previous experiences. Off-policy learning consists
of two critical components: off-policy evaluation, where
the aim is to approximate the value function of a target
policy; and off-policy control, where the aim is to approximate the optimal value function. Designing good evaluation
and control algorithms are crucial to high-performing RL
systems.

Doubly multi-step off-policy value iteration (DoMo-VI).
We introduce DoMo-VI, a multi-step learning algorithm
consisting of multi-step policy evaluation and multi-step improvement (hence the name doubly, Section 3). DoMo-VI is
compatible with using off-policy data, provably converges
to the optimal value function with accelerated convergence
rate, thanks to the application of multi-step learning to both
the policy evaluation and improvement steps. To our knowledge, this is the first set of theoretical results on how multistep control speeds up convergence in the off-policy setting.

1
Google DeepMind 2 Omron Sinic X. Correspondence to: Yunhao Tang <robintyh@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

