Adaptive Compositional Continual Meta-Learning

Bin Wu 1 Jinyuan Fang 2 Xiangxiang Zeng 3 Shangsong Liang 4 5 Qiang Zhang 1

Abstract

model generalization (Raghu et al., 2020). Traditional metalearning assumes all tasks are homogeneous and available
instantly (Finn et al., 2017; 2018), which can be unrealistic in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we focus on a
more practical and challenging setting, namely continual
meta-learning where few-shot tasks are heterogeneous and
arrive sequentially over time (Finn et al., 2019; Denevi et al.,
2019). Such a heterogeneous and continual setting fits better
for the real world and thus can be of practical significance
to different domains, such as recommendation (Zhang et al.,
2019) and personalization (Wu et al., 2022).

This paper focuses on continual meta-learning,
where few-shot tasks are heterogeneous and sequentially available. Recent works use a mixture model for meta-knowledge to deal with the
heterogeneity. However, these methods suffer
from parameter inefficiency caused by two reasons: (1) the underlying assumption of mutual
exclusiveness among mixture components hinders sharing meta-knowledge across heterogeneous tasks. (2) they only allow increasing mixture components and cannot adaptively filter out
redundant components. In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Compositional Continual MetaLearning (ACML) algorithm, which employs a
compositional premise to associate a task with
a subset of mixture components, allowing metaknowledge sharing among heterogeneous tasks.
Moreover, to adaptively adjust the number of mixture components, we propose a component sparsification method based on evidential theory to
filter out redundant components. Experimental
results show ACML outperforms strong baselines,
showing the effectiveness of our compositional
meta-knowledge, and confirming that ACML can
adaptively learn meta-knowledge.

Despite the great potential of continual meta-learning in
practical applications, there are two key challenges to be
tackled in this setting: (i) how to capture the incremental
meta-knowledge from the new tasks (Lee et al., 2017), (ii)
how to avoid forgetting the learned meta-knowledge from
previous tasks when dealing with the new heterogeneous
tasks, i.e.,catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
Existing works (Jerfel et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2021) mainly tackle these two challenges using a
mixture model for meta-knowledge, where each component
of the mixture model handles a task cluster, i.e., a set of
homogeneous tasks. In order to learn incremental metaknowledge and avoid catastrophic forgetting when facing a
new task, they learn a new component for the mixture model
if the task is dissimilar from previous tasks, otherwise, they
update an existing component to which the task corresponds.
However, these works suffer from the parameter-inefficiency
issue for two reasons. (1) They implicitly assume different components in the mixture meta-knowledge distribution
are mutually exclusive. As heterogeneous tasks (i.e., tasks
from different clusters) still have common information, the
one-to-one mapping between tasks and mixture components
overlooks the sharing of meta-knowledge among heterogeneous tasks, leading to meta-knowledge redundancy in
different components. (2) They increase mixture components by some priors (e.g., Chinese Restaurant Prior) (Jerfel
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021) or a simple judgment on
the similarities among tasks (Yao et al., 2019; 2020). These
methods cannot adaptively adjust the actually required components from the data, because they only allow adding new
meta-knowledge components but not removing redundant
components. Consequently, one needs to maintain a large
number of meta-knowledge components and face the param-

1. Introduction
Meta-learning is an effective paradigm to deal with lowresource learning tasks where only a few labeled samples
are available (Vanschoren, 2018; Hospedales et al., 2020),
and has gained tremendous attention in recent years. The
key idea of meta-learning is to inductively transfer metaknowledge (i.e., the experience of how to learn) among
different tasks to improve data efficiency and enhance
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK 3 Hunan University, Changsha, China 4 Mohamed bin
Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 5 Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Qiang
Zhang <qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

