Margin-based sampling in high dimensions:
When being active is less efficient than staying passive

Alexandru ,Tifrea * 1 Jacob Clarysse * 1 Fanny Yang 1

Abstract

is available and can potentially be leveraged for the task.
Active learning algorithms aim to reduce labeling costs, by
collecting a small labeled set that still results in a model
with good predictive performance.

It is widely believed that given the same labeling
budget, active learning (AL) algorithms like
margin-based active learning achieve better predictive performance than passive learning (PL),
albeit at a higher computational cost. Recent
empirical evidence suggests that this added
cost might be in vain, as margin-based AL can
sometimes perform even worse than PL. While
existing works offer different explanations in the
low-dimensional regime, this paper shows that
the underlying mechanism is entirely different in
high dimensions: we prove for logistic regression
that PL outperforms margin-based AL even for
noiseless data and when using the Bayes optimal
decision boundary for sampling. Insights from
our proof indicate that this high-dimensional
phenomenon is exacerbated when the separation
between the classes is small. We corroborate
this intuition with experiments on 20 highdimensional datasets spanning a diverse range
of applications, from finance and histology to
chemistry and computer vision.

A popular family of active learning algorithms is marginbased active learning (M-AL) (Scheffer & Wrobel, 2001;
Balcan et al., 2007; Ducoffe & Precioso, 2018). This
paradigm proposes to alternate between (i) training a prediction model (e.g. logistic regression, deep neural network)
on the currently available labeled set; and (ii) augmenting
the labeled set by acquiring labels for the unlabeled points
that lie close to the decision boundary of the model. M-AL
is closely related to strategies like uncertainty sampling
(Lewis & Gale, 1994), entropy sampling (Settles, 2009),
or softmax sampling for neural networks.
Numerous prior works have documented the success of MAL in low dimensions (Tong & Koller, 2001; Schein &
Ungar, 2007; Yang & Loog, 2018; Schohn & Cohn, 2000).
As it is evident in Figure 1, in the regime where the query
budget is large (i.e. n`  d), M-AL achieves low test error
with a lot less labeled data than passive learning (PL, i.e.
uniform sampling). This is in line with the intuition about
M-AL developed in prior works. At the same time, the
figure reveals that in the low-sample regime (i.e. n`  d)
M-AL “fails” – that is, it leads to worse predictive error than
PL. This regime is much less studied in the AL literature.1

1. Introduction

In this paper, we characterize theoretically and empirically
the settings that lead to the failure of M-AL for highdimensional logistic regression. We rule out two likely
causes for this phenomenon. First, it is known that, in
low dimensions, M-AL does not improve upon the sample
efficiency of PL when the Bayes optimal model has high
error (Mussmann & Liang, 2018). Second, several works
(Huang et al., 2014; Sener & Savarese, 2018; Hacohen
et al., 2022) argue that M-AL can fail due to the cold start
problem: using only a small labeled set, one cannot obtain
a meaningful decision boundary to be used for sampling.

In numerous machine learning applications, it is often
prohibitively expensive to acquire labeled data, even when
unlabeled data is readily available. For instance, consider
the task of inferring the sleep quality of a patient from
data collected during usual health checks (e.g. EEG, EKG,
blood tests etc). To get a high-precision label for this
task, patients need to spend a night in a sleep lab, which
is expensive and time-consuming. Therefore, the labeled
dataset that we can collect cannot be too large. However,
a large unlabeled set of medical records of similar patients
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Alexandru T, ifrea <tifreaa@inf.ethz.ch>.

Perhaps surprisingly, for high-dimensional problems with
a low labeling budget, M-AL underperforms PL even when
(i) the Bayes error is zero; and (ii) one uses the distance to

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
The work of Zhang (2018) also focuses on high-dimensional
data, but with the purpose of improved computational efficiency.

1

