Nearly-Optimal Hierarchical Clustering for Well-Clustered Graphs

Steinar Laenen * 1 Bogdan-Adrian Manghiuc * 1 He Sun * 1

Abstract

assuming the Small Set Expansion Hypothesis (Charikar &
Chatziafratis, 2017), an O(1)-approximate HC tree can be
constructed in nearly-linear time for a wide range of graph
instances occurring in practice. This nearly-linear time complexity of our designed algorithms represents a significant
improvement over the previous state-of-the-art on the same
problem (Manghiuc & Sun, 2021).

This paper presents two efficient hierarchical clustering (HC) algorithms with respect to Dasgupta’s
cost function. For any input graph G with a clear
cluster-structure, our designed algorithms run in
nearly-linear time in the input size of G, and return an O(1)-approximate HC tree with respect to
Dasgupta’s cost function. We compare the performance of our algorithm against the previous stateof-the-art on synthetic and real-world datasets
and show that our designed algorithm produces
comparable or better HC trees with much lower
running time.

Our designed two algorithms share the same framework at
the high level: we apply spectral clustering (Ng et al., 2001)
to partition an input graph G into k clusters P1 , . . . , Pk , and
further partition each cluster by grouping the vertices in
every Pi (1 ⩽ i ⩽ k) with respect to their degrees. We call
the resulting vertex sets degree buckets, and show that the
Dasgupta cost of HC trees constructed on degree buckets is
low. These intermediate trees constructed on every bucket
can therefore form the basis of our final tree. To construct
the final HC tree on G, we merge the degree bucket trees
based on the following two approaches:

1. Introduction
Hierarchical clustering (HC) is the recursive partitioning of
a dataset into increasingly smaller clusters via an effective
binary tree representation, and has been employed as a standard package in data analysis with widespread applications
in practice. Traditional HC algorithms are typically based
on agglomerative heuristics and, due to the lack of a clear
objective function, there was limited work on their analysis.
Dasgupta (2016) introduced a simple cost function for hierarchical clustering, and this work has inspired a number of
algorithmic studies on hierarchical clustering.

• Our first approach treats every degree bucket of vertices
in G as a single vertex of another “contracted” graph
H with much fewer vertices. Thanks to the small size
of H, we apply the recursive sparsest cut algorithm
and construct a tree on H in a top-down fashion. The
structure of this tree on H determines how the degree
bucket trees are merged when constructing our final
tree of G.

In this paper we study efficient hierarchical clustering for
graphs with a clear structure of clusters. We prove that, under two different conditions of an input graph G that characterise its cluster-structure, one can construct in nearly-linear
time1 an O(1)-approximate HC tree T of G with respect to
Dasgupta’s cost. Our results show that, while it’s NP-hard to
construct an O(1)-approximate HC tree for general graphs

• For our second approach, we show that under a regularity assumption on the vertex degrees, it suffices to
merge the clusters in a “caterpillar” style. This simpler construction allows our second algorithm to run
in nearly-linear time for a larger number of clusters k
compared with the first algorithm.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Informatics, University of
Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Steinar
Laenen <steinar.laenen@ed.ac.uk>, Bogdan-Adrian Manghiuc
<b.a.manghiuc@sms.ed.ac.uk>, He Sun <h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.

To demonstrate the significance of our work, we experimentally compare our first algorithm against the previous state-of-the-art and a well-known linkage heuristic
(AverageLinkage) on both synthetic and real-world
datasets. Our experimental results show that the trees
constructed from our algorithm and AverageLinkage
achieve similar cost values, which are much lower than
the ones constructed from Cohen-Addad et al. (2017) and
Manghiuc & Sun (2021). Moreover, our algorithm runs
significantly faster than the other three tested algorithms.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
We say that, for an input graph G with n vertices and m edges,
an algorithm runs in nearly-linear time if the algorithm’s running
time is O(m · logc n) for some constant c. For simplicity we use
e
O(·) to hide this logc n factor.

1

