Correcting discount-factor mismatch in on-policy policy gradient methods

Fengdi Che 1 Gautham Vasan 1 A. Rupam Mahmood 1 2

Abstract

-1

The policy gradient theorem gives a convenient
form of the policy gradient in terms of three factors: an action value, a gradient of the action likelihood, and a state distribution involving discounting called the discounted stationary distribution.
But commonly used on-policy methods based on
the policy gradient theorem ignores the discount
factor in the state distribution, which is technically
incorrect and may even cause degenerate learning behavior in some environments. An existing
solution corrects this discrepancy by using γ t as
a factor in the gradient estimate. However, this
solution is not widely adopted and does not work
well in tasks where the later states are similar to
earlier states. We introduce a novel distribution
correction to account for the discounted stationary distribution that can be plugged into many
existing gradient estimators. Our correction circumvents the performance degradation associated
with the γ t correction with a lower variance. Importantly, compared to the uncorrected estimators,
our algorithm provides improved state emphasis
to evade suboptimal policies in certain environments and consistently matches or exceeds the
original performance on several OpenAI gym and
DeepMind suite benchmarks.†

+1
1

2
-1
+1

Performance on the counterexample
our correction
existing correction
biased

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

00
10
00

training steps

80
00

0
60
00

0
40
00

20
00

0

0.0

0

probability of the optimal action

1.0

Figure 1. The top figure shows a deterministic two-state environment where the agent always starts from state 1 and takes either
top or bottom action. The bottom figure presents the learned probability of choosing the optimal action when the agent uses the
original biased gradient or gradients with corrections. More details
are given in the Experiments section.

1. Introduction
searching for an optimal parameterized policy. Although
the policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al. 1999) suggests
model-free PG algorithms based on the discounted stationary state distribution and the discounted expected returns
for estimating gradients, the widely used on-policy algorithms (Schulman et al. 2017, Wu et al. 2017) make a biased
approximation of the gradients with undiscounted stationary state distribution and discounted returns, leading to the
discount-factor mismatch issue. This biased gradient may
result in a sub-optimal policy (Nota & Thomas 2019) as
shown in Figure 1, which does not emphasize early rewards
and causes degenerate learning behavior. One solution to
this issue is including the discount factor’s power term γ t
in the update (Thomas 2014), where t is the showing-up

Maximizing discounted cumulative returns is a commonly
chosen surrogate objective for reinforcement learning (RL)
for many well-performing algorithms (Sutton & Barto 2018,
Fujimoto et al. 2018, Che et al. 2022). Popular policy gradient (PG) algorithms maximize this objective by directly
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada 2 CIFAR AI Chair, Amii,Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. Correspondence to: Fengdi Che <fengdi@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
†
Source code: Averaged PPO and the rest.

1

