Communication-Constrained Bandits under Additive Gaussian Noise
Prathamesh Mayekar 1 Jonathan Scarlett 1 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1

Abstract

The SMAB problem crucially captures the trade-off between exploring actions to find the optimal one or exploiting the action believed to be the best, but possibly sub optimal action, lying at the heart of many practical sequential
decision-making problems. In its simplest form, the SMAB
problem is a sequential game between the learner and the
environment. The game is played over a finite number of
rounds. In each round, the learner plays an arm from a
given set of arms, and then the environment reveals a reward corresponding to the played arm. The reward for a
particular arm is iid across rounds, with the reward distribution unknown to the learner. The learner’s goal is to
maximize the expected cumulative reward over the entirety
of the game.

We study a distributed stochastic multi-armed
bandit where a client supplies the learner with
communication-constrained feedback based on
the rewards for the corresponding arm pulls. In
our setup, the client must encode the rewards
such that the second moment of the encoded rewards is no more than P , and this encoded reward is further corrupted by additive Gaussian
noise of variance σ 2 ; the learner only has access to this corrupted reward. For this setting,
we derive
lower bound

q an information-theoretic
KT
on
the
minimax
regret
of any
of Ω
SNR∧1
scheme, where SNR := σP2 , and K and T are the
number of arms and time horizon, respectively.
Furthermore, we propose a multi-phase bandit
algorithm, UE-UCB++, which matches this lower
bound to a minor additive factor. UE-UCB++ performs uniform exploration in its initial phases
and then utilizes the upper confidence bound
(UCB) bandit algorithm in its final phase. An interesting feature of UE-UCB++ is that the coarser
estimates of the mean rewards formed during a
uniform exploration phase help to refine the encoding protocol in the next phase, leading to
more accurate mean estimates of the rewards in
the subsequent phase. This positive reinforcement cycle is critical to reducing the number of
uniform exploration rounds and closely matching
our lower bound.

In another direction, in modern distributed optimization
frameworks such as Federated Learning (Konečný et al.,
2016), a central learner trains a global machine learning
model by leveraging updates from remote clients (typically,
stochastic gradients computed on local data). However, a
major bottleneck in such settings is the uplink communication cost – the cost of sending remote client’s updates to the
learner. This has spurred a recent line of work that seeks to
minimize the amount of communication by a remote client
while still maintaining the accuracy of the global model
(see Kairouz et al. (2021) for a recent survey).
An emerging abstraction to understand the trade-off between communication and accuracy in distributed optimization is to understand the one-client setting, where one
remote client supplies the learner with gradient updates
over a rate-limited channel (see, for instance, Acharya et al.
(2021); Gandikota et al. (2019); Lin et al. (2021); Mayekar
& Tyagi (2020)). A similar abstraction has been studied
for distributed SMAB problems in two interesting recent
works: Hanna et al. (2022); Mitra et al. (2022). Our work
is inspired by these two studies.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (SMAB) is a classic sequential decision-making problem with decades of research
(see Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020) for a recent survey).

In particular, Hanna et al. (2022) studies the distributed
SMAB problem where a client supplies the learner with reward feedback corresponding to its arm pull. To account
for the uplink cost from the client to the learner, at the
tth round, the client must quantize the reward feedback to
rt -bits, and only the quantized reward feedback is available to the learner for further decision-making. Mitra et al.
(2022) study a linear distributed SMAB problem where at
each round, the remote client supplies the learner with a r-

1
National University of Singapore.
Correspondence
to: Prathamesh Mayekar, Jonathan Scarlett, Vincent Y.
F.
Tan <pratha22@nus.edu.sg, scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg,
vtan@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

