In Search of Insights, Not Magic Bullets: Towards Demystification of the Model
Selection Dilemma in Heterogeneous Treatment Effect Estimation

Alicia Curth 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract

the last five years: a plethora of new methods for estimating
conditional average treatment effects (CATE) have been proposed recently, including method-agnostic so-called metalearner strategies that could be implemented using any ML
prediction method (Künzel et al., 2019; Nie & Wager, 2021;
Kennedy, 2020; Curth & van der Schaar, 2021b) as well
as adaptations of specific ML methods (Shalit et al., 2017;
Alaa & van der Schaar, 2018; Wager & Athey, 2018) to the
treatment effect estimation context.

Personalized treatment effect estimates are often
of interest in high-stakes applications – thus, before deploying a model estimating such effects in
practice, one needs to be sure that the best candidate from the ever-growing machine learning
toolbox for this task was chosen. Unfortunately,
due to the absence of counterfactual information
in practice, it is usually not possible to rely on
standard validation metrics for doing so, leading
to a well-known model selection dilemma in the
treatment effect estimation literature. While some
solutions have recently been investigated, systematic understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of different model selection criteria is still
lacking. In this paper, instead of attempting to declare a global ‘winner’, we therefore empirically
investigate success- and failure modes of different selection criteria. We highlight that there is
a complex interplay between selection strategies,
candidate estimators and the data used for comparing them, and provide interesting insights into
the relative (dis)advantages of different criteria
alongside desiderata for the design of further illuminating empirical studies in this context.

Personalized treatment effect estimates, crucially, are often of interest in safety-critical applications, particularly in
medicine and policy making. Thus, prior to use in practice we would like to ensure that we have selected a ML
estimator from this vast toolbox that is trustworthy and outputs the best possible estimates. While this sounds like
a straightforward requirement, it remains a big hurdle in
practice: because of the fundamental problem of causal inference (Holland, 1986), ground truth treatment effects are
usually not available to perform standard model validation,
and alternative solutions need to be considered to overcome
this model selection dilemma. As we discuss below, despite
recent proposals of new model selection strategies and recent empirical studies comparing different strategies, we
believe that there is still a general lack of understanding
of the (dis)advantages of different strategies and how they
are entangled with underlying data-generating processes
(DGPs) – which we aim to provide in this work.

1. Introduction

Related work. Despite its practical relevance, the problem of model selection for heterogeneous treatment effect
estimation has received only very limited attention so far
(this stands also in stark contrast to the plethora of new
estimators proposed in recent years, see Appendix B for
an overview). An intuitive and often applied solution is to
rely on a simple prediction-type validation and evaluate a
model’s performance in predicting the observed (factual)
outcome associated with the factual treatment instead of
evaluating the quality of the effect estimate. More targeted
alternatives have recently been developed: Rolling & Yang
(2014) propose to construct approximate effect validation
targets by matching the nearest treated and control units
and comparing their outcomes, Nie & Wager (2021) highlight that their R-learner objective could also be used for

Applications in which the causal effects of treatments (or
actions, interventions & policies) are of interest are ubiquitous in empirical science, and personalized effect estimates
could ultimately be used to improve decision making in
many domains, including healthcare, economics and marketing. Machine learning (ML) has shown great promise
in providing such personalized effect estimates (Bica et al.,
2021), and the ML literature on the topic has matured over
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Alicia Curth <amc253@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

