Multisample Flow Matching: Straightening Flows with Minibatch Couplings

Aram-Alexandre Pooladian * 1 2 Heli Ben-Hamu * 3 Carles Domingo-Enrich * 1 4 Brandon Amos 1
Yaron Lipman 1 3 Ricky T. Q. Chen 1
NFE=400

Abstract
Simulation-free methods for training continuoustime generative models construct probability
paths that go between noise distributions and
individual data samples. Recent works, such as
Flow Matching, derived paths that are optimal
for each data sample. However, these algorithms
rely on independent data and noise samples, and
do not exploit underlying structure in the data
distribution for constructing probability paths.
We propose Multisample Flow Matching, a more
general framework that uses non-trivial couplings
between data and noise samples while satisfying
the correct marginal constraints. At very small
overhead costs, this generalization allows us to
(i) reduce gradient variance during training, (ii)
obtain straighter flows for the learned vector
field, which allows us to generate high-quality
samples using fewer function evaluations, and
(iii) obtain transport maps with lower cost in
high dimensions, which has applications beyond
generative modeling. Importantly, we do so
in a completely simulation-free manner with a
simple minimization objective. We show that our
proposed methods improve sample consistency
on downsampled ImageNet data sets, and lead
to better low-cost sample generation.

12

8

Flow Matching

6

NFE=400

12

8

6

Multisample Flow Matching

Figure 1. Multisample Flow Matching trained with batch optimal
couplings produces more consistent samples across varying NFEs.
Note that both flows on each row start from the same noise sample.

et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b). A number of works have
also adopted and generalized these simulation-free methods
(Lipman et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023;
Liu et al., 2022; Neklyudov et al., 2022) for continuous
normalizing flows (CNF; Chen et al. (2018)), a family of
continuous-time deep generative models that parameterizes
a vector field which flows noise samples into data samples.
Recently, Lipman et al. (2023) proposed Flow Matching
(FM), a method to train CNFs based on constructing explicit
conditional probability paths between the noise distribution
(at time t = 0) and each data sample (at time t = 1). Furthermore, they showed that these conditional probability
paths can be taken to be the optimal transport path when the
noise distribution is a standard Gaussian, a typical assumption in generative modeling. However, this does not imply
that the marginal probability path (marginalized over the
data distribution) is anywhere close to the optimal transport
path between the noise and data distributions.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models offer an attractive family of
paradigms that can approximate a data distribution and produce high quality samples, with impressive results in recent years (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Gafni
et al., 2022). In particular, these works have made use of
simulation-free training methods for diffusion models (Ho
*
Equal contribution 1 Meta AI (FAIR) 2 Center for Data Science,
NYU 3 Weizmann Institute of Science 4 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU. Correspondence to: Ricky T. Q. Chen
<rtqichen@meta.com>.

Most existing works, including diffusion models and Flow
Matching, have only considered conditional sample paths
where the endpoints (a noise sample and a data sample)
are sampled independently. However, this results in nonzero gradient variances even at convergence, slow training
times, and in particular limits the design of probability paths.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

