A Closer Look at Few-shot Classification Again

Xu Luo * 1 Hao Wu * 1 Ji Zhang 1 Lianli Gao 1 Jing Xu 2 Jingkuan Song 1

Abstract

design of the training algorithm should prepare for the algorithm used for adaptation. For this reason, pioneering works
(Vinyals et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017) formalize the problem with meta-learning framework,
where the training algorithm directly aims at optimizing the
adaptation algorithm during training in a learning-to-learn
fashion. Attracted by meta-learning’s elegant formalization
and properties well suited for few-shot learning, many subsequent works designed different meta-learning mechanisms
to solve few-shot classification problems.

Few-shot classification consists of a training
phase where a model is learned on a relatively
large dataset and an adaptation phase where the
learned model is adapted to previously-unseen
tasks with limited labeled samples. In this paper,
we empirically prove that the training algorithm
and the adaptation algorithm can be completely
disentangled, which allows algorithm analysis and
design to be done individually for each phase.
Our meta-analysis for each phase reveals several
interesting insights that may help better understand key aspects of few-shot classification and
connections with other fields such as visual representation learning and transfer learning. We hope
the insights and research challenges revealed in
this paper can inspire future work in related directions. Code and pre-trained models (in PyTorch)
are available at https://github.com/
Frankluox/CloserLookAgainFewShot.

It is then a surprise to find that a simple transfer learning
baseline — learning a supervised model using the training
set and adapting it using a simple adaptation algorithm (e.g.,
logistic regression) — performs better than all meta-learning
methods (Chen et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2020; Rizve et al.,
2021). Since simple supervised training is not designed
specifically for few-shot classification, this observation reveals that the training algorithm can be designed without
considering the choice of adaptation algorithm while achieving satisfactory performance. In this work, we take a step
further and ask the following question:

1. Introduction

Are training and adaptation algorithms completely uncorrelated in few-shot classification?

During the last decade, deep learning approaches have made
remarkable progress in large-scale image classification problems (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016). Since there
are infinitely many categories in the real world that cannot be
learned at once, a desire following success in image classification is to equip models with the ability to efficiently learn
new visual concepts. This demand gives rise to few-shot
classification (Fei-Fei et al., 2006; Vinyals et al., 2016)—
the problem of learning a model capable of adapting to new
classification tasks given only few labeled samples.

Here, “completely uncorrelated” means that the performance ranking of any set of adaptation algorithms is not
affected by the choice of training algorithms, and vice versa.
If this is true, the problem of finding the best combinations
of training and adaptation algorithms can be reduced to optimizing the training and adaptation algorithms individually,
which may largely ease the algorithm design process in the
future. We give an affirmative answer to this question by
conducting a systematic study on a variety of training and
adaptation algorithms used in few-shot classification.

This problem can be naturally broken into two phases: the
training phase for learning an adaptable model and the adaptation phase for adapting the model to new tasks. To make
quick adaptation possible, it is natural to think that the

This “uncorrelated” property also offers us an opportunity
to independently analyze algorithms of one phase by fixing
the algorithm of the other phase. We conduct such analysis in Section 4 for training algorithms and Section 5 for
adaptation algorithms. By varying important factors like
dataset scale, model architectures for the training phase, and
shots, ways, data distribution for the adaptation phase, we
obtain several interesting observations that lead to a deeper
understanding of few-shot classification and reveal some
critical relations to visual representation learning and trans-

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Jingkuan Song <jingkuan.song@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

