Interval Bound Interpolation for Few-shot Learning with Few Tasks

Shounak Datta * 1 Sankha Subhra Mullick * 1 Anish Chakrabarty 2 Swagatam Das 1
Task manifold

Abstract

Learned embedding
LU B

Few-shot learning aims to transfer the knowledge
acquired from training on a diverse set of tasks to
unseen tasks from the same task distribution with
a limited amount of labeled data. The underlying
requirement for effective few-shot generalization
is to learn a good representation of the task manifold. This becomes more difficult when only a limited number of tasks are available for training. In
such a few-task few-shot setting, it is beneficial to
explicitly preserve the local neighborhoods from
the task manifold and exploit this to generate artificial tasks for training. To this end, we introduce
the notion of interval bounds from the provably
robust training literature to few-shot learning. The
interval bounds are used to characterize neighborhoods around the training tasks. These neighborhoods can then be preserved by minimizing the
distance between a task and its respective bounds.
We then use a novel strategy to artificially form
new tasks for training by interpolating between
the available tasks and their respective interval
bounds. We apply our framework to both modelagnostic meta-learning as well as prototype-based
metric-learning paradigms. The efficacy of our
proposed approach is evident from the improved
performance on several datasets from diverse domains compared to current methods.

Task Distribution p(T )
LLB

Sample Task

Ti

f S
θ

f L−S
θ

LCE

Learner

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed interval bound propagation–
aided few-shot learning setup (best viewed in color): We use interval arithmetic to define a small ϵ-neighborhood around a training
task Ti sampled from the task distribution p(T ). IBP is then used
to obtain the bounding box around the mapping of the said neighborhood in the embedding space fθS given by the first S layers of
the learner fθ . While training the learner fθ to minimize the classification loss LCE on the query set Diq , we additionally attempt
to minimize the losses LLB and LU B , forcing the ϵ-neighborhood
to be compact in the embedding space as well.

methods attempt to leverage the knowledge acquired by
training on a large pool of such tasks to easily generalize to
unseen tasks from the same distribution, using only a few
labeled examples. We hereafter refer to the support of the
task distribution as the task manifold, which is distinct from
but closely related to the data manifold associated with the
data distribution. Since the unseen tasks are sampled from
the same underlying manifold governing the task distribution, we should ideally learn a good representation of the
task manifold by preserving the neighborhoods from the
high-dimensional manifold in the lower-dimensional feature
embedding (Tenenbaum et al., 2000; Roweis & Saul, 2000;
Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008). However, the labels associated with a task can define any arbitrary partitioning
of the data. Therefore, we may preserve the neighborhood
for a task by simply conserving the neighborhoods for the
corresponding subset of the data manifold in the feature
embedding learned by the few-shot learner. This facilitates
effective few-shot generalization to new tasks as the layers
which conserve the neighborhoods would likely require very
little adaptation, and only the subsequent layers of the network will need to be updated. However, existing few-shot
learning methods lack an explicit mechanism for achieving this. Further, real-world few-shot learning scenarios
like rare disease detection may have a smaller number of
training tasks required for effective learning due to various
constraints such as data collection costs, privacy concerns,

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning problems deal with diverse tasks consisting of subsets of data drawn from the same underlying data
manifold and associated labels. The joint distribution of
data and corresponding labels which governs the sampling
of such tasks is often called the task distribution (Finn et al.,
2017; Yao et al., 2022). Consequently, few-shot learning
*
Equal contribution 1 Electronics and Communication Sciences
Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India 2 Statistics and
Mathematics Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India. Correspondence to: Swagatam Das <swagatam.das@isical.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

