LESS-VFL: Communication-Efficient Feature Selection for
Vertical Federated Learning

Timothy Castiglia 1 Yi Zhou 2 Shiqiang Wang 2 Swanand Kadhe 2 Nathalie Baracaldo 2 Stacy Patterson 1

Abstract
We propose LESS-VFL, a communicationefficient feature selection method for distributed
systems with vertically partitioned data. We consider a system of a server and several parties with
local datasets that share a sample ID space but
have different feature sets. The parties wish to
collaboratively train a model for a prediction task.
As part of the training, the parties wish to remove
unimportant features in the system to improve
generalization, efficiency, and explainability. In
LESS-VFL, after a short pre-training period, the
server optimizes its part of the global model to
determine the relevant outputs from party models.
This information is shared with the parties to then
allow local feature selection without communication. We analytically prove that LESS-VFL removes spurious features from model training. We
provide extensive empirical evidence that LESSVFL can achieve high accuracy and remove spurious features at a fraction of the communication
cost of other feature selection approaches.

Figure 1. Example VFL model architecture. Non-significant features and embedding components (in gray) are removed after training with LESS-VFL.

where parties store a shared sample ID space, but different
private feature sets. For example, a healthcare provider, a
wearable technology company, and an insurance company
wish to collaboratively train a model for disease prediction. The parties have information on the same individuals
(sample ID space), but each party stores different health
information (feature space). In VFL, parties typically use local feature extractor models, such as deep neural networks,
to produce low-dimensional embeddings of local feature
sets (Hu et al., 2019; Ceballos et al., 2020). The server takes
embeddings as input to a fusion model for predictions. We
provide an example VFL model in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Federated learning has recently become of interest to the
research community, and has shown promise in several application areas, such as healthcare, smart transportation, and
predictive energy systems (Sun et al., 2019; Kairouz et al.,
2021; Zhou et al., 2021). Federated learning algorithms
support distributed model training among parties without
the need to directly share local private data.

Feature selection is an important part of machine learning
tasks. Often, datasets contain many spurious features that do
not relate to the current prediction task. For example, health
care providers may train models using electronic medical
records (EMRs), which contain clinical documents, results
from routine visits, and many features that may be irrelevant
to disease diagnosis (Canino et al., 2016). Failing to remove
spurious features can have drastic effects on generalization.
In Figure 2, we compare the test accuracy of VFL training
with the original dataset against training with the dataset
and an additional set of Gaussian noise features. Simply
adding in these spurious features causes the test accuracy
of VFL to fall drastically. In addition to improving model

Vertical Federated Learning (VFL), an important class of
federated learning algorithms, has received a significant
amount of attention lately (Yang et al., 2019; Cha et al.,
2021; Castiglia et al., 2022). VFL works consider the case
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 2 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Timothy Castiglia <castigliatim@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

