Learning Hidden Markov Models When the Locations of Missing Observations
are Unknown
Binyamin Perets * 1 Mark Kozdoba * 1 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract

quential data, with applications in a variety of fields, such as
speech recognition (Yu & Deng, 2016) and economical time
series (Hamilton, 2020; Kaufmann, 2019), to name a few.
In all of the above applications, it is common to have missing observations. That is, we assume that a certain system,
after N time steps, produces a full sequence of observations
Ui = (u1 , . . . , uN ), but there is a known subset of times,
1 ≤ t1 , . . . , tm ≤ N ,m ≤ N , such that the observation
m
values at these times, utj j=1 , are not known to us. This
situation is illustrated in the first and second lines of Figure
1a. We refer to this type of missing values as missing values with known locations (or known gaps, Interchangeably),
since we know which of the values are missing.

The Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is one of the
most widely used statistical models for sequential
data analysis. One of the key reasons for this versatility is the ability of HMM to deal with missing
data. However, standard HMM learning algorithms rely crucially on the assumption that the
positions of the missing observations within the
observation sequence are known. In the natural
sciences, where this assumption is often violated,
special variants of HMM, commonly known as
Silent-state HMMs (SHMMs), are used. Despite
their widespread use, these algorithms strongly
rely on specific structural assumptions of the underlying chain, such as acyclicity, thus limiting
the applicability of these methods. Moreover,
even in the acyclic case, it has been shown that
these methods can lead to poor reconstruction. In
this paper we consider the general problem of
learning an HMM from data with unknown missing observation locations. We provide reconstruction algorithms that do not require any assumptions about the structure of the underlying chain,
and can also be used with limited prior knowledge,
unlike SHMM. We evaluate and compare the algorithms in a variety of scenarios, measuring their
reconstruction precision, and robustness under
model miss-specification. Notably, we show that
under proper specifications one can reconstruct
the process dynamics as well as if the missing
observations positions were known.

(a) Omission Process Illustration

(b) Ignoring the Gaps
Figure 1. (a) The gaps location may alter the sequence considerably. (b) The Naive approach may perform poorly, highlighting
the need for a more careful treatment of gaps. (s.d < .062)

1. Introduction
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs),(Murphy, 2012), are a
well established and widely used method for modeling se-

1.1. Motivation and Previous Works
It is commonly assumed that observations are provided with
time stamps, and that a single time unit corresponds to a
step of the underlying chain. Such assumptions naturally
imply that when there are missing values their location
is known, however, this assumption do not hold for many
applications. For example consider the case of irregular time
series (Ramati.M, 2010), also known as unevenly spaced

*

Equal contribution 1 Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Binyamin Perets
<sbp67250@campus.technion.ac.il >.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

