Which Invariance Should We Transfer? A Causal Minimax Learning Approach

Mingzhou Liu 1 2 Xiangyu Zheng 3 Xinwei Sun

Abstract

Fang Fang 5 Yizhou Wang 1 2 6

1. Introduction

A major barrier to deploying current machine
learning models lies in their non-reliability to
dataset shifts. To resolve this problem, most
existing studies attempted to transfer stable information to unseen environments. Particularly,
independent causal mechanisms-based methods
proposed to remove mutable causal mechanisms
via the do-operator. Compared to previous methods, the obtained stable predictors are more effective in identifying stable information. However, a
key question remains: which subset of this whole
stable information should the model transfer, in
order to achieve optimal generalization ability?
To answer this question, we present a comprehensive minimax analysis from a causal perspective.
Specifically, we first provide a graphical condition
for the whole stable set to be optimal. When this
condition fails, we surprisingly find with an example that this whole stable set, although can fully
exploit stable information, is not the optimal one
to transfer. To identify the optimal subset under
this case, we propose to estimate the worst-case
risk with a novel optimization scheme over the
intervention functions on mutable causal mechanisms. We then propose an efficient algorithm
to search for the subset with minimal worst-case
risk, based on a newly defined equivalence relation between stable subsets. Compared to the
exponential cost of exhaustively searching over
all subsets, our searching strategy enjoys a polynomial complexity. The effectiveness and efficiency
of our methods are demonstrated on synthetic data
and the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease.
1

4

Current machine learning systems, which are commonly
deployed based on their in-distribution performance, often
encounter dataset shifts (Quinonero et al., 2008) such as
covariate shift, label shift, ect., due to changes in the data
generating process. When such shifts exist in deployment
environments, the model may give unreliable prediction results, which can cause severe consequences in safe-critical
tasks such as healthcare (Hendrycks et al., 2021). At the
heart of this unreliability issue are stability and robustness
aspects, which respectively denote the insensitivity of prediction behavior and generalization errors to dataset shifts.
For example, consider the system deployed to predict the
Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) score that is commonly adopted (Mayo, 2016) to measure the severity of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). During the prediction, the system
can only access biomarkers and volumes of brain regions
as covariates, with demographic information anonymous
for privacy consideration. However, the changes in such
demographics can cause shifts in covariates. To achieve
reliability for the deployed model, its prediction is desired
to be stable against demographic changes, and meanwhile
to be constantly accurate across all populations. For this
purpose, this paper aims to find the most robust (i.e., minimax optimal) predictor, among the set of stable predictors
across all deployed environments.
To achieve this goal, many studies attempted to learn invariance to transfer to unseen data. Examples include ICP
(Peters et al., 2016) and (Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018; Liu
et al., 2021; Ausset et al., 2022) that assumed the prediction mechanism given causal features or representations to
be invariant; or (Subbaswamy et al., 2019; Rothenhäusler
et al., 2021) that explicitly attributed the variation to a prior
selection diagram or an exogenous variable. Particularly,
the recent independent causal mechanisms (ICM)-based
methods (Subbaswamy et al., 2019; Schölkopf et al., 2021)
causally factorized the joint distribution into the mutable
(M ) set and the stable (S) set, which contained variables
with changed and unchanged causal mechanisms, respectively. By intervening on M , they obtained a set of stable
predictors, with each containing a stable subset of S to transfer. Compared to ICP-related methods (Peters et al., 2016;
Bühlmann, 2020), these stable predictors exploited more

Sch. of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University 3 Dep. of Statistics,
Guanghua Sch. of Management, Peking University 4 Sch. of Data
Science, Fudan University 5 Sch. of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University 6 Inst. for Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University. Correspondence to: Xinwei Sun <sunxinwei@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

