Causal Proxy Models for Concept-based Model Explanations

Zhengxuan Wu * 1 Karel D’Oosterlinck * 2 Atticus Geiger * 1 Amir Zur 1 Christopher Potts 1
to a relevant counterfactual version X ′ . Unfortunately, even
though neural networks are fully observed, deterministic systems, we still encounter the fundamental problem of causal
inference (Holland, 1986): for a given ground-truth input X,
we never observe the counterfactual inputs X ′ necessary for
isolating the causal effects of model representations on outputs. The issue is especially pressing in domains where it is
hard to synthesize approximate counterfactuals. In response
to this, explanation methods typically do not explicitly train
on counterfactuals at all.

Abstract
Explainability methods for NLP systems encounter a version of the fundamental problem of
causal inference: for a given ground-truth input
text, we never truly observe the counterfactual
texts necessary for isolating the causal effects of
model representations on outputs. In response,
many explainability methods make no use of counterfactual texts, assuming they will be unavailable. In this paper, we show that robust causal
explainability methods can be created using approximate counterfactuals, which can be written
by humans to approximate a specific counterfactual or simply sampled using metadata-guided
heuristics. The core of our proposal is the Causal
Proxy Model (CPM). A CPM explains a blackbox model N because it is trained to have the
same actual input/output behavior as N while
creating neural representations that can be intervened upon to simulate the counterfactual input/output behavior of N . Furthermore, we show
that the best CPM for N performs comparably
to N in making factual predictions, which means
that the CPM can simply replace N , leading to
more explainable deployed models. Our code is
available at https://github.com/frankaging/
Causal-Proxy-Model.

In this paper, we show that robust explanation methods
for NLP models can be obtained using texts approximating true counterfactuals. The heart of our proposal is the
Causal Proxy Model (CPM). CPMs are trained to mimic
both the factual and counterfactual behavior of a black-box
model N . We explore two different methods for training
such explainers. These methods share a distillation-style
objective that pushes them to mimic the factual behavior of
N , but they differ in their counterfactual objectives. The
simpler of these two methods is the input-based CPMIN ,
which appends to the factual input a new token associated
with the counterfactual concept value. This proves remarkably effective. However, we are able to achieve deeper
and more human-interpretable explanations with the hiddenstate CPMHI , which employs the Interchange Intervention
Training (IIT) method of Geiger et al. (2022) to localize information about the target concept in specific hidden states.
We show that both methods are effective even with very partial causal models of the target domain. Figure 1 provides a
high-level overview.

1. Introduction

We evaluate these methods on the CEBaB benchmark for
causal explanation methods (Abraham et al., 2022), which
provides large numbers of original examples (restaurant
reviews) with human-created counterfactuals for specific
concepts (e.g., service quality), with all the texts labeled
for their concept-level and text-level sentiment. This counterfactual data is used to uncover the true counterfactual
behavior of a model, against which a causal explanation
of the model can be benchmarked. We consider two types
of approximate counterfactuals derived from CEBaB: texts
written by humans to approximate a specific counterfactual,
and texts sampled using metadata-guided heuristics. Both
strategies lead to state-of-the-art performance on CEBaB
for both CPMIN and CPMHI , comparing against all public

The gold standard for model explanation methods in AI
should be to elucidate the causal role that a model’s representations play in its overall behavior – to truly explain why
the model makes the predictions it does. Causal explanation
methods seek to do this by resolving the counterfactual question of what the model would do if input X were changed
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, Stanford, California 2 Ghent University - imec, Ghent, Belgium. Correspondence to: Zhengxuan Wu <atticusg@stanford.edu>, Karel
D’Oosterlinck <karel.doosterlinck@ugent.be>, Atticus Geiger <atticusg@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

