A/B Testing in Network Data with Covariate-Adaptive Randomization

Jialu Wang
Department of Statistics
George Washington Univ.
Washington, DC 20052, USA
jialu@gwu.edu

Ping Li
LinkedIn Ads
Linkedin Corporation
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
pinli@linkedin.com

Abstract

Feifang Hu
Department of Statistics
George Washington Univ.
Washington, DC 20052, USA
feifang@gwu.edu

This aforementioned network interaction is demonstrated
by the network effect and the spill-over effect. The network effect, also known as social interference, happens
when users communicate treatment information with their
neighbors through a social network. It is considered as a
nuisance parameter since we focus on the classical average
treatment effect (ATE), which is denoted by µ (Basse and
Airoldi, 2018; Zhou et al., 2020; Gui et al., 2015; Zhang and
Kang, 2022). The spill-over effect is also undesirable in the
ATE estimation. It describes the scenario that a user is assigned to the control group but has neighbors assigned to the
treatment group. In such case, the treatment on one user may
impact the neighbors and impair comparisons in the design
of experiments (Jiang et al., 2016; Ugander et al., 2013).

Users linked together through a network often
tend to have similar behaviors. This phenomenon
is usually known as network interaction. Users’
characteristics, the covariates, are often correlated
with their outcomes. Therefore, one should incorporate both the covariates and the network information in a carefully designed randomization
to improve the estimation of the average treatment effect (ATE) in network A/B testing. In this
paper, we propose a new adaptive procedure to
balance both the network and the covariates. We
show that the imbalance measures with respect
to the covariates and the network are Op (1). We
also demonstrate the relationships between the
improved balances and the increased efficiency in
terms of the mean square error (MSE). Numerical
studies demonstrate the advanced performance
of the proposed procedure regarding the greater
comparability of the treatment groups and the reduction of MSE for estimating the ATE.

Homophily is also used to explain network interaction. It
refers to the tendency that users with similar characteristics,
the covariates, are more likely to connect with each other,
resulting in correlated behaviors among them. McPherson
et al. (2001) explained that the network ties are structured
according to the users’ covariates, and the users’ interacting
behaviors are related to their similar covariates. Therefore, a
carefully-designed randomization procedure, incorporating
the information of the covariates and the observed networks,
is critical for valid estimation of ATE (Manski, 1993).

1. Introduction

1.1. Our Contributions

The classical A/B testing is developed based on the Stable
Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA)(Rubin, 1978),
which claims that each user’s response depends only on his
or her own treatment, regardless of other users’ treatments
or responses. However, the SUTVA is often violated in network A/B testing because users can interact with each other,
e.g., their neighbors or friends, and thus may have similar behaviors. This phenomenon, widely existing in social
media platforms, online marketplaces, and economic studies, may complicate the estimation of the average treatment
effect (ATE).

The imbalance of covariates and the network interaction
may affect the evaluation of the ATE in network A/B testing.
To address this concern, we propose an adaptive randomization algorithm to achieve the balance with respect to
the covariates and the network effect simultaneously. It
directly reduces the MSE through a sequential experiment
without complicated post-design re-weighting. Several designs, such as complete randomization (CR), covariateadaptive randomization procedures (CAR) (Hu and Hu,
2012), and the adaptive randomization for network A/B
test (NAR) (Zhou et al., 2020), are special cases of our
proposed procedure.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

