Efficient Graph Field Integrators Meet Point Clouds

Krzysztof Choromanski * 1 2 Arijit Sehanobish * 3 Han Lin * 2 Yunfan Zhao * 2 Eli Berger 4 Tetiana Parshakova 5
Alvin Pan 2 David Watkins 6 Tianyi Zhang 2 Valerii Likhosherstov 7 Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury 8
Avinava Dubey 1 Deepali Jain 1 Tamas Sarlos 1 Snigdha Chaturvedi 8 Adrian Weller 7 9

Abstract
We present two new classes of algorithms for efficient field integration on graphs encoding point
clouds. The first class, SeparatorFactorization
(SF), leverages the bounded genus of point
cloud mesh graphs, while the second class,
RFDiffusion (RFD), uses popular ϵ-nearestneighbor graph representations for point clouds.
Both can be viewed as providing the functionality of Fast Multipole Methods (FMMs, Greengard & Rokhlin, 1987), which have had a tremendous impact on efficient integration, but for nonEuclidean spaces. We focus on geometries induced by distributions of walk lengths between
points (e.g., shortest-path distance). We provide
an extensive theoretical analysis of our algorithms,
obtaining new results in structural graph theory as
a byproduct. We also perform exhaustive empirical evaluation, including on-surface interpolation
for rigid and deformable objects (particularly for
mesh-dynamics modeling), Wasserstein distance
computations for point clouds, and the GromovWasserstein variant.

Figure 1. Visualization of the problem of integrating vector-field
F on the mesh-graph. Vector i(v) in the green-node v is defined as
a weighted sum of the vectors F(w) in all the nodes (red arrows)
with the coefficients K(w, v) given as K(w, v) = f (dist(w, v))
for a shortest-path-distance function dist between nodes of the
mesh-graph and some function f : R → R (with f (0) = 0). The
shortest-path-distance tree from v is marked in black.

expression i(v) for each v ∈ V, as defined below:
X
i(v) :=
K(w, v)F(w).

(1)

w∈V

The expression i(v) can be interpreted as an integration
of F on G with respect to measure K(·, v). As such, it
can also be thought of as a discrete approximation of the
F-field integration in the continuous non-Euclidean space,
discretely approximated by G. We refer to the process of
computing i(v) for every v ∈ V as graph-field integration
(GFI), see: Fig. 1. We write N = |V| for the size of V.

1. Introduction & Related Work
Let us consider a weighted undirected graph G =
(V, E, W), where: V stands for the set of vertices/nodes, E
is the set of edges and W : E → R+ encodes edge-weights.
We assume that a tensor-field F : V → Rd1 ×...×dl is defined on V, where: d1 , . . . , dl stand for tensor dimensions.
A kernel (similarity measure) K : V ×V → R on V is given.
In this paper, we are interested in efficiently computing the
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Columbia University
Independent Researcher 4 Haifa University 5 Stanford University
6
The Boston Dynamics AI Institute 7 University of Cambridge
8
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 9 The Alan
Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Krzysztof Choromanski
<kchoro@google.com>.

A naive, brute-force approach to computing all i(v) is to: (1)
calculate a kernel matrix K = [K(w, v)]w,v∈V ∈ RN ×N
(pre-processing), (2) conduct d1 · . . . · dl matrix-vector
multiplications: Kvc1 ,...,cl (inference) for 0 ≤ ci < di ,
def
where vc1 ,...,cl = F(·)[c1 ] . . . [cl ] ∈ RN . Both steps are
computationally expensive: inference requires O(N 2 d1 ·
. . .·dl ) time; and pre-processing at least O(N 2 ) (in practice,
depending on kernel K, often at least O(N 3 )). Therefore for
large N , this approach becomes computationally infeasible.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

It is thus natural to ask the following: Can pre-processing
or inference be performed in sub-quadratic time for the
number of nodes of a graph?

3

1

