Decoding Layer Saliency in Language Transformers

Elizabeth M. Hou 1 Gregory Castanon 1

Abstract

architectures, with convolutional heads to visual networks
encouraging local associations while stacks of fully connected transformer layers allow natural language tokens to
associate more globally. This free association, combined
with the degree of model complexity in transformer architectures, leads to challenges in interpretability, as not all
feature spaces within the hidden layers of the network map
cleanly to natural language.

In this paper, we introduce a strategy for identifying textual saliency in large-scale language
models applied to classification tasks. In visual
networks where saliency is more well-studied,
saliency is naturally localized through the convolutional layers of the network; however, the
same is not true in modern transformer-stack networks used to process natural language. We
adapt gradient-based saliency methods for these
networks, propose a method for evaluating the
degree of semantic coherence of each layer, and
demonstrate consistent improvement over numerous other methods for textual saliency on
multiple benchmark classification datasets. Our
approach requires no additional training or access to labelled data, and is comparatively very
computationally efficient.

Current methods that explain the decision making processes of transformer-stack architectures focus on the embedding layer. However, these methods often result in confusing or redundant explanations, as information gets muddled passing through multiple layers of transformers in the
stack. Along with (Rogers et al., 2020), we hypothesize
that a more meaningful, clear, decision-oriented representation exists in solely the later layers of the network. In this
paper, we propose a method that only captures the signal of
the later layers of the transformer stack and projects it back
onto the token space of natural language. Our method can
be paired with any layer-based saliency metric, explicitly
accounts for multiple layers of self-attention mechanisms
and reflects the implications of the complex pre-training
and task specific fine-tuning on the layers in the architecture. We validate this method both with objective measures of model importance (Hiding / Revealing Game) and
human measures of external consistency (Token Overlap),
and demonstrate significant improvements over the state of
the art.

1. Introduction
Trained on the vast swathes of open-source text available
on the internet, large-scale language models have demonstrated impressive performance in text generation and classification. Most recently, models with transformer-stack architectures have shown an impressive ability to focus on
task-salient elements of language and utilize that focus to
achieve superhuman performance in certain constrained areas. However, there is a growing concern that despite this
performance, these models lack transparency and have unpredictable blind spots in certain areas. This has led to an
increased focus on salience in natural language i.e. identifying which elements of text the model considers important
for making a decision.

Our contributions are:
1. We propose a computationally-efficient method using
a pre-trained language model (LM) head to “decode”
the hidden layers by mapping their features back onto
the token space and present its application to an example saliency approach (Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al.,
2017)) for both binary and multi-class classification
problems. Our method not only requires no additional
training or labels and works for any saliency method
that calculates layer-specific saliency, but prioritizes
task-specific information over language structure.

Unlike computer vision, where the pixels relevant to a task
are often grouped together, the words that are important
in a movie review, article or resume may not be close to
each other. This lack of locality is reflected in the preferred
1
STR, 600 West Cummings Park, Woburn, MA 01801, USA.
Correspondence to: Elizabeth M. Hou <elizabeth.hou@str.us>.

2. We demonstrate improvement over state of the art
methods for natural language explainability in two objective measures. In the Hiding / Revealing Game,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

