Near-Optimal Cryptographic Hardness of Agnostically Learning
Halfspaces and ReLU Regression under Gaussian Marginals

Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Daniel M. Kane * 2 Lisheng Ren * 1

Abstract

free agnostic model (Haussler, 1992; Kearns et al., 1994),
even weak learning is computationally hard (Guruswami &
Raghavendra, 2006; Feldman et al., 2006; Daniely, 2016;
Tiegel, 2022). Due to this computational intractability, a
significant branch of research has focused on agnostically
learning halfspaces in the distribution-specific setting. Intuitively, the underlying structure of the data distribution
can potentially be leveraged to obtain non-trivial efficient
algorithms robust to adversarial label noise.

We study the task of agnostically learning halfspaces under the Gaussian distribution. Specifically, given labeled examples (x, y) from an
unknown distribution on Rn × {±1}, whose
marginal distribution on x is the standard Gaussian and the labels y can be arbitrary, the goal is
to output a hypothesis with 0-1 loss OPT + ϵ,
where OPT is the 0-1 loss of the best-fitting
halfspace. We prove a near-optimal computational hardness result for this task, under the
widely believed sub-exponential time hardness
of the Learning with Errors (LWE) problem.
Prior hardness results are either qualitatively suboptimal or apply to restricted families of algorithms. Our techniques extend to yield nearoptimal lower bounds for related problems, including ReLU regression.

Here we focus on the well-studied task of agnostically
learning halfspaces when the underlying distribution on examples is assumed to be Gaussian. That is, we are given
i.i.d. samples from a joint distribution D on labeled examples (x, y), where x ∈ Rn is the example and y ∈ R is the
corresponding label, and the goal is to compute a hypothesis that is competitive with the best-fitting halfspace. Moreover, we assume that the marginal Dx on Rn is the standard
Gaussian N (0, I). As we will explain subsequently, the
distributional assumption makes the learning problem computationally easier, as compared to the distribution-free setting. Interestingly, even the Gaussian version of the problem exhibits information-computation tradeoffs that we explore — and essentially resolve — in this paper.

1. Introduction
A halfspace or Linear Threshold Function (LTF) is any
Boolean-valued function f : Rn → {±1} of the form
f (x) = sign (⟨w, x⟩ − t), where w ∈ Rn is called the
weight vector and t ∈ R is called the threshold. Here
the univariate function sign : R → {±1} is defined as
sign(u) = 1 if u ≥ 0 and sign(u) = −1 otherwise.
The task of learning an unknown halfspace is a classical problem in machine learning that has been extensively
studied since the 1950s, starting with the Perceptron algorithm (Rosenblatt, 1958), and has lead to practically important techniques such as SVMs (Vapnik, 1998) and AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire, 1997). In the realizable setting (Valiant, 1984), halfspaces are known to be efficiently
learnable (see, e.g., (Maass & Turan, 1994)) without distributional assumptions. In contrast, in the distribution-

For concreteness, we introduce some notation followed
by the definition of the aforementioned problem. For a
boolean-valued hypothesis h : Rn → {±1} and a distribution D supported on Rn × {±1}, we use R0−1 (h; D)
to denote the 0-1 error of h with respect to D, i.e.,
def
R0−1 (h; D) = Pr(x,y)∼D [h(x) ̸= y]. For a class C
of boolean-valued functions on Rn , we use R0−1 (C; D)
to denote the minimum 0-1 error of any h ∈ C, i.e.,
def
R0−1 (C; D) = minh∈C R0−1 (h; D).
Problem 1.1 (Agnostically Learning Halfspaces under
Gaussian Marginals). Let LTF be the class of halfspaces
on Rn . Given an error parameter 0 < ϵ < 1 and i.i.d.
samples (x, y) from a distribution D on Rn × {±1}, where
the marginal Dx on Rn is the standard Gaussian N (0, I)
and no assumptions are made on the labels y, the goal
of the learning algorithm A is to output a hypothesis h :
Rn → {±1} such that R0−1 (h; D) ≤ R0−1 (LTF; D) + ϵ
with high probability. We will say that the algorithm A
agnostically learns halfspaces (or LTFs) under Gaussian

*

1
Equal contribution
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to:
Lisheng Ren <lren29@wisc.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

