Oscillation-free Quantization for Low-bit Vision Transformers

Shih-Yang Liu * 1 Zechun Liu * 2 Kwang-Ting Cheng 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have enjoyed tremendous success in
numerous applications, ranging from computer vision (He
et al., 2016; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) to natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Kenton & Toutanova, 2019).
However, the prohibitive model size and resource-intensive
computation restrict the feasibility of deploying large models on resource-constrained devices. Among many methods
that study the compression and acceleration of neural networks (Liu et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2016),
quantization-based approaches have stood out due to their
high compression ratio and remarkable reduction in throughput time by adopting efficient bitwise operations (Zhu et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2018a).

Weight oscillation is an undesirable side effect
of quantization-aware training, in which quantized weights frequently jump between two quantized levels, resulting in training instability and
a sub-optimal final model. We discover that the
learnable scaling factor, a widely-used de facto
setting in quantization aggravates weight oscillation. In this study, we investigate the connection between the learnable scaling factor and
quantized weight oscillation and use ViT as a
case driver to illustrate the findings and remedies. In addition, we also found that the interdependence between quantized weights in query
and key of a self-attention layer makes ViT vulnerable to oscillation. We, therefore, propose
three techniques accordingly: statistical weight
quantization (StatsQ) to improve quantization
robustness compared to the prevalent learnablescale-based method; confidence-guided annealing
(CGA) that freezes the weights with high confidence and calms the oscillating weights; and
query-key reparameterization (QKR) to resolve
the query-key intertwined oscillation and mitigate
the resulting gradient misestimation. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that these proposed techniques successfully abate weight oscillation and
consistently achieve substantial accuracy improvement on ImageNet. Specifically, our 2-bit DeiTT/DeiT-S/Swin-T algorithms outperform the previous state-of-the-art by 9.8%/7.7%/4.64%, respectively. Code and models are available at:
https://github.com/nbasyl/OFQ.

Despite the efficacy of quantization, there is still a nonnegligible accuracy gap between quantized models and their
full-precision counterparts. The accuracy drop comes from
several aspects, including but not limited to the discrete
nature of quantization and its limited representational capability (Liu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2018a; Li et al., 2020;
Miyashita et al., 2016), difficulty in gradient approximation
to the non-differentiable quantization function (Gong et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2018), and quantization oscillation that hinders optimization (Nagel et al., 2022). The last, relatively
under-explored, is the primary focus of this study.
In this study, we choose the quantized ViT as the driver for
investigating the cause of oscillation. Previous work (Nagel
et al., 2022) assumes the scaling factors are fixed in quantization, while this is not the case as most of the prevalent
quantization methods adopt learnable scaling factors, including (Nagel et al., 2022). Surprisingly, we found that the
learnable scaling factor exacerbates the oscillation, leading
to unstable quantization-aware training and often results in
sub-optimal models. The learnable scaling factor is updated
with noisy gradients and determines quantization thresholds.
Thus, the intertwined oscillation between the noisy learnable threshold and the weights near the threshold makes
training unstable.

*
Equal contribution 1 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 2 Reality Labs, Meta Inc. Correspondence to:
Shih-Yang Liu <sliuau@connect.ust.hk>, Zechun Liu <zechunliu@fb.com>.

We visualize the composition of the oscillating weights and
observe that they are position-agnostic, meaning that there
are no such weights that would persistently stay within the
oscillation region during optimization. But the current optimizer fails to prevent new weights from entering the oscil-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

