Learning to Optimize Differentiable Games

Xuxi Chen 1 Nelson Vadori 2 Tianlong Chen 1 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

fectively modeled as differentiable games (Balduzzi et al.,
2018), where players correspond to internal parts of the
problems and different objective functions are introduced
for different players.

Many machine learning problems can be abstracted in solving game theory formulations and
boil down to optimizing nested objectives, such
as generative adversarial networks (GANs) and
multi-agent reinforcement learning. Solving these
games requires finding their stable fixed points
or Nash equilibrium. However, existing algorithms for solving games suffer from empirical
instability, hence demanding heavy ad-hoc tuning in practice. To tackle these challenges, we
resort to the emerging scheme of Learning to Optimize (L2O), which discovers problem-specific
efficient optimization algorithms through datadriven training. Our customized L2O framework
for differentiable game theory problems, dubbed
“Learning to Play Games” (L2PG), seeks a stable fixed point solution, by predicting the fast
update direction from the past trajectory, with
a novel gradient stability-aware, sign-based loss
function. We further incorporate curriculum learning and self-learning to strengthen the empirical training stability and generalization of L2PG.
On test problems including quadratic games and
GANs, L2PG can substantially accelerate the convergence, and demonstrates a remarkably more
stable trajectory. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/L2PG.

The solutions of differentiable games can be generally defined as equilibrium points, such as (local) Nash equilibrium
or stable equilibrium (stable fixed points) (Balduzzi et al.,
2018). From the perspective of optimization, the latter is
more appealing (Balduzzi et al., 2018) and will be our main
focus. Although various algorithms have been proposed to
locate stable fixed points, they suffer from empirical instability. Concretely, hyperparameters such as learning rates and
coefficients of regularization can significantly affect the convergence speed of these algorithms. Moreover, a pre-chosen
set of hyperparameters cannot consistently achieve satisfactory convergence speed across different game instances.
Therefore, these algorithms demand ad-hoc tuning, generally done by heavy trial-and-error experiments, making
them less efficient in practice.
We propose an automatic and flexible algorithm for solving
differentiable games to tackle these challenges. An optimization paradigm, termed “Learning to Learn” (Lv et al.,
2017; Andrychowicz et al., 2016) or “Learning to Optimize”
(L2O) (Chen et al., 2022a), is a well-suited candidate. It
learns problem-specific efficient optimization algorithms,
usually parameterized by a neural network (called an “optimizer”), from its performance on a set of optimization problems. The optimizer produced through data-driven training
is capable of efficiently solving optimization problems unseen yet similar to those encountered during training.

1. Introduction

However, several questions need to be answered before extending L2O into solving differentiable games: Firstly, L2O
trains an optimizer based on its “performance” (e.g. training
loss) on a series of optimization problems, but there is no offthe-shelf metric that characterizes both the distance to fixed
points and stability; Secondly, how to represent the game
dynamics for L2O models, and how to generate updates to
each player’s parameters, remain unexplored; Lastly, the
game dynamics can sometimes be noisy and cyclic, which
could further hinder the learning of L2O optimizers that are
already known to be unstable.

While a substantial fraction of recent progress in machine
learning is based on optimizing neural networks with respect to a single objective function, there is an increasing set
of problems that require optimizing nested objectives, such
as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
and multi-level optimization (Pfau & Vinyals, 2016), among
many of them. These multi-objective problems can be ef1
University of Texas at Austin 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research. Correspondence to: Xuxi Chen <xxchen@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we present an L2O framework called “Learning to Play Games” (L2PG), which attempts to tackle the
1

