ConCerNet: A Contrastive Learning Based Framework for Automated
Conservation Law Discovery and Trustworthy Dynamical System Prediction

Wang Zhang 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 2 Subhro Das 3 Alexandre Megretski 1 Luca Daniel 1 Lam M. Nguyen 4 3

Abstract

lems. This naturally raises a question:

Deep neural networks (DNN) have shown great
capacity of modeling a dynamical system; nevertheless, they usually do not obey physics constraints such as conservation laws. This paper proposes a new learning framework named ConCerNet to improve the trustworthiness of the DNN
based dynamics modeling to endow the invariant
properties. ConCerNet consists of two steps: (i)
a contrastive learning method to automatically
capture the system invariants (i.e. conservation
properties) along the trajectory observations; (ii)
a neural projection layer to guarantee that the
learned dynamics models preserve the learned invariants. We theoretically prove the functional
relationship between the learned latent representation and the unknown system invariant function.
Experiments show that our method consistently
outperforms the baseline neural networks in both
coordinate error and conservation metrics by a
large margin. With neural network based parameterization and no dependence on prior knowledge,
our method can be extended to complex and largescale dynamics by leveraging an autoencoder.

Q1: Can we learn conservation laws from realworld data in an automated fashion?
Recent works on automatic discovery of scientific laws try to
answer the above question by proposing symbolic regression
(Udrescu & Tegmark, 2020). The idea is to recursively fit
the data to different combinations of pre-defined function
operators. However, these methods’ implicit dependence
on human knowledge (i.e. function class and complexity)
and high computational cost limit their application to small
physics equations, making them less scalable and incapable
of handling general systems with complicated dynamics.
On the other hand, the approach of data-driven dynamical
modeling tries to learn a dynamical system from data, which
often generate models that are prone to violation of physics
laws as demonstrated in (Greydanus et al., 2019). This
motivates a second question:
Q2: Can we learn a dynamical system that is
trustworthy (i.e. obey physics laws)?
There has been a recent line of work trying to answer this
question by actively constructing dynamics models that
obey physical constraints. For example, Greydanus et al.
(2019) enforces the Hamiltonian to be conserved in Hamiltonian systems, Cranmer et al. (2020) further extends it to
Lagrangian dynamics. As these works focus on specific
systems, there is yet a method to be designed for preserving
the conservation quantities in general dynamical systems.

1. Introduction
Many critical discoveries in the world of physics were driven
by distilling the invariants from observations. For instance,
the Kepler laws were found by analyzing and fitting parameters for the astronomical observations, and the mass
conservation law was first carried out by a series of experiments. However, such discoveries usually require extensive
human insights and customized strategies for specific prob-

In this work, we aim at answering the two questions Q1 and
Q2 jointly by introducing a new framework ConCerNet1 ,
which is a novel pipeline to learn trustworthy dynamical systems f (x) based on the automatic discovery of the system’s
invariants H(x) from data. ConCerNet consists of two
steps: (i) contrastively learning H(x) as low-dimensional
representation as the invariant quantity for the system; (ii)
learning f (x) to approximate the system dynamics with
a correction step. This ensures the learned dynamics to
automatically preserve the learned H(x). An overview of
ConCerNet method pipeline is shown in Figure 1.

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA 3 MIT-IBM Watson
AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 IBM Research,
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Wang Zhang <wzhang16@mit.edu>, Lam
M. Nguyen <LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Source code available at https://github.com/wz16/
concernet.

1

