Fourmer: An Efficient Global Modeling Paradigm for Image Restoration

Man Zhou * 1 Jie Huang * 2 Chunle Guo 3 Chongyi Li 3

Abstract

Traditional methods formulate image restoration as an optimization problem and use various image priors, such as
dark channel prior for image dehazing (He et al., 2010), histogram distribution prior for underwater image enhancement
(Li et al., 2016), non-local mean prior for image denoising
(Dixit & Phadke, 2013), sparse image prior for guided image super-resolution (Kim & Kwon, 2010), to constrain the
solution space. However, these methods often have limited
versatility and require time-consuming optimization.

Global modeling-based image restoration frameworks have become popular. However, they often
require a high memory footprint and do not consider task-specific degradation. Our work presents
an alternative approach to global modeling that
is more efficient for image restoration. The key
insights which motivate our study are two-fold:
1) Fourier transform is capable of disentangling
image degradation and content component to a
certain extent, serving as the image degradation
prior, and 2) Fourier domain innately embraces
global properties, where each pixel in the Fourier
space is involved with all spatial pixels. While
adhering to the “spatial interaction + channel evolution” rule of previous studies, we customize
the core designs with Fourier spatial interaction
modeling and Fourier channel evolution. Our
paradigm, Fourmer, achieves competitive performance on common image restoration tasks such
as image de-raining, image enhancement, image dehazing, and guided image super-resolution,
while requiring fewer computational resources.
The code for Fourmer is publicly available at
https://manman1995.github.io/.

Deep learning-based methods, particularly CNNs, have
achieved promising results in image restoration tasks compared to traditional methods (Liu et al., 2020; Ma et al.,
2021; Zhou et al., 2022b). Recently, transformer and MLPsbased global modeling paradigms (Zamir et al., 2022; Tu
et al., 2022) have been used in image restoration, surpassing CNN-based methods. However, these frameworks are
often used without considering the intrinsic characteristics
of specific image restoration tasks and require significant
computational resources. We, therefore, wonder “Can we
provide a customized and efficient global modeling-based
image restoration paradigm?”
In this work, we present a customized and efficient global
modeling paradigm, called Fourmer, for image restoration,
motivated by our observations on the capabilities of the
Fourier transform in image restoration tasks, as shown in
Figure 1. The core insights of our approach include using
the Fourier transform to disentangle image degradation and
content, serving as a general image restoration prior, and
utilizing the global properties of the Fourier domain where
each pixel is connected to all spatial pixels.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover a clear image from its degraded version. It is challenging as there are infinite possible
results for a degraded image. Recent research efforts have
focused on solving the single image restoration problem,
which can be divided into two categories: traditional optimization methods and deep learning-based methods (Zhang
et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2021a; Zamir et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023).

Our approach, Fourmer, builds on the “spatial interaction + channel evolution” rule of existing global modeling paradigms, such as transformer and MLP-Mixer as
shown in Figure 3, but customizes the core designs with
Fourier spatial interaction and Fourier channel evolution.
These designs provide new insights into global modeling
network structures for image restoration. Our approach is
described in Figure 3 and has been tested on common image restoration tasks, including image de-raining, image
enhancement, image dehazing, and guided image superresolution. The results suggest that our paradigm achieves
competitive performance while requiring fewer computational resources. Our main goal is to provide an alternative,

*

Equal contribution 1 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 2 Department of Automation, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China 3 School of Computer Science,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to: Chongyi
Li <lichongyi25@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

