Learning to Bid in Repeated First-Price Auctions with Budgets

Qian Wang * 1 Zongjun Yang * 2 Xiaotie Deng 1 3 Yuqing Kong 1

Abstract

mented on advertising platforms and advertisers participate
in such repeated online auctions to purchase advertising
opportunities. An advertiser typically aims to maximize her
cumulative payoffs during a specific time horizon (e.g., a
day or a week) subject to a budget constraint, which reflects
her monetary limit throughout this period. The presence
of budgets constitutes an important operational challenge
for online bidding algorithm design since there will be considerable financial losses whether depleting the budget too
early or reaching the end of the period with unused funds.
Therefore, budget management is a fundamental issue for
designing practical online bidding algorithms.

Budget management strategies in repeated auctions have received growing attention in online
advertising markets. However, previous work on
budget management in online bidding mainly focused on second-price auctions. The rapid shift
from second-price auctions to first-price auctions
for online ads in recent years has motivated the
challenging question of how to bid in repeated
first-price auctions while controlling budgets. In
this work, we study the problem of learning in
repeated first-price auctions with budgets. We
design a dual-based
√ algorithm that can achieve a
e T ) regret with full information
near-optimal O(
feedback where the maximum competing bid is
always revealed after each auction. We further
consider the setting with one-sided information
feedback where only the winning bid is revealed
after each auction. We show that
√ our modified
e T ) regret with
algorithm can still achieve an O(
mild assumptions on the bidder’s value distribution. Finally, we complement the theoretical results with numerical experiments to confirm the
effectiveness of our budget management policy.

There has been a flourishing line of literature on budget management strategies in repeated second-price auctions (Balseiro & Gur, 2019; Balseiro et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 2022).
However, a major industry-wide shift has occurred recently
towards using first-price auctions as the preferred auction
format of selling digital ads (Despotakis et al., 2021), as
opposed to the earlier prevalent practice of using secondprice auctions (Lucking-Reiley, 2000; Klemperer, 2004;
Lucking-Reiley et al., 2007). Google Ad Exchange, the
largest online auction platform, announced its shift to the
first-price auction in September 2019 (Bigler, 2019). On
the one hand, the difference in the nature of first-price auctions and second-price auctions implies that the algorithms
proposed by the above work may not directly apply to the
first-price setting. On the other hand, most previous work
on repeated first-price auctions only considered bidding
without budgets (Balseiro et al., 2019; Han et al., 2020b;a;
Badanidiyuru et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). The shift thus
leads to a pressing question of how should an advertiser bid
in repeated first-price auctions to maximize the cumulative
payoffs while controlling the expenditures.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the explosive growth of the
online advertising market. It is estimated that worldwide
online advertising spending will reach 681 billion dollars in
2023, accounting for nearly 70% of the entire advertising
market spending (eMarketer, 2022). In practice, a huge
amount of online ads are sold via real-time auctions imple*

In this paper, we study the design of online bidding algorithms in repeated first-price auctions with budgets. We
focus on a stochastic setting where both the bidder’s values and the maximum competing bids are i.i.d. sampled
over auctions. The goal is to optimize the bidder’s expected
cumulative rewards while keeping her budget constraint
satisfied for any realization of values and competing bids.
We provide online bidding algorithms for the bidder in two
different feedback models: (1) the full information feedback,
where the maximum competing bid is always revealed after
each auction; (2) the one-sided information feedback, where

1

Equal contribution Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Center for Multi-Agent Research,
Institute for AI, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Qian Wang <charlie@pku.edu.cn>, Zongjun Yang <allenyzj@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Xiaotie Deng <xiaotie@pku.edu.cn>,
Yuqing Kong <yuqing.kong@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

