Efficient Algorithms for Exact Graph Matching on
Correlated Stochastic Block Models with Constant Correlation
Joonhyuk Yang * 1 Dongpil Shin * 1 Hye Won Chung 1

Abstract

set of all n × n permutation matrices Sn , where A and B denote the adjacency matrices of the two graphs. This problem
has been studied in various fields, including social network
analysis (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2009), computer vision
(Schellewald & Schnörr, 2005), pattern recognition (Conte
et al., 2004), natural language processing (Haghighi et al.,
2005), machine learning (Liu & Qiao, 2012), and bioinformatics (Kazemi et al., 2016; Chen & Yuan, 2006).

We consider the problem of graph matching, or
learning vertex correspondence, between two correlated stochastic block models (SBMs). The
graph matching problem arises in various fields,
including computer vision, natural language processing and bioinformatics, and in particular,
matching graphs with inherent community structure has significance related to de-anonymization
of correlated social networks. Compared to the
correlated Erdős-Rényi (ER) model, where various efficient algorithms have been developed,
among which a few algorithms have been proven
to achieve the exact matching with constant edge
correlation, no low-order polynomial algorithm
has been known to achieve exact matching for
the correlated SBMs with constant correlation. In
this work, we propose an efficient algorithm for
matching graphs with community structure, based
on the comparison between partition trees rooted
from each vertex, by extending the idea of Mao
et al. (2021a) to graphs with communities. The
partition tree divides the large neighborhoods of
each vertex into disjoint subsets using their edge
statistics to different communities. Our algorithm
is the first low-order polynomial-time algorithm
achieving exact matching between two correlated
SBMs with high probability in dense graphs.

Although the QAP is known to be NP-hard in the worst case
(Burkard et al., 1998), the graph matching can be solved
in polynomial time for the average case of random graph
models. Thus, many previous works have studied the graph
matching for random graph models, especially for ErdősRényi (ER) graphs. In particular, the correlated ER graph
model proposed by Pedarsani & Grossglauser (2011) has
been widely studied. In this model, there exists a parent ER
graph G0 ∼ G (n, p/(1 − α)), and two subgraphs G and
G′ are obtained by independent subsampling of G0 , where
each edge of G0 is removed independently with probability
α. The parameter α indicates the noise level, and 1 − α is
the correlation between G and G′ . Assuming a permutation
π : [n] → [n] and denoting by Gπ the graph obtained by
permuting the vertices of G with π, exact graph matching
aims to recover π from the two graphs Gπ , G′ ∼ G(n, p).
For the correlated ER model, many works have focused on
two fundamental questions: 1) deriving the informationtheoretic limit on (n, p, α) for exact matching, and 2) developing polynomial-time algorithms for recovering π. Regarding the first question, it was shown in (Cullina &
Kiyavash, 2016; Wu et al., 2022) that exact matching is
achievable if np(1 − α) ≥ (1 + ϵ) log n for any ϵ > 0
where p/(1 − α) = o(1). This limit implies that graph
matching is information-theoretically possible for constant
α if np = Θ(log n) and even for α close to 1 if np ≫ log n.
However, achieving this limit with polynomial-time algorithms is still open, although various efficient algorithms
have been proposed (Ding et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2020; Mao
et al., 2021b). Most of these algorithms require the noise
level α to be arbitrarily close to 0 in order to guarantee exact
matching. Some recent work has developed polynomialtime algorithms for constant correlation in the spare regime
(Mao et al., 2021a) or in the sparse and dense regimes but
with α less than some specific constant (Mao et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Graph matching aims to align two (or more) graphs to reveal a bijection between the vertex sets such that the number
of aligned edges is maximized. Given two graphs with n
vertices, graph matching finds a solution for a quadratic assignment problem (QAP), maxΠ∈Sn ⟨A, ΠBΠ⊤ ⟩ over the
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST,
Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to: Hye Won Chung
<hwchung@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

