Label Differential Privacy and Private Training Data Release

Róbert Busa-Fekete 1 Andres Muñoz Medina 1 Umar Syed 1 Sergei Vassilvitskii 1

Abstract

Since the dataset will be shared as part of a competition,
we also do not want to restrict the learner to any particular
training algorithm or model class.

We study differentially private mechanisms for
sharing training data in machine learning settings.
Our goal is to enable learning of an accurate predictive model while protecting the privacy of each
user’s label. Previous work established privacy
guarantees that assumed the features are public
and given exogenously, a setting known as label
differential privacy. In some scenarios, this can
be a strong assumption that removes the interplay
between features and labels from the privacy analysis. We relax this approach and instead assume
the features are drawn from a distribution that depends on the private labels. We first show that
simply adding noise to the label, as in previous
work, can lead to an arbitrarily weak privacy guarantee, and also present methods for estimating
this privacy loss from data. We then present a new
mechanism that replaces some training examples
with synthetically generated data, and show that
our mechanism has a much better privacy-utility
tradeoff if the synthetic data is realistic, in a certain quantifiable sense. Finally, we empirically
validate our theoretical analysis.

Differentially private mechanisms typically protect all the
data belonging to a user. But for many types of real-world
training data, only the label contains sensitive information.
Label differential privacy is a relaxation of differential privacy that protects each training label, but not necessarily the
features (Chaudhuri and Hsu, 2011). Early mechanisms that
satisfied label differential privacy were bound to a specific
training algorithm and were very inefficient (Beimel et al.,
2013), while recent work has proposed more practical approaches that are based on applying randomized response
to each training label (Esfandiari et al., 2022; Ghazi et al.,
2021), which gives the learner the flexibility to use essentially any training algorithm.
A key premise underlying all previous work on label differential privacy is that the features are public knowledge.
However, the ramifications of this assumption may not always align with user’s privacy expectations. For example,
label differential privacy does not protect users from label
inference attacks (Wu et al., 2022) that use the features to
predict the training labels. Also, the assumption that an
attacker has a priori access to the features is a poor match
for many applications, notably when the attacker obtains all
training data, including both the features and labels, from
the same source.

1. Introduction

For example, consider a hospital that wants to launch a machine learning competition to diagnose a sensitive illness
from X-ray images. The hospital must ask patients for consent to share their data with external parties. Neither the
patients’ illness status nor their X-ray images are public
knowledge, and while the X-rays are not sensitive per se,
patients are unlikely to be satisfied with a data sharing mechanism that allows a learner to accurately predict whether
they have the illness from their X-rays. At the same time,
we want the learner to be able to train a model that can accurately diagnose the illness in new patients from their X-rays.
In other words, we want a model that has low accuracy on
the training set, but high accuracy on the test set.

We consider the problem of privately sharing a dataset with
a learner. We are motivated by machine learning competitions such as those hosted by Netflix (Bell and Koren, 2007),
Yahoo! (Chapelle and Chang, 2010), Criteo (Diemert et al.,
2022) and Kaggle (Kaggle). We consider the problem both
from the perspective of individual users who must decide
whether to contribute their labeled example to the dataset,
as well as a learner whose goal is to train a model that accurately predicts the labels of new examples. We focus on the
local model of differential privacy, a mathematically rigorous definition of privacy protection (Dwork and Roth, 2014).
1
Google Research.
Correspondence to: All authors
<{busarobi,ammedina,usyed,sergeiv}@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our contributions. The traditional formalization of machine learning assumes that in a training set every example
1

