Strategic Classification with Unknown User Manipulations

Tosca Lechner 1 Ruth Urner 2 Shai Ben-David 1 3

Abstract

that decisions are to be made for are human beings, and
as such may actually adapt their application materials (as
best as they can) to fit the published admission criteria. The
decision maker may not know in advance in what ways
the applicants can modify their credentials to get accepted.
In addition, when it is time to publish a decision rule for
the next round, the decision maker does not have feedback
on the quality of last year’s admission yet (since students
usually take several years before they graduate or leave
school without a degree). Thus the only information about
the results from the last published decision rule was the set
of (potentially strategically modified) applications.

In many human-centric applications for Machine
Learning instances will adapt to a classifier after
its deployment. The field of strategic classification deals with this issue by aiming for a classifier
that balances the trade-off between correctness
and robustness to manipulation. This task is made
harder if the underlying manipulation structure
(i.e. the set of manipulations available at every
instance) is unknown to the learner. We propose
a novel batch-learning setting in which we use
unlabeled data from previous rounds to estimate
the manipulation structure. We show that in this
batch-learning setting it is possible to learn a close
to optimal classifier in terms of the strategic loss
even without knowing the feasible manipulations
beforehand. In line with recent advances in the
strategic classification literature, we do not assume a best-response from agents but only require
that observed manipulations are feasible.

Many human-centric real-life applications of machine learning, such as decisions on loan applications or bail recommendations, share characteristics with the above sketched
scenario: there is a need for transparent classification and
therefore a need (or maybe even a legal requirement) of
publishing the decision rule to be used. This requirement
for transparency, while in most scenarios well justified, has
the effect that individuals might use this knowledge to adapt
to or game the rules, i.e. they might change their feature vectors strategically in order to receive a desired outcome from
the published classifier. However, this change of features
often does not correspond to a change in their ground-truth
label. Such feature manipulations then yield a loss in accuracy of the learned classifier after its publication. Moreover,
often by the time the next round of decision making is due,
the outcomes from the previous rounds are not known yet.
That is, in addition to some labelled data to start with, a
learner has access only to unlabelled data that potentially
contains manipulated features in subsequent rounds.

1. Introduction
Consider the following scenario: a college or university
has large amounts of records of students who at some point
applied to the school, got admitted and then either succeeded
or failed at obtaining a degree. Based on these records,
the university sets (and publishes) admission criteria with
the intent to admit students that are likely to successfully
graduate. It then receives a set of applications for admission
for the next year, some of which will lead to admission.
In the next year (and upcoming years), the university will
need to set and publish admission criteria again, its aim
still being to attract and admit students that are likely to
succeed. This scenario differs from a classic (statistical)
decision-making setup in several ways: first, the entities

The field of strategic classification, first proposed by Hardt
et al (Hardt et al., 2016), studies the phenomenon of learning
classifiers which are robust to strategic manipulations. The
goal in strategic classification is to design a decision rule
which is accurate as well as designed to withstand feature
manipulations. There are two main motivations for discouraging such feature changes: either manipulated instances
will be misclassified after the manipulation (resulting in
false positives) or true positive instances are forced to misrepresent themselves in order to be classified correctly. This
second consideration is also known as “social burden” (Milli
et al., 2019) as individuals typically face a cost for this.

1

Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 2 Lassonde School of Engineering,
EECS Department, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
3
Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to:
Tosca Lechner <tlechner@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

