Attributing Image Generative Models using Latent Fingerprints

Guangyu Nie * 1 Changhoon Kim * 2 Yezhou Yang 2 Yi Ren 1

Abstract

ford et al., 2019) model due to concerns over potential
malicious use (Brockman et al., 2020). Additionally, the
source code for DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) and DALL-E
2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) has not been released for the same
reason (Mishkin & Ahmad, 2022).

Generative models have enabled the creation of
contents that are indistinguishable from those
taken from nature. Open-source development of
such models raised concerns about the risks of
their misuse for malicious purposes. One potential risk mitigation strategy is to attribute generative models via fingerprinting. Current fingerprinting methods exhibit a significant tradeoff
between robust attribution accuracy and generation quality while lacking design principles to
improve this tradeoff. This paper investigates
the use of latent semantic dimensions as fingerprints, from where we can analyze the effects of
design variables, including the choice of fingerprinting dimensions, strength, and capacity, on
the accuracy-quality tradeoff. Compared with
previous SOTA, our method requires minimum
computation and is more applicable to large-scale
models. We use StyleGAN2 and the latent diffusion model to demonstrate the efficacy of our
method. Codes are available in github.

One potential solution is model attribution (Yu et al., 2018;
Kim et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2020), where the model distributor tweaks each user-end model to generate content with
model-specific fingerprints. In practice, we consider a scenario where the model distributor or regulator maintains a
database of user-specific keys corresponding to each user’s
downloaded model. In the event of a malicious attempt, the
regulator can identify the user responsible for the attempt
by using attribution.
Formally, let a set of n generative models be G :=
{gi (·)}ni=1 where gi (·) : Rdz → Rdx is a mapping from
an easy-to-sample distribution pz to a fingerprinted data distribution px,i in the content space, and is parameterized by a
binary-coded key φi ∈ Φ := {0, 1}dφ . Let f (·) : Rdx → Φ
be a mapping that attributes contents to their source models
( Fig. 1(b)). We consider four performance metrics of a
fingerprinting mechanism: The attribution accuracy of gi is
defined as

1. Introduction

A(gi ) = Ez∼pz [1 (f (gi (z)) == φi )] .

Generative models can now create synthetic content such as
images and audio that are indistinguishable from those captured in nature (Karras et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022;
Ramesh et al., 2022; Hawthorne et al., 2022). This poses
a serious threat when used for malicious purposes, such
as disinformation (Breland, 2019) and malicious impersonation (Satter, 2019). Such potential threats have slowed
down the industrialization process of generative models, as
conservative model inventors hesitate to release their source
code (Yu et al., 2020). For example, in 2020, OpenAI
refused to release the source code of their GPT-2 (Rad-

(1)

The generation quality of gi measures the difference between px,i and the data distribution used for learning G,
e.g., the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) score (Heusel
et al., 2017) for images. Inception score (IS) (Salimans
et al., 2016) is also measured for px,i as additional generation quality metrics. Fingerprint secrecy is measured by
the mean structural similarity index measure (SSIM) of individual images drawn from px,i . Compared with generation
quality, this metric focuses on how obvious fingerprints are
rather than how well two content distributions match. Lastly,
the fingerprint capacity is n = 2dφ .

*

Equal contribution 1 School for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy, Arizona State University 2 School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University. Correspondence to: Yezhou Yang <yz.yang@asu.edu>, Yi Ren
<yren32@asu.edu>.

Existing model attribution methods exhibit a significant
tradeoff between attribution accuracy, generation quality,
and secrecy, particularly when countermeasures against deattribution attempts, e.g., image postprocesses, are considered.
For example, Kim et al. (2021) use shallow fingerprints for
image generators in the form of gi (z) = g0 (z) + φi where
g0 (·) is an unfingerprinted model and show that φi s have

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

