Masked Bayesian Neural Networks :
Theoretical Guarantee and its Posterior Inference
Insung Kong 1 Dongyoon Yang 1 Jongjin Lee 1 Ilsang Ohn 2 Gyuseung Baek 3 Yongdai Kim 1

Abstract

main focus of research of BNNs. Fast posterior concentrate
rates of edge-sparse BNNs have been studied by (Polson &
Ročková, 2018; Chérief-Abdellatif, 2020; Bai et al., 2020;
Lee & Lee, 2022). Particularly, Polson & Ročková (2018)
uses Spike-and-Slab prior on each edge and prove the near
minimax concentrate rate of the posterior, but posterior computation is difficult. To ease computation, Molchanov et al.
(2017) uses variational dropout (Kingma et al., 2015) to
search good edge-sparse BNNs and Deng et al. (2019) and
Wang et al. (2021) develop edge-sparse learning algorithms
via adaptive empirical Bayesian methods. Nalisnick et al.
(2019) shows that multiplicative noise induces structured
shrinkage priors on a network’s weights. However, theoretical justifications of these algorithms lack.

Bayesian approaches for learning deep neural networks (BNN) have been received much attention
and successfully applied to various applications.
Particularly, BNNs have the merit of having better
generalization ability as well as better uncertainty
quantification. For the success of BNN, search an
appropriate architecture of the neural networks is
an important task, and various algorithms to find
good sparse neural networks have been proposed.
In this paper, we propose a new node-sparse BNN
model which has good theoretical properties and
is computationally feasible. We prove that the posterior concentration rate to the true model is near
minimax optimal and adaptive to the smoothness
of the true model. In particular the adaptiveness is
the first of its kind for node-sparse BNNs. In addition, we develop a novel MCMC algorithm which
makes the Bayesian inference of the node-sparse
BNN model feasible in practice.

Node-sparse BNNs are useful alternatives to edge-sparse
BNNs because their inferential costs are lighter than edgesparse BNNs. Using scale-mixture priors, Louizos et al.
(2017) and Ghosh et al. (2019) develop node-sparse BNNs
based on the VI, but theoretical justifications of these algorithms are not available. Jantre et al. (2021) derives the
posterior concentration rate of a node-sparse VI approach
using Spike-and-Slab prior. However, their result does not
meet the minimax optimal rate and is not adaptive to the
smoothness of the true model.

1. Introduction
Bayesian approaches for learning deep neural networks
(DNN), which is called Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN)
(MacKay, 1992; Neal, 2012), have been received much
attention and successfully applied to various applications.
Particularly, BNNs have the merit of having better generalization ability as well as better uncertainty quantification
(Wilson & Izmailov, 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021). Applications of BNNs range from recommender systems (Wang
et al., 2015) to topic modeling (Gan et al., 2015), medical
diagnosis (Filos et al., 2019), and astrophysics (Cranmer
et al., 2021), to name just a few.

In this paper, we propose a new node-sparse BNN model
called the masked BNN (mBNN) which has good theoretical
properties and is computationally feasible. We prove that
the posterior concentration rate to the true model is near
minimax optimal and adaptive to the smoothness of the true
model. The adaptiveness, which is the first of its kind for
node-sparse BNNs, means that the mBNN selects optimal
sparse architectures without knowing the complexity of
the true model. Moreover, we develop a novel MCMC
algorithm which makes the Bayesian inference of the nodesparse BNN model possible.

Various BNN models to have desirable theoretical properties
have been proposed. In particular, edge-sparse BNNs are the

Our proposed node-sparse BNN can be also used for compressing complex DNNs. Mots recent DNNs are based on
complex network architectures consisting of multiple nonlinear hidden layers, which results in expensive computation
costs and requirements of excessive storage capacities when
they are deployed to application systems. Various methodologies to alleviate memory and computation costs have

1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University
Department of Statistics, Inha University 3 Obzen. Correspondence to: Yongdai Kim <ydkim0903@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

