Feature Learning in Deep Classifiers through Intermediate Neural Collapse

Akshay Rangamani * 1 Marius Lindegaard * 1 Tomer Galanti 1 Tomaso Poggio 1

Abstract

twin, 2021; Littwin et al., 2020)) aims to understand neural
networks at their infinite-width limit. In this framework, it
is shown that infinitely wide neural networks converge to
a solution of a kernel least squares problem with a kernel
associated with the network’s architecture, known as the
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). While this approach provides valuable insights into the solutions of optimization
problems in the “kernel regime”, it has limitations when it
comes to understanding the representations learned by finite
neural networks. For instance, Chen et al. (2020); AllenZhu & Li (2019); Malach et al. (2021) identified classes
of functions that can be learned efficiently by deep architectures, but not with kernel methods. In (Allen-Zhu & Li,
2020), they characterized a “backward feature correction”
process in which features are learned hierarchically by SGD.
Additionally, Woodworth et al. (2020) studied how the scale
of initialization controls the transition between the “kernel”
and “feature learning” regimes.

In this paper, we conduct an empirical study of
the feature learning process in deep classifiers.
Recent research has identified a training phenomenon called Neural Collapse (NC), in which
the top-layer feature embeddings of samples from
the same class tend to concentrate around their
means, and the top layer’s weights align with
those features. Our study aims to investigate if
these properties extend to intermediate layers. We
empirically study the evolution of the covariance
and mean of representations across different layers and show that as we move deeper into a trained
neural network, the within-class covariance decreases relative to the between-class covariance.
Additionally, we find that in the top layers, where
the between-class covariance is dominant, the subspace spanned by the class means aligns with the
subspace spanned by the most significant singular vector components of the weight matrix in
the corresponding layer. Finally, we discuss the
relationship between NC and Associative Memories (Willshaw et al., 1969).

In a recent study, Papyan et al. (2020) empirically observed
that when training overparameterized deep neural networks
for Cross-Entropy loss minimization on a given classification task, several structural properties tend to emerge in the
last layer. These properties, known as Neural Collapse (NC)
list four conditions: (NC1) the features of examples within
the same class collapse to their mean, (NC2) class means of
the features spread out to form an equiangular tight frame,
(NC3) the weights of the classifier converge to the class
means of the features, and (NC4) the deep network becomes
a nearest class center classifier. These observations raise the
question of whether similar phenomena also occur in the
intermediate layers of the neural network.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has emerged as a powerful technique for solving various problems in diverse domains such as computer
vision (He et al., 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al.,
2020), and decision making in novel environments (Silver
et al., 2016). Despite its successes, there remains a significant gap between its empirical performance and our theoretical understanding, even for simple supervised learning
problems in classification or regression.

Contributions. In this paper, we investigate whether
similar phenomena to Neural Collapse (NC) occur in
intermediate layers of deep classifiers. We study the process
of feature learning in terms of the first and second-order
statistics of representations at different layers. Our results
show that when deep networks exhibit NC at the last
layer, they also display signs of collapse in intermediate
layers. We identify layers where the within-class covariance
of representations is dominated by the between-class
covariance (NC1) and observe that in these layers, class
means to form a simplex ETF (NC2), the subspaces
spanned by class means are aligned with the input subspace
of linear transformations (NC3), and nearest class center

A major line of work (e.g., (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2019; 2018; Arora et al., 2019; Yang, 2020; Yang & Lit*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Akshay Rangamani <arangam@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

