Which Features are Learnt by Contrastive Learning?
On the Role of Simplicity Bias in Class Collapse and Feature Suppression

Yihao Xue 1 Siddharth Joshi 1 Eric Gan 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Abstract

Chuang et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2020).
Unsupervised CL learns representations of training examples by maximizing agreement between augmented views
of the same example. Similarly, supervised CL maximizes
agreement between augmented views of examples in the
same class. Despite their empirical success, both supervised
and unsupervised contrastive learning fail to capture all
semantically relevant features in the data. In particular, supervised CL can fall prey to class collapse (Graf et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2022), where representations of subclasses
within a class may no longer be distinguishable from each
other; thus, yielding a poor classification performance at the
subclass level. Similarly, unsupervised CL can be afflicted
with feature suppression (Chen et al., 2021; Robinson et al.,
2021) where easy but class-irrelevant features suppress
the learning of harder class-relevant ones; deteriorating the
generalizability of the obtained representations.

Contrastive learning (CL) has emerged as a powerful technique for representation learning, with or
without label supervision. However, supervised
CL is prone to collapsing representations of subclasses within a class by not capturing all their features, and unsupervised CL may suppress harder
class-relevant features by focusing on learning
easy class-irrelevant features; both significantly
compromise representation quality. Yet, there is
no theoretical understanding of class collapse or
feature suppression at test time. We provide the
first unified theoretically rigorous framework to
determine which features are learnt by CL. Our
analysis indicate that, perhaps surprisingly, bias
of (stochastic) gradient descent towards finding
simpler solutions is a key factor in collapsing subclass representations and suppressing harder classrelevant features. Moreover, we present increasing embedding dimensionality and improving the
quality of data augmentations as two theoretically motivated solutions to feature suppression.
We also provide the first theoretical explanation
for why employing supervised and unsupervised
CL together yields higher-quality representations,
even when using commonly-used stochastic gradient methods.

In spite of the significance of these failure modes, there is no
clear theoretical understanding of them and consequently,
no rigorous solution. Feature suppression has not been
studied theoretically by prior work and the only theoretical
work on class collapse (Graf et al., 2021) cannot explain
why we observe class collapse at test time.
Addressing class collapse and feature suppression requires
a theoretical understanding of which features CL learns.
However, existing CL theory (Wang & Isola, 2020; Graf
et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021; Tosh et al., 2021a;b; Arora
et al., 2019b; Tsai et al., 2020; HaoChen et al., 2021; Wen
& Li, 2021; Ji et al., 2021) only explains how semantically
relevant features are learned. The implicit assumption is
that all semantically relevant features are learned, but the
occurrence of class collapse and feature suppression proves
otherwise. We propose the first unified (i.e. for both supervised and unsupervised CL) framework to answer which
semantically relevant features are learned. We then leverage
this framework to characterize class collapse and feature
suppression. Table 1 summarizes the main findings in this
paper, which are detailed below.

1. Introduction
Learning high-quality representations that generalize well
to a variety of downstream prediction tasks has been a
long-standing goal of machine learning (Hinton et al.,
2006; Ranzato et al., 2006). Contrastive learning (CL) has
emerged as an effective approach for solving this problem,
both with and without supervision (Chen et al., 2020;
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Yihao Xue <yihaoxue@g.ucla.edu>.

Class Collapse in Supervised CL. We prove that, perhaps
surprisingly and in contrast to the current understanding
(Graf et al., 2021), global minimizers of the supervised contrastive loss do not necessarily collapse the representations

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

