Estimating Joint Treatment Effects by Combining Multiple Experiments

Yonghan Jung 1 Jin Tian 2 Elias Bareinboim 3

Abstract

blood pressure (W ) with baseline characteristics (C1 ) (e.g.,
(Hansson et al., 1999)) and on the effects of anti-diabetic
drugs (X2 ) on cardiovascular disease (Y ) with baseline characteristics (C2 ) (e.g., (Ajjan & Grant, 2006)). Other studies
reported that simultaneously taking both durgs was harmful to the population (Ferrannini & Cushman, 2012). This
leaves open the question on how to evaluate the joint effect
of antihypertensive and anti-diabetic medications from data
coming from individual randomized studies.
■

Estimating the effects of multi-dimensional treatments (i.e., joint treatment effects) is critical in
many data-intensive domains, including genetics
and drug evaluation. The main challenges for
studying the joint treatment effects include the
need for large sample sizes to explore different
treatment combinations as well as potentially unsafe treatment interactions. In this paper, we develop machinery for estimating joint treatment effects by combining data from multiple experimental datasets. In particular, first, we develop new
identification conditions for determining whether
a joint treatment effect can be computed in terms
of multiple interventional distributions under various scenarios. Further, we develop estimators
with statistically appealing properties, including
consistency and robustness to model misspecification and slow convergence. Finally, we perform
simulation studies, which corroborate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Example MTI (Multiple Treatments Interactions). Many
experimental studies have been conducted on the effects of
(1) taking an aspirin (X1 ) on blood pressure (W1 ) (e.g.,
(Hansson et al., 1998); (2) taking acetaminophen (X2 ) on
blood coagulation (W2 ) (e.g., (Gazzard et al., 1974)); and
(3) taking the ibuprofen (X3 ) on the gastrointestinal disease
(Y ) (e.g., (Lesko & Mitchell, 1995)). Other more recent
studies reported adverse drug reactions to taking ibuprofen
with aspirins and acetaminophen (Moore et al., 2015). What
are the causal effects of the combinations of such drugs? ■
Despite their critical importance, the analysis of multidimensional effects remains underrepresented compared
to the vast literature on single-treatment experiments. This
is primarily due to two major challenges: the need for large
sample sizes to investigate all possible treatment combinations and the possibility of unsafe or unethical treatment
interactions (Examples TTI and MTI). It is, therefore, of
great importance to investigate the possibility of estimating joint treatment effects by combining data from multiple
marginal experiments, which refer to experiments on a subset of treatments (e.g., a single treatment). In this paper,
we present novel methods for estimating joint effects given
data from multiple marginal experiments and a qualitative
description of the underlying causal system articulated in
the form of a causal graph. Specifically,

1. Introduction
A large body of scientific research is concerned with estimating the effect of multi-dimensional treatments. For
example, Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) in
computational biology application study the effect of multiple combinations of genes (Tam et al., 2019). As another
example, estimating the multi-dimensional treatment effects
is essential in the pharmaceutical industry because potential treatment-treatment interactions can lead to harmful
effects to patients, potentially lethal in some situations. Consider two real-world scenarios in which understanding the
treatment-treatment interaction is critical:

1. We develop nonparametric identification criteria determining whether a joint treatment effect can be expressed
through an adjustment formula using distributions from
marginal experiments.

Example TTI (Treatment-Treatment-Interaction (Lee
et al., 2019)). Many experimental studies have been conducted on the effects of antihypertensive drugs (X1 ) on
1
Purdue University 2 Iowa State Univerity 3 Columbia University.
Correspondence to: Yonghan Jung <jung222@purdue.edu>.

2. We construct estimators for the joint treatment effects
using samples from marginal experiments and provide learning guarantees for the estimators. We illustrate the empirical
validity of the estimators through simulations.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

