Autoregressive Diffusion Model for Graph Generation

Lingkai Kong 1 Jiaming Cui 1 Haotian Sun 1 Yuchen Zhuang 1 B. Aditya Prakash 1 Chao Zhang 1

Abstract

traditional random graph models (Erdos et al., 1960; Albert & Barabási, 2002), these methods fit graph data with
powerful deep generative models including variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018), generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Maziarka et al., 2020),
normalizing flows (Madhawa et al., 2019), and energy-based
models (EBMs) (Liu et al., 2021). These models are learned
to capture complex graph structural patterns and then generate new high-fidelity graphs with desired properties (Zhu
et al.; Du et al., 2021).

Diffusion-based graph generative models have
recently obtained promising results for graph generation. However, existing diffusion-based graph
generative models are mostly one-shot generative
models that apply Gaussian diffusion in the dequantized adjacency matrix space. Such a strategy
can suffer from difficulty in model training, slow
sampling speed, and incapability of incorporating constraints. We propose an autoregressive
diffusion model for graph generation. Unlike existing methods, we define a node-absorbing diffusion process that operates directly in the discrete
graph space. For forward diffusion, we design a
diffusion ordering network, which learns a datadependent node absorbing ordering from graph
topology. For reverse generation, we design a
denoising network that uses the reverse node ordering to efficiently reconstruct the graph by predicting the node type of the new node and its
edges with previously denoised nodes at a time.
Based on the permutation invariance of graph, we
show that the two networks can be jointly trained
by optimizing a simple lower bound of data likelihood. Our experiments on six diverse generic
graph datasets and two molecule datasets show
that our model achieves better or comparable generation performance with previous state-of-the-art,
and meanwhile enjoys fast generation speed.

Recently, the emergence of probabilistic diffusion models
has led to interest in diffusion-based graph generation (Jo
et al., 2022). Diffusion models decompose the full complex transformation between noise and real data into many
small steps of simple diffusion. Compared with prior deep
generative models, diffusion models enjoy both flexibility in modeling architecture and tractability of the model’s
probability distributions. However, existing diffusion-based
graph generative models (Niu et al., 2020; Jo et al., 2022;
Vignac et al., 2022) suffer from three key drawbacks: (1)
Generation Efficiency. The sampling processes are slow,
as they require a very long diffusion process to arrive at
the stationary noisy distribution and thus the reverse generation process is also time-consuming. (2) Incorporating
constraints. They are all one-shot generation models and
hence cannot easily incorporate constraints during the oneshot generation process. (3) Continuous Approximation.
Niu et al. (2020); Jo et al. (2022) convert discrete graphs
to continuous state spaces by adding real-valued noise to
graph adjacency matrices. Such dequantization can distort
the distribution of the original discrete graph structures, thus
increasing the difficulty of model training.

1. Introduction
Generating graphs from a target distribution is a fundamental problem in many domains such as drug discovery (Li
et al., 2018), material design (Maziarka et al., 2020), social
network analysis (Grover et al., 2019), and public health
(Yu et al., 2020). Deep generative models have recently
led to promising advances in this problem. Different from

We propose an autoregressive graph generative model
named G RAPH A RM via autoregressive diffusion on graphs.
Autoregressive diffusion model (ARDM) (Hoogeboom
et al., 2022) builds upon the recently developed absorbing diffusion (Austin et al., 2021) for discrete data, where
exactly one dimension of the data decays to the absorbing
state at each diffusion step. In G RAPH A RM, we design
node-absorbing autoregressive diffusion for graphs, which
diffuses a graph directly in the discrete graph space instead
of in the dequantized adjacency matrix space. The forward
pass absorbs one node in each step by masking it along
with its connecting edges, which is repeated until all the

1

School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Lingkai
Kong <lkkong@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

