Continuation Path Learning for Homotopy Optimization

Xi Lin 1 Zhiyuan Yang 1 Xiaoyuan Zhang 1 Qingfu Zhang 1

Abstract

problem. The simplest surrogate subproblem could be easily
solved, and its solution will serve as a good initial one for
the next subproblem. In this way, we can eventually find
a good initial and then a (nearly) optimal solution for the
original hard-to-solve optimization problem.

Homotopy optimization is a traditional method
to deal with a complicated optimization problem
by solving a sequence of easy-to-hard surrogate
subproblems. However, this method can be very
sensitive to the continuation schedule design and
might lead to a suboptimal solution to the original
problem. In addition, the intermediate solutions,
often ignored by classic homotopy optimization,
could be useful for many real-world applications.
In this work, we propose a novel model-based
approach to learn the whole continuation path
for homotopy optimization, which contains infinite intermediate solutions for any surrogate subproblems. Rather than the classic unidirectional
easy-to-hard optimization, our method can simultaneously optimize the original problem and all
surrogate subproblems in a collaborative manner.
The proposed model also supports real-time generation of any intermediate solution, which could
be desirable for many applications. Experimental studies on different problems show that our
proposed method can significantly improve the
performance of homotopy optimization and provide extra helpful information to support better
decision-making.

The idea of homotopy optimization is straightforward but it
also suffers several drawbacks. First, the optimization performance could heavily depend on the continuation schedule
of the surrogate subproblems, which is not easy to design for
a new problem (Dunlavy & O’Leary, 2005). It also needs
to iteratively solve each subproblem in sequence, which
could lead to undesirable long run time in practice (Iwakiri
et al., 2022). In addition, the existing homotopy optimization methods only focus on finding the final solution to the
original problem. However, the intermediate solutions for
homotopy surrogate subproblems could be useful for many
real-world applications.
In this work, to tackle the drawbacks mentioned above, we
propose a novel continuation path learning (CPL) method
to find the whole solution path for homotopy optimization,
which contains infinite solutions for all intermediate subproblems. The key idea is to build a learnable model that
maps any valid continuation level to its corresponding solution, and then optimize all of them simultaneously in a
collaborative manner. In this way, the whole path model can
be learned in a single run without sensitive schedule design
and iterative optimization. With the learned path model,
we can easily generate the solution for any intermediate homotopy level, which could be useful for many applications.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Homotopy optimization (Blake & Zisserman, 1987; Yuille,
1989; Allgower & Georg, 1990), also called continuation
optimization, is a general optimization strategy for solving complicated and highly non-convex optimization problems which can be found in many machine learning applications (Jain & Kar, 2017). This method first constructs a
simple surrogate of the original optimization problem, and
then gradually solves a sequence of easy-to-hard surrogates
to approach the optimal solution of the original complicated

• We propose a novel model-based approach to learn
the whole continuation path for homotopy optimization, which is significantly different from the existing
methods that iteratively solve a sequence of finite subproblems.
• We develop an efficient learning method to train the
path model concerning all homotopy levels simultaneously. The proposed model can generate solutions
for any intermediate subproblem in real time, which is
desirable for many real-world applications.

1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong. Correspondence to: Xi Lin <xi.lin@my.cityu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We empirically demonstrate that our proposed CPL
method can achieve promising performances on var1

