Optimally-weighted Estimators of the Maximum Mean Discrepancy for
Likelihood-Free Inference
Ayush Bharti 1 Masha Naslidnyk 2 Oscar Key 2 Samuel Kaski 1 3 François-Xavier Briol 2

Abstract

True

Likelihood-free inference methods typically make
use of a distance between simulated and real
data. A common example is the maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD), which has previously been
used for approximate Bayesian computation, minimum distance estimation, generalised Bayesian
inference, and within the nonparametric learning framework. The MMD is commonly estimated at a root-m rate, where m is the number of
simulated samples. This can lead to significant
computational challenges since a large m is required to obtain an accurate estimate, which is
crucial for parameter estimation. In this paper,
we propose a novel estimator for the MMD with
significantly improved sample complexity. The
estimator is particularly well suited for computationally expensive smooth simulators with low- to
mid-dimensional inputs. This claim is supported
through both theoretical results and an extensive
simulation study on benchmark simulators.

equally-weighted

optimally-weighted
(ours)

Figure 1. Estimating the MMD requires approximating the embedding µk,Pθ of the model Pθ in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
Hk . The classical approach consists of doing this from m equallyweighted independent samples from Pθ (denoted µEW
), but we
k,Pm
θ
show in this paper that it is possible to improve this estimator by
using optimally-weighted samples (denoted µOW
).
k,Pm
θ

2022a), and agent-based modelling (Jennings, 1999). However, the ease of simulating data from the model comes at
the cost of an intractable likelihood function, rendering most
standard statistical inference methods inapplicable to such
models. To solve this issue, a host of likelihood-free inference methods have been developed that circumvent the need
to evaluate the likelihood or its derivatives, see Lintusaari
et al. (2017); Cranmer et al. (2020) for an overview.

1. Introduction

A common approach for likelihood-free inference involves
comparing simulated observations from the model and the
observed data, with respect to some notion of distance. Accurately estimating the distance is essential for inference
but doing so usually requires simulating large amounts of
synthetic data. This can be a computational bottleneck, especially for expensive simulators, which in the most extreme
cases can take up to hundreds or thousands of CPU hours
per simulation; see Niederer et al. (2019) for an example in
cardiac modelling. Other examples include tsunami models based on shallow water equations that require several
GPU hours per run (Behrens & Dias, 2015), runaway electron analysis models for nuclear fusion devices that require
24 CPU hours per run (Hoppe et al., 2021), and models
of large-scale wind farms that require 100 CPU hours per
run (Kirby et al., 2022). Naturally, the discrepancies popular for likelihood-free inference are those which can be
efficiently estimated given samples from two distributions,
such as the KL divergence (Jiang, 2018), Wasserstein dis-

Many domains of science, medicine and engineering use
our mechanistic understanding of real-world phenomena to
create simulators that can represent system behaviour in different circumstances. Such simulator-based models define a
stochastic procedure that can generate (possibly complex)
synthetic data-sets, and are widely used in fields such as population genetics (Beaumont, 2010), ecology (Wood, 2010),
astronomy (Cameron & Pettitt, 2012; Akeret et al., 2015),
epidemiology (Kypraios et al., 2017), atmospheric contamination (Kopka et al., 2016), radio propagation (Bharti et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo,
Finland 2 Department of Statistical Science, University College
London, London, United Kingdom 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Ayush Bharti <ayush.bharti@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

