Graph Neural Networks with Learnable and Optimal Polynomial Bases

Yuhe Guo 1 Zhewei Wei 1 2 3 4

Abstract

As categorized in He et al. (2022), there are mainly
two kinds of spectral GNNs. In some works, the desired polynomial filters are predefined. For example,
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) fixes the filter to be I − L̂, and
APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019) restricts the filtering function
within the Personalized Pagerank.

Polynomial filters, a kind of Graph Neural Networks, typically use a predetermined polynomial
basis and learn the coefficients from the training
data. It has been observed that the effectiveness of
the model is highly dependent on the property of
the polynomial basis. Consequently, two natural
and fundamental questions arise: Can we learn a
suitable polynomial basis from the training data?
Can we determine the optimal polynomial basis
for a given graph and node features?

Another line of research approximates arbitrary filters with
learnable polynomials. These models typically fix a predetermined polynomial basis and learn the coefficients from
the training data. ChebNet (Defferrard et al., 2016) uses
Chebyshev basis following the tradition of Graph Signal Processing (Hammond et al., 2009). GPR-GNN (Chien et al.,
2021) uses Monomial basis, which is straightforward. BernNet (He et al., 2021) uses the non-negative Bernstein basis
for regularization and interpretation. JacobiConv (Wang &
Zhang, 2022) chooses among the family of Jacobi polynomial bases, with the exact basis determined by two extra
hyperparameters. ChebNetII (He et al., 2022) revisits the
Chebyshev basis, and incorporates the power of Chebyshev
interpolation by reparameterizing learnable coefficients by
chebynodes. Please refer to Section 2.1 for more concrete
backgrounds about polynomial filtering.

In this paper, we propose two spectral GNN models that provide positive answers to the questions
posed above. First, inspired by Favard’s Theorem, we propose the FavardGNN model, which
learns a polynomial basis from the space of all
possible orthonormal bases. Second, we examine
the supposedly unsolvable definition of optimal
polynomial basis from Wang & Zhang (2022) and
propose a simple model, OptBasisGNN, which
computes the optimal basis for a given graph structure and graph signal. Extensive experiments
are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed models. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yuziGuo/FarOptBasis.

However, there are still two fundamental challenges on the
choice of basis.
Challenge 1: It is well known and checked by ablation
studies (Wang & Zhang, 2022) that the choice of basis has
a significant impact on practical performance. However,
the proportion of known polynomial bases is small and
may not include the best-fitting basis for a given graph and
signal. Therefore, we pose the following question: Can we
learn a polynomial basis from the training data out of
all possible orthonormal polynomials? 1

1. Introduction
Spectral Graph Neural Networks are a type of Graph Neural Networks that comprise the majority of filter-based
GNNs (Shuman et al., 2013; Isufi et al., 2021; 2022). They
are designed to create graph signal filters in the spectral
domain. To avoid eigendecomposition, spectral GNNs approximate the desired filtering operations by polynomials
of laplacian eigenvalues.

Challenge 2: On the other hand, although these bases differ in empirical performances, their expressiveness should
be the same: any target polynomial of order K can be represented by any complete polynomial basis with truncated
order K (See Figure 1 for an example). Therefore, Wang &
Zhang (2022) raised a definition of optimal basis from an
optimization perspective, which promises an optimal convergence rate. However, this basis is believed to be unsolvable
using existing techniques. Consequently, a natural question

1

Gaoling School of Articial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Beijing Key Laboratory of
Big Data Management and Analysis Methods 4 MOE Key Lab of
Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering. Correspondence
to: Zhewei Wei <zhewei@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
For the concrete definition of orthonormal polynomial bases,
please check the preliminaries in Section 2.2.

1

