On Strengthening and Defending Graph Reconstruction Attack
with Markov Chain Approximation

Zhanke Zhou 1 Chenyu Zhou 1 Xuan Li 1 Jiangchao Yao 2 3 Quanming Yao 4 Bo Han 1

Abstract
Although powerful graph neural networks
(GNNs) have boosted numerous real-world applications, the potential privacy risk is still underexplored. To close this gap, we perform the first
comprehensive study of graph reconstruction attack that aims to reconstruct the adjacency of
nodes. We show that a range of factors in GNNs
can lead to the surprising leakage of private links.
Especially by taking GNNs as a Markov chain
and attacking GNNs via a flexible chain approximation, we systematically explore the underneath
principles of graph reconstruction attack, and propose two information theory-guided mechanisms:
(1) the chain-based attack method with adaptive
designs for extracting more private information;
(2) the chain-based defense method that sharply
reduces the attack fidelity with moderate accuracy loss. Such two objectives disclose a critical
belief that to recover better in attack, you must
extract more multi-aspect knowledge from the
trained GNN; while to learn safer for defense,
you must forget more link-sensitive information in
training GNNs. Empirically, we achieve state-ofthe-art results on six datasets and three common
GNNs. The code is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/tmlr-group/MC-GRA.

Figure 1: An illustration of Graph Reconstruction Attack.
The forward inference of a trained model is to predict the
node category ŶA , i.e., the family name of each character;
while the backward inversion attack is to recover the original
adjacency A, i.e., the kinship among characters (red edges).
proposed in the recent years have drawn much attention and
boosted a wide range of real-world applications, e.g., social
network (Fan et al., 2019), recommender systems (Wu et al.,
2020a) and drug discovery (Ioannidis et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, the privacy concerns behind these applications
raise with the development of the Model Inversion Attack
(MIA) technique, which only requires a trained model and
non-sensitive features to recover the sensitive information.
In particular, recent progress on MIA (Fredrikson et al.,
2015; Zhang et al., 2020; Struppek et al., 2022) has shown
the feasible recovery of private images in high fidelity and diversity. As for the scenarios of GNNs, the similar inversion
of the adjacency of the training graph is also a severe privacy threat, since links can reflect the sensitive relationship
information or intellectual properties of the model’s owner.
We term this kind of MIA on graphs as Graph Reconstruction Attack (GRA) for simplicity and illustrate exemplars in
Fig. 1. To date, only limited research has been conducted on
GRA (He et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2021b) that is designed
for ad-hoc scenarios. The general principles for strengthening and defending GRA are still unknown, which presents
hidden dangers in extensive real-world applications. Thus,
it is urgent to understand the vulnerability of GNNs under
such attacks and explore the proper defense methods to
protect GNNs and avoid privacy risks in advance.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has promoted tremendously broad research
from Euclidean data like images to non-euclidean data like
graphs. Specifically, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf &
Welling, 2016a; Gilmer et al., 2017; Zhang & Chen, 2018)
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist
University 2 Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Department
of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua Unversity. Correspondence to: Bo Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>, Jiangchao Yao
<Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn>.

In this work, we systematically investigate this crucial yet
under-explored problem from both sides of attack and defense. Roughly, the GNNs’ inference procedure can be
viewed as a Markov Chain fθ : (A, X) → HA → ŶA ↔ Y ,
where the adjacent matrix A and node features X are taken

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

