On the Initialization of Graph Neural Networks

Jiahang Li 1 * Yakun Song 2 * Xiang Song 3 David Paul Wipf 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Hamilton et al., 2017;
Veličković et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Xu et al.,
2018a; Monti et al., 2017) are a class of deep learning
models specifically designed to process and analyze graphstructured data, allowing for the integration of both node
and edge information for tasks such as node classification,
link prediction, and graph classification. GNNs have recently shown great success in graph representation learning in service of various downstream applications including social networks (Ying et al., 2018; Rossi et al., 2020),
recommendation (Fan et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2021), fraud
detection (Wang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020), and life sciences (Strokach et al., 2020; Jing & Xu, 2021; Nguyen et al.,
2020).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have displayed
considerable promise in graph representation
learning across various applications. The core
learning process requires the initialization of
model weight matrices within each GNN layer,
which is typically accomplished via classic initialization methods such as Xavier initialization.
However, these methods were originally motivated to stabilize the variance of hidden embeddings and gradients across layers of Feedforward
Neural Networks (FNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to avoid vanishing gradients
and maintain steady information flow. In contrast,
within the GNN context classical initializations
disregard the impact of the input graph structure
and message passing on variance. In this paper,
we analyze the variance of forward and backward
propagation across GNN layers and show that the
variance instability of GNN initializations comes
from the combined effect of the activation function, hidden dimension, graph structure and message passing. To better account for these influence
factors, we propose a new initialization method
for Variance Instability Reduction within GNN
Optimization (Virgo), which naturally tends to
equate forward and backward variances across
successive layers. We conduct comprehensive experiments on 15 datasets to show that Virgo can
lead to superior model performance and more stable variance at initialization on node classification,
link prediction and graph classification tasks.

To initiate model training, learnable GNN weight matrices
need to be initialized in one way or another. In the past,
more traditional deep learning models (e.g., CNNs, MLPs)
have typically adopted initialization schemes designed to
improve training outcomes by stabilizing the variance of
forward and backward passes (LeCun et al., 2012; Glorot
& Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015), the motivation being that
unstable variances could otherwise lead to undesirable phenomena such as vanishing gradients (LeCun et al., 2012)
or poor information flow (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). The
GNN community has largely borrowed these same schemes,
particularly the Xavier (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) and Lecun (LeCun et al., 2012) initialization paradigms. For example, the Deep Graph Library (DGL) (Wang et al., 2020) uses
Xavier to initialize the layers of GNN architectures such as
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al.,
2017), GAT/GATv2 (Veličković et al., 2017; Brody et al.,
2021) and SGC (Wu et al., 2019) models. Similarly, the PyTorch Geometric (PyG) package (Fey & Lenssen, 2019) also
uses Xavier to initialize models like GCN, GAT/GATv2, and
RGCN (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018). Meanwhile, RGCN and
ChebNet (Defferrard et al., 2016) layers within DGL and
GraphSAGE layers within PyG adopt Lecun initialization.

*Work was done during an internship in Amazon Shanghai AI
Lab 1 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong
University 3 Amazon AI 4 Amazon Shanghai AI Lab. Correspondence to: Jiahang Li <jiahangspongebob.li@connect.polyu.hk>,
Xiang Song <xiangsx@amazon.com>.

And yet despite this widespread adoption within GNN training, it remains unclear the degree to which the original justifications for existing initializations actually still apply when
we venture beyond the non-GNN architectures for which
they were first designed. Indeed, prior analysis has largely

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

