Stein Variational Goal Generation for adaptive Exploration in Multi-Goal
Reinforcement Learning

Nicolas Castanet 1 Olivier Sigaud 1 Sylvain Lamprier 2

Abstract

goal distribution is unknown at train time, which means
discovering the space of valid goals by experience, and
optimizing success coverage1

In multi-goal Reinforcement Learning, an agent
can share experience between related training
tasks, resulting in better generalization for new
tasks at test time. However, when the goal space
has discontinuities and the reward is sparse, a
majority of goals are difficult to reach. In this context, a curriculum over goals helps agents learn
by adapting training tasks to their current capabilities. In this work we propose Stein Variational
Goal Generation (SVGG), which samples goals of
intermediate difficulty for the agent, by leveraging a learned predictive model of its goal reaching
capabilities. The distribution of goals is modeled with particles that are attracted in areas of
appropriate difficulty using Stein Variational Gradient Descent. We show that SVGG outperforms
state-of-the-art multi-goal Reinforcement Learning methods in terms of success coverage in hard
exploration problems, and demonstrate that it is
endowed with a useful recovery property when
the environment changes.

To avoid deceptive gradient issues and a tedious reward engineering process, multi-goal RL often considers the sparse
reward context, where the agent only obtains a non-null
learning signal when the goal is achieved. In that case, the
multi-goal framework makes it possible to leverage Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017)
which helps densify the reward signal by relabeling failures
as successes for the goals achieved by accident. However,
in settings with discontinuities in the goal space (e.g., walls
in a maze), or in hard exploration problems where the long
task horizon results in an exponential decrease of the learning signal (Osband et al., 2016), many goals remain hard
to achieve and using HER does not suffice to reach all valid
goals. In these more difficult contexts, and without any
desired goal distribution at hand, the selection of training
goals from a behavior distribution must be structured into a
curriculum to help agents explore and learn progressively
by adapting training tasks to their current capabilities (Colas et al., 2022). The question is: how can we organize a
curriculum of goals to maximize the success coverage?
A first approach consists in focusing on novelty, with the
objective of expanding the set of achieved goals. This is the
approach of RIG (Nair et al., 2018), DISCERN (Warde-Farley
et al., 2018), S KEW-F IT (Pong et al., 2019) and MEGA (Pitis
et al., 2020)2 . This leads to strong exploration results, but
success coverage is only optimized implicitly.

1. Introduction
Multi-goal Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Kaelbling, 1993),
where agent policies are conditioned by goals specified
according to the task at hand, has recently been at the heart
of many research works (Schaul et al., 2015; Pitis et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2021), since it offers an efficient way
for sharing experience between related tasks. The usual
ambition in the multi-goal RL context is to obtain an agent
able to reach any goal from some desired goal distribution.
This is particularly challenging in settings where the desired

Another strategy is to bias the goal generation process toward goals of intermediate difficulty (GOIDs). The general
intuition is that addressing goals that are too easy or too hard
does not foster progress, thus the agent needs to identify
goals on which it can make some progress. The focus is thus
more on performance. This is the approach of asymetric
self-play (Sukhbaatar et al., 2017), G OAL GAN (Florensa

1

Sorbonne Université, ISIR, Paris, France 2 Univ Angers,
LERIA, SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000 Angers, France. Correspondence to: Nicolas Castanet <nicolas.castanet@isir.upmc.fr>,
Olivier Sigaud <olivier.sigaud@isir.upmc.fr>, Sylvain Lamprier
<sylvain.lamprier@univ-angers.fr>.

1

Success coverage, which measures the average performance
of the agent on all valid goals, is denoted competence in (Blaes
et al., 2019).
2
This is also the case for OMEGA (Pitis et al., 2020), which
extends MEGA, but for settings where the desired goal distribution
is known, which leaves the scope of our work.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

