Tighter Analysis for ProxSkip

Zhengmian Hu 1 2 Heng Huang 1

Abstract

in machine learning and statistics modeling (Candès et al.,
2011; Candès & Recht, 2012; Lustig et al., 2007; Tibshirani,
2011; Bao et al., 2022).

In this paper, we provide a tighter analysis for
ProxSkip, an algorithm that allows fewer proximal operator computations to solve composite
optimization problems. We improve the existing decreasing speed of Lyapunov function from
O(p2 ) to O(p), when p, the frequency of the proximal operators is small enough. Our theoretical
analysis also reveals the drawbacks of using large
step sizes for gradient descent in ProxSkip when
the proximal operator part is the bottleneck. Our
main motivation comes from the continuous limit
in which the original analysis of ProxSkip fails
to guarantee convergence when both the step size
γ and frequency p tend to zero. We construct a
counterexample to demonstrate why such counterintuitive behavior occurs for the original analysis
and then propose a novel Lyapunov function variant to construct a tighter analysis, avoiding the
problem of the old one. Such a new Lyapunov
function can be directly extended to many other
variants of ProxSkip. When applied to stochastic
gradient setup, our analysis leads to an improved
proximal
operator complexity
p
√ for SProxSkip from
O( 1/εµ2 log(1/ε)) to O( κ log(1/ε)).

Subgradient-based optimization algorithms are not generally used because of their slow convergence rates. Proximal
gradient descent (PGD) (Combettes & Wajs, 2005; Passty,
1979; Nesterov, 2013) is a canonical method for solving
composite optimization problems. Itis based on the proximal operator proxψ (y) = arg min 12 ∥x − y∥2 + ψ(x)
x∈Rd

and has a gradient complexity of O(κ log(1/ε)). Accelerated
proximal gradient descent (APGD) (Nesterov, 1998; 2013),
an accelerated variant of deterministic
√ gradient descent, has
a better gradient complexity of O( κ log(1/ε)).
Most prior work focused on the scenario where the cost
of the proximal operator is low and the gradient descent
part is the bottleneck. In this case, typically the gradient
complexity and proximal operator complexity are equal.
On the other hand, in federated learning (FL) one needs
to minimizePthe average of multiple different functions
n
f (x) := n1 i=1 fi (x). It can be put in consensus
form
Pn
1
(Parikh et al., 2014):
f
(x
,
.
.
.
,
x
)
:=
f
1
n
i=1 i (xi ),
n
(

0,
if x1 = · · · = xn ,
as a spe+∞, otherwise
cial case of composite optimization. This attracted attention because the proximal operator proxγψ (x1 , . . . , xn ) =
(x̄, . . . , x̄) ∈ Rnd amounts to a single global communication of the parameters from all clients for computing the
average. In this context, people sought fewer proximal operator steps and hence fewer communications, rather than
focusing on the gradient complexity of optimization.
ψ (x1 , . . . , xn ) :=

1. Introduction
Composite optimization is a problem of the form
min f (x) + ψ(x),

x∈Rd

Local training is a common approach to reduce communication and consists of multiple local gradient descent steps
interspersed by a few proximal operator steps. The simplest local training approach, known as Local SGD/FedAvg
(Mangasarian & Solodov, 1993; McDonald et al., 2010;
McMahan et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Stich, 2018; Lin
et al., 2018), is equivalent to a multi-step GD followed by
a single proximal operator step in composite optimization
and has been shown to suffer from client drift (Khaled et al.,
2019; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022). To address this, various methods have been proposed, including
Scaffold (Karimireddy et al., 2020), S-Local-GD (Gorbunov

where f : Rd → R is a smooth function and ψ : Rd →
R ∪ {+∞} is a proper, closed and convex function. In this
paper, we focus on the case where f is strongly convex.
This type of problems arises in a wide range of applications
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.. Correspondence to: Zhengmian Hu <huzhengmian@gmail.com>,
Heng Huang <henghuanghh@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

