Not All Semantics are Created Equal: Contrastive Self-supervised Learning with
Automatic Temperature Individualization

Zi-Hao Qiu 1 Quanqi Hu 2 Zhuoning Yuan 3 Denny Zhou 4 Lijun Zhang 1 Tianbao Yang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a promising way to learn
data representations that generalize across downstream tasks.
Specifically, contrastive learning (CL) has laid the foundation for state-of-the-art SSL models due to its effectiveness (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Tomasev et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022). CL aims to push the similarity
scores between “positive” pairs (e.g., augmented views of
the same image) to be higher than that between “negative”
pairs (e.g., augmented views from different images), which
has great promises in leveraging large amount of unlabelled
data (Goyal et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). Moreover, CL
has been extended to a broader scope, e.g., bimodal imagetext SSL (Zhang et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021), where
images and language text descriptions can be regarded as
multi-modal views of the same underlying concept. The
well-known CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) method shows that
models learned from millions of image-text pairs can attain
impressive recognition performance for a wide range of
visual understanding tasks.

In this paper, we aim to optimize a contrastive
loss with individualized temperatures in a principled manner. The common practice of using a
global temperature parameter τ ignores the fact
that “not all semantics are created equal”, meaning that different anchor data may have different
numbers of samples with similar semantics, especially when data exhibits long-tails. First, we
propose a new robust contrastive loss inspired by
distributionally robust optimization (DRO), providing us an intuition about the effect of τ and a
mechanism for automatic temperature individualization. Then, we propose an efficient stochastic
algorithm for optimizing the robust contrastive
loss with a provable convergence guarantee without using large mini-batch sizes. Theoretical and
experimental results show that our algorithm automatically learns a suitable τ for each sample.
Specifically, samples with frequent semantics use
large temperatures to keep local semantic structures, while samples with rare semantics use small
temperatures to induce more separable features.
Our method not only outperforms prior strong
baselines (e.g., SimCLR, CLIP) on unimodal and
bimodal tasks with larger improvements on imbalanced data but also is less sensitive to hyperparameters. To our best knowledge, this is the first
methodical approach to optimizing a contrastive
loss with individualized temperatures. Our proposed algorithms are implemented in the LibAUC
library at https://libauc.org/.

In general, contrastive methods share a common design of
the softmax-based loss function, For a given anchor data i,
a contrastive loss can be written as:
exp (sim(zi , zi+ )/τ )
,
(1)
Licon = − log P
k̸=i exp (sim(zi , zk )/τ )
where zi is the feature of the anchor data, zi+ is the feature
of a different ‘view’ of data i and called a positive sample,
zk (k ̸= i) are the features of other samples and called negative samples, τ is the temperature parameter, and sim(·, ·)
measures the similarity between two input vectors. The positive pair can be also added to the denominator, which does
not affect our discussion here. A significant property of the
loss is the hardness-aware property (Wang & Liu, 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2022). Consider the gradient
of τ Licon w.r.t. model parameters w, i.e., τ ∇w Licon :
X exp (sim(zi , zk )/τ )
P
−∇w sim(zi , zi+ )+
∇w sim(zi , zk ).
exp (sim(zi , zk )/τ )

Most work of Z.H. Qiu was done when visiting the OptMAI lab
at TAMU. 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Computer Science
and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, the University of Iowa, Iowa
City, USA 4 Google Research, USA. Correspondence to: Tianbao
Yang <tianbao-yang@tamu.edu>.

k̸=i

k̸=i

Note that the weight for the gradient of a negative pair
(zi , zk ) is proportional to exp (sim(zi , zk )/τ ). Thus, the
contrastive loss automatically penalizes negative pairs according to their hardness (hard means sim(zi , zk ) is large).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

