SeedGNN: Graph Neural Network for Supervised Seeded Graph Matching

Liren Yu 1 Jiaming Xu 2 Xiaojun Lin 1

Abstract

& Philip, 2015; Chiasserini et al., 2016), computer vision
(Conte et al., 2004; Schellewald & Schnörr, 2005; Vento
& Foggia, 2013), natural language processing (Haghighi
et al., 2005), and computational biology (Singh et al., 2008;
Kazemi et al., 2016; Kriege et al., 2019). This paper focuses
on seeded graph matching, where a small portion of the
node correspondence between the two graphs is revealed
as seeds, and we seek to complete the correspondence using the few seeded node-pairs. Seeded graph matching is
motivated by the fact that, in many real applications, the
correspondence between a small portion of the two node
sets is naturally available. For example, in social network
de-anonymization, some users who explicitly link their accounts across different social networks could become seeds
(Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; 2009). Knowledge of even
a few seeds has been shown to significantly improve the
matching results for many real-world graphs (Kazemi et al.,
2015; Fishkind et al., 2019).

There is a growing interest in designing Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) for seeded graph matching, which aims to match two unlabeled graphs
using only topological information and a small set
of seed nodes. However, most previous GNNs for
this task use a semi-supervised approach, which
requires a large number of seeds and cannot learn
knowledge that is transferable to unseen graphs.
In contrast, this paper proposes a new supervised
approach that can learn from a training set how
to match unseen graphs with only a few seeds.
Our SeedGNN architecture incorporates several
novel designs, inspired by theoretical studies of
seeded graph matching: 1) it can learn to compute
and use witness-like information from different
hops, in a way that can be generalized to graphs
of different sizes; 2) it can use easily-matched
node-pairs as new seeds to improve the matching
in subsequent layers. We evaluate SeedGNN on
synthetic and real-world graphs and demonstrate
significant performance improvements over both
non-learning and learning algorithms in the existing literature. Furthermore, our experiments
confirm that the knowledge learned by SeedGNN
from training graphs can be generalized to test
graphs of different sizes and categories.

Recently, the Graph Neural Network (GNN) approach for
graph matching has attracted much research attention. Although such a machine-learning-based approach usually
does not possess provable theoretical guarantees, it has the
potential to learn valuable features from a large set of training data. Unfortunately, to date GNN has not been successfully applied to seeded graph matching. Most previous
GNNs for seeded graph matching are limited to a semisupervised learning (SSL) paradigm, which only operates
on a single pair of graphs and treats the seed set as the labelled training data (Zhang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019a;b;c;
Zhou et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Derr et al., 2021). The
goal is to learn from the seed set useful features that can
be used to compute node embeddings for all nodes (see
Figure 1(a)). However, this semi-supervised learning suffers from two major limitations. First, in order to obtain
high matching accuracy, the set of seeds needs to be large,
which is often unrealistic in practice. Second, as this semisupervised setting only learns within a given pair of graphs,
there is no effort in transferring knowledge from one pair of
graphs to other pairs of unseen graphs, which severely limits
GNNs’ potential in distilling the common knowledge from
a large set of training graphs. A natural but fundamental
question is that

1. Introduction
Graph matching, also known as network alignment, aims to
find the node correspondence between two graphs that maximally aligns their edge sets. As a ubiquitous but challenging
problem, graph matching has numerous applications, including social network analysis (Narayanan & Shmatikov,
2008; 2009; Zafarani et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Zhang
1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA 2 The Fuqua
School of Business, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
USA. Correspondence to: Liren Yu <yu827@purdue.edu>, Jiaming XU <jx77@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Can we learn to match two graphs with only a few seeds
while generalizing to unseen graphs?
1

