Simplifying Momentum-based Positive-definite Submanifold Optimization
with Applications to Deep Learning

Wu Lin 1 Valentin Duruisseaux 2 Melvin Leok 2 Frank Nielsen 3 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 4 Mark Schmidt 1 5

Abstract

high-dimensions. This is because the methods often requires
inversion of dense matrices (see Table 1). Computations
can be reduced by using sparse matrices induced by a submanifold. However, this complicates manifold operations
needed for such submanifold optimization. For example,
the Riemannian gradient computation may involve another
matrix inverse (see Table 1). Other operations needed for
Riemannian momentum, such as the Riemannian exponential map and the parallel transport map, also require solving
an intractable ordinary differential equation (ODE).

Riemannian submanifold optimization with momentum is computationally challenging because,
to ensure that the iterates remain on the submanifold, we often need to solve difficult differential
equations. Here, we simplify such difficulties for
a class of structured symmetric positive-definite
matrices with the affine-invariant metric. We do
so by proposing a generalized version of the Riemannian normal coordinates that dynamically orthonormalizes the metric and locally converts the
problem into an unconstrained problem in the Euclidean space. We use our approach to simplify existing approaches for structured covariances and
develop matrix-inverse-free 2nd -order optimizers
for deep learning in low precision settings.

Another idea to develop practical Riemannian methods is to
use moving coordinates where a local coordinate is generated, used, and discarded at each iteration. Such approaches
can efficiently handle manifold constraints (see for example the proposed structured natural-gradient descent (NGD)
method by Lin et al. (2021a)). However, it is nontrivial to
include metric-aware momentum using moving coordinates
in a computationally efficient way. In this paper, we aim to
simplify the addition of momentum to such methods and develop efficient momentum-based updates on submanifolds.

1. Introduction
Estimation of symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices is
important in machine learning (ML) and related fields. For
example, many optimization methods require it to estimate
preconditioning matrices. Approximate inference methods
also estimate SPD matrices to obtain Gaussian posterior
approximations. Other applications include dictionary learning (Cherian & Sra, 2016), trace regression (Slawski et al.,
2015) for kernel matrices, metric learning (Guillaumin et al.,
2009), log-det maximization (Wang et al., 2010), Gaussian
mixtures (Hosseini & Sra, 2015), and Gaussian graphical
models (Makam et al., 2021).

We propose special local coordinates for a class of SPD
submanifolds with the affine-invariant metric. Our approach
avoids the use of global coordinates as well as the computation of Riemannian exponential and transport maps. Instead,
we exploit Lie-group structures to obtain efficient structurepreserving updates on submanifolds. Under our local coordinates, all constraints disappear and the metric at evaluation points becomes the standard Euclidean metric. This
metric-preserving trivialization on a submanifold enables
an efficient metric-inverse-free Riemannian momentum update by essentially performing, in the local coordinates, a
momentum-based Euclidean gradient descent update.

Because the set of SPD matrices forms a Riemannian manifold, one can use Riemannian gradient methods for SPD
estimation, but this can be computationally infeasible in

We extend the structured NGD approach in several ways:
(i) we establish its connection to Riemannian methods
(Sec. 3.1); (ii) we demystify the construction of coordinates
(Sec. 3.2); (iii) we introduce new coordinates for efficient
momentum computation (Sec. 3.1); and (iv) we expand
its scope to structured SPD matrices where Gaussian and
Bayesian assumptions are not needed (Sec. 3.3). By exploiting the submanifold structure of preconditioners, we use our
method to develop new inverse-free structured optimizers
for deep learning (DL) in low precision settings (Sec. 4).

1
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA 3 Sony Computer Science Laboratories Inc., Tokyo, Japan 4 RIKEN Center for
Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan 5 CIFAR AI Chair,
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Alberta, Canada.
Correspondence to: Wu Lin <yorker.lin@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

