Learning the Right Layers: a Data-Driven Layer-Aggregation Strategy for
Semi-Supervised Learning on Multilayer Graphs

Sara Venturini 1 Andrea Cristofari 2 Francesco Rinaldi 1 Francesco Tudisco 3

Abstract

where only a relatively small amount of labeled samples are
available (Song et al., 2022). Given a graph and a set of initially labeled nodes, the aim of GSSL is to infer the labels of
the remaining unlabeled nodes. To this end, exploiting the
graph structure is particularly important, especially when
the percentage of input labels (size of the training dataset)
is small and when no features are available for the nodes.
Based on the so-called smoothness assumption, one of the
most successful approaches for GSSL relies on a Laplacian
regularization formulation, where we aim at minimizing a
loss function that simultaneously forces consistency with
the initial labels and with the graph structure. The minimizer
can be interpreted as a new node embedding, which is then
used to classify the unlabeled nodes. After the pioneering
work by Zhou et al. (2003); Belkin et al. (2004); Yang et al.
(2016), this approach has been widely explored in the machine learning literature (Hein et al., 2013; Welling & Kipf,
2016; Gasteiger et al., 2018; Mercado et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2020; Tudisco et al., 2021; Prokopchik et al., 2022).

Clustering (or community detection) on multilayer graphs poses several additional complications with respect to standard graphs as different
layers may be characterized by different structures and types of information. One of the major
challenges is to establish the extent to which each
layer contributes to the cluster assignment in order to effectively take advantage of the multilayer
structure and improve upon the classification obtained using the individual layers or their union.
However, making an informed a-priori assessment
about the clustering information content of the
layers can be very complicated. In this work, we
assume a semi-supervised learning setting, where
the class of a small percentage of nodes is initially provided, and we propose a parameter-free
Laplacian-regularized model that learns an optimal nonlinear combination of the different layers
from the available input labels. The learning algorithm is based on a Frank-Wolfe optimization
scheme with inexact gradient, combined with a
modified Label Propagation iteration. We provide
a detailed convergence analysis of the algorithm
and extensive experiments on synthetic and realworld datasets, showing that the proposed method
compares favourably with a variety of baselines
and outperforms each individual layer when used
in isolation.

While graphs are a popular and successful tool to model
data interactions, many empirical systems and real-world
datasets are characterized by multiple types of interactions
or relationships simultaneously, and are actually better described by multilayer graphs (De Domenico et al., 2013; Gao
et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2015). For instance, transportation
systems are characterized by different transportation means
such as train, bus, etc (De Domenico et al., 2014), scientific
data is characterized by co-authorship, co-citation, as well
as topic and institution affinities (Higham et al., 2022), people in a social environment interact at different layers such
as friendship, acquaintance or business, etc (Dickison et al.,
2016). Also, many biological systems are characterized
by multiple types of relationships among their constituents
(Bentley et al., 2016; Mangioni et al., 2018). Multilayer
graphs are a standard representation of such data and directly modeling these multilayer interactions has led to improvements in a number of network science and machine
learning problems (Bianconi, 2018; Magnani et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Graph-based Semi-Supervised Learning (GSSL) has
achieved great success in various real-world applications,
1
Department of Mathematics “Tullio Levi-Civita”, University
of Padova, Padova, Italy 2 Department of Civil Engineering and
Computer Science Engineering, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”,
Rome, Italy 3 School of Mathematics, Gran Sasso Science Institute, 67100 L’Aquila, Italy. Correspondence to: Sara Venturini
<sara.venturini@math.unipd.it>.

Even though potentially very useful and powerful, multilayer graph models pose an intrinsic fundamental challenge.
Multilayer graphs can have a large number of layers describing a variety of different properties, however, it is a-priori

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

