Evaluating Self-Supervised Learning via Risk Decomposition

Yann Dubois 1 Tatsu Hashimoto 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract

provide much insight into why or when a model is better,
nor how to improve it. What are the major sources of errors
in current SSL methods? Are there tradeoffs between SSl
SSL models across different settings (e.g. full- vs few-shot
probing)? How does each design choice affect the SSL
model? Those are difficult to answer using a single metric.

Self-supervised learning (SSL) pipelines differ
in many design choices such as the architecture,
augmentations, or pretraining data. Yet SSL is typically evaluated using a single metric: linear probing on ImageNet. This does not provide much
insight into why or when a model is better, now
how to improve it. To address this, we propose
an SSL risk decomposition, which generalizes the
classical supervised approximation-estimation decomposition by considering errors arising from
the representation learning step. Our decomposition consists of four error components: approximation, representation usability, probe generalization, and encoder generalization. We provide
efficient estimators for each component and use
them to analyze the effect of 30 design choices on
169 SSL vision models evaluated on ImageNet.
Our analysis gives valuable insights for designing
and using SSL models. For example, it highlights the main sources of error and shows how
to improve SSL in specific settings (full- vs fewshot) by trading off error components. All results
and pretrained models are at github.com/
YannDubs/SSL-Risk-Decomposition

1

In supervised learning, one can get more fine-grained insights using the estimation/approximation (or bias/variance)
risk decomposition, which is estimated using the training
and validation errors. For example, models with low training error and high generalization gap often perform better in
large-data regimes and can be improved via regularization.
In this paper, we generalize this classical decomposition to
SSL. Our decomposition consists of four sources of errors:
1. approximation errors due to the encoder’s architecture
not having the capacity to perform the task;
2. representation usability errors due to using SSL followed by linear probing. Usability error is large if a
given SSL algorithm fails to produce linearly separable
representations that can be used to predict desired tasks;
3. probe generalization errors due to finite training data;
4. encoder generalization errors due to pretraining the encoder on finite data.
We further provide consistent and computationally efficient
estimators for each risk component, akin to the training and
validation errors in supervised learning. Using those estimators, we analyze 169 pretrained SSL models and the effect
of 30 design choices. These results provide insights into
the state of the field, help understand design choices, and
suggest which SSL encoder to choose in various settings.

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a popular approach for
pretraining an encoder from minimal supervision, such
that linear probes trained on the encoder’s representation
perform well on downstream tasks. SSL pipelines differ
in many design choices, such as the objective (Chen et al.,
2020a; He et al., 2022), architecture (Caron et al., 2021;
Bardes et al., 2022b), augmentations (Tian et al., 2020a;
Dubois et al., 2022) or pretraining data.Yet SSL models are
typically evaluated using a single metric: linear probing on
ImageNet. This is convenient for leaderboards but does not

Our analysis highlights that the most important source of
error used to be the representation usability but, since SimCLR, it is now the probe generalization. Furthermore, we
show that some design choices (e.g. large projection heads,
ViT encoders) improve all error components simultaneously.
But others (e.g. representations’ dimensionality or SSL objective) trade off components and thus only help in specific
settings. For example, Fig. 1 shows that SwAV RN50w4
gives more usable representations (bottom left) than MSN
ViT-L16 (Assran et al., 2022) but induces a worse probe
generalization (bottom right). This results in the former
being better in full-shot probing (76% vs 74% accuracy) but
worse in 3-shot (37% vs 63% ). In summary, we:

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Yann Dubois <yanndubs@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

