A Framework for Adapting Offline Algorithms to Solve Combinatorial
Multi-Armed Bandit Problems with Bandit Feedback
Guanyu Nie 1 Yididiya Y Nadew 1 Yanhui Zhu 1 Vaneet Aggarwal 2 3 Christopher John Quinn 1

Abstract

tive reward over a (possibly unknown) time horizon. Actions
result both in the immediate reward and, more importantly,
information about that action’s reward distribution. Such
problems result in a trade-off between trying actions the
agent is uncertain of (exploring) or only taking the action
that is empirically the best seen so far (exploiting).

We investigate the problem of stochastic, combinatorial multi-armed bandits where the learner
only has access to bandit feedback and the reward
function can be non-linear. We provide a general
framework for adapting discrete offline approximation algorithms into sublinear α-regret methods that only require
 bandit feedback, achieving
1
2
O T 3 log(T ) 3 expected cumulative α-regret
dependence on the horizon T . The framework
only requires the offline algorithms to be robust
to small errors in function evaluation. The adaptation procedure does not even require explicit
knowledge of the offline approximation algorithm
— the offline algorithm can be used as black box
subroutine. To demonstrate the utility of the proposed framework, the proposed framework is applied to multiple problems in submodular maximization, adapting approximation algorithms for
cardinality and for knapsack constraints. The new
CMAB algorithms for knapsack constraints outperform a full-bandit method developed for the
adversarial setting in experiments with real-world
data.

In the classic MAB setting, the number of possible actions
is small relative to the time horizon, meaning each action
can be taken at least once, and there is no assumed relationship between the reward distributions of different arms. The
combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) setting involves
a large but structured action space. For example, in product
recommendation problems, the decision maker may select
a subset of products (base arms) from among a large set.
There are several aspects that can affect the difficulty of
these problems. First, MAB methods are typically compared against a learner with access to a value oracle of the
reward function (an offline problem). For some problems, it
is NP-hard for the baseline learner with value oracle access
to optimize. An example is if the expected/averaged reward
function is submodular and actions are subsets constrained
by cardinality. At best, for these problems, approximation algorithms may exist. Thus, unless the time horizon
is large (exponentially long in the number of base arms,
for instance), it would be more reasonable to compare the
CMAB agent against the performance of the approximation
algorithm for the related offline problem. Likewise, one
could apply state of the art methods for (unstructured) MAB
problems treating each subset as a separate arm, and obtain
1
Õ(T 2 ) dependence on the horizon T for the subsequent
regret bound. However, that dependence would only apply
for exponentially large T .

1. Introduction
Many real world sequential decision problems can be modeled using the framework of stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB), such as scheduling, assignment problems, adcampaigns, and product recommendations, among others.
The decision maker sequentially selects actions and receives
stochastic rewards from an unknown distribution. The goal
of the decision maker is to maximize the expected cumula-

Feedback plays an important role in how challenging the
problem is. When the decision maker only observes a (numerical) reward for the action taken, that is known as bandit
or full-bandit feedback. When the decision maker observes
additional information, such as contributions of each base
arm in the action, that is semi-bandit feedback. Semi-bandit
feedback greatly facilitates learning. Suppose for instance
that the reward function (on average) was monotone increasing over the inclusion lattice and there was a cardinality
constraint of size k. The agent would know from the start
that no set of size smaller than k could be optimal (or could

1

Computer Science Department, Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, USA 2 School of IE and School of ECE, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA 3 Computer Science Program, KAUST,
Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Christopher John Quinn
<cjquinn@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

