Dirichlet Diffusion Score Model for Biological Sequence Generation

Pavel Avdeyev 1 Chenlai Shi 1 Yuhao Tan 1 Kseniia Dudnyk 1 Jian Zhou 1

Abstract

differential equation (ODE) and flexibility in sampling approaches. However, the originally proposed generative
SDEs are not directly suitable for modeling discrete data.
Recent works have proposed methods for adapting diffusion models to discrete data (Campbell et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022b; Sun et al., 2022; Austin et al., 2021; Hoogeboom et al., 2021b;a), including continuous-time diffusion
in discrete space (Campbell et al., 2022), but no methods
are formulated within the continuous-time SDE diffusion
framework (Song et al., 2020), except for quantization-based
methods. In this manuscript, we propose a general mechanism to extend this approach to discrete data, while allowing continuous-time diffusion in probability simplex space.
Specifically, designed to utilize the natural connection between Dirichlet distribution and discrete data, we consider
continuous-time diffusion within the probability simplex
for which the stationary distribution is Dirichlet distribution.
Forward diffusion (data-to-noise) of discrete data starts from
the vertices of the probability simplex space, and diffuses
continuously in the same space, and the continuous-discrete
space gap can be bridged with a latent variable interpretation.

Designing biological sequences is an important
challenge that requires satisfying complex constraints and thus is a natural problem to address
with deep generative modeling. Diffusion generative models have achieved considerable success in many applications. Score-based generative
stochastic differential equations (SDE) model is a
continuous-time diffusion model framework that
enjoys many benefits, but the originally proposed
SDEs are not naturally designed for modeling discrete data. To develop generative SDE models for
discrete data such as biological sequences, here
we introduce a diffusion process defined in the
probability simplex space with stationary distribution being the Dirichlet distribution. This makes
diffusion in continuous space natural for modeling discrete data. We refer to this approach as
Dirchlet diffusion score model. We demonstrate
that this technique can generate samples that satisfy hard constraints using a Sudoku generation
task. This generative model can also solve Sudoku, including hard puzzles, without additional
training. Finally, we applied this approach to develop the first human promoter DNA sequence design model and showed that designed sequences
share similar properties with natural promoter sequences.

While our intended application is in biological sequence generation, we evaluated our, Dirichlet diffusion score model
(DDSM)1 , on a range of discrete data generation tasks to
better understand its performance. In addition to demonstrating competitive performance on a small benchmark dataset,
binarized MNIST, we applied it to generating Sudoku puzzles to test for its ability in generating highly structured
data with strong constraints. The model can not only generate but also solve Sudoku puzzles including hard puzzles,
which is the first time this is achieved with a purely generative modeling approach. Finally, we applied DDSM to
a real-world application in biological sequence generation.
Specifically, we developed the first model for designing human promoter DNA sequences that drive gene expression,
and demonstrate that it designs diverse sequences comparable to human genome promoter sequences.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models are a family of models that
reverse diffusion process to generate data from noise. Scorebased generative stochastic differential equation (SDE) is
a type of continuous-time diffusion model that has many
desirable properties, such as allowing likelihood evaluation through a connection to a probability flow ordinary

1

1

Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, USA. Correspondence to: Jian Zhou
<jian.zhou@utsouthwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Code available at https://github.com/jzhoulab/ddsm

