Input uncertainty propagation through trained neural networks

Paul Monchot 1 2 Loı̈c Coquelin 2 Sébastien J. Petit 2 Sébastien Marmin 2 Erwan Le Pennec 1 Nicolas Fischer 2

Abstract

Monte Carlo (Welling & Teh, 2011; Chen et al., 2014). The
second source of uncertainty in a deep neural network is
the inherent uncertainty of the data composing the training dataset (known in the community as aleatoric uncertainty, and that cannot be reduced by increasing the number of training points). Proposed methods rely on adapted
loss functions (Kendall & Gal, 2017), quantile regression
(Tagasovska & Lopez-Paz, 2019), or ensemble distillation
(Malinin et al., 2019) and try to capture the uncertainty
induced by noisy trainable data points at inference time.
This allows, in particular, to improve the prediction performance and increase the detection of out-of-distribution
samples. The scope of this paper is to assess the predictive uncertainty induced by the input uncertainty (of the
test data point) at inference time for a not-editable trained
neural network. This amounts to estimating the output probability density function (PDF) for new samples not seen
by the neural network. Such problem arises especially in
a laboratory setting to investigate the robustness of trained
neural networks to corrupted inputs. Among many other
examples, it can be used in the field of autonomous driving
to develop neural networks capable of learning proper driving maneuvers and thus be highly resilient to various types
of input noise (brightness, blur, vibrations, sensor noise,
...). Equally, this issue is raised in an embedded context,
where time constraints prevent MC sampling. Our proposed
method allows for distribution propagation while staying
within a designated time budget, producing an estimate and
an upper bound of the error. Literature on this problem is
less abundant and lacks generic methods with mathematical
guarantees over the estimation.

When physical sensors are involved, such as image sensors, the uncertainty over the input data is
often a major component of the output uncertainty
of machine learning models. In this work, we
address the problem of input uncertainty propagation through trained neural networks. We do not
rely on a Gaussian distribution assumption of the
output or of any intermediate layer. We propagate
instead a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) that offers much more flexibility using the Split&Merge
algorithm. This paper’s main contribution is the
computation of a Wasserstein criterion to control
the Gaussian splitting procedure for which theoretical guarantees of convergence on the output
distribution estimates are derived. The methodology is tested against a wide range of datasets
and networks. It shows robustness, and genericity and offers highly accurate output probability
density function estimation while maintaining a
reasonable computational cost compared with the
standard Monte Carlo (MC) approach.1

1. Introduction
Predictive uncertainty results from the combination of numerous sources. The most studied uncertainty source in the
literature is the weight uncertainty (known in the community by epistemic uncertainty (Der Kiureghian & Ditlevsen,
2009), translating the lack of data (i.e. knowledge) in the
training dataset. Among the most popular approaches, we
can cite methods such as Monte Carlo Dropout (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016), variational inference with Bayes By
Backprop (Blundell et al., 2015), or based on Markov Chain

We suggest building upon a long history of the Split&Merge
paradigm to propagate a distribution through non-linear
models. This paradigm was originally proposed by Sorenson & Alspach (1971), who use Kalman filters for linear
filtering problems, with an extension to non-linear problems
in (Alspach & Sorenson, 1972). This method was taken
up again and improved as time went by. We can note in
particular the integration of Unscented Transform (UT) sampling (Julier & Uhlmann, 2004) by Faubel et al. (2009), an
update of adaptive weights in (Terefjanu, 2011), and finally
the integration of an entropy-based criterion for nonlinear
dynamical systems in (DeMars et al., 2013). This paradigm
will be detailed in Section 3.2. The proposed methodology

1

CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, Palaiseau, France 2 Data Science and Uncertainty Department, National Laboratory of Metrology and Testing, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Paul Monchot <paul.monchot@lne.fr>, Paul
Monchot <paul.monchot@polytechnique.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
The code to reproduce the experiments is available at https:
//github.com/PaulMcht/WGMprop.

1

