Subsample Ridge Ensembles: Equivalences and Generalized Cross-Validation

Jin-Hong Du * 1 Pratik Patil * 2 Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla 1

Abstract

0.1
0.00

We study subsampling-based ridge ensembles in
the proportional asymptotics regime, where the
feature size grows proportionally with the sample
size such that their ratio converges to a constant.
By analyzing the squared prediction risk of ridge
ensembles as a function of the explicit penalty λ
and the limiting subsample aspect ratio ϕs (the
ratio of the feature size to the subsample size),
we characterize contours in the (λ, ϕs )-plane at
any achievable risk. As a consequence, we prove
that the risk of the optimal full ridgeless ensemble
(fitted on all possible subsamples) matches that of
the optimal ridge predictor. In addition, we prove
strong uniform consistency of generalized crossvalidation (GCV) over the subsample sizes for
estimating the prediction risk of ridge ensembles.
This allows for GCV-based tuning of full ridgeless
ensembles without sample splitting and yields a
predictor whose risk matches optimal ridge risk.

Subsample aspect ratio
s
*
1

s

10

Ridge regularization

1.10
0.10

1.15
*

1

1.20
1.25

10

1.30

Figure 1. Heat map of the asymptotic prediction risk landscape of
full ridge ensembles as the number of observation n, the subsample
size k, and the feature dimension p tend to infinity, for varying
regularization parameters λ and limiting subsample aspect ratio
ϕs = lim p/k. The data (x, y) ∈ Rp × R is generated from a nonisotropic linear model y = x⊤ β0 + ϵ with ϕ = lim p/n = 0.1,
where the features, the coefficients,P
and the residuals are distributed
as x ∼ N (0, ΣAR1 ), β0 = 15 5j=1 w(j) , and ϵ ∼ N (0, 1),
respectively. Here, the covariance matrix (ΣAR1 )ij = 0.5|i−j| ,
w(j) is the top jth eigenvector of ΣAR1 . The green and blue stars
denote the risk of the optimal full-ensemble ridgeless predictor
and the optimal ridge predictor without subsampling, respectively.
The black dashed line denotes the set of (λ, ϕs ) pairs that yield
the same risk as (λ∗ , ϕ) and (0, ϕ∗s ), while the gray dashed lines
indicate the set of pairs that all result in the same sub-optimal risk.

1. Introduction
Ensemble methods (Breiman, 1996) are widely used in
various real-world applications in statistics and machine
learning. They combine a collection of weak predictors
to produce more stable and accurate predictions. One notable example of an ensemble method is bagging (bootstrap
aggregating) (Breiman, 1996; Bühlmann & Yu, 2002). Bagging involves averaging base predictors that are fitted on different subsampled datasets and has been shown to stabilize
the prediction and reduce the predictive variance (Bühlmann
& Yu, 2002). In this paper, we study such a class of ensemble methods that fit each base predictor independently using
a different subsampled dataset of the full training data. As
a prototypical base predictor, we focus on ridge regression

(Hoerl & Kennard, 1970a;b), one of the most popular statistical methods. We refer readers to the “ridgefest” by Hastie
(2020) for the history and review of ridge regression.
Ridge regression has recently attracted great interest, particularly the limiting case of zero regularization (where the
regularization parameter tends to zero), termed “ridgeless”
regression. In the underparameterized regime, the ridgeless predictor is ordinary least squares. However, in the
overparameterized regime, it interpolates the training data
and exhibits a peculiar risk behavior (Belkin et al., 2020;
Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022; Muthukumar et al.,
2020). LeJeune et al. (2020); Patil et al. (2022a) have recently analyzed the statistical properties of the ensemble
ridge and ridgeless predictors under proportional asymp-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
USA. 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Correspondence to: Jin-Hong <jinhongd@andrew.cmu.edu>, Pratik <pratikpatil@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

