A theory of representation learning
gives a deep generalisation of kernel methods

Adam X. Yang 1 Maxime Robeyns 1 Edward Milsom 1 Ben Anson 1 Nandi Schoots 2 Laurence Aitchison 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The successes of modern machine learning methods from
neural networks (NNs) to deep Gaussian processes (DGPs
Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; Salimbeni & Deisenroth,
2017) is based on their ability to use depth to transform
the input into high-level representations that are good for
solving difficult tasks (Bengio et al., 2013; LeCun et al.,
2015). However, theoretical approaches using infinite limits
to understand deep models struggle to capture representation learning. In particular, there are two broad families of
infinite limit, and while they both use kernel-matrix-like
objects they are ultimately very different. First is the neural
network Gaussian process (NNGP Neal, 1996; Lee et al.,
2018; Matthews et al., 2018) which applies to Bayesian
models like Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) and DGPs
and describes the representations at each layer (formally,
the NNGP kernel is raw second moment of the activities).
Second is the neural tangent kernel (NTK Jacot et al., 2018),
which is a very different quantity that involves gradients,
and describes how predictions at all datapoints change if
we do a gradient update on a single datapoint. As such, the
NNGP and NTK are suited to asking very different theoretical questions. For instance, the NNGP is better suited to
understanding the transformation of representations across
layers, while the NTK is better suited to understanding how
predictions change through NN training.

The successes of modern deep machine learning
methods are founded on their ability to transform
inputs across multiple layers to build good highlevel representations. It is therefore critical to
understand this process of representation learning. However, standard theoretical approaches
(formally NNGPs) involving infinite width limits
eliminate representation learning. We therefore
develop a new infinite width limit, the Bayesian
representation learning limit, that exhibits representation learning mirroring that in finite-width
models, yet at the same time, retains some of the
simplicity of standard infinite-width limits. In
particular, we show that Deep Gaussian processes
(DGPs) in the Bayesian representation learning
limit have exactly multivariate Gaussian posteriors, and the posterior covariances can be obtained
by optimizing an interpretable objective combining a log-likelihood to improve performance with
a series of KL-divergences which keep the posteriors close to the prior. We confirm these results
experimentally in wide but finite DGPs. Next, we
introduce the possibility of using this limit and
objective as a flexible, deep generalisation of kernel methods, that we call deep kernel machines
(DKMs). Like most naive kernel methods, DKMs
scale cubically in the number of datapoints. We
therefore use methods from the Gaussian process
inducing point literature to develop a sparse DKM
that scales linearly in the number of datapoints. Finally, we extend these approaches to NNs (which
have non-Gaussian posteriors) in the Appendices.

While challenges surrounding representation learning have
recently been addressed in the NTK setting (Yang & Hu,
2021), we are the first to address this challenge in the NNGP
setting.
At the same time, kernel methods (Smola & Schölkopf,
1998; Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004; Hofmann et al.,
2008) were a leading machine learning approach prior to
the deep learning revolution (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). However, kernel methods were eclipsed by deep NNs because
depth gives NNs the flexibility to learn a good top-layer
representation (Aitchison, 2020). In contrast, in a standard
kernel method, the kernel (or equivalently the representation) is highly inflexible — there are usually a few tunable
hyperparameters, but nothing that approaches the enormous
flexibility of the top-layer representation in a deep model.
There is therefore a need to develop flexible, deep gener-

1
University of Bristol 2 Kings College London. Correspondence
to: Laurence Aitchison <laurence.aitchison@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

