Learning-augmented private algorithms for multiple quantile release

Mikhail Khodak 1 Kareem Amin 2 Travis Dick 2 Sergei Vassilvitskii 2
lic dataset z P RN and should thus have similar quantiles,
a case known as the public-private setting (Liu et al., 2021;
Bie et al., 2022). Alternatively, in what we call sequential release, we aim to release the quantiles of each of a sequence
of datasets x1 , . . . , xT one-by-one. These could be generated by a stationary or other process that allows information
derived from prior releases to inform predictions of future
releases. In all of these settings, we might hope to incorporate external information to reduce error, but approaches for
doing so tend to be ad hoc and assumption-heavy.

Abstract
When applying differential privacy to sensitive
data, we can often improve performance using
external information such as other sensitive data,
public data, or human priors. We propose to use
the learning-augmented algorithms (or algorithms
with predictions) framework—previously applied
largely to improve time complexity or competitive
ratios—as a powerful way of designing and
analyzing privacy-preserving methods that can
take advantage of such external information
to improve utility. This idea is instantiated
on the important task of multiple quantile
release, for which we derive error guarantees
that scale with a natural measure of prediction
quality while (almost) recovering state-of-the-art
prediction-independent guarantees. Our analysis
enjoys several advantages, including minimal
assumptions about the data, a natural way of
adding robustness, and the provision of useful
surrogate losses for two novel “meta” algorithms
that learn predictions from other (potentially
sensitive) data. We conclude with experiments
on challenging tasks demonstrating that learning
predictions across one or more instances can lead
to large error reductions while preserving privacy.

We propose that the framework of learning-augmented
algorithms—a.k.a. algorithms with predictions (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2021)—provides the right tools for
deriving DP algorithms in this setting, and instantiate this
idea for multiple quantile release (Gillenwater et al., 2021;
Kaplan et al., 2022). Algorithms with predictions is an
expanding field of algorithm design that constructs methods
whose instance-dependent performance improves with
the accuracy of some prediction about the instance. The
goal is to bound the cost Cx pwq of running on instance x
given a prediction w by some metric Ux pwq of the quality
of the prediction on that instance. Motivated by practical
success (Liu et al., 2012; Kraska et al., 2018) and as a type
of beyond-worst-case analysis (Roughgarden, 2020), such
algorithms can target a wide variety of cost measures, e.g.
competitive ratios in online algorithms (Anand et al., 2020;
Bamas et al., 2020; Diakonikolas et al., 2021; Dütting et al.,
2021; Indyk et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Christianson et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2018; Lykouris &
Vassilvitskii, 2021; Rohatgi, 2020), space complexity in
streaming algorithms (Du et al., 2021), and time complexity
in graph algorithms (Dinitz et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022;
Sakaue & Oki, 2022) and distributed systems (Lattanzi
et al., 2020; Lindermayr & Megow, 2022; Scully et al.,
2022). Departing from such work, we instead aim to design
learning-augmented algorithms whose cost Cx pwq captures
the error of some statistic—in our case quantiles—computed
privately on instance an x given a prediction w. We are
interested in bounding this cost in terms of the quality of
the external information provided to our algorithm, Ux pwq.

1. Introduction
The differentially private (DP) release of statistics such as
the quantile q of a private dataset x P Rn is an inevitably
error-prone task because we are by definition precluded
from revealing exact information about the instance at
hand (Dwork & Roth, 2014). However, DP instances rarely
occur in a vacuum: even in the simplest practical settings,
we usually know basic information such as the fact that all
individuals have a nonnegative age. Often, the dataset we
are considering is drawn from a similar population as a pub1

Carnegie Mellon University; work done in part as an intern
at Google Research - New York. 2 Google Research - New York.
Correspondence to: Mikhail Khodak <khodak@cmu.edu>.

While incorporating external information into DP is wellstudied, c.f. public-private methods (Bie et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2021) and private posterior inference (Dimitrakakis
et al., 2017; Geumlek et al., 2017; Seeman et al., 2020), by

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

