Learning Subpocket Prototypes for Generalizable Structure-based Drug Design

Zaixi Zhang 1 2 Qi Liu 1 2

Abstract
Generating molecules with high binding affinities to target proteins (a.k.a. structure-based drug
design) is a fundamental and challenging task in
drug discovery. Recently, deep generative models have achieved remarkable success in generating 3D molecules conditioned on the protein
pocket. However, most existing methods consider
molecular generation for protein pockets independently while neglecting the underlying connections such as subpocket-level similarities. Subpockets are the local protein environments of ligand fragments and pockets with similar subpockets may bind the same molecular fragment (motif)
even though their overall structures are different.
Therefore, the trained models can hardly generalize to unseen protein pockets in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose a novel method
DrugGPS for generalizable structure-based drug
design. With the biochemical priors, we propose
to learn subpocket prototypes and construct a
global interaction graph to model the interactions
between subpocket prototypes and molecular motifs. Moreover, a hierarchical graph transformer
encoder and motif-based 3D molecule generation
scheme are used to improve the model’s performance. The experimental results show that our
model consistently outperforms baselines in generating realistic drug candidates with high affinities in challenging out-of-distribution settings.

2avd

1p1r

(a) Aligned subpocket pairs

(b) Ligands

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) Two proteins (PDB ID:
2avd and 1p1r) with low sequence similarity (≤10%) have similar
subpockets and bind to similar ligand fragments. 2avd is colored
yellow and 1p1r is color white. The subpockets are aligned and
highlighted with a red dashed box. (b) The molecular graphs of
ligands binding to protein 2avd and 1p1r. Similar fragments in the
subpockets are marked with green ovals.

2015; Jin et al., 2020b). Traditionally this has been achieved
with virtual screening that identifies candidate molecules
from molecular databases based on rules such as molecular
docking (Morris & Lim-Wilby, 2008; Pagadala et al., 2017)
and molecular dynamics simulations (Hansson et al., 2002;
Karplus & McCammon, 2002). However, such exhaustive
searches are time-consuming and infeasible to generate new
molecules not existing in the database. Recently, a line of
works leverage deep generative models to directly generate
3D molecules inside binding pockets (Luo & Ji, 2021; Liu
et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b).
However, existing methods suffer from the generalization
issue. The amount of high-quality protein-ligand complex
data is rather limited and the target protein pocket may not
be in the training dataset. In practice, when unpredictable
events like COVID-19 occur, the generative models are required to generate molecules for new protein targets e.g.,
the main protease of SARS-CoV-2 (Zhang et al., 2020).
Moreover, only atom-level interactions are considered and
encoded in these works and the atom-by-atom generation
may result in invalid molecules with unrealistic 3D structures. More discussions are included in related works.

1. Introduction
Structure-based drug design (SBDD), i.e., designing
molecules with high affinities to target protein pockets is one
critical and challenging task in drug discovery (Anderson,
2003; Blundell, 1996; Verlinde & Hol, 1994; Ferreira et al.,
1
Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China 2 State Key
Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence. Correspondence to: Qi Liu
<qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose DrugGPS, a structure-based Drug
design method that is Generalizable with Protein Subpocket
prototypes to address the aforementioned challenges. Firstly,
an atom-level graph and a residue-level graph are con-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

