Understanding Plasticity in Neural Networks

Clare Lyle 1 Zeyu Zheng 1 Evgenii Nikishin 1
Bernardo Avila Pires 1 Razvan Pascanu 1 Will Dabney 1

Abstract

crucial if we wish to develop deep RL agents which can
rise to the challenge of complex and constantly-changing
environments. Existing methods to promote trainability act
on a wide variety of potential mechanisms by which plasticity might be lost, including resetting of layers (Nikishin
et al., 2022) and activation units (Dohare et al., 2021), and
regularization of the features (Kumar et al., 2020; Lyle et al.,
2021). While all of these works observe performance improvements, it is unlikely that they are all obtaining these
improvements by the same mechanism. As a result, it is
difficult to know how to improve on these interventions to
further preserve plasticity.

Plasticity, the ability of a neural network to
quickly change its predictions in response to new
information, is essential for the adaptability and
robustness of deep reinforcement learning systems. Deep neural networks are known to lose
plasticity over the course of training even in relatively simple learning problems, but the mechanisms driving this phenomenon are still poorly
understood. This paper conducts a systematic
empirical analysis into plasticity loss, with the
goal of understanding the phenomenon mechanistically in order to guide the future development of
targeted solutions. We find that loss of plasticity
is deeply connected to changes in the curvature
of the loss landscape, but that it often occurs in
the absence of saturated units. Based on this insight, we identify a number of parameterization
and optimization design choices which enable networks to better preserve plasticity over the course
of training. We validate the utility of these findings on larger-scale RL benchmarks in the Arcade
Learning Environment.

This paper seeks to identify the mechanisms by which plasticity loss occurs. We begin with an analysis of two interpretable case studies, illustrating the mechanisms by which
both adaptive optimizers and naive gradient descent can
drive the loss of plasticity. Prior works have conjectured,
implicitly or explicitly, that a variety of network properties might cause plasticity loss: we present a falsification
framework inspired by the study of causally robust predictors of generalization (Dziugaite et al., 2020), and leverage
this framework to show that loss of plasticity cannot be
uniquely attributed to any of these properties. While difficult to characterize explicitly, we provide evidence that
the curvature of the loss landscape induced by new tasks
on trained parameters is a crucial factor determining a network’s plasticity, particularly in value-based reinforcement
learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
It is a widely observed phenomenon that after training on
a non-stationary objective, neural networks exhibit a reduced ability to solve new tasks (Lyle et al., 2021; Nikishin
et al., 2022; Dohare et al., 2021). This loss of plasticity
occurs most robustly when the relationship between inputs
and prediction targets changes over time, and the network
must learn to ‘overwrite’ its prior predictions (Lyle et al.,
2021). While such scenarios are relatively rare in supervised
learning, they are baked into the way that deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents are trained. Understanding how
plasticity is lost, and whether this loss can be mitigated, is

We conclude by completing a broad empirical analysis of
methods which aim to improve the ability of a network to
navigate the loss landscape throughout training. We find
that architectural choices which have been conjectured to
smooth out the loss landscape, such as categorical output
representations and normalization layers, provide the greatest improvements to plasticity, while methods which perturb
the parameters or provide other forms of regularization tend
to see less benefit. To test the generality of these findings,
we apply the best-performing intervention, layer normalization, to a standard DQN architecture and obtain significant
improvements in performance on the Arcade Learning Environment benchmark. We conclude that controlling the loss
landscape sharpness and optimizer stability present highly
promising avenues to improve the robustness and usability

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Clare Lyle <clarelyle@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

