Self-Repellent Random Walks on General Graphs Achieving Minimal Sampling Variance via Nonlinear Markov Chains

Vishwaraj Doshi 1 Jie Hu 2 Do Young Eun 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Random walk based techniques are a staple in statistics
and learning theory. Markov chains such as the Metropolis
Hastings random walk, designed to achieve any given target
probability distribution as its stationary measure, are widely
used as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers and
in distributed optimization via stochastic gradient descent
(Sun et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2022). The local nature of the information required to compute state transition probabilities
means that the algorithms scale well and are robustly implementable over state spaces such as large graphs/networks
with general topologies. However, classic Markov chains
can often be victims of limitations set by the underlying
topology of the state space (communication matrix or adjacency matrix of the underlying network structure) leading to
correlated samples which can negatively affect the estimator
performance. It has also been well established that the timereversibility requirement for the classical MCMC samplers
is one of the causes for their slow convergence (see Andrieu & Livingstone, 2021, Section 1). One way in which
this problem has been approached in the literature is via
construction of non-reversible versions of the base Markov
chain (Diaconis et al., 2000; Turitsyn et al., 2011; Chen &
Hwang, 2013; Ma et al., 2016; Thin et al., 2020), which
is often done by inducing some form of non-backtracking
behaviour, that is, avoiding states most recently visited by
the random walker (Alon et al., 2007). This involves the
random walker interacting with some of its own past history, and has been shown to possess better efficiency than
the original base Markov chain in the sense of the MCMC
estimator achieving a smaller asymptotic variance (Neal,
2004; Lee et al., 2012). Since these non-backtracking based
methods only utilize the most recent history of the random
walker and are still provably more efficient, it is natural to
consider the design of protocols where the random walker
interacts with its entire past history to speed up its diffusion
and increase its sampling efficiency, especially for sampling
over discrete state spaces. This is the approach taken in our
paper.

We consider random walks on discrete state
spaces, such as general undirected graphs, where
the random walkers are designed to approximate a
target quantity over the network topology via sampling and neighborhood exploration in the form of
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) procedures.
Given any Markov chain corresponding to a target
probability distribution, we design a self-repellent
random walk (SRRW) which is less likely to transition to nodes that were highly visited in the past,
and more likely to transition to seldom visited
nodes. For a class of SRRWs parameterized by
a positive real α, we prove that the empirical distribution of the process converges almost surely
to the the target (stationary) distribution of the
underlying Markov chain kernel. We then provide a central limit theorem and derive the exact
form of the arising asymptotic co-variance matrix, which allows us to show that the SRRW with
a stronger repellence (larger α) always achieves
a smaller asymptotic covariance, in the sense of
Loewner ordering of co-variance matrices. Especially for SRRW-driven MCMC algorithms, we
show that the decrease in the asymptotic sampling
variance is of the order O(1/α), eventually going
down to zero. Finally, we provide numerical simulations complimentary to our theoretical results,
also empirically testing a version of SRRW with
α increasing in time to combine the benefits of
smaller asymptotic variance due to large α, with
empirically observed faster mixing properties of
SRRW with smaller α.

1
IQVIA Inc., Plymouth Meeting, USA. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA.. Correspondence to: Do Young Eun
<dyeun@ncsu.edu>.

Let G(N , E) be an undirected, connected graph where N ≜
{1, · · · , N } denotes the set of nodes and E denotes the set
of edges, where we say (i, j) ∈ E if there is an edge between

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

