Rethinking Backdoor Attacks

Alaa Khaddaj * 1 Guillaume Leclerc * 1 Aleksandar Makelov * 1 Kristian Georgiev * 1 Hadi Salman 1
Andrew Ilyas 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract

Backdoor attacks pose a serious threat to machine learning
systems as they are easy to deploy and hard to detect. Indeed,
recent work has shown that modifying a very small number
of training inputs suffices for mounting a successful backdoor attack on models trained on web-scale datasets (Carlini
et al., 2023). Consequently, there is a growing body of work
on backdoor attacks and approaches to defend against them
(Chen et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2021; Hayase
et al., 2021; Levine & Feizi, 2021; Jia et al., 2021).

In a backdoor attack, an adversary inserts maliciously constructed backdoor examples into a
training set to make the resulting model vulnerable to manipulation. Defending against such
attacks involves viewing inserted examples as outliers in the training set and using techniques from
robust statistics to detect and remove them.
In this work, we present a different approach to
the backdoor attack problem. Specifically, we
show that without structural information about
the training data distribution, backdoor attacks
are indistinguishable from naturally-occuring features in the data—and thus impossible to “detect”
in a general sense. Then, guided by this observation, we revisit existing defenses against backdoor
attacks and characterize the (often latent) assumptions they make, and on which they depend. Finally, we explore an alternative perspective on
backdoor attacks: one that assumes these attacks
correspond to the strongest feature in the training data. Under this assumption (which we make
formal) we develop a new primitive for detecting
backdoor attacks. Our primitive naturally gives
rise to a detection algorithm that comes with theoretical guarantees, and is effective in practice.

A prevailing perspective on defending against backdoor
attacks treats the manipulated training inputs as outliers,
and thus draws a parallel between backdoor attacks and the
classic data poisoning setting from robust statistics. In data
poisoning, one receives data that is, with probability 1 − ε,
from a known distribution D, and, with probability ε, chosen
by an adversary. The goal is to detect the adversarially
chosen inputs, or to learn a good classifier in spite of the
presence of these inputs. This perspective is a natural one–
and has led to a host of defenses against backdoor attacks
(Chen et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2018; Hayase et al., 2021)—
but is it the right way to approach the problem?
In this work, we take a step back from the above view and
offer a different perspective on backdoor attacks: rather
than viewing the manipulated inputs as outliers, we view
the trigger used in the backdoor attack as simply another
feature in the data. To justify this view, we demonstrate that
backdoors triggers can be indistinguishable from features already present in the dataset. On one hand, this immediately
pinpoints the difficulty of detecting backdoor attacks, especially when they can correspond to arbitrary trigger patterns.
On the other hand, this observation suggests there might
be an equivalence between detecting backdoor attacks and
surfacing features present in the data.

1. Introduction
A backdoor attack (Gu et al., 2017) allows an adversary to
manipulate the predictions of a machine learning model by
modifying a small fraction of the training set inputs. This
involves adding a fixed pattern (called the “trigger”) to some
training inputs, and setting the labels of these inputs to some
fixed value yb . This intervention enables the adversary to
take control of the resulting models’ predictions at deployment time by adding the trigger to inputs of interest.

Equipped with this perspective, we introduce a primitive for
studying features in the input data and characterizing a feature’s strength. This primitive then gives rise to an algorithm
for detecting backdoor attacks in a given dataset. Specifically, our algorithm flags the training examples containing
the strongest feature as being manipulated, and removes
them from the training set. We empirically verify the efficacy of this algorithm on a variety of standard backdoor
attacks. Overall, our contributions are as follows:

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Alaa Khaddaj
<alaakh@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

