The Power of Uniform Sampling for k-Median

Lingxiao Huang 1 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 2 Jianing Lou 2

Abstract

the objective
cost(X, C) :=

We study the power of uniform sampling for
k-M EDIAN in various metric spaces. We relate the query complexity for approximating kM EDIAN, to a key parameter of the dataset,
called the balancedness β ∈ (0, 1] (with 1 being perfectly balanced). We show that any algorithm must make Ω(1/β) queries to the point
set in order to achieve O(1)-approximation for
k-M EDIAN. This particularly implies existing
constructions of coresets, a popular data reduction technique, cannot be query-efficient. On the
other hand, we show a simple uniform sample
of poly(kε−1 β −1 ) points suffices for (1 + ε)approximation for k-M EDIAN for various metric
spaces, which nearly matches the lower bound.
We conduct experiments to verify that in many
real datasets, the balancedness parameter is usually well bounded, and that the uniform sampling performs consistently well even for the case
with moderately large balancedness, which justifies that uniform sampling is indeed a viable approach for solving k-M EDIAN.

X

dist(x, C),

x∈X

where dist(x, C) := minc∈C dist(x, c) is the distance to
the closest center.
Data reduction is a powerful way for dealing with clustering problems, and a popular method called coreset (HarPeled & Mazumdar, 2004) has been extensively studied
during the last decades. Roughly, an ε-coreset aims to
find a tiny but accurate proxy of the data, so that an εapproximate center set C can be found by running existing algorithms on top of it. Specifically, coresets for
k-M EDIAN in Euclidean Rd has been studied in a series
of works (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004; Har-Peled &
Kushal, 2007; Chen, 2009; Feldman & Langberg, 2011;
Feldman et al., 2020; Sohler & Woodruff, 2018; Huang
& Vishnoi, 2020; Braverman et al., 2021b; Cohen-Addad
et al., 2021b; Braverman et al., 2022), and coresets of size
poly(kε−1 ) were obtained, which is independent of the dimension d and the data size. In addition to speeding up
existing algorithms, coresets can also be used to derive algorithms in sublinear modesl such as streaming (Har-Peled
& Mazumdar, 2004), distributed (Balcan et al., 2013) and
dynamic algorithms (Henzinger & Kale, 2020).

1
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
State Key
Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Jiangsu, China 2 Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lingxiao Huang <huanglingxiao1990@126.com>,
Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang <shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn>, Jianing
Lou <loujn@pku.edu.cn>.

Despite the progress on the size bounds, an outstanding
issue of coresets is that known coreset constructions are
usually not query-efficient, i.e., it needs to access Ω(n)
data points (even in sublinear models such as streaming).
In fact, it is not hard to see that this limitation cannot be
avoided, and in the worst case, any algorithm must make
Ω(n) queries to the identity of data points in order to construct a coreset (see Theorem 1.2 which we discuss later).
Technically, existing coreset constructions are often based
on non-uniform sampling which is not data-oblivious, and
this inherently requires to read the entire dataset. This also
makes it more difficult to efficiently implement in practice
due to the sophisticated sampling procedure. Hence, in order to achieve a sublinear query complexity, one must consider other methods than the coreset.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To this end, we consider uniform sampling as a natural alternative data reduction approach for clustering. Clearly,
uniform sampling is data-oblivious and hence has a great

1. Introduction
We investigate the power of uniform sampling in data reduction for k-M EDIAN, which is a fundamental machine
learning problem that has wide applications. Given a metric space (X , dist), k-M EDIAN takes an n-point dataset
X ⊆ X and an integer parameter k ≥ 1 as inputs, and the
goal is to find a k-point center set C ⊆ X that minimizes

1

