“Why did the Model Fail?”: Attributing Model Performance Changes to
Distribution Shifts
Haoran Zhang * 1 Harvineet Singh * 2 Marzyeh Ghassemi 1 Shalmali Joshi 3

Abstract

Koh et al., 2021; Geirhos et al., 2020; Nestor et al., 2019;
Yang et al., 2023). Importantly, such shifts are hard to
anticipate and reduce the ability of model developers to
design reliable systems.

Machine learning models frequently experience
performance drops under distribution shifts. The
underlying cause of such shifts may be multiple
simultaneous factors such as changes in data quality, differences in specific covariate distributions,
or changes in the relationship between label and
features. When a model does fail during deployment, attributing performance change to these
factors is critical for the model developer to identify the root cause and take mitigating actions. In
this work, we introduce the problem of attributing
performance differences between environments
to distribution shifts in the underlying data generating mechanisms. We formulate the problem as
a cooperative game where the players are distributions. We define the value of a set of distributions
to be the change in model performance when only
this set of distributions has changed between environments, and derive an importance weighting
method for computing the value of an arbitrary set
of distributions. The contribution of each distribution to the total performance change is then quantified as its Shapley value. We demonstrate the
correctness and utility of our method on synthetic,
semi-synthetic, and real-world case studies, showing its effectiveness in attributing performance
changes to a wide range of distribution shifts.

When the performance of a model does degrade during deployment, it is crucial for the model developer to know not
only which distributions have shifted, but also how much a
specific distribution shift contributed to model performance
degradation. Using this information, the model developer
can then take mitigating actions such as additional data collection, data augmentation, and model retraining (Ashmore
et al., 2021; Zenke et al., 2017; Subbaswamy et al., 2019).
In this work, we present a method to attribute changes in
model performance to shifts in a given set of distributions.
Distribution shifts can occur in various marginal or conditional distributions that comprise variables involved in the
model. Further, multiple distributions can change simultaneously. We handle this in our framework by defining the
effect of changing any set of distributions on model performance, and use the concept of Shapley values (Shapley et al.,
1953) to attribute the change to individual distributions. The
Shapley value is a co-operative game theoretic framework
with the goal of distributing surplus generated by the players
in the co-operative game according to their contribution. In
our framework, the players correspond to individual distributions, or more precisely, mechanisms involved in the data
generating process.
Most relevant to our contributions is the work of Budhathoki
et al. (2021), which attributes a shift between two joint
distributions to a specific set of individual distributions.
The distributions here correspond to the components of
the factorization of the joint distribution when the datagenerating process is assumed to follow causal structural
assumptions. This line of work defines distribution shifts as
interventions on causal mechanisms (Pearl & Bareinboim,
2011; Subbaswamy et al., 2019; 2021; Budhathoki et al.,
2021; Thams et al., 2022). We build on their framework
to justify the choice of players in our cooperative game.
We significantly differ from the end goal by attributing a
change in model performance between two environments to
individual distributions. Note that each shifted distribution
may influence model performance differently and may result

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are widely deployed in dynamic
environments ranging from recommendation systems to
personalized clinical care. Such environments are prone to
distribution shifts, which may lead to serious degradations
in model performance (Guo et al., 2022; Chirra et al., 2018;
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 New York University 3 Columbia
University.
Correspondence to: Haoran Zhang <haoranz@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

