Semi-Dual Unbalanced Quadratic Optimal Transport: Fast Statistical Rates and
Convergent Algorithm

Adrien Vacher 1 François-Xavier Vialard 1

Abstract

a coupling instead of a map with minimal cost and whose
marginals are constrained to be µ and ν. Quite recently, OT
was extended to arbitrary positive measures (Chizat, 2017),
with possibly different masses, thus the name Unbalanced
Optimal Transport (UOT). On the primal problem, the hard
marginal constraints are relaxed by soft entropic penalties.

In this paper, we derive a semi-dual formulation
for the problem of unbalanced quadratic optimal
transport and we study its stability properties,
namely we give upper and lower bounds for the
Bregman divergence of the new objective that
hold globally. We observe that the new objective
gains even more convexity than in the balanced
case. We use this formulation to prove the first
results on statistical estimation of UOT potentials
and we leverage the extra convexity to recover
super-parametric rates. Interestingly, unlike in the
balanced case, we do not require the potentials to
be smooth. Then, use variable metric descent to
solve the semi-dual problem for which we prove
convergence at a 1/k rate for strongly convex
potentials and exponential convergence in the balanced case when potentials are also smooth. We
emphasize that our convergence results has an
interest on its own as it generalizes previous convergence results to non-equivalent metrics. Last,
we instantiate a proof-of-concept tractable version
of our theoretical algorithm that we benchmark
on a 2D experiment in the balanced case and on
a medium dimension synthetic experiment in the
unbalanced case.

Currently, the methods to estimate UOT potentials mostly
rely on the dual formulation of the problem (Chizat, 2017;
Séjourné et al., 2019). Yet, just as in the balanced case, the
raw dual formulations suffers two major drawback: first
the discretisation of the infinite cost inequality constraint
strongly bias the estimators, especially when the dimension is large (Vacher et al., 2021) and second, the lack of
strong convexity of the objective leads to algorithms that
require many iterations (Léger, 2021; Pham et al., 2020).
One way to circumvent this issue is to pre-optimize on one
potential in the dual formulation to get rid of the cost constraint and obtain the so-called semi-dual formulation of
optimal transport. From a statistical point of view, this new
formulation now benefits from the underlying regularity of
the problem, even leading to superparametric rates of estimation under smoothness hypothesis (Hütter & Rigollet,
2021). Concerning numerical experiments, it was shown
empirically to produce very sharp transport maps on grids
with algorithms converging in just a few iterations (Jacobs &
Léger, 2020). The key element behind these successes is the
fact that the semi-dual formulation gains in convexity with
respect to the previous linear objective of OT; around the
optimum, its controls the L2 distance between the gradient
of the potential and the gradient of the optimal solution.

1. Introduction
In its original formulation, OT is a tool to compare probability distributions: it seeks a map that optimally transports
one distribution µ to an other distribution ν with respect to
some fixed cost c and it returns the associated transport cost.
This problem was later relaxed into a linear program by Kantorovitch and its primal formulation consists into seeking

In this article, we propose to continue this line of study and
derive a semi-dual formulation for quadratic UOT. Unlike
previous works (Hütter & Rigollet, 2021; Manole et al.,
2021), we derive stability bounds that hold globally and not
simply around the optimum. First, we observe that in the
unbalanced case, there is a gain of convexity with respect
to the balanced case that allows us to derive fast statistical rates (van de Geer, 2002) even when the potentials are
not assumed to be smooth. As a corollary, we obtain the
first statistical rates for the problem for UOT potentials estimation. Then we derive a provably convergent algorithm
to solve theoretically our semi-dual formulation. To this

1
LIGM, Université Gustave Eiffel, Marne-La-Vallée, France.
Correspondence to: Adrien Vacher <adrien.vacher@univeiffel.fr>, François-Xavier Vialar <francois-xavier.vialard@univeiffel.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

