Semi Bandit Dynamics in Congestion Games: Convergence to Nash Equilibrium
and No-Regret Guarantees.

Ioannis Panageas * 1 Stratis Skoulakis * 2 Luca Viano * 2 Xiao Wang 3 Volkan Cevher 2

Abstract

Nash Equilibrium (NE) which is a steady state at which
no agent can unilaterally deviate without increasing her
cost. At the same time, a long line of research studies the
convergence properties to NE of game dynamics (e.g. noregret, best response, fictitious play) at which the agents of a
congestion game iteratively update their strategies based on
the strategies of the other agents in their attempt to minimize
their individual cost.

In this work, we introduce a new variant of online gradient descent, which provably converges
to Nash Equilibria and simultaneously attains sublinear regret for the class of congestion games in
the semi-bandit feedback setting. Our proposed
method admits convergence rates depending only
polynomially on the number of players and the
number of facilities, but not on the size of the action set, which can be exponentially large in terms
of the number of facilities. Moreover, the running
time of our method has polynomial-time dependence on the implicit description of the game. As
a result, our work answers an open question from
(Cui et al., 2022).

In most real-world scenarios, agents do not have access to
the strategies of the other agents (full-information feedback)
and are only informed on the loads/cost of the resources
they selected at each round. For example a driver learns
only the congestion on the highways that she selected and
not the congestion of the alternatives that she did not select.
This type of feedback is called semi-bandit feedback and has
been extensively studied in the context of online learning.
Motivated by the above, (Cui et al., 2022) in their recent
work investigate the following question:

1. Introduction

Question. (Cui et al., 2022) Are there update rules under
(semi)-bandit feedback, that once adopted by all agents of
a congestion game, the overall system converges to a Nash
Equilibrium with rate that is independent of the number of
possible strategies?

Congestion games is a class of multi-agent games at which
n selfish agents compete over a set of m resources. Each
agent selects a subset of the resources and her cost depends
on the load of each of the selected resources (number of
other agents using the resource). For example in Network
Congestion Games, given a graph, each agent i wants to
travel from a starting vertex si to a target position ti and thus
needs to select set of edges forming an (si , ti )-path. Due
to their numerous applications congestion games have been
extensively studied over the years (Koutsoupias & Papadimitriou, 1999; Roughgarden & Tardos, 2002; Christodoulou
& Koutsoupias, 2005; Fotakis et al., 2005; de Keijzer et al.,
2010; Roughgarden, 2009).

We note that in congestion games the number of possible
strategies can be exponentially large with respect to the
game description. For example
 the number of (s, t)-paths
can be of the order O 2Θ(m) with respect to the number
of edges m. (Cui et al., 2022) provide an update rule (based
on the Frank-Wolfe method) that once adopted by all n
agents, the overall system requires O(n12 m9 /ϵ6 ) time-steps
(samples) to reach an ϵ-approximate NE.

It is well-known that congestion games always admit a

Despite its fast convergence properties, the update rule of
(Cui et al., 2022) is not aligned with the selfish nature of the
agents participating in a congestion game. This is because
their method does not provide any kind of guarantees on
the regret of the agents adopting it. As a result, (Cui et al.,
2022) posed the following open question.

*

Equal contribution 1 Donald Bren School of Information and
Computer Science, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California, USA 2 Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, IEM
STI, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Vaud,
Switzerland 3 Istitute of Theoretical Computer Science, Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Stratis Skoulakis <efstratios.skoulakis@epfl.ch>.

Open Question. (Cui et al., 2022) Are there update rules
under (semi)-bandit feedback that

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1. provide (adversarial) no-regret guarantees to any
1

