Social learning spontaneously emerges by searching optimal heuristics
with deep reinforcement learning

Seungwoong Ha 1 2 Hawoong Jeong 1 3

Abstract

2018), which distinguishes social learning from asocial, individual learning where information directly comes from
exploration through the environment. While social learning
is intuitively beneficial at first sight, research over the past
several decades has consistently proven that naive social imitation is not inherently adaptive and often fails to achieve
good group-level performance (Boyd & Richerson, 1988;
Laland, 2004; Hashimoto et al., 2010; Rendell et al., 2011;
Mason & Watts, 2012; Barkoczi & Galesic, 2016; Todd
et al., 2020). Instead, current theory suggests that, to properly determine how to learn from others one should employ
a selective heuristics called a social learning strategy (SLS)
(Laland, 2004), which governs the internal rules for choosing the proper time, subject, and methods to engage both
social and individual learning. SLSs significantly contribute
to building social norms and driving cultural evolution in
society, and thus the understanding of SLSs provides fruitful
insight to policymakers and group leaders (Toyokawa et al.,
2019; Almaatouq et al., 2020). Throughout the history of
research into SLSs, two fundamental questions have yet
to be fully answered: how it naturally emerged for social
beings in nature, and what is the optimal strategy for the
given environment.

How have individuals of social animals in nature
evolved to learn from each other, and what would
be the optimal strategy for such learning in a specific environment? Here, we address both problems by employing a deep reinforcement learning model to optimize the social learning strategies (SLSs) of agents in a cooperative game in
a multi-dimensional landscape. Throughout the
training for maximizing the overall payoff, we
find that the agent spontaneously learns various
concepts of social learning, such as copying, focusing on frequent and well-performing neighbors, self-comparison, long-term cooperation between agents, and the importance of balancing
between individual and social learning, without
any explicit guidance or prior knowledge about
the system. The SLS from a fully trained agent
outperforms all of the traditional, baseline SLSs
in terms of mean payoff. We demonstrate the superior performance of the reinforcement learning
agent in various environments, including temporally changing environments and real social networks, which also verifies the adaptability of our
framework to different social settings.

In this work, we employ a modern computational model
to tackle both of the central questions—namely, regarding
the natural emergence of social learning and finding the
optimal strategy. By constructing a reinforcement learning
(RL) framework with a neural network tailored to SLSs, we
train a model-free agent to search for the multi-dimensional
policy that yields the maximum average payoff during its
social evolution. We show that social learning in a cooperative game can naturally emerge through RL from a simple
reward, without any selective pressure or explicit knowledge of the information the agent receives from interactions.
The most intriguing point is that the agent progressively discovers significant notions of social learning throughout the
training, including the concept of copying other solutions
based on their frequency or payoff, stochastic copying, individual learning, self-comparison, and even the delicate interplay between exploration and exploitation, which yields a
long-term cooperation between agents in a non-greedy manner. The optimized SLS from the trained agent outperforms
all of the baseline SLSs in various environmental settings,

1. Introduction
Learning is one of the most salient properties that emerge
from flourishing species in nature. Particularly, learning
from other members in a group generally leads to a collective success by exploiting verified information (Feldman &
Cavalli-Sforza, 1984; Feldman et al., 1996; Kendal et al.,
1
Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, Daejeon 34141, South Korea 2 School of Computational Sciences, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Seoul 02455,
South Korea 3 Center for Complex Systems, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34141, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Hawoong Jeong <hjeong@kaist.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

