Learning Mixtures of Markov Chains and MDPs

Chinmaya Kausik 1 Kevin Tan 2 Ambuj Tewari 2

Abstract

MDP or Markov chain any trajectory comes from and (2)
one does not know the transition structures of any of the K
MDPs or Markov chains. Previous literature like Kwon et al.
(2021) and Gupta et al. (2016) has stated and underlined
the importance of this problem, but so far, the literature on
methods to solve it with theoretical guarantees and empirical
results has been sparse.

We present an algorithm for learning mixtures
of Markov chains and Markov decision processes (MDPs) from short unlabeled trajectories. Specifically, our method handles mixtures of
Markov chains with optional control input by going through a multi-step process, involving (1) a
subspace estimation step, (2) spectral clustering of
trajectories using "pairwise distance estimators,"
along with refinement using the EM algorithm,
(3) a model estimation step, and (4) a classification step for predicting labels of new trajectories.
We provide end-to-end performance guarantees,
where we only explicitly require the length of trajectories to be linear in the number of states and
the number of trajectories to be linear in a mixing time parameter. Experimental results support
these guarantees, where we attain 96.6% average
accuracy on a mixture of two MDPs in gridworld,
outperforming the EM algorithm with random
initialization (73.2% average accuracy). We also
significantly outperform the EM algorithm on real
data from the LastFM song dataset.

Broadly, there are three threads of literature on problems related to ours. Within reinforcement learning literature, there
has been a sustained interest in frameworks very similar
to mixtures of MDPs – latent MDPs (Kwon et al. (2021)),
multi-task RL (Brunskill & Li (2013)), hidden model MDPs
(Chades et al. (2021)), to name a few. However, most effort
in this thread has been towards regret minimization in the
online setting, where the agent interacts with an MDP from
a set of unknown MDPs. The framework of latent MDPs
in Kwon et al. (2021) is equivalent to adding reward information to ours. They have shown that one can only learn
latent MDPs online with number of episodes required polynomial in states and actions to the power of trajectory length
(under a reachability assumption similar to our mixing time
assumption). On the other hand, our method learns latent
MDPs offline with number of episodes needed only linear
in the number of states (in no small part due to the subspace
estimation step we make).

1. Introduction
Efficiently clustering a mixture of time series data, especially with access to only short trajectories, is a problem
that pervades sequential decision making and prediction
(Liao (2005), Huang et al. (2021), Maharaj (2000)). This is
motivated by various real-world problems, ranging through
psychology (Bulteel et al. (2016)), economics (McCulloch
& Tsay (1994)), automobile sensing (Hallac et al. (2017)),
biology (Wong & Li (2000)), neuroscience (Albert (1991)),
to name a few. One natural and important time series model
is that of a mixture of K MDPs, which includes the case of
a mixture of K Markov chains. We want to cluster from a
set of short trajectories where (1) one does not know which

The other thread of literature deals with using a "subspace
estimation" idea to efficiently cluster mixture models, from
which we gain inspiration for our algorithm. Vempala &
Wang (2004) first introduce the idea of using subspace estimation and clustering steps, with application to learning
mixtures of Gaussians. Kong et al. (2020) adapt these ideas
to the setting of meta-learning for mixed linear regression,
adding a classification step. Chen & Poor (2022) bring
these ideas to the time-series setting to learn mixtures of
linear dynamical systems. They leave open the problems
of (1) adapting the method to handle control inputs (mentioning mixtures of MDPs as an important example) and
(2) handling other time series models (like autoregressive
models and Markov chains), and state that the former is of
great importance. There are many technical and algorithmic
subtleties in adapting the ideas developed so far to MDPs
and Markov Chains. The most obvious one comes from
the following observation: in linear dynamical systems, the
deviation from the predicted next-state value under the lin-

1
Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, USA. Correspondence to: Chinmaya Kausik <ckausik@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

