RLang: A Declarative Language for Describing
Partial World Knowledge to Reinforcement Learning Agents

Rafael Rodriguez-Sanchez * 1 Benjamin A. Spiegel * 1 Jennifer Wang 1
Roma Patel 1 Stefanie Tellex 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract

(Luketina et al., 2019). Formal languages benefit from unambiguous syntax and semantics, and can therefore be reliably used to represent knowledge. These have proven useful
in specifying advice to agents in the form of hints about actions (Maclin & Shavlik, 1996) or policy structure (Andreas
et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2020). Communicating using natural
language would be more intuitive, but that requires converting natural language sentences into grounded knowledge
usable by the agent; most approaches in this area can ground
limited subsets of natural language (e.g., only commands).
For example, for describing task objectives (Artzi & Zettlemoyer, 2013; Patel et al., 2020), or other individual task
components such as rewards (Goyal et al., 2019; Sumers
et al., 2021) and policies (Branavan et al., 2010). All of the
above approaches provide information about a single component of a chosen decision-making formalism; there exists
no unified framework able to express information about all
the components of a task.

We introduce RLang, a domain-specific language
(DSL) for communicating domain knowledge to
an RL agent. Unlike existing RL DSLs that
ground to single elements of a decision-making
formalism (e.g., the reward function or policy),
RLang can specify information about every element of a Markov decision process. We define precise syntax and grounding semantics for
RLang, and provide a parser that grounds RLang
programs to an algorithm-agnostic partial world
model and policy that can be exploited by an RL
agent. We provide a series of example RLang
programs demonstrating how different RL methods can exploit the resulting knowledge, encompassing model-free and model-based tabular algorithms, policy gradient and value-based methods,
hierarchical approaches, and deep methods.

We therefore introduce RLang, a domain-specific language
(DSL) that can specify information about every component
of a Markov decision process (MDP), including flat and
hierarchical policies, state factors, state features, transition
functions, and reward functions. RLang is human-readable
and compiles into simple data structures that can be accessed
by any learning algorithm. We explain how to write statements that inform each MDP component, and demonstrate
RLang’s versatility through a series of example programs
expressing different types of domain knowledge. We also
show how to integrate this knowledge into several RL methods to improve learning performance.1

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning tasks are often impractically hard
to solve tabula rasa. Fortunately, even a small amount of
prior knowledge about the world—knowledge that is often
either seemingly obvious or easy for a human to produce—
can dramatically improve learning. For instance, knowing
about the action dynamics of a game (e.g., you can jump to
avoid falling into pits) or properties of its state (e.g., that a
particular state variable indicates a block of lava) can prevent
an agent from making poor decisions. In long-horizon tasks,
especially those with sparse rewards, such knowledge may
even be a prerequisite for finding an acceptable policy.

2. Background
Domain-Specific Languages Domain-specific languages
(DSLs) are formal languages designed to specify information relevant to a target domain. Compared to generalpurpose programming languages like Python (Van Rossum
& Drake Jr, 1995) and C (Kernigham & Ritchie, 1973),
DSLs typically contain a smaller set of narrower semantics

Languages, both formal and natural, have been used in various ways to add prior knowledge into decision-making
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Brown
University, Providence, RI, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin
Spiegel <bspiegel@cs.brown.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

RLang source code, documentation, and examples are available at rlang.ai.

1

