Identifying Interpretable Subspaces in Image Representations

Neha Kalibhat 1 Shweta Bhardwaj 1 Bayan Bruss 2 Hamed Firooz 3 Maziar Sanjabi 3 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract

Representation Space
Pre-trained
Vision Model

We propose Automatic Feature Explanation using Contrasting Concepts (FALCON), an interpretability framework to explain features of image representations. For a target feature, FALCON captions its highly activating cropped images using a large captioning dataset (like LAION400m) and a pre-trained vision-language model
like CLIP. Each word among the captions is
scored and ranked leading to a small number
of shared, human-understandable concepts that
closely describe the target feature. FALCON
also applies contrastive interpretation using lowly
activating (counterfactual) images, to eliminate
spurious concepts. Although many existing approaches interpret features independently, we observe in state-of-the-art self-supervised and supervised models, that less than 20% of the representation space can be explained by individual features.
We show that features in larger spaces become
more interpretable when studied in groups and
can be explained with high-order scoring concepts
through FALCON. We discuss how extracted concepts can be used to explain and debug failures in
downstream tasks. Finally, we present a technique
to transfer concepts from one (explainable) representation space to another unseen representation
space by learning a simple linear transformation.

Highly Activating
Images

GradCAM

Feature Crop

Large Captioning Dataset

CLIP

Top 5 Captions Per
Image with CLIP
confidence
Lowly Activating Images

Contrastive
Concept Extraction

Figure 1. Framework of FALCON: We outline the process of
interpreting any given feature(s) in the representation space of
a pre-trained model using a probe dataset D and a captioning
dataset S. Taking the set of highly activating images (from D) for
the target features we compute their gradient heatmap (Selvaraju
et al., 2019) crops, keeping only the highly activating regions. We
compute CLIP (Oikarinen & Weng, 2022) image representations of
the cropped images and text representations of a large captioning
dataset (in our case, LAION-400m (Schuhmann et al., 2021)).
For contrastive interpretation, we also caption lowly activating
(counterfactual) images. Using cosine similarity, we select the top
5 captions per image and pass them through our concept extraction
module (Described in Figure 3).

et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020a;b; Chen & He, 2021) have
shown successful generalization capability with frozen representations, however, their representation spaces are still
not fully understood. Prior works attempt to understand neural features through detailed visualization of concepts (Olah
et al., 2020; 2017; Selvaraju et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021;
Ghorbani et al., 2019). Visualization (via saliency) helps
discover various attributes that neurons react to, but can be
noisy and greatly ambiguous requiring manual inspection
to achieve any useful explanation. Natural language explanations can complement saliency heatmaps by providing a
small number of conceptual keywords that accurately describe the salient component. Text-based explanations of
model features can also enable scalable analysis of model
interpretability. We can automatically identify concept frequency and sensitivity, their contribution in downstream
tasks and debug failures modes. We note that such analysis
is not easily possible using traditional interpretation methods involving saliency (gradient heatmaps). One way to

1. Introduction
Learning generalizable representations has a growing requirement given the considerable cost of pre-training and
inference. More importantly, understanding what is encoded
in representations is a necessity for deployment, particularly
in medical and safety-critical applications (Salahuddin et al.,
2021). Large pre-trained self-supervised models (Caron
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland, College Park
Center for Machine Learning, CapitalOne 3 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Neha Kalibhat <nehamk@umd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

