CLIPood: Generalizing CLIP to Out-of-Distributions

Yang Shu * 1 Xingzhuo Guo * 1 2 Jialong Wu 1 Ximei Wang 3 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, where
the model needs to handle distribution shifts from
training, is a major challenge of machine learning.
Contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP)
models have shown impressive zero-shot ability,
but the further adaptation of CLIP on downstream
tasks undesirably degrades OOD performances.
This paper aims at generalizing CLIP to out-ofdistribution test data on downstream tasks. We
propose CLIPood, a fine-tuning method that can
adapt CLIP models to OOD situations where both
domain shifts and open classes may occur on the
unseen test data. To exploit the semantic relations
between classes from the text modality, CLIPood
introduces a new training objective, margin metric
softmax (MMS), with class adaptive margins for
fine-tuning. To incorporate both pre-trained zeroshot model and fine-tuned task-adaptive model,
CLIPood leverages a new optimization strategy,
Beta moving average (BMA), to maintain a temporal ensemble weighted by Beta distribution. Experiments on diverse datasets with different OOD
scenarios show that CLIPood consistently outperforms existing generalization techniques.

Pre-trained
CLIP
Puppy
playing in
the grass

Pre-train

Test Data

Domain Shift

Web-scale
VisionLanguage
Data

Training Data

Abstract

Fine-tuned
CLIP
Fine-tune

Test

Open Class

Figure 1: We adapt pre-trained CLIP models on downstream
tasks with training data, while maintaining OOD generalization ability to overcome both domain shift and open class.
ing system for the open world (Taori et al., 2020; Gulrajani
& Lopez-Paz, 2021; Miller et al., 2021). Instead of learning from human-labeled data, recent advances in visionlanguage pre-training seek to learn from naturally formed supervision of web-scale image-language pairs (Radford et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021), which enables learning from diverse
domains, and recognizing concepts from an open world. As
a result, vision-language pre-trained models demonstrate
impressive zero-shot learning performance and outperform
models trained from only labeled images, which reveals a
promising approach toward OOD generalization.
Despite the good zero-shot performance, vision-language
models such as Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
(CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) achieves OOD generalization
in a task-agnostic way. In order for more satisfactory performance on downstream tasks of interest, the pre-trained
models still need to utilize task-specific data to make adaptations such as fine-tuning (Agrawal et al., 2014; Girshick
et al., 2014). Although fine-tuning achieves better performance than using fixed representations (Kornblith et al.,
2019), for CLIP it comes at the cost of OOD generalization:
the performance of fine-tuned models may be even worse
than zero-shot models on related tasks with distribution
shifts (Radford et al., 2021; Pham et al., 2021; Wortsman
et al., 2022). These results leave OOD generalization an
important yet unsolved problem for adapting CLIP models.

1. Introduction
In a complex and changing open world, machine learning
applications inevitably come across the problem of out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization (Bengio et al., 2021),
which confronts new tasks with different distributions from
the training situation. Even equipped with large-scale pretrained models and carefully-designed transfer learning algorithms, OOD generalization still remains a significant
challenge in the way of developing a reliable machine learn*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University. 2 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University. 3 Tencent Inc, China. E-mail: Yang Shu <shuy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng
Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Motivated by the promising zero-shot performance, the
stronger transfer learning performance against image-only
models, and the under-explored challenge of generalization
degradation during adaptation, in this paper, we explore the
problem of generalizing CLIP models to out-of-distribution
data in downstream tasks. As shown in Figure 1, a more

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

