Topological Singularity Detection at Multiple Scales

Julius von Rohrscheidt 1 2 Bastian Rieck 1 2

Abstract
The manifold hypothesis, which assumes that data
lies on or close to an unknown manifold of low
intrinsic dimension, is a staple of modern machine learning research. However, recent work
has shown that real-world data exhibits distinct
non-manifold structures, i.e. singularities, that
can lead to erroneous findings. Detecting such
singularities is therefore crucial as a precursor to
interpolation and inference tasks. We address this
issue by developing a topological framework that
(i) quantifies the local intrinsic dimension, and
(ii) yields a Euclidicity score for assessing the
‘manifoldness’ of a point along multiple scales.
Our approach identifies singularities of complex
spaces, while also capturing singular structures
and local geometric complexity in image data.

0.04
Input space with singularities

0.09

0.14

Euclidicity

Figure 1: Overview of our method. Given a space with
singularities, our Euclidicity score measures the deviation
from a space to a Euclidean model space. Here, Euclidicity
highlights the singularity at the ‘pinch point.’ Please refer
to Section 4 for more details.
For example, the ‘pinched torus,’ an object obtained by
compressing a random region of the torus (specifically, a
meridian) to a single point, fails to satisfy the manifold hypothesis at the ‘pinch point:’ this point, unlike all other points,
does not have a neighbourhood homeomorphic to R2 (see
Fig. 1 for an illustration). Since singularities—in contrast
to outliers arising from incorrect labels, for example—often
carry relevant information (Jakubowski et al., 2020), new
tools for detecting and handling non-manifold regions in
spaces are needed.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing amount and complexity of real-world
data necessitate the development of new methods to extract
less complex but still meaningful representations of the underlying data. While numerous methods for approaching
this representation learning problem exist, they all share a
common assumption: the underlying data is supposed to be
close to a manifold with small intrinsic dimension, i.e. while
the input data may have a large ambient dimension N , there
is an n-dimensional manifold with n ≪ N that best describes the data. For some data sets, such as natural images,
this manifold hypothesis is appropriate (Carlsson, 2009).
However, recent research shows evidence that the manifold hypothesis does not necessarily hold for complex data
sets (Brown et al., 2023), and that manifold learning techniques tend to fail for non-manifold data (Rieck & Leitte,
2015; Scoccola & Perea, 2023). These failures are often
the result of singularities, i.e. regions of a space that violate the properties of a manifold (see Section 2 for details).

Our contributions. We develop an unsupervised representation learning framework for detecting singular regions
in point cloud data. Our framework is agnostic with respect to geometric or stochastic properties of the underlying
data and only requires a notion of intrinsic dimension of
neighbourhoods, which, crucially, is allowed to vary across
different points. Our approach is based on a novel formulation of persistent local homology (PLH), a method for
assessing the shape of neighbourhoods at multiple scales
of locality. We use PLH to (i) estimate the intrinsic dimension of a point locally, and (ii) define Euclidicity, a novel
quantity that measures the deviation of a point from being
Euclidean. We also provide theoretical guarantees on the approximation quality for certain classes of spaces, including
manifolds. Euclidicity yields a complementary perspective
on data, highlighting regions where the manifold hypothesis
breaks down. We show the utility of this perspective experimentally on several data sets, ranging from spaces with
known singularities to high-dimensional image data sets.

1

Helmholtz Munich 2 Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to: Bastian Rieck <bastian.rieck@helmholtzmunich.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

