Sequential Counterfactual Risk Minimization

Houssam Zenati 1 2 Eustache Diemert 1 Matthieu Martin 1 Julien Mairal 2 Pierre Gaillard 2

Abstract

out by Bottou et al. (2013), confidence intervals obtained
from counterfactual estimates may not be sufficiently accurate to select a final policy from offline data (Dai et al.,
2020). This can occur when the logging policy does not
sufficiently explore the action space. To address this, one
option is to simply collect additional data from the same
logging system to increase the sample size. However, it may
be more efficient to use already collected data to design a
better data collection experiment through a sequential design approach (Bottou et al., 2013, see Section 6.4). It is
thus appealing to consider successive policy deployments
when possible.

Counterfactual Risk Minimization (CRM) is a
framework for dealing with the logged bandit
feedback problem, where the goal is to improve
a logging policy using offline data. In this paper,
we explore the case where it is possible to deploy
learned policies multiple times and acquire new
data. We extend the CRM principle and its theory to this scenario, which we call ”Sequential
Counterfactual Risk Minimization (SCRM).” We
introduce a novel counterfactual estimator and
identify conditions that can improve the performance of CRM in terms of excess risk and regret
rates, by using an analysis similar to restart strategies in accelerated optimization methods. We also
provide an empirical evaluation of our method in
both discrete and continuous action settings, and
demonstrate the benefits of multiple deployments
of CRM.

We tackle this sequential design problem and are interested
in multiple deployments of the CRM setup of Swaminathan
& Joachims (2015a), which we call sequential counterfactual risk minimization (SCRM). SCRM performs a sequence
of data collection experiments by determining at each round
a policy using data samples collected during previous experiments. The obtained policy is then deployed for the
next round to collect additional samples. Such a sequential
decision making system thus entails designing an adaptive
learning strategy that minimizes the excess risk and expected
regret of the learner. In contrast to the conservative learning strategy in CRM, the exploration induced by sequential
deployments of enhanced logging policies should allow for
improved excess risk and regret guarantees. Yet, obtaining
such guarantees is nontrivial and we address it in this work.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual reasoning in the logged bandit problem has
become a common task for practitioners in a wide range of
applications such as recommender systems (Swaminathan
& Joachims, 2015a), ad placements (Bottou et al., 2013) or
precision medicine (Kallus & Zhou, 2018). Such a task typically consists in learning an optimal decision policy from
logged contextual features and partial feedbacks induced
by predictions from a logging policy. To do so, the logged
data is originally obtained from a randomized data collection experiment. However, the success of counterfactual
risk minimization is highly dependent on the quality of the
logging policy and its ability to sample meaningful actions.

In order to accomplish this, we first propose a new counterfactual estimator that controls the variance and analyze
its convergence guarantees. Specifically, we obtain an improved dependence on the variance of importance weights
between the optimal and logging policy. Second, leveraging
this estimator and a weak assumption on the concentration
of this variance term, we show how the error bound sequentially concentrates through CRM rollouts. This allows us
to improve the excess risk bounds convergence rate as well
as the regret rate. Our analysis employs methods similar to
restart strategies in acceleration methods (Nesterov, 2012)
and optimization for strongly convex functions (Boyd &
Vandenberghe, 2004). We also conduct numerical experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in both
discrete and continuous action settings, and how it improves
upon CRM and other existing methods in the literature.

Counterfactual reasoning can be challenging due to large
variance issues associated with counterfactual estimators
(Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015b). Additionally, as pointed
1

Criteo AI Lab 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble
INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Houssam
Zenati <housszenati@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

