Towards Learning Geometric Eigen-Lengths Crucial for Fitting Tasks

Yijia Weng 1 Kaichun Mo 1 2 Ruoxi Shi 3 Yanchao Yang 1 4 Leonidas Guibas 1

Abstract

have diverse geometric configurations. While the robot can
simply try to accomplish the task by trial and error, to us
as humans, it is clear that certain placements should not be
attempted because they will obviously fail. For example,
we should not attempt to place a tall object on a shelf whose
height is too low. We base this judgment on the estimation of
a critical geometric eigen-length or measurement, the height
of the object and the shelf, whose comparison allows a quick
estimate of task feasibility. Such scalar measurements are
crucial for downstream tasks. And we call them "eigen" because they are intrinsic properties of the object and usually
act as very low-dimensional geometric summaries with respect to many tasks, invariant to the environment it interacts
with. For example, to determine whether M objects can
be placed on N different shelves, once the height of each
object/shelf is extracted, we can compose and compare them
arbitrarily without having to exhaustively analyze N × M
pairs of raw geometries.

Some extremely low-dimensional yet crucial geometric eigen-lengths often determine the success
of some geometric tasks. For example, the height
of an object is important to measure to check if
it can fit between the shelves of a cabinet, while
the width of a couch is crucial when trying to
move it through a doorway. Humans have materialized such crucial geometric eigen-lengths in
common sense since they are very useful in serving as succinct yet effective, highly interpretable,
and universal object representations. However,
it remains obscure and underexplored if learning
systems can be equipped with similar capabilities
of automatically discovering such key geometric quantities from doing tasks. In this work, we
therefore for the first time formulate and propose a
novel learning problem on this question and set up
a benchmark suite including tasks, data, and evaluation metrics for studying the problem. We focus
on a family of common fitting tasks as the testbed
for the proposed learning problem. We explore
potential solutions and demonstrate the feasibility of learning eigen-lengths from simply observing successful and failed fitting trials. We also
attempt geometric grounding for more accurate
eigen-length measurement and study the reusability of the learned eigen-lengths across multiple
tasks. Our work marks the first exploratory step
toward learning crucial geometric eigen-lengths
and we hope it can inspire future research in
tackling this important yet underexplored problem. Project page: https://yijiaweng.github.io/geoeigen-length.

While object height is an example of important eigenlengths that are crucial for the above shelf placement task,
it is not hard to think of many other types of object eigenlengths for other geometric tasks. Figure 1 presents some
example tasks together with the presumed geometric eigenlengths based on human common sense. For example, the
geometric eigen-length diameter is important for the task
of stacking plates in different sizes (Figure 1, (a)), while
the width and length of an object are crucial geometric
eigen-lengths for deciding if one can put it into an open box
(Figure 1, (c)).
Having such extremely low-dimensional yet crucial geometric eigen-lengths extracted as the representations for objects
is certainly beneficial for designing learning systems aimed
at artificial general intelligence. One telling evidence is
that we humans have naturally built up the vocabulary of
geometric key quantities, such as height, width, and diameter, when perceiving and modeling everyday objects, and
used them to perform various tasks. Besides being succinct
yet effective abstractions of objects for quickly estimating
the feasibility for the downstream tasks, such crucial geometric eigen-lengths are also highly interpretable, which
exposes the principled reasoning process behind the feasibility checking, and universal, as they are generally applicable
to objects with arbitrary shapes and useful across different
downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Consider a robot tasked with placing many small objects on
warehouse shelves, where both the objects and the shelves
1

Stanford University 2 NVIDIA Research 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University 4 HKU. Correspondence to: Yijia Weng <yijiaw@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

