Recovering Top-Two Answers and Confusion Probability
in Multi-Choice Crowdsourcing

Hyeonsu Jeong 1 Hye Won Chung 1

Abstract

multiple-choice tasks, where a worker is asked to provide
a single answer among multiple choices. Some examples
are as follows: 1) Using crowdsourcing platforms such as
MTurk, we solve object counting or classification tasks
on a large collection of images. Answers can be noisy
either due to the difficulty of the scene or due to unreliable
workers making random guesses. 2) Scores are collected
from referees for papers submitted to a conference. For
certain papers, scores can vary widely among reviewers,
either due to the inherent nature of the paper (clear pros and
cons) or due to the reviewer’s subjective interpretation of
the scoring scale (Stelmakh et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022).

Crowdsourcing has emerged as an effective platform for labeling large amounts of data in a costand time-efficient manner. Most previous work
has focused on designing an efficient algorithm to
recover only the ground-truth labels of the data. In
this paper, we consider multi-choice crowdsourcing tasks with the goal of recovering not only the
ground truth, but also the most confusing answer
and the confusion probability. The most confusing answer provides useful information about the
task by revealing the most plausible answer other
than the ground truth and how plausible it is. To
theoretically analyze such scenarios, we propose
a model in which there are the top two plausible answers for each task, distinguished from the
rest of the choices. Task difficulty is quantified
by the probability of confusion between the top
two, and worker reliability is quantified by the
probability of giving an answer among the top
two. Under this model, we propose a two-stage
inference algorithm to infer both the top two answers and the confusion probability. We show
that our algorithm achieves the minimax optimal
convergence rate. We conduct both synthetic and
real data experiments and demonstrate that our
algorithm outperforms other recent algorithms.
We also show the applicability of our algorithms
in inferring the difficulty of tasks and in training
neural networks with top-two soft labels.

In the above scenarios, the answers provided by human
workers may not be consistent among themselves, not only
due to the presence of unreliable workers, but also due to
the inherent difficulty of the tasks. In particular, for multiple
choice tasks, there can exist plausible answers other than
the ground truth, which we call confusing answers.1 For
tasks with confusing answers, even reliable workers may
provide wrong answers due to confusion. Thus, we need to
decompose the two different causes of wrong answers: low
reliability of workers and confusion due to task difficulty.
However, most previous models of multi-choice crowdsourcing do not adequately model the errors from confusion. For
example, the single-coin Dawid-Skene model (Dawid &
Skene, 1979), which is the most widely studied model in the
literature, assumes that a worker is associated with a single
skill parameter that is fixed across all tasks, which models
the probability of giving a correct answer for every task.
Under this model, any algorithm that infers the worker’s
skill would count a confused labeling as the worker’s error
and lower its accuracy estimate for the worker, resulting in
a wrong estimate of the worker’s true skill level.

1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing has been widely adopted to solve a large
number of tasks in a time- and cost-efficient manner with
the help of human workers. In this paper, we consider

To model the effect of confusion in multi-choice crowdsourcing problems, we propose a new model in which each
task can have a confusing answer other than the ground truth,
with a different confusion probability across tasks. Task difficulty is quantified by the confusion probability between

1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to: Hyeonsu Jeong <hsjeong1121@kaist.ac.kr>,
Hye Won Chung <hwchung@kaist.ac.kr>.

1

This phenomenon is evident on public datasets: for ‘Web’
dataset (Zhou et al., 2012), which consists of five-choice tasks, the
most dominant top-two answers of each task account for 80% of
the total answers, and the ratio between the top two is 2.4:1.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

