Neural signature kernels as infinite-width-depth-limits of controlled ResNets

Nicola Muça Cirone 1 Maud Lemercier 2 Cristopher Salvi 1

Abstract

This approximation has been treated rigorously for finitewidth ResNets, which in the infinite-depth limit converge
in distribution to zero-drift neural stochastic differential
equations (Neural SDEs) with diffusion depending on the
choice of activation function (Cohen et al., 2021; Hayou,
2022; Marion et al., 2022; Cont et al., 2022).

Motivated by the paradigm of reservoir computing, we consider randomly initialized controlled
ResNets defined as Euler-discretizations of neural
controlled differential equations (Neural CDEs),
a unified architecture which enconpasses both
RNNs and ResNets. We show that in the infinitewidth-depth limit and under proper scaling, these
architectures converge weakly to Gaussian processes indexed on some spaces of continuous
paths and with kernels satisfying certain partial
differential equations (PDEs) varying according
to the choice of activation function φ, extending the results of Hayou (2022); Hayou & Yang
(2023) to the controlled and homogeneous case.
In the special, homogeneous, case where φ is
the identity, we show that the equation reduces
to a linear PDE and the limiting kernel agrees
with the signature kernel of Salvi et al. (2021a).
We name this new family of limiting kernels neural signature kernels. Finally, we show that in
the infinite-depth regime, finite-width controlled
ResNets converge in distribution to Neural CDEs
with random vector fields which, depending on
whether the weights are shared across layers, are
either time-independent and Gaussian or behave
like a matrix-valued Brownian motion.

The “dual” scenario of finite-depth and infinite-width neural
networks has also been the object of many recent studies
(Neal, 2012; Matthews et al., 2018; Novak et al., 2018).
Notably, through the unifying algorithmic language of Tensor Programs designed by Yang (2019), many standard
feedforward, convolutional and recurrent architectures of
finite-depth can be shown to converge to Gaussian processes
(GPs) in the infinite-width limit.
In the context of deep learning for sequential data, finitewidth RNNs have been informally identified as approximations to neural controlled differential equations (Neural
CDEs) introduced by Kidger et al. (2020); Morrill et al.
(2021) and inspired from the homonymous class of dynamical systems studied in rough analysis, a branch of stochastic
analysis providing a robust solution theory for differential
equations driven by irregular signals (Lyons, 1998; Lyons
et al., 2007; Friz & Hairer, 2020; Friz & Victoir, 2010).
However, contrarily to this widespread interpretation, the
Euler discretization of a Neural CDE with vector fields1 f
produces a recursive relation for the hidden state h in the
form of (1), where the increments of the input signal x enter
the recursion in a multiplicative manner rather than via an
additive interaction typically assumed in RNNs:

1. Introduction

hk+1 = hk + f (hk )(xk+1 − xk ).

The symbiosis between differential equations and deep learning has become an active research area in recent years, notably through the introduction of hybrid models named neural differential equations (Kidger, 2022). In fact, many
standard neural network architectures may be interpreted as
approximations to some differential equations.

(1)

Furthermore, the addition of the previous hidden state hk
on the right-hand side of (1), commonly referred to as a
skip connection, is characteristic of ResNets and absent
in classical RNNs. We will refer to architectures defined
by (1) as homogeneous controlled ResNets. We will also
consider their inhomogenous counterparts where the map
f = f (k, hk ) depends on the iteration k.

1
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Department of Mathematics, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Nicola
Muça Cirone <nm2322@ic.ac.uk>.

Dynamical systems in the form of (1) are often called reservoirs in the paradigm of reservoir computing (Tanaka et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Typically f is taken to be a randomly initialized feedforward
neural network with Gaussian weights and biases.

1

