FedAvg Converges to Zero Training Loss Linearly for Overparameterized
Multi-Layer Neural Networks

Bingqing Song 1 Prashant Khanduri * 2 Xinwei Zhang * 1 Jinfeng Yi 3 Mingyi Hong 1

Abstract

training data at individual nodes originates from different
distributions, referred to as the heterogeneous data setting
(Yu et al., 2019a; Woodworth et al., 2020a). In the past few
years, a substantial research effort has been devoted towards
developing a large number of algorithms that can better deal
with data heterogeneity, (Karimireddy et al., 2020b; Zhang
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2018; Acar et al., 2020; Khanduri et al.,
2021). However, in practice it has been observed by a number of recent works, that in spite of the data heterogeneity,
the simple vanilla FedAvg algorithm (a.k.a. the Local SGD)
still offers competitive performance in comparison to the
state-of-the-art. For example, see Table 2 in (Karimireddy
et al., 2020a), Table 1 in (Reddi et al., 2020), and Table 2 in
(Yang et al., 2021) for performance comparison of FedAvg
on popular FL tasks.

Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning
paradigm that allows multiple clients to learn a
joint model by utilizing privately held data at each
client. Significant research efforts have been devoted to develop advanced algorithms that deal
with the situation where the data at individual
clients have heterogeneous distributions. In this
work, we show that data heterogeneity can be
dealt from a different perspective. That is, by
utilizing a certain overparameterized multi-layer
neural network at each client, even the vanilla
FedAvg (a.k.a. the Local SGD) algorithm can
accurately optimize the training problem: When
each client has a neural network with one wide
layer of size N (where N is the number of total
training samples), followed by layers of smaller
widths, FedAvg converges linearly to a solution
that achieves (almost) zero training loss, without
requiring any assumptions on the clients’ data distributions. To our knowledge, this is the first work
that demonstrates such resilience to data heterogeneity for FedAvg when trained on multi-layer
neural networks. Our experiments also confirm
that, neural networks of large size can achieve better and more stable performance for FL problems.

1. Introduction

Motivated by these observations, we ask: Is it possible to
handle the the data heterogeneity issue from a different perspective, without modifying the vanilla FedAvg algorithm?
To answer this question, in this work we show that FedAvg
can indeed perform very well regardless of the heterogeneity conditions, if the models to be learned are nice enough.
Specifically, FedAvg finds solutions that achieve almost
zero training loss (or almost global optimal solution) very
quickly (i.e., linearly), when the FL model to be trained is
certain overparameterized multi-layer neural network. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first result that shows
(linear) convergence of FedAvg in the overparameterized
regime for training multilayer neural networks. The major
contributions of our work are listed below.

In Federated Learning (FL), multiple clients collaborate
with the help of a server to learn a joint model (McMahan et al., 2017). The privacy guarantees of FL has made
it a popular distributed learning paradigm, as each client
holds a private data set and aims to learn a global model
without leaking its data to other nodes or the server. The
performance of FL algorithms is known to degrade when

• Under certain assumptions on the neural network architecture, we prove some key properties of the clients’ (stochastic) gradients during the training phase (Lemmas 1 and
2). These results allow us to establish convergence of
FedAvg for training overparameterized neural networks
without imposing restrictive heterogeneity assumptions
on the gradients of the local loss functions.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Wayne State University 3 JD AI Research-Shanghai. Correspondence to: Bingqing Song <song0409@umn.edu>.

• We design a special initialization strategy for training the
network using FedAvg. The initialization is designed such
that the singular values of the model parameters and the
outputs of the first layer of local and aggregated model
parameters stay positive definite during the training. This
property combined with overparameterization enables Fe-

2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

