Identifiability and Generalizability in
Constrained Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Andreas Schlaginhaufen 1 Maryam Kamgarpour 1

Abstract

known. In many cases, such as autonomous driving or
human-robot interactions, the reward functions are a priori unknown and are hard to design. The framework of
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) addresses learning reward functions based on expert demonstrations. However,
most past work on IRL is not incorporating safety explicitly.
While safety can be learned implicitly by learning a reward
that penalizes unsafe behavior, incorporating safety in IRL
is essential in ensuring that the learned rewards can be
transferred to new tasks efficiently.

Two main challenges in Reinforcement Learning
(RL) are designing appropriate reward functions
and ensuring the safety of the learned policy. To
address these challenges, we present a theoretical
framework for Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) in constrained Markov decision processes.
From a convex-analytic perspective, we extend
prior results on reward identifiability and generalizability to both the constrained setting and a
more general class of regularizations. In particular, we show that identifiability up to potential
shaping (Cao et al., 2021) is a consequence of entropy regularization and may generally no longer
hold for other regularizations or in the presence
of safety constraints. We also show that to ensure
generalizability to new transition laws and constraints, the true reward must be identified up to
a constant. Additionally, we derive a finite sample guarantee for the suboptimality of the learned
rewards, and validate our results in a gridworld
environment.

Related Work Safe RL for Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) has been extensively studied and various notions of
safety have been considered (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015).
A well-established framework for safety is Constrained
Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) (Altman, 1999). In
this setting, safety is defined through a set of cost functions on the state and actions, whose expectations should be
bounded by a predefined threshold. The CMDP approach
has been broadly applied to safe RL (Achiam et al., 2017;
Chow et al., 2018; Turchetta et al., 2020).
The above safe RL works all assume that the reward is
known or can be evaluated along the MDP trajectories.
Learning rewards from a data set of expert demonstrations
– i.e. the concept of IRL – was first introduced by Russell
(1998). Whereas imitation learning (Pomerleau, 1988; Syed
& Schapire, 2007; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Garg et al., 2021)
attempts to directly recover the expert’s policy, the goal
of IRL is to learn the expert’s latent reward function. The
main motivation for IRL is that the reward, being independent of the transition law, provides the most succinct and
transferable description of a task (Ng et al., 2000).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been successfully applied
to many artificial intelligence tasks such as playing the
games of Chess, Go, and Starcraft (Silver et al., 2016), control of humanoid robots (Akkaya et al., 2019), or fine-tuning
of large language models (Stiennon et al., 2020). However,
two of the key challenges in bringing RL to the real world
include designing suitable reward functions for the problem
at hand and guaranteeing safety of the learned policy.

A fundamental challenge in IRL is that in general many
rewards can generate a given optimal behavior, making it
difficult to recover the true underlying reward function. In
particular, Ng et al. (1999) show that the set of optimal policies is always invariant under the so-called potential shaping
transformations. Additionally, the non-uniqueness of the
optimal policy corresponding to some reward can lead to
trivial solutions to the IRL problem. For instance, for a
constant reward all policies are optimal, but such a reward
is most likely not informative for the expert’s task. Various
methods have been proposed to deal with the above two

While a surge of recent work addresses safe RL, past work
has focused on the case in which the reward function is
1

SYCAMORE Lab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Andreas
Schlaginhaufen <andreas.schlaginhaufen@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

