Scaling Vision Transformers to 22 Billion Parameters

Mostafa Dehghani * Josip Djolonga * Basil Mustafa * Piotr Padlewski * Jonathan Heek *
Justin Gilmer Andreas Steiner Mathilde Caron Robert Geirhos Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
Rodolphe Jenatton Lucas Beyer Michael Tschannen Anurag Arnab Xiao Wang
Carlos Riquelme Matthias Minderer Joan Puigcerver Utku Evci Manoj Kumar
Sjoerd van Steenkiste Gamaleldin F. Elsayed Aravindh Mahendran Fisher Yu
Avital Oliver Fantine Huot Jasmijn Bastings Mark Patrick Collier Alexey A. Gritsenko
Vighnesh Birodkar Cristina Vasconcelos Yi Tay Thomas Mensink Alexander Kolesnikov
Filip Pavetić Dustin Tran Thomas Kipf Mario Lučić Xiaohua Zhai Daniel Keysers
Jeremiah Harmsen Neil Houlsby *
Google Research

Abstract

wide variety of vision tasks (Pan & Yang, 2010; Zhai et al.,
2019; Kolesnikov et al., 2020). Larger datasets, scalable
architectures, and new training methods (Mahajan et al.,
2018; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021; Zhai
et al., 2022a) have accelerated this growth. Despite this,
vision models have trailed far behind language models,
which have demonstrated emergent capabilities at massive
scales (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022). Specifically, the largest dense vision model to date is a mere 4B
parameter ViT (Chen et al., 2022), while a modestly parameterized model for an entry-level competitive language
model typically contains over 10B parameters (Raffel et al.,
2019; Tay et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023),
and the largest dense language model has 540B parameters (Chowdhery et al., 2022). Sparse models demonstrate
the same trend, where language models go beyond a trillion parameters (Fedus et al., 2021) but the largest reported
sparse vision models are only 15B (Riquelme et al., 2021).

The scaling of Transformers has driven breakthrough capabilities for language models. At
present, the largest large language models (LLMs)
contain upwards of 100B parameters. Vision
Transformers (ViT) have introduced the same architecture to image and video modelling, but these
have not yet been successfully scaled to nearly
the same degree; the largest dense ViT contains
4B parameters (Chen et al., 2022). We present
a recipe for highly efficient and stable training
of a 22B-parameter ViT (ViT-22B) and perform
a wide variety of experiments on the resulting
model. When evaluated on downstream tasks
(often with a lightweight linear model on frozen
features), ViT-22B demonstrates increasing performance with scale. We further observe other interesting benefits of scale, including an improved
tradeoff between fairness and performance, stateof-the-art alignment to human visual perception
in terms of shape/texture bias, and improved robustness. ViT-22B demonstrates the potential for
“LLM-like” scaling in vision, and provides key
steps towards getting there.

This paper presents ViT-22B, the largest dense ViT model
to date. En route to 22B parameters, we uncover pathological training instabilities which prevent scaling the default
recipe, and demonstrate architectural changes which make
it possible. Further, we carefully engineer the model to
enable model-parallel training at unprecedented efficiency.
ViT-22B’s quality is assessed via a comprehensive evaluation suite of tasks, ranging from (few-shot) classification to
dense output tasks, where it reaches or advances the current
state-of-the-art. For example, even when used as a frozen
visual feature extractor, ViT-22B achieves an accuracy of
89.5% on ImageNet. With a text tower trained to match
these visual features (Zhai et al., 2022b), it achieves 85.9%
accuracy on ImageNet in the zero-shot setting. The model
is furthermore a great teacher — used as a distillation target,
we train a ViT-B student that achieves 88.6% on ImageNet,
state-of-the-art at this scale.

1. Introduction
Similar to natural language processing, transfer of pretrained vision backbones has improved performance on a
Core contributors. Correspondence to: Mostafa Dehghani <dehghani@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

