B-Learner: Quasi-Oracle Bounds on Heterogeneous Causal Effects Under
Hidden Confounding

Miruna Oprescu 1 Jacob Dorn 2 Marah Ghoummaid 3 Andrew Jesson 4 Nathan Kallus 1 Uri Shalit 3

Abstract

to estimate which patients react well to a certain medication
and which patients should avoid it. In many cases, due to
economic and ethical considerations, the data available for
these tasks is observational data, i.e. data that was not collected as part of a randomized experiment. Using such data
carries the risk of unobserved confounding: correlations
between the observed interventions and outcomes that are
not accounted for in the available data. For example, patients with more social support might tend to receive certain
interventions over others. If the level of a patient’s social
support is not recorded in the data, the estimated effect of
the intervention will be biased due to not observing the confounder of social support. Unobserved confounding cannot
be detected from data, and its presence can lead to arbitrary
and unknown bias in causal effect estimates. Such bias can
lead to unreliable and potentially harmful policies.

Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects from
observational data is a crucial task across many
fields, helping policy and decision-makers take
better actions. There has been recent progress
on robust and efficient methods for estimating
the conditional average treatment effect (CATE)
function, but these methods often do not take into
account the risk of hidden confounding, which
could arbitrarily and unknowingly bias any causal
estimate based on observational data. We propose a meta-learner called the B-Learner, which
can efficiently learn sharp bounds on the CATE
function under limits on the level of hidden confounding. We derive the B-Learner by adapting
recent results for sharp and valid bounds of the average treatment effect (Dorn et al., 2021) into the
framework given by Kallus & Oprescu (2023) for
robust and model-agnostic learning of conditional
distributional treatment effects. The B-Learner
can use any function estimator such as random
forests and deep neural networks, and we prove
its estimates are valid, sharp, efficient, and have
a quasi-oracle property with respect to the constituent estimators under more general conditions
than existing methods. Semi-synthetic experimental comparisons validate the theoretical findings,
and we use real-world data demonstrate how the
method might be used in practice.

In this work we are concerned with estimating causal effects on an individual level in the presence of a limited
degree of unobserved confounding. Specifically, we give
a method for effectively learning upper and lower bounds
on the conditional average treatment effect (CATE) function that allows for flexible nuisance estimation and highdimensional conditioning sets like patient medical records.
The degree of allowed hidden confounding can be set by domain knowledge; alternatively, we can estimate what degree
of hidden confounding is needed to significantly change our
understanding of the CATE for any particular instance or
sub-population.
We pursue the desirable treatment effect bound properties
of validity, sharpness, efficiency, and robustness. A bound
is called valid if it contains the true value of the causal estimand. A sharp bound is a valid bound that contains only
those values of the causal estimand that could emerge from
a plausible data generation process that could have produced
the observed data (Ho & Rosen, 2017). Therefore, sharp
bounds are the smallest possible bounds accounting for both
observational data and domain knowledge (in the form of the
degree of hidden confounding), a property which is important for precise decision making under hidden confounding.
In contrast, a valid bound could in principle contain extraneous values, leading to overly cautious decision making.
Efficient bounds converge to their target values using as lit-

1. Introduction
Using data to estimate the causal effect of actions is a fundamental task in medicine, economics, education research,
and more. For instance, we might wish to use patient data
1
Cornell University and Cornell Tech 2 Princeton University 3 Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 4 OATML, University of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Miruna Oprescu
<amo78@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

