Disentangled Multi-Fidelity Deep Bayesian Active Learning

Dongxia Wu 1 2 Ruijia Niu 1 Matteo Chinazzi 3 4 Yi-An Ma 2 1 Rose Yu 1 2

Abstract

offer less accuracy but are less computationally expensive.
Multi-fidelity modeling, as outlined in (Peherstorfer et al.,
2018), aims to strike a balance between computation cost
and prediction accuracy by using data from multiple levels
of fidelity to learn an accurate high-fidelity surrogate. The
learned surrogate can replicate the behavior of the original
model to eliminate the complex numerical integration.

To balance quality and cost, various domain areas of science and engineering run simulations at
multiple levels of sophistication. Multi-fidelity
active learning aims to learn a direct mapping
from input parameters to simulation outputs at
the highest fidelity by actively acquiring data
from multiple fidelity levels. However, existing approaches based on Gaussian processes are
hardly scalable to high-dimensional data. Deep
learning-based methods often impose a hierarchical structure in hidden representations, which only
supports passing information from low-fidelity
to high-fidelity. These approaches can lead to
the undesirable propagation of errors from lowfidelity representations to high-fidelity ones. We
propose a novel framework called Disentangled
Multi-fidelity Deep Bayesian Active Learning
(D-MFDAL), which learns the surrogate models
conditioned on the distribution of functions at
multiple fidelities. On benchmark tasks of learning deep surrogates of partial differential equations including heat equation, Poisson’s equation
and fluid simulations, our approach significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art in prediction accuracy and sample efficiency.

While Gaussian processes (GPs) remain to be predominant
tools in multi-fidelity modeling (Perdikaris et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2021), deep learning arises as a more scalable
alternative for high-dimensional data (Cutajar et al., 2019;
Wang & Lin, 2020; Hebbal et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022).
These methods use a deep neural network to learn a direct
mapping from input parameters to simulation outputs using
multi-fidelity data. However, they also require simulating
massive training data beforehand, which is expensive to
obtain, especially for high-fidelity simulation.
Multi-fidelity deep active learning (MFDAL) (Li et al.,
2022b;a) proposes a framework to acquire data at different fidelity levels with deep learning and to reduce the cost
of data simulation. Such models pass information from
low-fidelity to high-fidelity hidden representations through
a neural network (NN). This design requires accurate hidden
representations at each fidelity to propagate useful information from low-fidelity to high-fidelity levels. However, in
multi-fidelity active learning, these hidden representations
can be easily erroneous when the number of training data
is highly unbalanced at each fidelity and the data distribution is dramatically shifted during the beginning stage of
active learning. Moreover, the trained surrogate model will
also have the overfitting issue at the beginning stage with
limited training data at each fidelity level. These overfitted
hidden representations are less accurate and their error will
propagate from low-fidelity to high-fidelity.

1. Introduction
Mathematical modeling and simulations play a crucial role
in various scientific and engineering fields, ranging from diffusion modeling to epidemic simulation. These models can
often be simulated at different levels of sophistication. Highfidelity models provide highly accurate results but require
more computational resources, while low-fidelity models

To alleviate the overfitting problem, (Wu et al., 2022) propose a unified neural latent variable model for multi-fidelity
surrogate modeling called Multi-fidelity Hierarchical Neural Processes (MFHNP). They introduce latent variables to
learn the distributions over functions at each fidelity level.
However, this model still requires a hierarchical structure
to pass information from low-fidelity to high-fidelity levels
via hidden representations of a NN. Therefore, the error
propagation issue remains.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California San Diego, La Jolla, USA 2 Halıcıoğlu Data Science
Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, USA 3 The
Roux Institute, Northeastern University, Portland, USA 4 Network
Science Institute, Northeastern University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Rose Yu <roseyu@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

