Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning:
Asynchronous Communication and Linear Function Approximation

Yifei Min * 1 Jiafan He * 2 Tianhao Wang * 1 Quanquan Gu 2

Abstract

that the same performance as single-agent methods can be
achieved with efficient communication strategy.

We study multi-agent reinforcement learning in
the setting of episodic Markov decision processes,
where multiple agents cooperate via communication through a central server. We propose a
provably efficient algorithm based on value iteration that enable asynchronous communication
while ensuring the advantage of cooperation with
low communication overhead. With linear function approximation, we
√ prove that our algorithm
2
e 3/2 H 2 K) regret with O(dHM
e
enjoys an O(d
)
communication complexity, where d is the feature
dimension, H is the horizon length, M is the total
number of agents, and K is the total number of
episodes. We also provide a lower bound showing
that a minimal Ω(dM ) communication complexity is required to improve the performance through
collaboration.

1

We focus on the so-called parallel RL setting (Kretchmar,
2002; Grounds & Kudenko, 2007), where agents interact
with the environment in parallel to solve a common problem.
More specifically, we consider a model of episodic Markov
decision processes (MDPs) called linear MDPs (Yang &
Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020), where both the transition
probability and reward functions are linear in some known
d-dimensional feature mapping. We assume there are M
agents, which share the same underlying MDP model, but
interact with the environment independently in parallel. The
agents cannot communicate directly with each other, and
the information exchange is realized only through a central
server. We emphasize that in our setting, the communication between the agents and server is not required to be
synchronous, and any communication is initiated solely by
the agent, thus providing flexibility for practical needs. The
goal of the agents is to achieve a low total regret with as less
communication as possible.

Introduction

Notably, a recent work by Dubey & Pentland (2021) studied cooperative multi-agent RL with linear MDPs. They
proposed a cooperative variant of the LSVI-UCB algorithm (Jin et al.,
√ 2020) named Coop-LSVI, which achieves
e 3/2 H 2 K) regret1 with O(dHM 3 ) communication
an O(d
complexity. However, their algorithm mandates the participation of all agents in a round-robin fashion, which is
impractical as it imposes a stringent synchronous constraint
on the agents’ interaction with the environment and their
communication with the server. It is possible that some
agents might be temporarily unavailable in a round, or the
connection with the server is disrupted due to infrastructure failure. These anomalies demand the algorithm to be
resilient to irregular participation patterns of the agents.

Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been successfully applied in various application scenarios, such as
robotics (Williams et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2019; Ding et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2020), games (Vinyals et al., 2017; Berner
et al., 2019; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020), and
many other real-world systems and settings (Bazzan, 2009;
Yu et al., 2014; 2020; Fei & Xu, 2022; Min et al., 2022b;
Xu et al., 2023b). In particular, in the cooperative setting,
agents benefit from collaboration via (in)direct communication among each other. It thus requires the RL algorithm
to effectively coordinate the communication in a flexible
way, in order to fully exploit the advantage of cooperation.
Towards this goal, in this paper, we study cooperative multiagent RL with asynchronous communication, and show

To this end, we propose an asynchronous version of
LSVI-UCB (Jin et al., 2020). We eliminate the synchronous
constraint by carefully designing a determinant-based crite-

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

√
Their original result is written as e
O(d3/2 H 2 M T ). Here d
is the feature dimension, H is the horizon length, M is the total
number of agents, and K is the total number of episodes. Because
of their round-robin-type participation, their M T is equivalent to
K, which is the total number of episodes under our notation.
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

