Neural Network Approximations of PDEs Beyond Linearity:
A Representational Perspective

Tanya Marwah 1 Zachary C. Lipton 1 Jianfeng Lu 2 Andrej Risteski 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Scientific applications have become one of the new frontiers
for the application of deep learning (Jumper et al., 2021;
Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2021; Sønderby et al., 2020). PDEs
are a fundamental modeling techniques, and designing neural networks-aided solvers, particularly in high-dimensions,
is of widespread usage in many scientific domains (Hsieh
et al., 2019; Brandstetter et al., 2022). One of the most
common approaches for applying neural networks to solve
PDEs is to parametrize the solution as a neural network and
minimize a variational objective that represents the solution (Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018; E & Yu, 2017). The
hope in doing so is to have a method which computationally
avoids the “curse of dimensionality”—i.e., that scales less
than exponentially with the ambient dimension.

A burgeoning line of research leverages deep
neural networks to approximate the solutions to
high dimensional PDEs, opening lines of theoretical inquiry focused on explaining how it is
that these models appear to evade the curse of
dimensionality. However, most prior theoretical analyses have been limited to linear PDEs.
In this work, we take a step towards studying
the representational power of neural networks
for approximating solutions to nonlinear PDEs.
We focus on a class of PDEs known as nonlinear elliptic variational PDEs, whose solutions
minimize Ran Euler-Lagrange energy functional
E(u) = Ω L(x, u(x), ∇u(x)) − f (x)u(x)dx.
We show that if composing a function with Barron norm b with partial derivatives of L produces
a function of Barron norm at most BL bp , the
solution to the PDE can be ϵ-approximated in
the L2 sense by a function with
 Barron norm
max{p log(1/ϵ),plog(1/ϵ) }
O (dBL )
. By a classical result due to (Barron, 1993), this correspondingly bounds the size of a 2-layer neural network
needed to approximate the solution. Treating
p, ϵ, BL as constants, this quantity is polynomial
in dimension, thus showing neural networks can
evade the curse of dimensionality. Our proof
technique involves neurally simulating (preconditioned) gradient in an appropriate Hilbert space,
which converges exponentially fast to the solution
of the PDE, and such that we can bound the increase of the Barron norm at each iterate. Our
results subsume and substantially generalize analogous prior results for linear elliptic PDEs over a
unit hypercube.

To date, neither theoretical analysis nor empirical applications have yielded a precise characterization of the range
of PDEs for which neural networks-aided methods outperform classical methods. Active research on the empirical
side (Han et al., 2018; E et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020a;b) has
explored several families of PDEs, e.g., Hamilton-BellmanJacobi and Black-Scholes, where neural networks have been
demonstrated to outperform classical grid-based methods.
On the theory side, a recent line of works (Marwah et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2021; 2022) has considered the following
fundamental question:
For what families of PDEs, can the solution be represented
by a small neural network?
The motivation for this question is computational: fitting the
neural network (by minimizing some objective) is at least
as expensive as the neural network required to represent it.
Specifically, these works focus on understanding when the
approximating neural network can be sub-exponential in
size, thus avoiding the curse of dimensionality. However, to
date, these results have only been applicable to linear PDEs.
In this paper, we take the first step beyond such work,
considering a nonlinear family of PDEs and study nonlinear variational PDEs. These equations have the
form −divx (∂∇u L(x, u, ∇u)) + ∂u L(x, u, ∇u) = f
and are a (very general) family of nonlinear EulerLagrange equations. Equivalently, the solution to the

1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Duke University. Correspondence to: Tanya Marwah <tmarwah@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

