Deja Vu: Contextual Sparsity for Efficient LLMs at Inference Time

Zichang Liu 1 Jue Wang 2 Tri Dao 3 Tianyi Zhou 4 Binhang Yuan 5 Zhao Song 6 Anshumali Shrivastava 1
Ce Zhang 5 Yuandong Tian 7 Christopher Ré 3 Beidi Chen 8 7

Abstract

parameters unleashes impressive performance and emergent
in-context-learning abilities—they can perform a task by
conditioning on input-output examples, without updating
their parameters (Bommasani et al., 2021; Liang et al.,
2022; Brown et al., 2020; Min et al., 2022; Chan et al.,
2022). However, they are very expensive at inference time,
especially for latency-sensitive applications (Pope et al.,
2022). An ideal inference-time model should use less computation and memory while maintaining the performance
and special abilities of pre-trained LLMs. The simplest and
most natural approach is sparsification or pruning, which
has a long history before the LLM era (LeCun et al., 1989).
Unfortunately, speeding up inference-time sparse LLMs in
wall-clock time while maintaining quality and in-context
learning abilities remains a challenging problem.

Large language models (LLMs) with hundreds of
billions of parameters have sparked a new wave
of exciting AI applications. However, they are
computationally expensive at inference time. Sparsity is a natural approach to reduce this cost, but
existing methods either require costly retraining,
have to forgo LLM’s in-context learning ability, or
do not yield wall-clock time speedup on modern
hardware. We hypothesize that contextual sparsity,
which are small, input-dependent sets of attention
heads and MLP parameters that yield approximately the same output as the dense model for a
given input, can address these issues. We show that
contextual sparsity exists, that it can be accurately
predicted, and that we can exploit it to speed up
LLM inference in wall-clock time without compromising LLM’s quality or in-context learning ability.
Based on these insights, we propose DEJAVU, a
system that uses a low-cost algorithm to predict
contextual sparsity on the fly given inputs to each
layer, along with an asynchronous and hardwareaware implementation that speeds up LLM
inference. We validate that DEJAVU can reduce the
inference latency of OPT-175B by over 2× compared to the state-of-the-art FasterTransformer,
and over 6× compared to the widely used Hugging
Face implementation, without compromising
model quality. The code is available at https:
//github.com/FMInference/DejaVu.

1

While sparsity and pruning have been well-studied, they
have not seen wide adoption on LLMs due to the poor
quality and efficiency trade-offs on modern hardware such
as GPUs. First, it is infeasible to retrain or iteratively prune
models at the scale of hundreds of billions of parameters.
Thus, methods in iterative pruning and lottery ticket
hypothesis (Lee et al., 2018; Frankle & Carbin, 2018) can
only be applied to smaller-scale models. Second, it is
challenging to find sparsity that preserves the in-context
learning ability of LLMs. Many works have shown the
effectiveness of task-dependent pruning (Michel et al., 2019;
Bansal et al., 2022), but maintaining different models for
each task conflicts with the task independence goal of LLMs.
Lastly, it is hard to achieve wall-clock time speed-up with
unstructured sparsity due to its well-known difficulty with
modern hardware (Hooker, 2021). For example, recent
development in zero-shot pruning like SparseGPT (Frantar
& Alistarh, 2023) finds 60% unstructured sparsity but does
not yet lead to any wall-clock time speedup.

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-3, PaLM,
and OPT have demonstrated that an immense number of
1

2

An ideal sparsity for LLMs should (i) not require model
retraining, (ii) preserve quality and in-context learning
ability, and (iii) lead to speed-up in wall-clock time on
modern hardware. To achieve such demanding requirements,
we go beyond static sparsity in previous works (e.g., structured/unstructured weight pruning). We instead envision
contextual sparsity, which are small, input-dependent
sets of attention heads and MLP parameters that lead to
(approximately) the same output as the full model for an
input. Inspired by the connections between LLMs, Hidden

3

Rice University Zhe Jiang University Stanford University 4 University of California, San Diego 5 ETH Zurich
6
Adobe Research 7 Meta AI (FAIR) 8 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Zichang Liu <zl71@rice.edu>, Tri Dao
<trid@stanford.edu>, Tianyi Zhou <t8zhou@ucsd.edu>, Zhao Song
<zsong@adobe.com>, Beidi Chen <beidic@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

