Bidirectional Looking with A Novel Double Exponential Moving Average to
Adaptive and Non-adaptive Momentum Optimizers

Yineng Chen † 1 Zuchao Li † 1 2 Lefei Zhang 1 2 Bo Du 1 2 Hai Zhao 3

Abstract

petitive optimizers. We also provide theoretical
proof of these two algorithms, which verifies the
convergence of our proposed A DMETA.

Optimizer is an essential component for the success of deep learning, which guides the neural
network to update the parameters according to
the loss on the training set. SGD and Adam are
two classical and effective optimizers on which
researchers have proposed many variants, such
as SGDM and RAdam. In this paper, we innovatively combine the backward-looking and
forward-looking aspects of the optimizer algorithm and propose a novel A DMETA (A Double
exponential Moving averagE To Adaptive and
non-adaptive momentum) optimizer framework.
For backward-looking part, we propose a DEMA
variant scheme, which is motivated by a metric
in the stock market, to replace the common exponential moving average scheme. While in the
forward-looking part, we present a dynamic lookahead strategy which asymptotically approaches
a set value, maintaining its speed at early stage
and high convergence performance at final stage.
Based on this idea, we provide two optimizer implementations, A DMETA R and A DMETA S, the
former based on RAdam and the latter based on
SGDM. Through extensive experiments on diverse tasks, we find that the proposed A DMETA
optimizer outperforms our base optimizers and
shows advantages over recently proposed com-

1. Introduction
The field of training neural network is dominated by gradient decent optimizers for a long time, which use first order
method. Typical ones include SGD (Robbins & Monro,
1951) and SGD with momentum (SGDM) (Sutskever et al.,
2013), which are simple yet efficient algorithms and enjoy
even better resulting convergence than many recently proposed optimizers. However, it suffers the disadvantage of
low speed in initial stage and poor performance in sparse
training datasets. This shortcoming can not be ignored since
with the development of deep learning, the amount of data
becomes much larger, and the model becomes much more
complex. The time to train a network is also considered an
important metric when evaluating an optimizer. To address
this issue, optimizers with adaptive learning rate have been
proposed which use nonuniform stepsizes to scale the gradient while training, and the usual implementation is scaling
the gradient by square roots of some kind of combination
of the squared values of historical gradients. By far the
most used are Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and AdamW
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) due to their simplicity and
high training speed in early stage. Despite their popularity,
Adam and many variants like of it (such as RAdam (Liu
et al., 2019)) is likely to achieve worse generalization ability
than non-adaptive optimizers, observing that their performance quickly plateaus on validation sets.

†

Equal contribution. This work was supported by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.
2042023kf1033), the Special Fund of Hubei Luojia Laboratory
under Grant 220100014, and the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars under Grant 62225113. Hai Zhao was
funded by the Key Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011). 1 National Engineering
Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer
Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P. R. China 2 Hubei
Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China 3 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, P. R. China. Correspondence to: Zuchao
Li <zcli-charlie@whu.edu.cn>.

To achieve a better tradeoff, researchers have made many
improvements based on SGD and Adam family optimizers. One attempt is switching from adaptive learning rate
methods to SGD, based on the idea of complementing
each other’s advantages. However, a sudden change from
one optimizer to another in a set epoch or step is not applicable because different algorithms make characteristic
choices at saddle points and tend to converge to final points
whose loss functions nearby have different geometry (Im
et al., 2016). Therefore, many optimizers based on this
idea seek for a smooth switch. The representative ones

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

