On Pitfalls of Test-Time Adaptation

Hao Zhao 1 * Yuejiang Liu 1 * Alexandre Alahi 1 Tao Lin 2 3

Abstract

et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2022; Sinha
et al., 2023). Compared to other approaches, TTA offers
two key advantages: (i) generality: TTA does not rest on
strong assumptions regarding the structures of distribution
shifts, which is often the case with Domain Generalization
(DG) methods (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021); (ii) flexibility: TTA does not require the co-existence of training and
test data, a prerequisite of the Domain Adaptation (DA) approach (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015). At the core of TTA is to
define a proxy objective used at test time to adapt the model
in an unsupervised manner. Recent works have proposed
a broad array of proxy objectives, ranging from entropy
minimization (Wang et al., 2021) and self-supervised learning (Sun et al., 2020) to pseudo-labeling (Liang et al., 2020)
and feature alignment (Liu et al., 2021). Nevertheless, the
efficacy of TTA in practice is often called into question
due to restricted and inconsistent experimental conditions
in prior literature (Boudiaf et al., 2022; Su et al., 2022).

Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) has recently
emerged as a promising approach for tackling
the robustness challenge under distribution shifts.
However, the lack of consistent settings and
systematic studies in prior literature hinders
thorough assessments of existing methods. To
address this issue, we present TTAB, a test-time
adaptation benchmark that encompasses ten
state-of-the-art algorithms, a diverse array of
distribution shifts, and two evaluation protocols.
Through extensive experiments, our benchmark
reveals three common pitfalls in prior efforts.
First, selecting appropriate hyper-parameters,
especially for model selection, is exceedingly
difficult due to online batch dependency. Second, the effectiveness of TTA varies greatly
depending on the quality and properties of
the model being adapted. Third, even under
optimal algorithmic conditions, none of the
existing methods are capable of addressing
all common types of distribution shifts. Our
findings underscore the need for future research
in the field to conduct rigorous evaluations
on a broader set of models and shifts, and to
re-examine the assumptions behind the empirical
success of TTA. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/lins-lab/ttab.

The goal of this work is to gain a thorough understanding of
the current state of TTA methods while setting the stage for
critical problems to be worked on. To this end, we present
TTAB, an open-sourced Test-Time Adaptation Benchmark
featuring rigorous evaluations, comprehensive analyses as
well as extensive baselines. Our benchmark carefully examines ten state-of-the-art TTA algorithms on a wide range of
distribution shifts using two evaluation protocols. Specifically, we place a strong emphasis on subtle yet crucial
experimental settings that have been largely overlooked in
previous works. Our analyses unveil three common pitfalls
in prior TTA methods:

1. Introduction

Pitfall 1: Hyperparameters have a strong influence on the
effectiveness of TTA, and yet they are exceedingly difficult
to choose in practice without prior knowledge of distribution
shifts. Our results show that the common practice of hyperparameter choice for TTA methods does not necessarily
improve test accuracy and may instead lead to detrimental
effects. Moreover, we find that even given the labels of test
examples, selecting TTA hyperparameters remains challenging, primarily due to the batch dependency that arises during
online adaptation.

Tackling the robustness issue under distribution shifts is one
of the most pressing challenges in machine learning (Koh
et al., 2021). Among existing approaches, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA)—in which neural network models are adapted
to new distributions by making use of unlabeled examples
at test time—has emerged as a promising paradigm of growing popularity (Lee et al., 2022; Kundu et al., 2022; Gong
*
Equal contribution 1 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 2 Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University 3 School of Engineering, Westlake University. Correspondence to: Tao Lin <lintao@westlake.edu.cn>.

Pitfall 2: The effectiveness of TTA may vary greatly across
different models. In particular, not only the model accuracy
in the source domain but also its feature properties have a
strong influence on the result post-adaptation. Crucially, we

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

