Learning for Edge-Weighted Online Bipartite Matching with Robustness
Guarantees
Pengfei Li 1 Jianyi Yang 1 Shaolei Ren 1

Abstract

in two separate sets: when an online item arrives, we need
to match it to an offline item given applicable constraints
(e.g., capacity constraint), with the goal of maximizing the
total rewards collected (Mehta, 2013). For example, numerous applications, including scheduling tasks to servers,
displaying advertisements to online users, recommending
articles/movies/products, among many others, can all be
modeled as online bipartite matching or its variants.

Many problems, such as online ad display, can
be formulated as online bipartite matching. The
crucial challenge lies in the nature of sequentiallyrevealed online item information, based on which
we make irreversible matching decisions at each
step. While numerous expert online algorithms
have been proposed with bounded worst-case
competitive ratios, they may not offer satisfactory
performance in average cases. On the other hand,
reinforcement learning (RL) has been applied to
improve the average performance, but it lacks robustness and can perform arbitrarily poorly. In
this paper, we propose a novel RL-based approach
to edge-weighted online bipartite matching with
robustness guarantees (LOMAR), achieving both
good average-case and worst-case performance.
The key novelty of LOMAR is a new online switching operation which, based on a judicious condition to hedge against future uncertainties, decides
whether to follow the expert’s decision or the RL
decision for each online item. We prove that for
any ρ ∈ [0, 1], LOMAR is ρ-competitive against
any given expert online algorithm. To improve
the average performance, we train the RL policy
by explicitly considering the online switching operation. Finally, we run empirical experiments to
demonstrate the advantages of LOMAR compared
to existing baselines.

The practical importance, along with substantial algorithmic challenges, of online bipartite matching has received
extensive attention in the last few decades (Karp et al., 1990;
Fahrbach et al., 2020). Concretely, many algorithms have
been proposed and studied for various settings of online
bipartite matching, ranging from simple yet effective greedy
algorithms to sophisticated ranking-based algorithms (Karp
et al., 1990; Kim & Moon, 2020; Fahrbach et al., 2020;
Aggarwal et al., 2011; Devanur et al., 2013). These expert
algorithms typically have robustness guarantees in terms
of the competitive ratio — the ratio of the total reward obtained by an online algorithm to the reward of another baseline algorithm (commonly the optimal offline algorithm) —
even under adversarial settings given arbitrarily bad problem inputs (Karp et al., 1990; Huang & Shu, 2021). In
some settings, even the optimal competitive ratio for adversarial inputs has been derived (readers are referred to
(Mehta, 2013) for an excellent tutorial). The abundance
of competitive online algorithms has clearly demonstrated
the importance of performance robustness in terms of the
competitive ratio, especially in safety-sensitive applications
such as matching mission-critical items or under contractual obligations (Fahrbach et al., 2020). Nonetheless, as
commonly known in the literature, the necessity of conservativeness to address the worst-case adversarial input means
that the average performance is typically not optimal (see,
e.g., (Christianson et al., 2022; Zeynali et al., 2021) for
discussions in other general online problems).

1. Introduction
Online bipartite matching is a classic online problem of
practical importance (Mehta, 2013; Kim & Moon, 2020;
Fahrbach et al., 2020; Antoniadis et al., 2020b; Huang &
Shu, 2021; Gupta & Roughgarden, 2020). In a nutshell, online bipartite matching assigns online items to offline items

More recently, online optimizers based on reinforcement
learning (RL) (Chen et al., 2022; Georgiev & Lió, 2020;
Wang et al., 2019; Alomrani et al., 2022; Du et al., 2019;
Zuzic et al., 2020) have been proposed in the context of
online bipartite matching as well as other online problems.
Specifically, by exploiting statistical information of problem
inputs, RL models are trained offline and then applied online

1
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, United States.
Correspondence to: Shaolei Ren <sren@ece.ucr.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

