Hindsight Learning for MDPs with Exogenous Inputs

Sean R. Sinclair 1 Felipe Frujeri 2 Ching-An Cheng 2 Luke Marshall 2 Hugo Barbalho 2 Jingling Li 3
Jennifer Neville 2 Ishai Menache 2 Adith Swaminathan 2

Abstract

using machine learning (ML) to allocate future demands
more efficiently.

Many resource management problems require
sequential decision-making under uncertainty,
where the only uncertainty affecting the decision
outcomes are exogenous variables outside the control of the decision-maker. We model these problems as Exo-MDPs (Markov Decision Processes
with Exogenous Inputs) and design a class of dataefficient algorithms for them termed Hindsight
Learning (HL). Our HL algorithms achieve data
efficiency by leveraging a key insight: having
samples of the exogenous variables, past decisions can be revisited in hindsight to infer counterfactual consequences that can accelerate policy
improvements. We compare HL against classic
baselines in the multi-secretary and airline revenue management problems. We also scale our
algorithms to a business-critical cloud resource
management problem – allocating Virtual Machines (VMs) to physical machines, and simulate
their performance with real datasets from a large
public cloud provider. We find that HL algorithms
outperform domain-specific heuristics, as well as
state-of-the-art reinforcement learning methods.

In this work, we make the key observation that in resource management applications the system is often partially known and the only uncertainty is due to exogenous
variables like resource requests — that are (to a first-order
approximation) independent of an agent’s decisions (Powell,
2022). For example, a cloud operator deciding to place a
virtual machine (VM) on a specific server rack does not
directly affect future VM requests, but future demands can
strongly affect the eventual quality of their allocation decisions (Hadary et al., 2020). We define these problems as
Exo-MDPs (Markov Decision Processes with Exogenous
Inputs), which are a subclass of Input-Driven MDPs (Mao
et al., 2019b). In Input-Driven MDPs the minimal state describing the system dynamics decompose into (i) exogenous
inputs, which evolve independently of the agent’s actions,
and (ii) endogenous factors that are impacted by the agent’s
actions and the exogenous inputs. Exo-MDPs make the
additional assumption that the only unknowns are the distribution of future exogenous inputs (see §3).
ML has been applied in several resource management applications, which we will show are Exo-MDPs, and found
to outperform domain-specific heuristics (Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021; Kumar et al., 2018; Gollapudi & Panigrahi,
2019). The ML approaches often follow the Predict-ThenOptimize (PTO) paradigm (Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022),
using ML to forecast the future exogenous inputs (e.g., demands). However, when the future is highly stochastic,
forecasting is challenging. For example, VM requests from
real-world data-centers (Hadary et al., 2020) show longterm regularity of diurnal and weekly patterns but extreme
short-term fluctuations (see Figure 4).

1. Introduction
Many aspects of our physical and digital infrastructure —
like data centers, power grids, and supply chains — can
become more adaptive and efficient through data-driven
decision-making. For instance, in a world-wide cloud service, even 1% lower resource fragmentation can reduce
energy use and save approximately $100M per year (Hadary
et al., 2020). This type of improvement could be achieved
by examining historical patterns of compute demands and

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is an alternative to PTO. RL
directly optimizes decision quality (Chen et al., 2021; Fang
et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2016) by replaying historical samples of the exogenous inputs through the known dynamics
of endogenous factors to learn good policies (Madeka et al.,
2022). RL methods applied to Exo-MDPs must, however,
learn by trial-and-error that their actions can never affect
the exogenous inputs. RL is thus sensitive to variance in the
outcomes introduced by the exogenous inputs and requires

1

School of Operations Research and Information Engineering,
Cornell University 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of Maryland. Correspondence
to: Sean Sinclair <srs429@cornell.edu>, Adith Swaminathan
<adswamin@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

