Graph Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence on Large Graphs

Sanjukta Krishnagopal * 1 2 3 Luana Ruiz * 3 4

Abstract

Defferrard et al., 2016; Gama et al., 2018). GNNs have
shown remarkable empirical performance in a number of
graph machine learning tasks, but can be hard to train on
large-graph data. Recent research efforts have attempted
to understand the large-graph behavior of GNNs, and in
particular why GNNs trained on small graphs scale well to
large networks (Ruiz et al., 2020; Levie et al., 2021; Keriven
et al., 2020). However, the specific learning dynamics of
a GNN trained directly on the large network, which are
known to be challenging, are not as well understood.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) achieve remarkable performance in graph machine learning tasks
but can be hard to train on large-graph data, where
their learning dynamics are not well understood.
We investigate the training dynamics of largegraph GNNs using graph neural tangent kernels
(GNTKs) and graphons. In the limit of large
width, optimization of an overparametrized NN is
equivalent to kernel regression on the NTK. Here,
we investigate how the GNTK evolves as another
independent dimension is varied: the graph size.
We use graphons to define limit objects—graphon
NNs for GNNs, and graphon NTKs for GNTKs—,
and prove that, on a sequence of graphs, the GNTKs converge to the graphon NTK. We further
prove that the spectrum of the GNTK, which is related to the directions of fastest learning which becomes relevant during early stopping, converges
to the spectrum of the graphon NTK. This implies
that in the large-graph limit, the GNTK fitted on
a graph of moderate size can be used to solve
the same task on the large graph, and to infer the
learning dynamics of the large-graph GNN. These
results are verified empirically on node regression
and classification tasks.

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are typically overparametrized. The benefits of overparametrization include
faster convergence (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Arora et al.,
2018) and better generalization (Cao & Gu, 2019), but on the
other hand the parameters can be more difficult to interpret
and the learning dynamics harder to understand. A remarkable contribution of Jacot et al. (2018) was the observation
that, in the infinite width limit, learning the weights of a
DNN via gradient descent reduces to kernel regression with
a deterministic and fixed kernel called the neural tangent
kernel (NTK), which captures the first-order approximation
of the neural network’s evolution during gradient descent
(Lee et al., 2019). Since its introduction, the NTK has been
an important and widely-studied tool in the machine learning toolbox, and kernel regression using the NTK has shown
strong performance on small datasets (Arora et al., 2019b).
In the graph case, it is straightforward to define the NTK
associated with a GNN, or the graph neural tangent kernel
(GNTK) (Du et al., 2019). The GNTK allows studying the
training dynamics of the GNN when the number of features
(the analog of width in the DNN) is large. Nonetheless, the
effect of graph size on the GNN learning dynamics, which
can itself be thought of as another ‘width dimension’, is not
well understood, and there is limited research that investigates this rigorously. Herein, we propose to to understand
the training dynamics of GNNs that are wide in both of these
senses by combining the NTK formalism with the theory of
graphons (Lovász, 2012; Borgs et al., 2008).

1. Introduction
Several real-world systems such as social-interactions, brainconnectome, epidemic spread, recommender systems, and
traffic patterns are best represented by structured data in the
form of large graphs. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are
deep neural network architectures that leverage these graph
structures to learn meaningful representations of node and
edge data (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017;
*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 2 Dept. of Mathematics, UCLA 3 Work done in part
while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
4
MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: Sanjukta Krishnagopal <sanjukta@berkeley.edu>, Luana Ruiz <ruizl@mit.edu>.

A graphon is a symmetric bounded measurable function W :
[0, 1]2 → [0, 1] representing the limit of a sequence of dense
graphs. It can also be interpreted as a random graph model,
in which case we can use the graphon to sample stochastic
graphs. The interpretation of W as both a graph limit and a

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

