CRISP: Curriculum based Sequential neural decoders for Polar code family

S. Ashwin Hebbar † 1 Viraj Nadkarni † 1 Ashok Vardhan Makkuva 2 Suma Bhat 1 Sewoong Oh 3
Pramod Viswanath 1

Abstract

of (Shannon, 1948), several landmark codes have been
proposed: Convolutional codes, low-density parity-check
(LDPC) codes, Turbo codes, Polar codes, and more recently,
Polarization-Adjusted-Convolutional (PAC) codes (Richardson & Urbanke, 2008). In particular, polar codes, introduced
by (Arikan, 2009), are widely used in practice owing to their
reliable performance in the short blocklength regime. A family of variants of polar codes known as PAC codes further
improves performance, nearly achieving the fundamental
lower bound on the performance of any code at finite lengths,
albeit at a higher decoding complexity (Arıkan, 2019). In
this paper, we focus on the decoding of these two classes of
codes, jointly termed the “Polar code family”.

Polar codes are widely used state-of-the-art codes
for reliable communication that have recently
been included in the 5th generation wireless
standards (5G). However, there remains room
for the design of polar decoders that are both
efficient and reliable in the short blocklength
regime. Motivated by recent successes of datadriven channel decoders, we introduce a novel
CurRIculum based Sequential neural decoder
for Polar codes (CRISP)* . We design a principled curriculum, guided by information-theoretic
insights, to train CRISP and show that it outperforms the successive-cancellation (SC) decoder and attains near-optimal reliability performance on the Polar(32, 16) and Polar(64, 22)
codes. The choice of the proposed curriculum is
critical in achieving the accuracy gains of CRISP,
as we show by comparing against other curricula. More notably, CRISP can be readily extended to Polarization-Adjusted-Convolutional
(PAC) codes, where existing SC decoders are significantly less reliable. To the best of our knowledge, CRISP constructs the first data-driven decoder for PAC codes and attains near-optimal performance on the PAC(32, 16) code.

The polar family exhibits several crucial informationtheoretic properties; practical finite-length performance,
however, depends on high complexity decoders. This search
for the design of efficient and reliable decoders for the Polar family is the focus of substantial research in the past
decade. (a) Polar codes: The classical successive cancellation (SC) decoder achieves information-theoretic capacity
asymptotically, but performs poorly at finite blocklengths
compared to the optimal maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoder (Arıkan, 2019). To improve upon the reliability of
SC, several polar decoders have been proposed in the literature (Sec. 6). One such notable result is the celebrated
Successive-Cancellation-with-List (SCL) decoder (Tal &
Vardy, 2015). SCL improves upon the reliability of SC and
approaches that of the MAP with increasing list size (and
complexity). (b) PAC codes: The sequential “Fano decoder”
(Fano, 1963) allows PAC codes to perform informationtheoretically near-optimally; however, the decoding time is
long and variable (Rowshan et al., 2020a). Although SC
is efficient, O(n log n), its performance with PAC codes
is significantly worse than that of the Fano decoder. Several works (Yao et al., 2021; Rowshan et al., 2020b; Zhu
et al., 2020; Rowshan & Viterbo, 2021b;a; Sun et al., 2021)
propose ameliorations; it is safe to say that constructing
efficient and reliable decoders for the Polar family is an
active area of research and of utmost practical interest given
the advent of Polar codes in 5G wireless cellular standards.
The design of efficient and reliable decoders for the Polar
family is the focus of this paper.

1. Introduction
Error-correcting codes (codes) are the backbone of modern digital communication. Codes, composed of (encoder,
decoder) pairs, ensure reliable data transmission even under noisy conditions. Since the groundbreaking work
1

Princeton University 2 EPFL 3 University of Washington.
Correspondence to: Ashwin Hebbar <hebbar@princeton.edu>,
Viraj Nadkarni <viraj@princeton.edu>, Ashok Makkuva
<ashok.makkuva@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
†
Equal contribution
*
Source code available at the following link.

In this paper, we introduce a novel CurRIculum based
1

