Are Equivariant Equilibrium Approximators Beneficial?

Zhijian Duan 1 Yunxuan Ma 1 Xiaotie Deng 1 2

Abstract

vectors or tensors) when the input game representations (e.g.,
the game payoff tensors) are permuted. We will provide a
formal definition of equivariance equilibrium approximators
in Section 4. While equivariant approximators achieved
empirical success, little work has theoretically discussed
whether they are beneficial.

Recently, remarkable progress has been made by
approximating Nash equilibrium (NE), correlated
equilibrium (CE), and coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) through function approximation that
trains a neural network to predict equilibria from
game representations. Furthermore, equivariant
architectures are widely adopted in designing such
equilibrium approximators in normal-form games.
In this paper, we theoretically characterize the
benefits and limitations of equivariant equilibrium
approximators. For the benefits, we show that they
enjoy better generalizability than general ones and
can achieve better approximations when the payoff distribution is permutation-invariant. For the
limitations, we discuss their drawbacks in terms
of equilibrium selection and social welfare. Together, our results help to understand the role of
equivariance in equilibrium approximators.

We theoretically characterize the benefits and limitations
of equivariant NE, CE, and CCE approximators. For the
benefits, we first show that equivariant approximators enjoy better generalizability, where we evaluate the approximators using the maximum exploitability (Lockhart et al.,
2019; Goktas & Greenwald, 2022) over all players. To get
such a result, we derive the generalization bounds and the
sample complexities of the NE, CE, and CCE approximators: The generalization bounds offer confidence intervals
on the expected testing approximations based on the empirical training approximations; The sample complexities
describe how many training samples the equilibrium approximators need to achieve desirable generalizability. Both the
generalization bounds and sample complexities include the
covering numbers (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014),
which measure the representativeness of the approximators’
function classes. We then prove that the equivariant approximators have lower covering numbers than the general
models, therefore have lower generalization bounds and
sample complexities. Additionally, we also show that the
equivariant approximators can achieve better approximation
when the payoff distribution is permutation-invariant.

1. Introduction
The equivariant equilibrium property states that, given a
Nash Equilibrium (NE) solution of a game, the permuted
solution is also an NE for the game whose actions of representation are permuted in the same way. The same property also holds in correlated equilibrium (CE) and coarse
correlated equilibrium (CCE), as well as the approximate
solutions for all three solution concepts.

As for the limitations, we find the equivariant approximators
unable to find all the equilibria of some normal-form games.
Such a result is caused by the limited representativeness of
the equivariant approximators’ function class. Besides, we
find that the equivariant NE approximator may lose social
welfare. Specifically, in an example we constructed, while
the maximum NE social welfare is significant, the maximum
social welfare of NEs that the equivariant NE approximators
could find can be arbitrarily close to zero. Such a negative result inspires us to balance generalizability and social
welfare when we design the approximators’ architectures.

In this paper, we are interested in understanding the equivariant equilibrium property in designing neural networks that
predict equilibria from game payoffs, following such recent
approaches in designing equivariant equilibrium approximators (Feng et al., 2021; Marris et al., 2022) in normal-form
games. Informally, such equivariant approximators keep the
same permutation of the output strategies (represented as
1
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Center for MultiAgent Research, Institute for AI, Peking University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Xiaotie Deng <xiaotie@pku.edu.cn>.

In summary, we make the following contributions:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We theoretically characterize the benefits of equivariant equilibrium approximators: Compared to general
1

