Learning to Learn from APIs: Black-Box Data-Free Meta-Learning

Zixuan Hu 1 Li Shen 2 Zhenyi Wang 3 Baoyuan Wu 4 Chun Yuan 1 Dacheng Tao 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Data-free meta-learning (DFML) aims to meta-learn the useful prior knowledge from a collection of pre-trained models
to enable efficient learning of new tasks without access to
the training data due to privacy issues. Existing DFML work
(Wang et al., 2022c) can only deal with the white-box pretrained models, assuming access to the underlying model
architecture and parameters. However, this assumption is
not always satisfied. Recently, the concept of Model as A Sevice (MaaS) (Roman et al., 2009) comes to reality. Without
access to the underlying models, users only have inference
access to the corresponding APIs provided by the service
providers like OpenAI or Google. For example, Cloud Vision API of Google, Amazon AI and Alibaba Cloud provide
thousands of APIs designed for solving various specific
tasks. TensorFlow Lite APIs provides numerous lightweight
APIs deployed on mobiles, microcontrollers and edge devices. In this paper, we argue that these APIs can not only
be the black-box tools for solving specific tasks, but can also
serve as the training resources of meta-learning to enable
efficient learning of new unseen tasks. The significance of
doing this is to remove the need for large volumes of labeled
data to perform meta-learning and reliably protect data privacy and security. This motivation leads to our valuable
but challenging topic, i.e., black-box DFML, which aims
to meta-learn the meta-initialization from a collection of
black-box APIs without access to the training data and with
only inference access, to enable efficient learning of new
tasks without data privacy leakage.

Data-free meta-learning (DFML) aims to enable
efficient learning of new tasks by meta-learning
from a collection of pre-trained models without
access to the training data. Existing DFML work
can only meta-learn from (i) white-box and (ii)
small-scale pre-trained models (iii) with the same
architecture, neglecting the more practical setting where the users only have inference access
to the APIs with arbitrary model architectures
and model scale inside. To solve this issue, we
propose a Bi-level Data-free Meta Knowledge
Distillation (BiDf-MKD) framework to transfer
more general meta knowledge from a collection of
black-box APIs to one single meta model. Specifically, by just querying APIs, we inverse each API
to recover its training data via a zero-order gradient estimator and then perform meta-learning via
a novel bi-level meta knowledge distillation structure, in which we design a boundary query set
recovery technique to recover a more informative
query set near the decision boundary. In addition, to encourage better generalization within the
setting of limited API budgets, we propose task
memory replay to diversify the underlying task
distribution by covering more interpolated tasks.
Extensive experiments in various real-world scenarios show the superior performance of our BiDfMKD framework.

The main challenges of black-box DFML lie in three aspects:
(i) data-free: we have no access to the original training data
of each API; (ii) black-box: we have no prior knowledge
of the underlying model architecture and parameters inside
each API; (iii) model-agnostic: each API may correspond
to arbitrary underlying model architectures and model scale.
Existing DFML work (Wang et al., 2022c) only tries to
handle the first challenge, which can not meta-learn from
black-box APIs with arbitrary underlying model architecture and scale. Concretely, Wang et al. (2022c) propose to
meta-learn a neural network to predict the meta-initialization
given a collection of white-box pre-trained models. However, this method requires the exact parameter of each pretrained model, and it requires all pre-trained models share
the same architecture. Besides, it can not scale to large-scale

1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen, China 2 JD Explore Academy, Beijing,
China 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University at Buffalo, NY, USA 4 School of Data Science, the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 5 School of
Computer Science, the University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>,
Zhenyi Wang <zhenyiwa@buffalo.edu>,
Chun Yuan
<yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

