Great Models Think Alike: Improving Model Reliability via Inter-Model Latent
Agreement

Ailin Deng 1 Miao Xiong 2 Bryan Hooi 1 2

Abstract

A possible answer to this dilemma comes from the recent
emergence of powerful general purpose (or ‘foundation’)
models (Brown et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021), which provide rich “implicit knowledge”
while being freely available for use without additional training costs. This presents an opportunity to use them to assist
in evaluating the reliability of a newly trained model.

Reliable application of machine learning is of
primary importance to the practical deployment
of deep learning methods. A fundamental challenge is that models are often unreliable due to
overconfidence (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017). In
this paper, we estimate a model’s reliability by
measuring the agreement between its latent space,
and the latent space of a foundation model. However, it is challenging to measure the agreement
between two different latent spaces due to their
incoherence, e.g., arbitrary rotations and different dimensionality. To overcome this incoherence issue, we design a neighborhood agreement
measure between latent spaces and find that this
agreement is surprisingly well-correlated with the
reliability of a model’s predictions. Further, we
show that fusing neighborhood agreement into a
model’s predictive confidence in a post-hoc way
significantly improves its reliability. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments on failure
detection across various datasets verify the effectiveness of our method on both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution settings.

As encapsulated by the phrase “great minds think alike”, it
is intuitive that a model tends to be more reliable on some input if its reasoning aligns well with that of other models. For
example, if we want to examine whether a human learner
has well-understood some input image (e.g. an animal), we
can ask them questions about it (e.g. what animals is it
similar to?): the more they agree with other human learners,
the more confident we can be that they have correctly understood the image. Similarly, for models, we want to evaluate
the reliability of a model by estimating the extent to which
its reasoning agrees with that of a foundation model. This
further leads to the main challenge: how can we quantitatively measure how much two models agree on a concept?
In this work, we propose to measure this model agreement
via latent spaces. Intuitively, the two models agree if their
latent spaces “model the concept similarly”; however, this
is complicated by the fact that different models are typically
trained with different data distributions, model architectures
and optimization objectives, leading to incoherence between
different latent spaces: e.g. differing by an arbitrary rotation,
and different dimensionalities.

1. Introduction
Model reliability is a critical and challenging issue in deep
neural networks for deploying neural network systems in
real-world applications, particularly in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis.
In particular, a key challenge is that models tend to be overconfident (Guo et al., 2017; Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017;
Ovadia et al., 2019), and it is hard to identify such overconfidence purely based on the model’s own internal states, as
these internal states are themselves potentially unreliable.

To solve this problem, we introduce inter-model latent agreement - a framework for measuring of how much two models
agree on a sample while avoiding the incoherence issue, and
then show its utility for estimating and enhancing model reliability. Our framework uses the similarity of neighborhoods
in the latent spaces of an input as a proxy task to measure
agreement between latent spaces of different models.
In particular, we present our main empirical observation that
the reliability (or probability of correctness) of a model on
a sample correlates well with its inter-model latent agreement with foundation models on that sample. Motivated
by this, we propose our latent space agreement framework,
which exploits the inter-model agreement to improve prediction reliability in a post-hoc way. Notably, our proposed

1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. Correspondence to: Ailin Deng <ailin@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

