Towards Constituting Mathematical Structures for Learning to Optimize

Jialin Liu * 1 Xiaohan Chen * 1 Zhangyang Wang 2 Wotao Yin 1 HanQin Cai 3

Abstract

algorithm to solve this problem is gradient descent:

Learning to Optimize (L2O), a technique that utilizes machine learning to learn an optimization
algorithm automatically from data, has gained
arising attention in recent years. A generic L2O
approach parameterizes the iterative update rule
and learns the update direction as a black-box
network. While the generic approach is widely
applicable, the learned model can overfit and may
not generalize well to out-of-distribution test sets.
In this paper, we derive the basic mathematical
conditions that successful update rules commonly
satisfy. Consequently, we propose a novel L2O
model with a mathematics-inspired structure that
is broadly applicable and generalized well to outof-distribution problems. Numerical simulations
validate our theoretical findings and demonstrate
the superior empirical performance of the proposed L2O model.

xk+1 = xk − αk ∇F (xk ),

where the estimate of x is updated in an iterative manner,
αk > 0 is a positive scalar named as step size, and the update
direction αk ∇F (xk ) is aligned with the gradient of F at
xk . Instead of the vanilla gradient descent, (Andrychowicz
et al., 2016) proposes to parameterize the update rule into
a learnable model that suggests the update directions by
taking the current estimate and the gradient of F as inputs
xk+1 = xk − dk (xk , ∇F (xk ); ϕ), k = 0, 1, ⋯, K − 1, (1)
where ϕ is the learnable parameter that can be trained by
minimizing a loss function:
K

min L(ϕ) ∶= EF ∈F [ ∑ wk F (xk )],
ϕ

(2)

k=1

where F is the problem set we concern and {wk }K
k=1 is a
set of hand-tuned weighting coefficients. Such loss function
aims at finding an update rule of xk such that the objective
values {F (xk )} are as small as possible for all F ∈ F. This
work and its following works (Lv et al., 2017; Wichrowska
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018; Metz et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020; Shen et al., 2021; Harrison et al., 2022) show that
modeling dk with a deep neural network and learning a
good update rule from data is doable. To train such models,
they randomly pick some training samples from F and build
estimates of the loss function defined in (2). Such learned
rules are able to generalize to unseen instances from F, i.e.,
the problems similar to the training samples. This method
is quite generic and we can use it as long as we can access
the gradient or subgradient of F . For simplicity, we name
the method in (1) as generic L2O.

1. Introduction
Solving mathematical problems with the help of artificial
intelligence, particularly machine learning techniques, has
gained increasing interest recently (Davies et al., 2021; Charton, 2021; Polu et al., 2022; Drori et al., 2021). Optimization
problems, a type of math problem that finds a point with
minimal objective function value in a given space, can also
be solved with machine learning models (Gregor & LeCun,
2010; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2021a; Bengio et al., 2021). Such technique is coined as Learning to
Optimize (L2O).
As an example, we consider an unconstrained optimization
problem minx∈Rn F (x) where F is differentiable. A classic
*

k = 0, 1, 2, ⋯,

Generic L2O is flexible and applicable to a broad class of
problems. However, generalizing the learned update rules
to out-of-distribution testing problems is quite challenging
and a totally free dk usually leads to overfitting (Metz et al.,
2020; 2022). In this paper, we propose an approach to explicitly regularize the update rule dk . Our motivation comes
from some common properties that basic optimization algorithms should satisfy. For example, if an iterate xk reaches
one of the minimizers of the objective F (x), the next iterate
xk+1 should be fixed. Such condition is satisfied by many

1

Equal contribution Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc, Bellevue, WA,
USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 3 Department of Statistics
and Data Science and Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA. Correspondence to:
HanQin Cai <hqcai@ucf.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

