Scalable Adaptive Computation for Iterative Generation

Allan Jabri 1 2 † David J. Fleet 1 Ting Chen 1

Abstract
Natural data is redundant yet predominant architectures tile computation uniformly across their
input and output space. We propose the Recurrent
Interface Network (RIN), an attention-based architecture that decouples its core computation from
the dimensionality of the data, enabling adaptive
computation for more scalable generation of highdimensional data. RINs focus the bulk of computation (i.e. global self-attention) on a set of
latent tokens, using cross-attention to read and
write (i.e. route) information between latent and
data tokens. Stacking RIN blocks allows bottomup (data to latent) and top-down (latent to data)
feedback, leading to deeper and more expressive
routing. While this routing introduces challenges,
this is less problematic in recurrent computation
settings where the task (and routing problem)
changes gradually, such as iterative generation
with diffusion models. We show how to leverage
recurrence by conditioning the latent tokens at
each forward pass of the reverse diffusion process
with those from prior computation, i.e. latent selfconditioning. RINs yield state-of-the-art pixel
diffusion models for image and video generation,
scaling to 1024×1024 images without cascades or
guidance, while being domain-agnostic and up to
10× more efficient than 2D and 3D U-Nets.

ImageNet

ImageNet

ImageNet

Kinetics

128x128

256x256

512x512

16x64x64

Lower is Better

10x

*

*

Figure 1. RINs outperform U-Nets widely used in state-of-the-art
image and video diffusion models, while being more efficient and
domain-agnostic. Our models are simple pixel-level denoising
diffusion models without cascades as in (CDM (Ho et al., 2022a))
or guidance (as in ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2022) and VD (Ho
et al., 2022b)). ∗: uses input scaling (Chen, 2023).

ers (Vaswani et al., 2017), allocate computation in a fixed,
uniform manner over the input data (e.g., over image pixels,
image patches, or token sequences). Information in natural
data is often distributed unevenly, or exhibits redundancy, so
it is important to ask how to allocate computation in an adaptive manner to improve scalability. While prior work has
explored more dynamic and input-decoupled computation,
e.g., networks with auxiliary memory (Dai et al., 2019; Rae
et al., 2019) and global units (Zaheer et al., 2020; Burtsev
et al., 2020; Jaegle et al., 2021b;a), general architectures
that leverage adaptive computation to effectively scale to
tasks with large input and output spaces remain elusive.

1. Introduction
The design of effective neural network architectures has
been crucial to the success of deep learning (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017). Influenced by modern accelerator hardware, predominant architectures, such as convolutional neural networks (Fukushima,
1988; LeCun et al., 1989; He et al., 2016) and Transform-

In this paper, we consider this issue as it manifests in highdimensional generative modeling tasks, such as image and
video generation. When generating an image with a simple
background, an adaptive architecture should ideally be able
to allocate computation to regions with complex objects and
textures, rather than regions with little or no structure (e.g.,
the sky). When generating video, one should exploit temporal redundancy, allocating less computation to static regions.
While such non-uniform computation becomes more crucial
in higher-dimensional data, achieving it efficiently is challenging on modern hardware, given the preference for fixed
computation graphs with dense matrix multiplication.

†
Work done as a student researcher at Google. 1 Google
Brain, Toronto. 2 Department of EECS, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Ting Chen <iamtingchen@google.com>, Allan Jabri
<ajabri@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

