Efficient Parametric Approximations of
Neural Network Function Space Distance

Nikita Dhawan 1 2 Sicong Huang 1 2 Juhan Bae 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2 3
for expensive iterative procedures over the full data.

Abstract
It is often useful to compactly summarize important properties of model parameters and training
data so that they can be used later without storing
and/or iterating over the entire dataset. As a specific case, we consider estimating the Function
Space Distance (FSD) over a training set, i.e. the
average discrepancy between the outputs of two
neural networks. We propose a Linearized Activation Function TRick (LAFTR) and derive an
efficient approximation to FSD for ReLU neural networks. The key idea is to approximate
the architecture as a linear network with stochastic gating. Despite requiring only one parameter
per unit of the network, our approach outcompetes other parametric approximations with larger
memory requirements. Applied to continual learning, our parametric approximation is competitive
with state-of-the-art nonparametric approximations, which require storing many training examples. Furthermore, we show its efficacy in estimating influence functions accurately and detecting
mislabeled examples without expensive iterations
over the entire dataset.

We focus on the problem of estimating Function Space Distance (FSD) for neural networks: the amount by which
the outputs of two networks differ, in expectation over the
training distribution. Benjamin et al. (2018) observed that
regularizing FSD over the previous task data is an effective way to prevent catastrophic forgetting. Other tasks
such as influence estimation (Bae et al., 2022a), model editing (Mitchell et al., 2021), unlearning (Bourtoule et al.,
2021) and second-order optimization (Amari, 1998; Bae
et al., 2022b) have also been formulated in terms of FSD
regularization or similar locality constraints.
Methods for summarizing the training data can be categorized as parametric or nonparametric. In the context of preventing catastrophic forgetting, parametric approaches typically store the parameters of a previously trained network,
along with additional information about the importance of
different directions in parameter space for preserving past
knowledge. The canonical example is Elastic Weight Consolidation (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017, EWC), which uses a
diagonal approximation to the Fisher information matrix.
Nonparametric approaches explicitly store, in addition to
network parameters, a collection (coreset) of training examples, often optimized directly to be the most important or
memorable ones (Rudner et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2020; Titsias et al., 2019). Currently, the most effective approaches
to prevent catastrophic forgetting are nonparametric due to
the lack of sufficiently accurate parametric models. However, this advantage comes at the expense of high storage
requirements.

1. Introduction
As machine learning models are trained on increasingly
large quantities of data or experience, it can be useful to
compactly summarize information contained in a training
set. In continual learning, an agent continues interacting
with its environment over a long time period — longer
than it is able to store explicitly. A natural goal is to avoid
overwriting previously learned knowledge as it learns new
tasks (Goodfellow et al., 2013) while controlling storage
costs. Even in cases where it is possible to store the entire
training set, a compact representation circumvents the need

In this paper, we formally formulate neural network FSD
estimation and propose novel parametric approximations.
To motivate our approach, notice that several parametric
approximations, like EWC, can be interpreted as a secondorder Taylor approximation to the FSD. This leads to a
quadratic form involving the Fisher information matrix Fθ
or some other metric matrix Gθ , where θ denotes the network parameters. Second-order approximations are practically useful because one can estimate Fθ or Gθ by sampling
vectors from a distribution with these matrices as the covariance (Martens & Grosse, 2015). Then, tractable probabilistic models can be fit to these samples to approximate the

1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Anthropic. Correspondence to: Nikita Dhawan <nikita@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

