InfoDiffusion: Representation Learning Using
Information Maximizing Diffusion Models

Yingheng Wang 1 Yair Schiff 1 2 Aaron Gokaslan 1 2 Weishen Pan 3
Fei Wang 3 Christopher De Sa 1 Volodymyr Kuleshov 1 2

Abstract
While diffusion models excel at generating highquality samples, their latent variables typically
lack semantic meaning and are not suitable for representation learning. Here, we propose InfoDiffusion, an algorithm that augments diffusion models
with low-dimensional latent variables that capture
high-level factors of variation in the data. InfoDiffusion relies on a learning objective regularized
with the mutual information between observed
and hidden variables, which improves latent space
quality and prevents the latents from being ignored
by expressive diffusion-based decoders. Empirically, we find that InfoDiffusion learns disentangled and human-interpretable latent representations that are competitive with state-of-the-art generative and contrastive methods, while retaining
the high sample quality of diffusion models. Our
method enables manipulating the attributes of generated images and has the potential to assist tasks
that require exploring a learned latent space to
generate quality samples, e.g., generative design.

Image A

Smooth interpolation

Image B

``

+
Sunglasses

Facial Hair

Hair Length

Figure 1. InfoDiffusion produces semantically meaningful
latent space for a diffusion model. (Top) Smooth latent space.
(Bottom) Disentangled, human-interpretable factors of variation.

However, diffusion models rely on latent variables that
typically lack semantic meaning and are not well-suited for
the task of representation learning (Yang et al., 2022)—the
unsupervised discovery of high-level concepts in data (e.g.,
topics across news articles, facial features in human photos,
clusters of related molecules). This paper seeks to endow
diffusion models with a semantically meaningful latent
space while retaining their high sample quality.
Specifically, we propose InfoDiffusion, an algorithm that
augments diffusion models with low-dimensional latent variables that capture high-level factors of variation in the data.
InfoDiffusion relies on variational inference to optimize the
mutual information between the low-dimensional latents
and the generated samples (Zhao et al., 2017); this prevents
expressive diffusion-based generators from ignoring auxiliary latents and promotes their use for storing semantically
meaningful and disentangled information (Chen et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models are a family of generative models characterized by high sample quality (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2021). These models achieve
state-of-the-art performance across a range of generative
tasks, including image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Ramesh et al., 2022), audio synthesis (Kong et al., 2020),
and molecule design (Jing et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022).

The InfoDiffusion algorithm generalizes several existing
methods for representation learning (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Makhzani et al., 2015; Higgins et al., 2017). Our
method is a principled probabilistic extension of DiffAE
(Preechakul et al., 2022) that supports custom priors and
discrete latents and improves latents via mutual information
regularization. It also extends InfoVAEs (Zhao et al., 2017)
to leverage more flexible diffusion-based decoders. See
Figure 2 for an overview of our method.

1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Cornell Tech,
New York City, NY, USA 3 Department of Population Health
Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York City, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Yingheng Wang <yw2349@cornell.edu>,
Volodymyr Kuleshov <kuleshov@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

