Online Learning in Stackelberg Games with an Omniscient Follower

Geng Zhao 1 * Banghua Zhu 1 * Jiantao Jiao 1 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract

In this paper, we study how the information asymmetry affects the sample complexity of learning a two-player decentralized cooperative repeated Stackelberg game, with a
focus on the setting when the follower is omniscient and
myopic, and always best-responds to the leader’s actions.

We study the problem of online learning in a
two-player decentralized cooperative Stackelberg
game. In each round, the leader first takes an
action, followed by the follower who takes their
action after observing the leader’s move. The goal
of the leader is to learn to minimize the cumulative
regret based on the history of interactions. Differing from the traditional formulation of repeated
Stackelberg games, we assume the follower is omniscient, with full knowledge of the true reward,
and that they always best-respond to the leader’s
actions. We analyze the sample complexity of
regret minimization in this repeated Stackelberg
game. We show that depending on the reward
structure, the existence of the omniscient follower
may change the sample complexity drastically,
from constant to exponential, even for linear cooperative Stackelberg games. This poses unique
challenges for the learning process of the leader
and the subsequent regret analysis.

Consider an illustrative example in human-robot interaction
where a robot is required to collaborate with a human to
achieve some shared objective. This can be formulated as a
repeated Stackelberg game where the interactions between
human and robot happen in multiple rounds, and the human
is an omniscient expert who knows the exact target and how
to achieve it. In each round, the robot, as the leader who
hopes to learn the world model and human behavior from
scratch, first takes some action. After seeing the robot’s
action, the human, as an expert follower who possesses
perfect information about the world, always best-responds
to the robot’s action to maximize their reward. The robot
hopes to use as few as possible interactions to learn the
world model and human behavior, and eventually find the
optimal action that maximizes a shared reward.
Concretely, during each round t of the interaction, the leader
first plays an action at ∈ A, and the follower plays another
action bt ∈ B upon (perfectly) observing at . We assume
that the two players share a reward, rt = h⋆ (at , bt ) + zt ,
where zt ∈ R is some zero-mean sub-Gaussian noise,
h⋆ belongs to a family H. We also assume that the follower has full knowledge of the reward and always best
responds with bt ∈ arg maxb∈B h⋆ (at , b). However, the
leader does not know h⋆ and can only explore via taking
actions at and making inferences from past observations
(a1 , b1 , r1 ), · · · , (at−1 , bt−1 , rt−1 ).1 We are interested in
providing tight bound for the Stackelberg regret, defined as
" T 
#
X
⋆
⋆
R(T ) = max E
max h (a, b) − max h (at , bt ) .

1. Introduction
The multi-agent learning problem (Ferber & Weiss, 1999;
Wooldridge, 2009; Filar & Vrieze, 2012; Zhang et al., 2021)
has received significant attention reflecting its wide variety of real-world applications, including autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Sallab et al., 2017) and
human-robot interaction (Kober et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Goodrich et al., 2008; Xie et al., 2021). In a multiagent system, it is natural to assume that each agent possesses a different set of information due to its different viewpoint and history of actions. This phenomenon is commonly
referred to as the property of information asymmetry (Yang
et al., 2022). Such information asymmetry poses challenges
to the coordination and cooperation between learning agents.

a∈A

t=1

b∈B

bt ∈B

The Stackelberg regret characterizes the gap between the
reward achieved from the optimal leader action and the
reward from the actual leader action at .

*
1
Equal contribution
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Geng Zhao <gengzhao@berkeley.edu>, Banghua Zhu
<banghua@berkeley.edu>.

Compared with the traditional bandit problem, the extra
observation of bt can be viewed as side information accom-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

For simplicity, we assume in the introduction that the leader
can see b1 , · · · , bt−1 without noise. Later we generalize to the
case when the observed bt is also noisy.

1

