Sequential Changepoint Detection via Backward Confidence Sequences

Shubhanshu Shekhar 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1 2

Abstract

design a random stopping time, τ , adapted to the natural
filtration {Ft : t ≥ 1} with Ft = σ(X1 , . . . , Xt ), at which
we reject the null. A good stopping rule τ takes large values
under the the null (i.e., when T = ∞), while minimizing the
time required to detect the change under the alternative (i.e.,
when T < ∞). Formally, when T = ∞, we require the
average run length (ARL), E∞ [τ ], to be lower bounded by
1/α, for a given α ∈ (0, 1], while ensuring a small detection
delay, ET [(τ − T )+ ], when T < ∞. Informally, this means
that we will have a false alarm roughly every 1/α steps, so
the reader may use α = 10−3 as a rough guideline. (We also
briefly discuss how to keep the probability of even a single
false alarm below α, but there is a tradeoff between the false
alarm guarantee and detection delay; detecting true changes
quickly necessitates tolerating infrequent false alarms.)

We present a simple reduction from sequential
estimation to sequential changepoint detection
(SCD). In short, suppose we are interested in detecting changepoints in some parameter or functional θ of the underlying distribution. We demonstrate that if we can construct a confidence sequence (CS) for θ, then we can also successfully
perform SCD for θ. This is accomplished by
checking whether two CSs — one forwards and
the other backwards — ever fail to intersect. Since
the literature on CSs has been rapidly evolving
recently, the reduction provided in this paper immediately solves several old and new change detection problems. Further, our “backward CS”,
constructed by reversing time, is new and potentially of independent interest. We provide strong
nonasymptotic guarantees on the frequency of
false alarms and detection delay, and demonstrate
numerical effectiveness on several problems.

The literature on the topic of sequential changepoint detection is vast, as this problem arises in several important realworld applications, such as quality control (Shewhart, 1930),
monitoring power networks (Chen et al., 2015), analysis of
genomes (Chen et al., 2011; Shen and Zhang, 2012), and epidemic detection (Baron et al., 2004; Yu et al., 2013). Some
of the earliest works in this topic (Shewhart, 1925; Page,
1954; Shiryaev, 1963) assume that the pre- and post-change
distributions admit known densities f0 and f1 (w.r.t. some
common reference measure). These methods use statistics
involving likelihood ratios, that can be computed efficiently
in an incremental manner, and have also been shown to
admit strong optimality properties. The ideas underlying
these likelihood-based schemes have also been extended to
the case of (finite-dimensional) parametric families of distributions, such as the exponential family; see Tartakovsky
et al. (2014) for a detailed discussion. However, these parametric assumptions are often too stringent to be applicable
to many practical applications, where the data distributions
may lie in much larger, nonparametric, classes. Most of the
ideas developed for the parametric setting, and in particular the likelihood-based schemes, fail to be applicable in
the nonparametric case. With some exceptions discussed
later, there are very few general principles for constructing
nonparametric changepoint detection schemes. Our work in
this paper addresses this issue, by developing a conceptually
simple ‘meta-algorithm’ for transforming any confidence sequence construction into a powerful changepoint detection
method. As a consequence, we can immediately build upon

1. Introduction
We study the problem of sequential changepoint detection (SCD), where the goal is to quickly detect any changes
in the distribution generating a stream of observations, while
controlling the false alarm rate at a specified level. Formally,
for some (possibly infinite-dimensional) index set Θ, let
{Pθ }θ∈Θ denote a class of distributions on some observation
space X . Suppose that for some T ≥ 1, the observations
{Xt : 1 ≤ t ≤ T } are drawn i.i.d. from Pθ0 with θ0 ∈ Θ,
and {Xt : t > T } are drawn i.i.d. from Pθ1 for some
θ1 ∈ Θ, with θ1 ̸= θ0 . Then, the SCD problem involves
deciding between the null H0 : {T = ∞}, meaning no
change occurred, and the alternative H1 = ∪i∈N {T = i}.
Since the observations arrive sequentially, our task is to
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, USA 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Shubhanshu Shekhar
<shubhan2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

