RankMe: Assessing the Downstream Performance of Pretrained Self-Supervised
Representations by Their Rank

Quentin Garrido 1 2 Randall Balestriero 1 Laurent Najman 2 Yann LeCun 1 3 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has shown great progress to
learn informative data representations in recent years (Chen
et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Grill
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021; Caron et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2021; Tomasev et al., 2022;
Caron et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b; Zhou
et al., 2022a;b; HaoChen et al., 2021; He et al., 2022), catching up to supervised baselines and even surpassing them
in few-shot learning, i.e., when evaluating the SSL model
from only a few labeled examples. Although various SSL
families of losses have emerged, most are variants of the
joint-embedding (JE) framework with a siamese network
architecture (Bromley et al., 1994), denoted as JE-SSL for
short. The only technicality we ought to introduce to make
our study precise is the fact that JE-SSL has introduced
some different notations to denote an input’s representation.
In short, JE-SSL often composes a backbone or encoder
network e.g., a ResNet50 and a projector network e.g., a
multilayer perceptron. This projector is only employed during training, and we refer to its outputs as embeddings, while
the actual inputs’ representation employed for downstream
tasks are obtained at the encoder’s output.

Joint-Embedding Self Supervised Learning (JESSL) has seen a rapid development, with the emergence of many method variations but only few
principled guidelines that would help practitioners to successfully deploy them. The main reason
for that pitfall comes from JE-SSL’s core principle
of not employing any input reconstruction therefore lacking visual cues of unsuccessful training.
Adding non informative loss values to that, it becomes difficult to deploy SSL on a new dataset for
which no labels can help to judge the quality of the
learned representation. In this study, we develop a
simple unsupervised criterion that is indicative of
the quality of the learned JE-SSL representations:
their effective rank. Albeit simple and computationally friendly, this method —coined RankMe—
allows one to assess the performance of JE-SSL
representations, even on different downstream
datasets, without requiring any labels. A further
benefit of RankMe is that it does not have any
training or hyper-parameters to tune. Through
thorough empirical experiments involving hundreds of training episodes, we demonstrate how
RankMe can be used for hyperparameter selection with nearly no reduction in final performance
compared to the current selection method that involve a dataset’s labels. We hope that RankMe
will facilitate the deployment of JE-SSL towards
domains that do not have the opportunity to rely
on labels for representations’ quality assessment.

Although downstream tasks performance of JE-SSL representations might seem impressive, one pondering fact should
be noted: all existing methods, hyperparameters, models —
and thus performances — are obtained by manual search
involving the labels of the considered datasets. In words,
JE-SSL is tuned by monitoring the supervised performance
of the model at hand. Therefore, successfully deploying a
SSL model on a new dataset relies on the strong assumption
of having labels on that dataset to tune the SSL method e.g.
through a linear classifier feeding on the JE-SSL representations (Misra & Maaten, 2020). This quality assessment
strategy was also extended to the use of nonlinear classifiers,
e.g., a k-nn classifier (Wu et al., 2018; Zhuang et al., 2019).
Hence, although labels are not directly employed to compute
the weight updates, they are used as a proxy. This limitation
prevents the deployment of JE-SSL in challenging domains
where the number of available labelled examples is limited.
Adding to the challenge, one milestone of JE-SSL is to
move away from reconstruction based learning; hence with-

1
Meta AI - FAIR 2 Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM, F-77454
Marne-la-Vallée, France 3 Courant Institute, New York University
4
Center for Data Science, New York University. Correspondence
to: Quentin Garrido <garridoq@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

