Loss Balancing for Fair Supervised Learning

Mohammad Mahdi Khalili 1 Xueru Zhang 2 Mahed Abroshan 3

Abstract

cern that the algorithms may exhibit discrimination against
protected population groups. For example, speech recognition products such as Google Home and Amazon Alexa
were shown to have accent bias (Harwell, 2018). The COMPAS recidivism prediction tool, used by courts in the US
in parole decisions, has been shown to have a substantially
higher false positive rate for African Americans compared
to the general population (Dressel and Farid, 2018). Amazon had been using automated software since 2014 to assess
applicants’ resumes, which were found to be biased against
women (Dastin, 2018). As a result, there have been several
works focusing on interpreting machine learning models to
understand how features and sensitive attributes contribute
to the output of the model (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg
and Lee, 2017; Abroshan et al., 2023).

Supervised learning models have been used in
various domains such as lending, college admission, face recognition, natural language processing, etc. However, they may inherit pre-existing
biases from training data and exhibit discrimination against protected social groups. Various
fairness notions have been proposed to address unfairness issues. In this work, we focus on Equalized Loss (EL), a fairness notion that requires
the expected loss to be (approximately) equalized
across different groups. Imposing EL on the learning process leads to a non-convex optimization
problem even if the loss function is convex, and
the existing fair learning algorithms cannot properly be adopted to find the fair predictor under the
EL constraint. This paper introduces an algorithm
that can leverage off-the-shelf convex programming tools (e.g., CVXPY (Diamond and Boyd,
2016; Agrawal et al., 2018)) to efficiently find the
global optimum of this non-convex optimization.
In particular, we propose the ELminimizer algorithm, which finds the optimal fair predictor under EL by reducing the non-convex optimization
to a sequence of convex optimization problems.
We theoretically prove that our algorithm finds the
global optimal solution under certain conditions.
Then, we support our theoretical results through
several empirical studies.

Various fairness notions have been proposed in the literature to measure and remedy the biases in ML systems;
they can be roughly classified into two categories: 1) individual fairness focuses on equity at the individual level
and it requires similar individuals to be treated similarly
(Dwork et al., 2012; Biega et al., 2018; Jung et al., 2019;
Gupta and Kamble, 2019); 2) group fairness requires certain
statistical measures to be (approximately) equalized across
different groups distinguished by some sensitive attributes
(Hardt et al., 2016; Conitzer et al., 2019; Khalili et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020; Khalili et al., 2021; Diana et al., 2021;
Williamson and Menon, 2019; Zhang et al., 2022).
Several approaches have been developed to satisfy a given
definition of fairness; they fall under three categories: 1)
pre-processing, by modifying the original dataset such as
removing certain features and reweighing, (e.g., (Kamiran
and Calders, 2012; Celis et al., 2020; Abroshan et al.)); 2) inprocessing, by modifying the algorithms such as imposing
fairness constraints or changing objective functions during
the training process, (e.g., (Zhang et al., 2018; Agarwal et al.,
2018; 2019; Reimers et al., 2021; Calmon et al., 2017)); 3)
post-processing, by adjusting the output of the algorithms
based on sensitive attributes, (e.g., (Hardt et al., 2016)).

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly being
used in applications such as education, lending, recruitment,
healthcare, criminal justice, etc., there is a growing con1
Yahoo Research, NYC, NY. The author also holds a visiting professor position at The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH. 2 The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. 3 Optum Labs,
London, UK. The work was done while at Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Mohammad Mahdi Khalili
<khaliligarekani.1@osu.edu>.

In this paper, we focus on group fairness, and we aim to
mitigate unfairness issues in supervised learning using an
in-processing approach. This problem can be cast as a constrained optimization problem by minimizing a loss function
subject to a group fairness constraint. We are particularly in-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

