Building Neural Networks on Matrix Manifolds: A Gyrovector Space Approach

Xuan Son Nguyen 1 Shuo Yang 1

Abstract

spaces (Ungar, 2014) that enables principled generalizations of DNNs to the manifold setting (Ganea et al., 2018).
Another type of Riemannian manifolds referred to as matrix manifolds (Absil et al., 2007), where elements can be
represented in the form of matrix arrays, are also popular
in representation learning. Typical examples are SPD and
Grassmann manifolds. Unlike the works in Ganea et al.
(2018); Skopek et al. (2020), the works in (Huang & Gool,
2017; Dong et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018; Nguyen et al.,
2019a;b; 2020; Nguyen, 2021; Wang et al., 2021) approach
the problem of generalizing DNNs to the considered manifolds in an unprincipled way. This makes it hard for them
to generalize a broad class of DNNs to these manifolds. Another line of research (Chakraborty et al., 2018; Chakraborty
et al., 2020; Weiler et al., 2021; Banerjee et al., 2022; Xu
et al., 2022) that proposes analogs of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on Riemannian manifolds relies on
the notion of equivariant neural networks (Bronstein et al.,
2017). However, these works mainly focus on building
CNNs where many essential building blocks of DNNs for
solving a wide range of problems are missing.

Matrix manifolds, such as manifolds of Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices and Grassmann manifolds, appear in many applications. Recently, by applying the theory of gyrogroups and
gyrovector spaces that is a powerful framework
for studying hyperbolic geometry, some works
have attempted to build principled generalizations
of Euclidean neural networks on matrix manifolds. However, due to the lack of many concepts
in gyrovector spaces for the considered manifolds,
e.g., the inner product and gyroangles, techniques
and mathematical tools provided by these works
are still limited compared to those developed for
studying hyperbolic geometry. In this paper, we
generalize some notions in gyrovector spaces for
SPD and Grassmann manifolds, and propose new
models and layers for building neural networks on
these manifolds. We show the effectiveness of our
approach in two applications, i.e., human action
recognition and knowledge graph completion.

Recently, some works (Kim, 2020; Nguyen, 2022b) have
attempted to explore analogies that SPD and Grassmann
manifolds share with Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces. Although these works show how to construct some basic operations, e.g., the binary operation and scalar multiplication
from the Riemannian geometry of the considered manifolds,
it might be difficult to obtain closed-form expressions for
such operations even if closed-form expressions for the exponential and logarithmic maps, and the parallel transport
exist. This is the case of Grassmann manifolds from the
ONB (orthonormal basis) perspective (Edelman et al., 1998;
Bendokat et al., 2020), where the expressions of the exponential map and parallel transport are based on singular
value decomposition (SVD). In some applications, it is more
advantageous (Bendokat et al., 2020) to represent points on
Grassmann manifolds with orthogonal matrices (the ONB
perspective) than with projection matrices. Furthermore,
due to the lack of some concepts in gyrovector spaces for
the considered matrix manifolds, e.g., the inner product and
gyroangles (Ungar, 2014), it is not trivial for these works to
generalize many traditional machine learning models, e.g.,
multinomial logistic regression (MLR) to the considered
manifolds.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) usually assume Euclidean
geometry in their computations. However, in many applications, data exhibit a strongly non-Euclidean latent structure
such as those lying on Riemannian manifolds (Bronstein
et al., 2017). Therefore, a lot of effort has been put into
building DNNs on Riemannian manifolds in recent years.
The most common representation spaces are Riemannian
manifolds of constant non-zero curvature, e.g., spherical and
hyperbolic spaces (Ganea et al., 2018; Skopek et al., 2020).
Beside having closed-form expressions for the distance function, exponential and logarithmic maps, and parallel transport that ease the task of learning parametric models, such
spaces also have the nice algebraic structure of gyrovector
1

ETIS, UMR 8051, CY Cergy Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS,
Cergy, France. Correspondence to: Xuan Son Nguyen <xuanson.nguyen@ensea.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

