Tuning Language Models as Training Data Generators for
Augmentation-Enhanced Few-Shot Learning

Yu Meng 1 Martin Michalski 1 Jiaxin Huang 1 Yu Zhang 1 Tarek Abdelzaher 1 Jiawei Han 1

Abstract

2021a; 2022b) on natural language understanding (NLU)
tasks (Wang et al., 2019; 2018): Instead of relying on abundant task-specific annotations, PLMs can effectively leverage a small set of training samples to quickly learn a new
task. Such training data efficiency is usually achieved by formulating downstream tasks as prompts (Brown et al., 2020;
Gao et al., 2021; Scao & Rush, 2021; Schick & Schütze,
2021a;d), allowing the PLM to adapt its language modeling
ability acquired through pretraining to downstream tasks.

Recent studies have revealed the intriguing fewshot learning ability of pretrained language models (PLMs): They can quickly adapt to a new task
when fine-tuned on a small amount of labeled
data formulated as prompts, without requiring
abundant task-specific annotations. Despite their
promising performance, most existing few-shot
approaches that only learn from the small training
set still underperform fully supervised training
by nontrivial margins. In this work, we study
few-shot learning with PLMs from a different perspective: We first tune an autoregressive PLM on
the few-shot samples and then use it as a generator to synthesize a large amount of novel training samples which augment the original training
set. To encourage the generator to produce labeldiscriminative samples, we train it via weighted
maximum likelihood where the weight of each
token is automatically adjusted based on a discriminative meta-learning objective. A classification PLM can then be fine-tuned on both the
few-shot and the synthetic samples with regularization for better generalization and stability. Our
approach FewGen achieves an overall better result across seven classification tasks of the GLUE
benchmark than existing few-shot learning methods, improving no-augmentation methods by 5+
average points, and outperforming augmentation
methods by 3+ average points.

The success of prompt-based methods has stimulated numerous explorations along the line of effective few-shot
learning with PLMs: The training samples converted to
natural language prompts can be used to directly fine-tune
PLMs (Gao et al., 2021; Schick & Schütze, 2021a) or as
in-context demonstrations to facilitate better inference (Liu
et al., 2022b; Min et al., 2022b). Recent approaches aim to
automate the design of prompts by gradient-based searching (Shin et al., 2020) or parameterizing prompts as continuous learnable embeddings (Lester et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2021). Other studies investigate
and address specific issues in prompt-based few-shot learning (Liu et al., 2022a; Tam et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021).
While remarkable, the model performance still has a nontrivial gap from fully supervised models trained on massive
labeled data. Indeed, training deep models is inherently data
demanding—model generalization usually benefits from
more training samples (Baum & Haussler, 1988).
In this work, we study few-shot learning with PLMs from
a different perspective: Instead of proposing new methods
for fine-tuning on few-shot samples, we focus on the generation of quality training data based on few-shot samples
and using these synthesized training samples to fine-tune
the classification models. Motivated by the strong text generation power of autoregressive PLMs (Brown et al., 2020;
Keskar et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019), a few previous
studies enlarge the training set by generating new texts as
training samples. They either fine-tune the generator on the
initial training set with the standard maximum likelihood
objective (Anaby-Tavor et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020)
or use the training samples as demonstrations (Yoo et al.,
2021). However, these methods do not explicitly model
the distinction across different labels and may struggle to

1. Introduction
Recent research has demonstrated the appealing fewshot learning potential of pretrained language models
(PLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Clark et al., 2020; Devlin
et al., 2019; He et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019; Meng et al.,
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to:
Yu Meng <yumeng5@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

