FedDisco: Federated Learning with Discrepancy-Aware Collaboration

Rui Ye 1 Mingkai Xu 1 Jianyu Wang 2 Chenxin Xu 1 Siheng Chen 1 3 Yanfeng Wang 3 1

Abstract
This work considers the category distribution heterogeneity in federated learning (FL). This issue
is due to biased labeling preferences at multiple
clients and is a typical setting of data heterogeneity. To alleviate this issue, most previous works
consider either regularizing local models or finetuning the global model, while they ignore the
adjustment of aggregation weights and simply assign weights based on the dataset size. However,
based on our empirical observations and theoretical analysis, we find that the dataset size is not
optimal and the discrepancy between local and
global category distributions could be a beneficial
and complementary indicator for determining aggregation weights. We thus propose a novel FL
algorithm, Federated Learning with DiscrepancyAware Collaboration (FedDisco), whose aggregation weights not only involve both the dataset
size and the discrepancy value, but also contribute
to a tighter theoretical upper bound of the optimization error. FedDisco can promote utility and
modularity in a communication- and computationefficient way. Extensive experiments show that
our FedDisco outperforms several state-of-theart methods and can be easily incorporated with
many existing methods to further enhance the
performance. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/FedDisco.

Figure 1. To mitigate the negative impact of category distribution
heterogeneity, FedDisco considers discrepancy-aware aggregation
weights, which involves both dataset size and discrepancy between
local category distribution and uniform distribution. FedDisco is
still privacy preserving, communication and computation efficient.

algorithms have been widely applied to many real-world
scenarios, such as users’ next-word prediction (Hard et al.,
2018), recommendation systems (Ding et al., 2022), and
smart healthcare (Kaissis et al., 2020).

1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Siheng Chen <sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn>.

In spite of the promising trend, there are still multiple key
challenges that impede the further development of FL, including data heterogeneity, communication cost and privacy
concerns (Kairouz et al., 2019). In this work, we focus on
one critical issue in data heterogeneity: category distribution
heterogeneity; that is, clients have drastically different category distributions. For example, some clients have many
samples in category 1 but very few in category 2; while
other clients are opposite. This setting is common in practice, since clients collect local data privately and usually
tend to have biased labeling preferences. Due to this heterogeneity, different local models are optimized towards
different local objectives, causing divergent optimization
directions. It is thus difficult to aggregate these divergent local models to obtain a robust global model. This unpleasant
phenomenon has been theoretically and empirically verified
in (Zhao et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To mitigate the negative impact of category distribution
heterogeneity, there are mainly two approaches: i) local
model adjustment at the client side and ii) global model

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging field that offers a privacy-preserving collaborative machine learning
paradigm (Kairouz et al., 2019). Its main idea is to enable multiple clients to collaboratively train a shared global
model by sharing information about model parameters. FL

1

