Nearly Optimal Competitive Ratio for Online Allocation Problems with
Two-sided Resource Constraints and Finite Requests

Qixin Zhang * 1 2 Wenbing Ye * 2 Zaiyi Chen * 2 Haoyuan Hu 2 Enhong Chen 3 Yu Yang 1

Abstract

Li & Ye, 2021) and machine learning communities (Balseiro
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020). In these settings, the requests
arrive online and we need to serve each request via one of
the available channels, which consumes a certain amount
of resources and generates a corresponding service charge.
The objective of the decision maker is to maximize the cumulative revenue subject to the resource capacity constraints.
Such problem frequently appears in many applications including online advertising (Mehta et al., 2007; Buchbinder
et al., 2007), online combinatorial auctions (Chawla et al.,
2010), online linear programming (Agrawal et al., 2014;
Buchbinder & Naor, 2009), online routing (Buchbinder &
Naor, 2006), online multi-leg flight seats and hotel rooms
allocation (Talluri et al., 2004), etc.

In this paper, we investigate the online allocation
problem of maximizing the overall revenue subject to both lower and upper bound constraints.
Compared to the extensively studied online problems with only resource upper bounds, the twosided constraints affect the prospects of resource
consumption more severely. As a result, only limited violations of constraints or pessimistic competitive bounds could be guaranteed. To tackle the
challenge, we define a measure of feasibility ξ ∗
to evaluate the hardness of this problem, and estimate this measurement by an optimization routine
with theoretical guarantees. We propose an online algorithm adopting a constructive framework,
where we initialize a threshold price vector using
the estimation, then dynamically update the price
vector and use it for decision-making at each step.
It can be shown
 that the proposedalgorithm is
1 − O( ξ∗ε−ε ) or 1 − O( ξ∗ −ε√ε ) competitive
with high probability for ξ ∗ known or unknown
respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first result establishing a nearly optimal
competitive algorithm for solving two-sided constrained online allocation problems with a high
probability of feasibility.

The aforementioned online resource allocation framework
only considers the capacity (upper bound) constraints for
resources. As a measure of fairness for resources expenditure, the requirements for guaranteeing a certain amount of
resource allocation play important roles in real-world applications (Haitao Cui et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2020) ranging
from contractual obligations and group-level fairness to
load balance. We give several examples in Appendix A for
completeness. Recently, some attempts come out to alleviate the difficulties introduced by lower bound constraints.
For instance, Lobos et al. (2021) propose an online mirror descent method
√ to address this new online allocation
√
problem with O( T ) asymptotic regret as well as O( T )
violation of lower bounds in expectation, where T is the
number of requests. Meanwhile, Balseiro et al. (2021) consider a more general regularized setting to satisfy fairness
requirements
by non-separable penalties, which also leads
√
to O( T ) asymptotic regret for the regularized reward.
That is, Balseiro
et al. (2021) only guarantee a gap of the
√
order O( T ) for the sum of the regret of revenues and the
violation of lower-bound constraints. All these studies consider the lower bound requirements as soft threshold, i.e.,
there is no guarantee on the satisfaction of lower bound constraints, which remains an open problem for online resource
allocation.

1. Introduction
Online resource allocation is a prominent paradigm for sequential decision making during a finite horizon subject to
the resource constraints, increasingly attracting the wide
attention of researchers and practitioners in theoretical computer science (Mehta et al., 2007; Devanur & Jain, 2012; Devanur et al., 2019), operations research (Agrawal et al., 2014;
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Data Science City University of
Hong Kong, Kowloon Hong Kong, China 2 Cainiao Network, Hang
Zhou, China 3 University of Science and Technology of China.
Correspondence to: Yu Yang <yuyang@cityu.edu.hk>.

In this paper, we investigate the online resource allocation
problem under stochastic setting, where requests are drawn
independently from some unknown distribution, and arrive

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

