Towards Theoretical Understanding of Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Filippo Lazzati 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract

which diverges from standard reinforcement learning (RL,
Sutton & Barto, 2018), as the reward function has to be
learned, arises in a large variety of real-world tasks. In
particular, in a human-in-the-loop (Wu et al., 2022) scenario, when the expert is represented by a human solving a
task, an explicit specification of the reward function representing the human’s goal is often unavailable. Experience
suggests that humans are uncomfortable when asked to describe their intent and, thus, the underlying reward; while
they are much more comfortable providing demonstrations
of what is believed to be the right behavior. Indeed, human
behavior is usually the product of many, possibly conflicting, objectives.1 Succeeding in retrieving a representation
of the expert’s reward has notable implications (Sharifzadeh
et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2019; Imani & Braga-Neto, 2019; Wu
et al., 2020; Likmeta et al., 2021). First, we obtain explicit
information for understanding the motivations behind the
expert’s choices (interpretability). Second, the reward can
be employed in RL to train artificial agents, under shifts in
the features of the underlying system (transferability).

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) denotes a
powerful family of algorithms for recovering a
reward function justifying the behavior demonstrated by an expert agent. A well-known limitation of IRL is the ambiguity in the choice of the
reward function, due to the existence of multiple
rewards that explain the observed behavior. This
limitation has been recently circumvented by formulating IRL as the problem of estimating the
feasible reward set, i.e., the region of the rewards
compatible with the expert’s behavior. In this paper, we make a step towards closing the theory
gap of IRL in the case of finite-horizon problems
with a generative model. We start by formally
introducing the problem of estimating the feasible
reward set, the corresponding PAC requirement,
and discussing the properties of particular classes
of rewards. Then, we provide the first minimax
lower bound on the sample complexity for the
problem´of estimating the feasible
reward set of
` `1˘
˘¯
H 3 SA
log δ ` S , being S and A
order Ω
2
the number of states and actions respectively, H
the horizon,  the desired accuracy, and δ the confidence. We analyze the sample complexity of a
uniform sampling strategy (US-IRL), proving a
matching upper bound up to logarithmic factors.
Finally, we outline several open questions in IRL
and propose future research directions.

Since the beginning, the community recognized that the IRL
problem is, per se, ill-posed, as multiple reward functions
are compatible with the expert’s behavior (Ng & Russell,
2000). This ambiguity was heterogeneously addressed by
the algorithmic proposals that have followed over the years,
which realized in several selection criteria, including maximum margin (Ratliff et al., 2006), maximum entropy (Zeng
et al., 2022), minimum Hessian eigenvalue (Metelli et al.,
2017; 2020), and a balance between compatibility and learning efficiency (Damiani et al., 2022). Some of these approaches come with theoretical guarantees on the sample
complexity, although according to different performance
indices (e.g., Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Syed & Schapire, 2007;
Pirotta & Restelli, 2016).

1. Introduction
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims at efficiently
learning a desired behavior by observing an expert agent
and inferring their intent encoded in a reward function (refer
to Osa et al. (2018); Arora & Doshi (2021); Adams et al.
(2022) for recent surveys on IRL). This abstract setting,

A promising line of research that aspires to overcome the
ambiguity issue has been recently investigated in (Metelli
et al., 2021; Lindner et al., 2022). These works focus on
estimating all the reward functions compatible with the expert’s demonstrated behavior, namely the feasible rewards.
Remarkably, this viewpoint which focuses on the feasible
reward set, rather than on one reward obtained with a spe-

1

Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria.
Politecnico di Milano. Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Alberto
Maria Metelli <albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In RL, the Sutton’s hypothesis (Sutton & Barto, 2018) conjectures that a scalar reward is an adequate notion of goal.

1

