Algorithms for bounding contribution for histogram estimation
under user-level privacy

Yuhan Liu 1 Ananda Theertha Suresh 2 Wennan Zhu 2 Peter Kairouz 2 Marco Gruteser 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) provides a
rigorous formulation of privacy and has been applied to
many algorithmic and learning tasks that involve the access
to private and sensitive information. Notable applications
include private data release (Hardt et al., 2012), learning
histograms (Dwork et al., 2006), statistical estimation (Diakonikolas et al., 2015; Kamath et al., 2019; Acharya et al.,
2021; Kamath et al., 2020; Acharya et al., 2019a;b), and
machine learning (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Bassily et al.,
2014; McMahan et al., 2018b; Dwork et al., 2014; Abadi
et al., 2016).

We study the problem of histogram estimation
under user-level differential privacy, where the
goal is to preserve the privacy of all entries of
any single user. We consider the heterogeneous
scenario where the quantity of data can be different for each user. In this scenario, the amount
of noise injected into the histogram to obtain differential privacy is proportional to the maximum
user contribution, which can be amplified by few
outliers. One approach to circumvent this would
be to bound (or limit) the contribution of each user
to the histogram. However, if users are limited to
small contributions, a significant amount of data
will be discarded. In this work, we propose algorithms to choose the best user contribution bound
for histogram estimation under both bounded and
unbounded domain settings. When the size of
the domain is bounded, we propose a user contribution bounding strategy that almost achieves a
two-approximation with respect to the best contribution bound in hindsight. For unbounded domain
histogram estimation, we propose an algorithm
that is logarithmic-approximation with respect to
the best contribution bound in hindsight. This
result holds without any distribution assumptions
on the data. Experiments on both real and synthetic datasets verify our theoretical findings and
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.
We also show that clipping bias introduced by
bounding user contribution may be reduced under
mild distribution assumptions, which can be of
independent interest.

In several applications, each user may contribute many data
samples to a dataset. For example, one may have multiple
health records in a hospital, or may type many words on
their phone’s virtual keyboard. Naturally, users would hope
that all of their private data is protected. To achieve this,
private algorithms should guarantee user-level differential
privacy.
However, many existing works assume that each user only
contributes one data sample. Thus, an algorithm designed
under this assumption can only be used to protect the privacy
of each data sample but not the user. In other words, such algorithms achieve item-level privacy, but they cannot protect
privacy at the user level and may not meet the increasing
privacy concerns in most applications where users may contribute a lot of data. Therefore, there has been a growing
interest in revisiting differential privacy in the user-level
setting.
User-level privacy is much more stringent than the itemlevel counterpart. Under user-level privacy, the amount of
noise added is dependent on the sensitivity of the differential privacy mechanism, which is typically the maximum
number of items contributed by any single user. Hence,
even if a majority of users contribute little data and very few
outliers contribute a large amount of data, then the amount
of noise added will be significantly large. This begs an
important question: should we limit the user contribution
while providing differential privacy? This question was
initiated by Amin et al. (2019) in the context of empirical
risk minimization. They showed that not restricting user

Part of the work was done during an internship at Google.
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Yuhan Liu <yl2976@cornell.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

