Learning in POMDPs is Sample-Efficient with Hindsight Observability

Jonathan N. Lee 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Christoph Dann 2 Tong Zhang 3

Abstract

of observations reveals enough information about the latent
states to permit sample-efficient learning. In this paper, we
ask if the motivating practical applications for POMDPs
sometimes allow a more informative sensing of the underlying state for some part of the learning process. We formulate a novel learning setting called a Hindsight Observable
Markov Decision Process (HOMDP), and provide learning
algorithms that are significantly more sample-efficient than
those for general POMDPs.

POMDPs capture a broad class of decision making problems, but hardness results suggest that
learning is intractable even in simple settings due
to the inherent partial observability. However, in
many realistic problems, more information is either revealed or can be computed during some
point of the learning process. Motivated by diverse applications ranging from robotics to data
center scheduling, we formulate a Hindsight Observable Markov Decision Process (HOMDP) as
a POMDP where the latent states are revealed
to the learner in hindsight and only during training. We introduce new algorithms for the tabular
and function approximation settings that are provably sample-efficient with hindsight observability,
even in POMDPs that would otherwise be statistically intractable. We give a lower bound showing
that the tabular algorithm is optimal in its dependence on latent state and observation cardinalities.

For motivation, let us consider robotic control, where we
want our robot to sense its state using a relatively cheap
camera sensor upon deployment. However, during training,
it is common to allow a more expensive sensing of the state,
using simulators, higher-fidelity cameras, lidars, or even
full-fledged motion capture setups (Pinto et al., 2017; Pan
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020). In a completely different
style of scenarios, Sinclair et al. (2022) discuss problems
such as scheduling in a data center, where the unknown lifetime of a job creates partial observability of the state when
the job is scheduled. This partial observability is resolved
when the job actually concludes. While the two examples
are very different, they share a similarity. The learner needs
a decision-making policy to act based on partial observations alone, due either to resource/sensor constraints upon
deployment or to fundamental lack of information at the
time of decision. However, the underlying state eventually gets revealed, either intrinsically, or due to extrinsic
measurements during the training process. We refer to this
eventual observation of the latent environment state as hindsight observability, and study learning settings where the
learner acts based on partial state observations, but observes
the true latent states eventually upon the conclusion of the
trajectory.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making settings where the learning
agent only receives incomplete observations of its environmental state are typical in diverse practical scenarios,
such as control of physical systems (Thrun, 2000), dialogue
and recommendation systems (Young et al., 2013; Shani
et al., 2005), and decision making in educational or clinical settings (Ayer et al., 2012). Typically studied within
the framework of a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP), classical literature on such problems
provides hardness results on sample and computationally
efficient learning. The hardness results apply even in simple
settings with small action, observation and state spaces, in
stark contrast to the MDP setting where the state is fully observable. Fueled by this gap, there is a body of literature that
characterizes observability conditions when the sequence

We start by noting that learning in a HOMDP remains considerably challenging in comparison with MDPs, as the
learner’s policy needs to depend on observations during deployment (e.g. robotics, scheduling) and sometimes even
during training (e.g. scheduling). Hence we cannot use
MDP learning techniques directly. At the same time, the
HOMDP model eliminates the identifiability or observability conditions that are crucial to success in POMDP learning,
since the hindsight observation of the latent state allows us
to associate latent states and corresponding observations,
albeit with a delay. This makes the HOMDP an intermediate

1
Stanford University 2 Google Research 3 HKUST. Correspondence to: Jonathan N. Lee <jnl@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

