Distributional Offline Policy Evaluation with Predictive Error Guarantees

Runzhe Wu 1 Masatoshi Uehara 1 Wen Sun 1

Abstract

to predicting the expected traveling time, we may be interested in estimating the tails of the distribution of traveling
time so that customers can prepare for worst-case situations.
Other risk-sensitive applications in finance and control often
require one to model beyond the expectation as well.

We study the problem of estimating the distribution of the return of a policy using an offline
dataset that is not generated from the policy, i.e.,
distributional offline policy evaluation (OPE). We
propose an algorithm called Fitted Likelihood Estimation (FLE), which conducts a sequence of
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) and has
the flexibility of integrating any state-of-the-art
probabilistic generative models as long as it can
be trained via MLE. FLE can be used for both
finite-horizon and infinite-horizon discounted settings where rewards can be multi-dimensional
vectors. Our theoretical results show that for both
finite-horizon and infinite-horizon discounted settings, FLE can learn distributions that are close
to the ground truth under total variation distance
and Wasserstein distance, respectively. Our theoretical results hold under the conditions that the
offline data covers the test policy’s traces and that
the supervised learning MLE procedures succeed.
Experimentally, we demonstrate the performance
of FLE with two generative models, Gaussian
mixture models and diffusion models. For the
multi-dimensional reward setting, FLE with diffusion models is capable of estimating the complicated distribution of the return of a test policy.

In this work, we study how to estimate the distribution of
the return of a policy in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
using only an offline dataset that is not necessarily generated from the test policy (i.e., distributional offline policy
evaluation). Estimating distributions of returns has been
studied in the setting called distributional RL (Bellemare
et al., 2017), where most existing works focus on solving
the regular RL problem, i.e., finding a policy that maximizes
the expected return by treating the task of predicting additional information beyond the mean as an auxiliary task.
Empirically, it is believed that this auxiliary task helps representation learning which in turn leads to better empirical
performance. Instead of focusing on this auxiliary loss perspective, we aim to design distributional OPE algorithms,
which can accurately estimate the distribution of returns
with provable guarantees. We are also interested in the setting where the one-step reward could be multi-dimensional
(i.e., multi-objective RL), and the state/action spaces could
be large or even continuous. This requires us to design new
algorithms that can leverage rich function approximation
(e.g., state-of-art probabilistic generative models).
Our algorithm, Fitted Likelihood Estimation (FLE), is
inspired by the classic OPE algorithm Fitted Q Evaluation
(FQE) (Munos & Szepesvári, 2008). Given a test policy and
an offline dataset, FLE iteratively calls a supervised learning
oracle — Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) in this
case, to fit a conditional distribution to approximate a target
distribution constructed using the distribution learned from
the previous iteration. At the end of the training procedure,
it outputs an estimator which approximates the true
distribution of the return of the test policy. Our algorithm
is simple: like FQE, it decomposes the distributional OPE
problem into a sequence of supervised learning problems
(in this case, MLE). Thus it has great flexibility to leverage
any state-of-art probabilistic generative models as long as
it can be trained via MLE. Such flexibility is important,
especially when we have large state/action spaces, and
reward vectors coming from complicated high-dimensional
distributions. FLE naturally works for both finite-horizon

1. Introduction
Traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL) focuses on studying the expected behaviors of a learning agent. However,
modeling the expected behavior is not enough for many
interesting applications. For instance, when estimating the
value of a new medical treatment, instead of just predicting
its expected value, we may be interested in estimating the
variance of the value as well. For a self-driving car whose
goal is to reach a destination as soon as possible, in addition
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Runzhe Wu
<rw646@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

