Graph Generative Model for Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks

Minji Yoon 1 Yue Wu 1 John Palowitch 2 Bryan Perozzi 2 Russ Salakhutdinov 1

Abstract

cial recommendation (Ying et al., 2018). However, datasets
from these industrial tasks are overwhelmingly proprietary
and privacy-restricted and thus almost always unavailable
for researchers to study or evaluate new GNN architectures.
This state-of-affairs means that in many cases, GNN models
cannot be trained or evaluated on graphs that are appropriate
for the actual tasks that they need to execute.

As the field of Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
continues to grow, it experiences a corresponding increase in the need for large, real-world
datasets to train and test new GNN models on
challenging, realistic problems. Unfortunately,
such graph datasets are often generated from online, highly privacy-restricted ecosystems, which
makes research and development on these datasets
hard, if not impossible. This greatly reduces
the amount of benchmark graphs available to researchers, causing the field to rely only on a handful of publicly-available datasets. To address this
problem, we introduce a novel graph generative
model, Computation Graph Transformer (CGT)
that learns and reproduces the distribution of realworld graphs in a privacy-controlled way. More
specifically, CGT (1) generates effective benchmark graphs on which GNNs show similar task
performance as on the source graphs, (2) scales
to process large-scale graphs, (3) incorporates offthe-shelf privacy modules to guarantee end-user
privacy of the generated graph. Extensive experiments across a vast body of graph generative
models show that only our model can successfully
generate privacy-controlled, synthetic substitutes
of large-scale real-world graphs that can be effectively used to benchmark GNN models.

In this paper, we propose a novel graph generation problem
to overcome the limited access to real-world graph datasets.
Given a graph, our goal is to generate synthetic graphs that
follow its distribution in terms of graph structure, node
attributes, and labels, making them usable as substitutes for
the original graph for GNN research. Any observations or
results from experiments on the original graph should be
near-reproduced on the synthetic graphs. Additionally, the
graph generation process should be scalable and privacycontrolled to consume large-scale and privacy-restricted
real-world graphs. Formally, our new graph generation
problem is stated as follow:
Problem Definition 1. Let A, X , and Y denote adjacency,
node attribute, and node label matrices; given an original
graph G = (A, X , Y), generate a synthetic graph dataset
G ′ satisfying:
• Benchmark effectiveness: performance rankings among
m GNN models on G ′ should be similar to the rankings
among the same m GNN models on G.
• Scalability: computation complexity of graph generation
should be linearly proportional to the size of the original
graph O(|G|) (i.e., number of nodes or edges).
• Privacy guarantee: any syntactic privacy notions are
given to end users (e.g., k-anonymity).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016a;
Chami et al., 2022) are machine learning models that learn
the dependences in graphs via message passing between
nodes. Various GNN models have been widely applied on a
variety of industrial domains such as misinformation detection (Benamira et al., 2019), financial fraud detection (Wang
et al., 2019), traffic prediction (Zhao et al., 2019), and so1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Minji Yoon <minjiy@cs.cmu.edu>.

While there is already a vast body of work on graph generation, we found that no study has fully addressed the problem
setting above. (Leskovec et al., 2010; Palowitch et al., 2022)
generate random graphs using a few known graph patterns,
while (You et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2019) learn only graph
structures without considering node attribute/label information. Recent graph generative models (Shi et al., 2020; Luo
et al., 2021) are mostly specialized to small-scale molecule
graph generation.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we introduce a novel graph generative model,
Computation Graph Transformer (CGT) that addresses the
three requirements above for the benchmark graph gen1

