PFNs4BO: In-Context Learning for Bayesian Optimization

Abstract

0.6

10
Function Value

In this paper, we use Prior-data Fitted Networks
(PFNs) as a flexible surrogate for Bayesian Optimization (BO). PFNs are neural processes that
are trained to approximate the posterior predictive
distribution (PPD) through in-context learning on
any prior distribution that can be efficiently sampled from. We describe how this flexibility can be
exploited for surrogate modeling in BO. We use
PFNs to mimic a naive Gaussian process (GP),
an advanced GP, and a Bayesian Neural Network
(BNN). In addition, we show how to incorporate
further information into the prior, such as allowing hints about the position of optima (user priors), ignoring irrelevant dimensions, and performing non-myopic BO by learning the acquisition
function. The flexibility underlying these extensions opens up vast possibilities for using PFNs
for BO. We demonstrate the usefulness of PFNs
for BO in a large-scale evaluation on artificial
GP samples and three different hyperparameter
optimization testbeds: HPO-B, Bayesmark, and
PD1. We publish code alongside trained models
at github.com/automl/PFNs4BO.

0.4

0

0.2

Observation
GP Ground Truth
PFN GP

−10

Acquisition Value (EI)

Samuel Müller 1 2 Matthias Feurer 1 Noah Hollmann 1 2 3 Frank Hutter 1 2

0
0

5
Function Input

10

Figure 1: Our proposed Prior-data Fitted Network almost exactly approximates a Gaussian Process posterior with fixed
hyperparameters. We plot the exact and approximated GP
prediction for (i) the mean and (ii) expected improvement.
For the simple GP model approximated here, a ground truth
can be exactly calculated, which is generally not the case,
see Section 4.1. PFNs, however, can be extended to approximate any prior one can sample from.

nassi et al., 2011; Snoek et al., 2012; Eriksson & Jankowiak,
2021). Instead, GPs are usually fitted using maximum likelihood, often called “Empirical Bayes”. This makes Bayesian
optimization less principled from a Bayesian perspective.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are today's de facto standard
surrogate model in Bayesian Optimization (BO; Frazier,
2018; Garnett, 2022). This dominance can be attributed to
both their strong performance and their mathematical convenience. However, a GP can only model priors that can
be encoded as a valid kernel function and is jointly normaldistributed. Moreover, while kernel hyperparameters could
be treated in a Bayesian manner with Markov chain Monte
Carlo, this is typically not done due to the high computational cost, even though the fully Bayesian treatment was
already shown to yield stronger results a decade ago (BeUniversity of Freiburg, Germany 2 Prior Labs 3 Charité – Berlin
University of Medicine, Germany. Correspondence to: Samuel
Müller <muellesa@cs.uni-freiburg.de>.

The recently proposed Prior-data Fitted Networks (PFNs,
Müller et al., 2022) show that fast approximate Bayesian
inference is possible by training a neural network, more
specifically, a specific type of neural process (Garnelo et al.,
2018), to mimic the posterior predictive distribution (PPD)
in a single forward pass using in-context learning. This
is a powerful approach, as it makes approximate Bayesian
inference readily usable in novel applications and allows
using any prior that we can sample from, e.g. a GP kernel
and its hyperparameters, or also a Bayesian neural network.
PFNs can be a robust and generalizable PPD approximation
method, e.g. for tabular data using a prior over different neural architectures and their weights (Hollmann et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we demonstrate the flexibility and effectiveness of PFNs as a Bayesian drop-in replacement for Gaussian Processes. We perform Bayesian optimization with

1

1

