DetectGPT: Zero-Shot Machine-Generated Text Detection
using Probability Curvature

Eric Mitchell 1 Yoonho Lee 1 Alexander Khazatsky 1 Christopher D. Manning 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract

Candidate passage

:

“Joe Biden recently made a move to the White House
that included bringing along his pet German Shepherd…”

The increasing fluency and widespread usage of
large language models (LLMs) highlight the desirability of corresponding tools aiding detection
of LLM-generated text. In this paper, we identify
a property of the structure of an LLM’s probability function that is useful for such detection.
Specifically, we demonstrate that text sampled
from an LLM tends to occupy negative curvature regions of the model’s log probability function. Leveraging this observation, we then define
a new curvature-based criterion for judging if a
passage is generated from a given LLM. This
approach, which we call DetectGPT, does not require training a separate classifier, collecting a
dataset of real or generated passages, or explicitly watermarking generated text. It uses only
log probabilities computed by the model of interest and random perturbations of the passage
from another generic pre-trained language model
(e.g., T5). We find DetectGPT is more discriminative than existing zero-shot methods for model
sample detection, notably improving detection of
fake news articles generated by 20B parameter
GPT-NeoX from 0.81 AUROC for the strongest
zero-shot baseline to 0.95 AUROC for DetectGPT. See ericmitchell.ai/detectgpt
for code, data, and other project information.

DetectGPT
(reword
(1) Perturb with
T5)

Dele

g”
“pet” → “do

“ma

de a

move

”→

...

x

(3) Compare

GPT-3
...

ga

in
ring
te “b

(2) Score

”
long

“mo

ved”

Yes
🤖

from GPT-3

No
🤔

from other source

Figure 1. We aim to determine whether a piece of text was generated by a particular LLM p, such as GPT-3. To classify a candidate
passage x, DetectGPT first generates minor perturbations of the
passage x̃i using a generic pre-trained model such as T5. Then
DetectGPT compares the log probability under p of the original
sample x with each perturbed sample x̃i . If the average log ratio
is high, the sample is likely from the source model.

While recent work has found that cogent-sounding LLMgenerated responses are often simply wrong (Lin et al.,
2022), the articulate nature of such generated text may still
make LLMs attractive for replacing human labor in some
contexts, notably student essay writing and journalism. At
least one major news source has released AI-written content
with limited human review, leading to substantial factual errors in some articles (Christian, 2023). Such applications of
LLMs are problematic for a variety of reasons, making fair
student assessment difficult, impairing student learning, and
proliferating convincing-but-inaccurate news articles. Unfortunately, humans perform only slightly better than chance
when classifying machine-generated vs human-written text
(Gehrmann et al., 2019), leading researchers to consider
automated detection methods that may identify signals difficult for humans to recognize. Such methods might give
teachers and news-readers more confidence in the human
origin of the text that they consume.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have proven able to generate remarkably fluent responses to a wide variety of user
queries. Models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM
(Chowdhery et al., 2022), and ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022)
can convincingly answer complex questions about science,
mathematics, historical and current events, and social trends.
1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Eric Mitchell
<eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

As in prior work (Jawahar et al., 2020), we study the
1

