Functional Neural Networks: Shift Invariant Models for Functional Data with
Applications to EEG Classification

Florian Heinrichs 1 Mavin Heim 1 Corinna Weber 1
signal with one classification per window. The advantage
of this approach is that only the most recent data is used for
predictions, but it comes at cost: the signal of interest might
occur at any time point in the extracted window. Thus, any
classifier of the sliding windows needs to be “shift invariant”
in the sense that it detects the desired signal independently
of its position in the window.

Abstract
It is desirable for statistical models to detect signals of interest independently of their position. If
the data is generated by some smooth process, this
additional structure should be taken into account.
We introduce a new class of neural networks that
are shift invariant and preserve smoothness of
the data: functional neural networks (FNNs). For
this, we use methods from functional data analysis
(FDA) to extend multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks to functional data. We
propose different model architectures, show that
the models outperform a benchmark model from
FDA in terms of accuracy and successfully use
FNNs to classify electroencephalography (EEG)
data.

In the context of BCIs, more specifically for the analysis
of data measured via electroencephalography (EEG), traditional methods are based on carefully selected features that
are calculated from the data. Commonly applied techniques
include the principal component analysis of EEG data in
the time domain, or features based on the power spectrum
in the frequency domain (Azlan & Low, 2014; Boubchir
et al., 2017; Boonyakitanont et al., 2020). Due to recent
advances in the field of deep learning, different architectures of neural networks were proposed that avoid a manual
feature extraction and seem to outperform more traditional
methods. For example the neural network EEGNet was
proposed to support multiple BCI paradigms and is often
referred to as benchmark model in the field (Lawhern et al.,
2018). In a clinical setting, some variant of the VGG16
neural network was used to detect signals associated with
epilepsy (da Silva Lourenço et al., 2021). In general, deep
learning has been applied successfully to a variety of tasks
related to EEG data (Craik et al., 2019; Roy et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
When autonomous machines act in their environment or
humans interact with computers, the necessary input data
is often streamed continuously. In some settings, the input streams can be easily transformed into control signals
based on simple physical models. However, in more advanced scenarios, it is necessary to develop a more complex,
data-driven model and use its predictions to control the
machine. An important example of the latter scenario are
brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), which record the user’s
brain activity and decode control signals based on the measured data.

Inspired by their successes in computer vision and natural language processing, common neural networks used for
the classification of EEG data are based on convolutions.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) using some form of
pooling can be shift-invariant and therefore a good choice
in the given context. However, they do not take the specific structure of EEG data into account. Similar to most
physical processes, the electrical activity, that is recorded on
the user’s scalp by the EEG, can be considered as smooth
(Ramsay & Silverman, 2005). This additional structure is
not taken into account by traditional multivariate methods,
including deep neural networks, and it might be more appropriate to model the data as a (discretized) sample of
an underlying smooth function. With this approach new
information becomes available. For example, the use of
derivatives could uncover hidden patterns, while smoothing

Most statistical models require an input of fixed dimension
and a common approach is to extract windows of a fixed size
with a fixed step size from the continuous data stream. These
sliding windows are then used to predict the desired control
1

SNAP GmbH, Gesundheitscampus-Süd 17, 44801 Bochum,
Germany. Correspondence to: Florian Heinrichs <mail@florianheinrichs.de, florian.heinrichs@snap-gmbh.com>, Mavin Heim
<mavin.heim@snap-gmbh.com>, Corinna Weber <weber@snapgmbh.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

