Attention-Based Recurrence for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning under
Stochastic Partial Observability

Thomy Phan 1 † Fabian Ritz 2 Philipp Altmann 2 Maximilian Zorn 2 Jonas Nüßlein 2 Michael Kölle 2
Thomas Gabor 2 Claudia Linnhoff-Popien 2

Abstract

multi-agent system (MAS), where multiple agents have to
coordinate to achieve a common goal (Oliehoek & Amato,
2016). Stochastic partial observability poses a major challenge for decentralized coordination in Dec-POMDPs due to
noisy sensors and potentially high variance in initial states
which are common in the real world (Kaelbling et al., 1998;
Oliehoek & Amato, 2016).

Stochastic partial observability poses a major
challenge for decentralized coordination in multiagent reinforcement learning but is largely neglected in state-of-the-art research due to a strong
focus on state-based centralized training for decentralized execution (CTDE) and benchmarks
that lack sufficient stochasticity like StarCraft
Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC). In this paper, we
propose Attention-based Embeddings of Recurrence In multi-Agent Learning (AERIAL) to approximate value functions under stochastic partial
observability. AERIAL replaces the true state
with a learned representation of multi-agent recurrence, considering more accurate information
about decentralized agent decisions than statebased CTDE. We then introduce MessySMAC, a
modified version of SMAC with stochastic observations and higher variance in initial states, to
provide a more general and configurable benchmark regarding stochastic partial observability.
We evaluate AERIAL in Dec-Tiger as well as in
a variety of SMAC and MessySMAC maps, and
compare the results with state-based CTDE. Furthermore, we evaluate the robustness of AERIAL
and state-based CTDE against various stochasticity configurations in MessySMAC.

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a general
approach to tackle Dec-POMDPs with remarkable progress
in recent years (Wang et al., 2021; Wen et al., 2022). Stateof-the-art MARL is based on centralized training for decentralized execution (CTDE), where training takes place
in a laboratory or a simulator with access to global information (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018). For example,
state-based CTDE exploits true state information to learn
a centralized value function in order to derive coordinated
policies for decentralized decision making (Rashid et al.,
2018; Yu et al., 2022). Due to its effectiveness in the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) as the current de facto
standard for MARL evaluation, state-based CTDE has become very popular and is widely considered an adequate
approach to general Dec-POMDPs for more than half a
decade, leading to the development of many increasingly
complex algorithms (Lyu et al., 2021; 2022).
However, merely relying on state-based CTDE and SMAC
in MARL research can be a pitfall in practice as stochastic
partial observability is largely neglected – despite being an
important aspect in Dec-POMDPs (Lyu et al., 2022):
From an algorithm perspective, purely state-based value
functions are insufficient to evaluate and adapt multi-agent
behavior, since all agents make decisions on a completely
different basis, i.e., individual histories of noisy observations and actions. True Dec-POMDP value functions consider more accurate closed-loop information about decentralized agent decisions though (Oliehoek et al., 2008). Furthermore, the optimal state-based value function represents
an upper-bound of the true optimal Dec-POMDP value function thus state-based CTDE can result in overly optimistic
behavior in general Dec-POMDPs (Lyu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
A wide range of real-world applications like fleet management, industry 4.0, or communication networks can be formulated as decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) representing a cooperative
1
University of Southern California, USA. † Work done at
LMU Munich 2 LMU Munich, Germany. This paper is an extension of (Phan et al., 2023). Correspondence to: Thomy Phan
<thomy.phan@ifi.lmu.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

From a benchmark perspective, SMAC has very limited

1

