Collaborative Multi-Agent Heterogeneous Multi-Armed Bandits

Ronshee Chawla 1 Daniel Vial 1 2 Sanjay Shakkottai 1 R. Srikant 2

Abstract

one of M stochastic MABs (where each of the bandits have
K arms and M < N ) to minimize the group cumulative regret, i.e., the sum of individual cumulative regrets of all the
agents. We assume that every bandit m ∈ [M ] is learnt by
N
Nm = Θ( M
) agents. At time t ∈ N, for all m ∈ [M ], any
agent learning the mth bandit plays one of the K arms and
receives a stochastic reward, independent of everything else
(including the other agents learning the mth bandit pulling
the same arm). The network among the agents is denoted by
a N × N gossip matrix G (fixed and unknown to the agents),
where every nth row of G (n ∈ [N ]) is a probability mass
function over the set [N ]. We investigate our setting under
two scenarios: (a) context unaware, in which no agent is
aware of the other agents learning the same bandit, and (b)
partially context aware, in which every agent is aware of
r − 1 other agents learning the same bandit. In the context
unaware scenario, in addition to the arm pulls conducted
at each time, each agent can choose to pull information
from another agent who is chosen at random based on the
gossip matrix G. In the partially context aware scenario,
every agent can also choose to exchange messages with the
r − 1 agents that they know are learning the same bandit, in
addition to the arm pulls and the information pulls. Agents
behave in a decentralized manner, i.e., the arm pulls, information pulls and messages exchanged are only dependent
on their past actions, obtained rewards and the messages
received from other agents.

The study of collaborative multi-agent bandits has
attracted significant attention recently. In light
of this, we initiate the study of a new collaborative setting, consisting of N agents such that each
agent is learning one of M stochastic multi-armed
bandits to minimize their group cumulative regret.
We develop decentralized algorithms which facilitate collaboration between the agents under two
scenarios. We characterize the performance of
these algorithms by deriving the per agent cumulative regret and group regret upper bounds. We
also prove lower bounds for the group regret in
this setting, which demonstrates the near-optimal
behavior of the proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a paradigm for
sequential decision-making under uncertainty, which involves allocating a resource to an action, in order to obtain
a reward. MABs address the tradeoff between exploration
and exploitation while making sequential decisions. Owing
to their utility in large-scale distributed systems (such as
information retrieval (Yue & Joachims, 2009), advertising
(Chakrabarti et al., 2008), etc.), an extensive study has been
conducted on multi-agent versions of the classical MAB in
the last few years. In multi-agent MABs, there are multiple
agents learning a bandit and communicating over a network.
The goal is to design communication strategies which allow
efficient exploration of arms across agents, so that they can
perform better than single agent MAB algorithms.

Problem Motivation: Our setting finds its utility in applications involving multiple agents, with possibly differing
contexts. While agents with the same context have the same
objective, they may not be aware of who else shares the
same context. Analyzing the proposed setting is an attempt
in figuring out the best way agents should utilize recommendations from others. The quality of the recommendations
received from other agents depends on whether those agents
share the same context (and hence have the same objective).

There exist many versions of multi-agent MABs in the literature (see Section 1.2 for an overview). We propose a new
collaborative setting where each of the N agents is learning

For example, consider a social recommendation engine like
Yelp, where the N agents correspond to the users, each
choosing one from among K pizzerias (arms) in a particular
location; this can be modeled as a K-armed MAB. Suppose that each pizzeria serves multiple pizza styles such
as Neapolitan, Chicago deep dish, New York style, Detroit
style, etc., where each pizza style corresponds to a bandit.
Each user has a preference for one of the pizza styles and

1

Chandra Family Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Ronshee
Chawla <ronsheechawla@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

