Beam Tree Recursive Cells
Jishnu Ray Chowdhury 1 Cornelia Caragea 1

Abstract

Given an input text, RvNNs (Pollack, 1990; Goller & Kuchler, 1996; Socher et al., 2010) are designed to build up
the representation of the whole text by recursively building
up the representations of their constituents starting from
the most elementary representations (tokens) in a bottomup fashion. As such, RvNNs can model the hierarchical
part-whole structures underlying texts. However, originally RvNNs required access to pre-defined hierarchical
constituency-tree structures. Several works (Choi et al.,
2018; Peng et al., 2018; Havrylov et al., 2019; Maillard
et al., 2019; Chowdhury & Caragea, 2021) introduced latenttree RvNNs that sought to move beyond this limitation by
making RvNNs able to learn to automatically determine
the structure of composition from any arbitrary downstream
task objective.

We propose Beam Tree Recursive Cell (BT-Cell)
- a backpropagation-friendly framework to extend Recursive Neural Networks (RvNNs) with
beam search for latent structure induction. We
further extend this framework by proposing a
relaxation of the hard top-k operators in beam
search for better propagation of gradient signals.
We evaluate our proposed models in different
out-of-distribution splits in both synthetic and
realistic data. Our experiments show that BTCell achieves near-perfect performance on several challenging structure-sensitive synthetic tasks
like ListOps and logical inference while maintaining comparable performance in realistic data
against other RvNN-based models. Additionally,
we identify a previously unknown failure case for
neural models in generalization to unseen number of arguments in ListOps. The code is available at: https://github.com/JRC1995/
BeamTreeRecursiveCells.

Among these approaches, Gumbel-Tree models (Choi et al.,
2018) are particularly attractive for their simplicity. However, they not only suffer from biased gradients due to the
use of Straight-Through Estimation (STE) (Bengio et al.,
2013), but they also perform poorly on synthetic tasks like
ListOps (Nangia & Bowman, 2018; Williams et al., 2018a)
that were specifically designed to diagnose the capacity
of neural models for automatically inducing underlying hierarchical structures. To tackle these issues, we propose
the Beam Tree Cell (BT-Cell) framework that incorporates
beam-search on RvNNs replacing the STE Gumbel Softmax
(Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017) in Gumbel-Tree
models. Instead of greedily selecting the highest scored
sub-tree representations like Gumbel-Tree models, BT-Cell
chooses and maintains top-k highest scored sub-tree representations. We show that BT-Cell outperforms Gumbel-Tree
models in challenging structure sensitive tasks by several
folds. For example, in ListOps, when testing for samples
of length 900-1000, BT-Cell increases the performance of
a comparable Gumbel-Tree model from 37.9% to 86.7%
(see Table 1). We further extend BT-Cell by replacing its
non-differentiable top-k operators with a novel operator
called OneSoft Top-k. Our proposed operator, combined
with BT-Cell, achieves a new state-of-the-art in length generalization and depth-generalization in structure-sensitive
synthetic tasks like ListOps and performs comparably in
realistic data against other strong models.

1. Introduction
In the space of sequence encoders, Recursive Neural Networks (RvNNs) can be said to lie somewhere in-between
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Transformers in
terms of flexibility. While vanilla Transformers show phenomenal performance and scalability on a variety of tasks,
they can often struggle in length generalization and systematicity in syntax-sensitive tasks (Tran et al., 2018; Shen et al.,
2019a; Lakretz et al., 2021; Csordás et al., 2022). RvNNbased models, on the other hand, can often excel on some
of the latter kind of tasks (Shen et al., 2019a; Chowdhury &
Caragea, 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Bogin et al., 2021) making
them worthy of further study although they may suffer from
limited scalability in their current formulations.
1

Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago. Correspondence to: Jishnu Ray Chowdhury <jraych2@uic.edu>, Cornelia
Caragea <cornelia@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A few recently proposed latent-tree models simulating
RvNNs including Tree-LSTM-RL (Havrylov et al., 2019),
1

