Learning Deductive Reasoning from Synthetic Corpus based on Formal Logic

Terufumi Morishita 1 Gaku Morio 1 Atsuki Yamaguchi 1 Yasuhiro Sogawa 1

Abstract

ability. Yet still, even such powerful LMs struggle with
these benchmarks, showing their limited logical reasoning
ability (Askell, 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022).

We study a synthetic corpus based approach for
language models (LMs) to acquire logical deductive reasoning ability. The previous studies generated deduction examples using specific sets of
deduction rules. However, these rules were limited or otherwise arbitrary. This can limit the
generalizability of acquired deductive reasoning
ability. We rethink this and adopt a well-grounded
set of deduction rules based on formal logic theory, which can derive any other deduction rules
when combined in a multistep way. We empirically verify that LMs trained on the proposed
corpora, which we name FLD (Formal Logic
Deduction), acquire more generalizable deductive
reasoning ability. Furthermore, we identify the
aspects of deductive reasoning ability on which
deduction corpora can enhance LMs and those
on which they cannot. Finally, on the basis of
these results, we discuss the future directions for
applying deduction corpora or other approaches
for each aspect. We release the code, data, and
models 1 .

LMs have acquired their linguistic understanding ability
inductively from a lot of high-quality examples in humanwritten texts (Devlin et al., 2019). Conversely, their poor
logical reasoning ability suggests the lack of high-quality examples of logical reasoning. This is not a surprise given that
humans usually think reflexively rather than logically step
by step (Kahneman, 2011). The consideration here suggests
a straightforward strategy to equip LMs with logical reasoning ability: create corpora that include many examples of
valid logical reasoning and train LMs on them.
For this purpose, we can use the recently proposed RuleTaker (Clark et al., 2021). RuleTaker is a benchmark composed of many synthetically generated multistep deductive
proofs written in natural languages. Each deductive proof
(dis-)proves a hypothesis by applying deduction rules multiple times to a given set of facts (the same as “Deduction Instance” in Figure 1). RuleTaker adopted the deduction rules
of the implication kind, such as ∀xF (x) → G(x), F (a) ⊢
G(a) (here, ⊢ means “derives”). Artificial Argument Corpus
(AACorpus) (Betz et al., 2021) is another corpus composed
of synthetically generated single-step deductive proofs. AACorpus adopted hand-selected deduction rules useful for critical thinking, such as contraposition F → G ⊢ ¬G → ¬F
(¬ is negation). All these corpora could offer LMs opportunities to acquire logical deductive reasoning ability, one of
the most important and universally used logical reasoning
abilities.

1. Introduction
Building a machine that logically reasons step by step has
been the Holy Grail since the early era of artificial intelligence (McCarthy, 1959). Such a machine will solve complex real-world problems in a very explainable and transparent way. Toward this goal, various benchmarks for measuring logical reasoning ability have recently been proposed
(Weston et al., 2015; Habernal et al., 2018; Niven & Kao,
2019; Richardson et al., 2020). Usually, researchers tackle
these benchmarks using state-of-the-art language models
(LMs) expecting their remarkable linguistic understanging

However, it is still an open question whether this research
direction will genuinely lead to the improvement of deductive reasoning ability. First, the deduction rules used in
the previous corpora were limited or otherwise arbitrary.
This can limit the generalizability of the acquired deductive
reasoning ability since complex real-world reasoning can
require various deduction rules. Second, it has not yet been
studied on what aspect of deductive reasoning ability deduction corpora can enhance LMs. Such aspects will include,
in addition to the mastery of deduction rules, the ability to
solve complex deductive proofs, understanding of diverse
linguistic expressions of logical statements, robustness to
distractive facts, and understanding of complex formulas.

1

Hitachi, Ltd. Research and Development Group, Kokubunji,
Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Terufumi Morishita <terufumi.morishita.wp@hitachi.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Available at: https://github.com/hitachi-nlp/
FLD

1

