M ODEL D IFF: A Framework for Comparing Learning Algorithms

Harshay Shah * 1 Sung Min Park * 1 Andrew Ilyas * 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
We study the problem of (learning) algorithm
comparison, where the goal is to find differences
between models trained with two different learning algorithms. We begin by formalizing this goal
as one of finding distinguishing feature transformations, i.e., input transformations that change
the predictions of models trained with one learning algorithm but not the other. We then present
M ODEL D IFF, a framework that leverages datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022) to compare learning algorithms based on how they use training data. We
demonstrate M ODEL D IFF through three case studies, comparing models trained with/without data
augmentation, with/without pre-training, and with
different SGD hyperparameters. Our code is available at https://github.com/MadryLab/
modeldiff.

1. Introduction
Building a machine learning model involves making a number of design choices. Indeed, even after choosing a dataset,
one must decide on a model architecture, an optimization
method, and a data augmentation pipeline. These design
choices together that define the learning algorithm, the function mapping training datasets to machine learning models.

learning algorithms. Our framework is general, as one can
use it to study any two algorithms without a prior hypothesis
on what the difference between them is. As a result, it
enables us to precisely dissect the impact of particular design
choices on model predictions. Specifically, our two main
contributions are:
(a) A precise, quantitative definition of the algorithm comparison problem. We introduce the problem of (featurebased) comparisons between learning algorithms. Given
two learning algorithms, the (intuitive) goal here is to find
features used by one learning algorithm but not by the
other. We formalize this goal by stating it as one of finding transformations in input space that induce different
behavior from (i.e., that distinguish) models trained by
the two learning algorithms (Section 2.1).
(b) A method for comparing any two algorithms. We propose a method, M ODEL D IFF, for comparing algorithms in
terms of how they use the training data. The key tool we
leverage here is datamodeling (Ilyas et al., 2022), which
allows us to quantify the impact of each training example
on a specific (single) model prediction (see Section 2.2).
Intuitively, two models that use different features to arrive
at their final predictions should differ in what training
examples they rely on1 . We translate this intuition into a
method with formal guarantees in Section 3. The output
of our method is a set of distinguishing subpopulations,
groups of test examples for which the two algorithms
systematically differ in how they make predictions.

One of the key reasons why these design choices matter to
us is that—even when they do not directly affect accuracy—
they determine the biases of the resulting models. For example, Hermann et al. (2020) find significant variation in
shape bias (Geirhos et al., 2019) across a group of ImageNet
models that vary in accuracy by less than 1%. Similarly, Liu
et al. (2022) find that language models with the same loss
can have drastically different implicit biases and as a result,
different performances when used for transfer learning.

We tie our method back to our formal definition of algorithm
comparison in two steps. As shown in Figure 1, we first infer
a pattern surfaced in each distinguishing subpopulation and
use it to design an input transformation. Then, we verify the
effect of this input transformation on models trained with
different algorithms through counterfactual analysis.
We illustrate the utility of our framework M ODEL D IFF
through three case studies (Section 4), motivated by typical train-time design choices one needs to make within ML
pipelines.

Motivated by this, we develop a framework for comparing
*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Harshay Shah <harshay@mit.edu>.

1

For example, suppose we were comparing a texture-biased
model to a shape-biased one: when faced with a test example
containing, e.g., a cat in a unique pose, the texture-biased model
will rely on examples with similar texture, whereas the shapebiased model will rely more on examples in a similar pose.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

