Demystifying Uneven Vulnerability of Link Stealing Attacks
against Graph Neural Networks

He Zhang 1 Bang Wu 1 Shuo Wang 2 Xiangwen Yang 1 Minhui Xue 2 Shirui Pan 3 Xingliang Yuan 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Graphs depict complex data from a wide range of real-world
applications due to their flexibility in representing objects
and their interactions (Wang et al., 2022; Galmés et al.,
2022; Luo et al., 2022). Taking a graph in social networks
(Backstrom & Leskovec, 2011) for example, nodes represent
individuals and edges indicate connection (e.g., friendship)
between individuals. With the advancement of graph neural
networks (GNNs) (Zheng et al., 2022c; Jin et al., 2022a;
Zheng et al., 2022d; Jin et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2023b), they
are now widely deployed in practise as a method to explore
graph data. For example, GNNs can provide personalised
searches and recommendations to users on social media
or doctor recommendation systems, dramatically enriching
people’s daily life (Pal et al., 2020).

While graph neural networks (GNNs) dominate
the state-of-the-art for exploring graphs in realworld applications, they have been shown to be
vulnerable to a growing number of privacy attacks. For instance, link stealing is a well-known
membership inference attack (MIA) on edges that
infers the presence of an edge in a GNN’s training graph. Recent studies on independent and
identically distributed data (e.g., images) have
empirically demonstrated that individuals from
different groups suffer from different levels of
privacy risks to MIAs, i.e., uneven vulnerability.
However, theoretical evidence for such uneven
vulnerability is missing. In this paper, we first
present theoretical evidence of the uneven vulnerability of GNNs to link stealing attacks, which
lays the foundation for demystifying such uneven
risks among different groups of edges. We further demonstrate a group-based attack paradigm
to expose the practical privacy harm to GNN users
derived from the uneven vulnerability of edges.
Finally, we empirically validate the existence of
obvious uneven vulnerability on ten real-world
datasets (e.g., about 25% AUC difference between
different groups in the Credit graph). Compared
with existing methods, the outperformance of our
group-based attack paradigm confirms that customising different strategies for different groups
results in more effective privacy attacks.

Along with their widespread deployment, GNNs are increasingly becoming the target of privacy attacks due to
the private information contained in them (e.g., graph data,
model architecture and parameters (Duddu et al., 2020; Wu
et al., 2022a)), whose leakage can benefit privacy attackers in various aspects (e.g., reducing effort in collecting
graph data). However, users of GNN systems desire to keep
their personal information private, especially for sensitive
applications. For example, in a GNN-based doctor recommendation system that connects patients and specialist
doctors (Mondal et al., 2020), information leakage between
a patient and a heart specialist indicates that attackers can
infer whether the patient has heart disease, consequently
leading to trust crises in GNN systems. Therefore, there is
an urgent need to fully reveal the privacy risks of GNNs.
As a typical privacy attack on GNNs, membership inference
attacks (MIAs) attempt to infer if a particular sample or
graph component exists in the training dataset. In addition
to determining the membership of nodes/graphs (He et al.,
2021b; Wu et al., 2021a; Wang & Sun, 2021), attackers can
also launch MIAs targeting edges. According to a recent
method called link stealing (He et al., 2021a), attackers can
infer the connection between any two nodes in the training
graph based solely on their prediction distributions. It exposes the privacy risk of edges in the most practical setting
when deploying GNNs, where attackers only need to query
target GNNs (i.e., a black-box setting) to launch attacks.

1

Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity, Faculty of
Information Technology, Monash University, Australia 2 CSIRO’s
Data61, Australia 3 School of Information and Communication
Technology, Griffith University, Australia. Correspondence to:
Xingliang Yuan <xingliang.yuan@monash.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

