LipsNet: A Smooth and Robust Neural Network with Adaptive
Lipschitz Constant for High Accuracy Optimal Control

Xujie Song 1 Jingliang Duan 2 Wenxuan Wang 1 Shengbo Eben Li 1 Chen Chen 1 Bo Cheng 1 Bo Zhang 3
Junqing Wei 3 Xiaoming Simon Wang 3

Abstract

can fit complex nonlinear functions conveniently (Hornik
et al., 1989; Kidger & Lyons, 2020), neural networks have
become RL’s classical control policy container. However,
the policy trained by RL severely suffers from the action
fluctuation problem, which means the consecutive actions
vibrate greatly despite only slight difference in states. This
problem is often overlooked in simulation and training, but
has important consequences in real-world applications. Fluctuating actions do not satisfy control requirements, resulting
in the wear and tear on mechanical components and safety
hazards. This problem is prevalent in a variety of scenarios,
such as the drone control (Mysore et al., 2021; Shi et al.,
2019), robot arm control (Yu et al., 2021) and autonomous
driving (Chen et al., 2021; Wasala et al., 2020).

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful approach for solving optimal control problems. However, RL-trained policies often suffer from the action fluctuation problem, where
the consecutive actions significantly differ despite only slight state variations. This problem
results in mechanical components’ wear and tear
and poses safety hazards. The action fluctuation
is caused by the high Lipschitz constant of actor networks. To address this problem, we propose a neural network named LipsNet. We propose the Multi-dimensional Gradient Normalization (MGN) method, to constrain the Lipschitz
constant of networks with multi-dimensional input and output. Benefiting from MGN, LipsNet
achieves Lipschitz continuity, allowing smooth
actions while preserving control performance by
adjusting Lipschitz constant. LipsNet addresses
the action fluctuation problem at network level
rather than algorithm level, which can serve as
actor networks in most RL algorithms, making
it more flexible and user-friendly than previous
works. Experiments demonstrate that LipsNet
has good landscape smoothness and noise robustness, resulting in significantly smoother action
compared to the Multilayer Perceptron.

In order to make RL more applicable to the real-world usage,
researchers are attempting to address the action fluctuation
problem. Siddharth Mysore et al. (2021) found that filters would not be directly used to smoothen the actions,
because it changes the dynamic response and breaks the
Markov assumption, which results in anomalous behaviors.
Therefore, the problem must be addressed during training.
Current methods can be divided into four categories, which
are action penalty methods (Mysore et al., 2021; Kobayashi,
2022), adversarial disturbance methods (Shen et al., 2020;
Zhao et al., 2022), hierarchical network methods (Chen
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021) and network enhancement
methods (Takase et al., 2020; 2022).
In action penalty methods, penalty terms indicating action
smoothness are added to the actor loss of RL. For example, the Conditioning for Action Policy Smoothness (CAPS)
method (Mysore et al., 2021) introduces two penalty terms
in actor loss. The first term indicates the similarity between adjacent actions in successive time steps. The second term indicates the similarity between actions under
close states. In the Locally Lipschitz Continuous Constraint
(L2C2) method (Kobayashi, 2022), the penalty terms include the similarity between actions under close states and
the similarity between critic values under close states. The
distance between the actual state and the sampled close
state in L2C2 is bounded by a multiple of the distance between the actual state and the subsequent state in the next

1. Introduction
Recently, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as
an effective method for solving optimal control problems in
the physical world (Guan et al., 2021). As neural networks
1

School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 School of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China 3 Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Shengbo Eben Li
<lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

