Maximum Optimality Margin: A Unified Approach for
Contextual Linear Programming and Inverse Linear Programming

Chunlin Sun * 1 Shang Liu * 2 Xiaocheng Li 2

Abstract

ultimate goal of the learner is to prescribe a decision/solution
for the downstream optimization problem using directly the
input (variables) of the machine learning model but without
full observation of the input of the optimization problem. A
similar problem formulation was also studied as prescriptive analytics (Bertsimas & Kallus, 2020) and contextual
linear programming (Hu et al., 2022). While (Elmachtoub
& Grigas, 2022) justifies the importance of leveraging the
optimization problem structure when building the machine
learning model, the existing efforts on exploiting the optimization structure have been largely inadequate. In this
paper, we delve deeper into the structural properties of the
optimization problem and propose a new approach called
maximum optimality margin which builds a max-margin
learning model based on the optimality condition of the
downstream optimization problem. More importantly, our
approach only needs the observations of the optimal solution
in the training data rather than the objective function, thus it
draws an interesting connection to the inverse optimization
problem. The connection gives a new shared perspective
on both the predict-then-optimize problem and the inverse
optimization problem, and our analysis reveals a scale inconsistency issue that arises practically and theoretically for
many existing methods.

In this paper, we study the predict-then-optimize
problem where the output of a machine learning prediction task is used as the input of some
downstream optimization problem, say, the objective coefficient vector of a linear program. The
problem is also known as predictive analytics or
contextual linear programming. The existing approaches largely suffer from either (i) optimization intractability (a non-convex objective function)/statistical inefficiency (a suboptimal generalization bound) or (ii) requiring strong condition(s)
such as no constraint or loss calibration. We develop a new approach to the problem called maximum optimality margin which designs the machine learning loss function by the optimality condition of the downstream optimization. The maxmargin formulation enjoys both computational
efficiency and good theoretical properties for the
learning procedure. More importantly, our new
approach only needs the observations of the optimal solution in the training data rather than the objective function, which makes it a new and natural
approach to the inverse linear programming problem under both contextual and context-free settings; we also analyze the proposed method under
both offline and online settings, and demonstrate
its performance using numerical experiments.

Now we present the problem formulation and provide an
overview of the existing techniques and related literature.
Consider a linear program (LP) that takes the following
standard form
LP(c, A, b) := min c⊤ x,

(1)

s.t. Ax = b, x ≥ 0.

1. Introduction
n

where c ∈ R , A ∈ R
, and b ∈ Rm are the inputs
of the LP. In addition, there is an available feature vector
z ∈ Rd that encodes the useful covariates (side information)
associated with the LP.

The predict-then-optimize problem considers a learning
problem under a decision making context where the output
of a machine learning model serves as the input of a downstream optimization problem (e.g. a linear program). The

m×n

Predict-then-optimize/Contextual LP

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA. 2 Imperial
College Business School, Imperial College London, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Chunlin Sun <chunlin@stanford.edu>.

The problem of predict-the-optimize or contextual LP is
stated as follows. A set of training data
T

DML (T ) := {(ct , At , bt , zt )}t=1

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

consists of i.i.d. samples from an unknown distribution
P, where ct ∈ Rn , At ∈ Rm×n , bt ∈ Rm , and zt ∈ Rd .
1

