SOM-CPC: Unsupervised Contrastive Learning with Self-Organizing
Maps for Structured Representations of High-Rate Time Series

Iris A.M. Huijben 1 2 Arthur A. Nijdam 1 Sebastiaan Overeem 1 3 Merel M. van Gilst 1 3 Ruud J.G. van Sloun 1

Abstract

at their Nyquist rate (often hundreds of samples per second),
which are distinct from, e.g., (medical) tabular data, which
contain sparsely sampled information (e.g. once per hour).
We specify an interpretable representation as one that has
the ability to be informative and to facilitate exploration of
the underlying structure over time (Lipton, 2018).

Continuous monitoring with an ever-increasing
number of sensors has become ubiquitous across
many application domains. However, acquired
time series are typically high-dimensional
and difficult to interpret. Expressive deep
learning (DL) models have gained popularity
for dimensionality reduction, but the resulting
latent space often remains difficult to interpret.
In this work we propose SOM-CPC, a model
that visualizes data in an organized 2D manifold,
while preserving higher-dimensional information.
We address a largely unexplored and challenging
set of scenarios comprising high-rate time
series, and show on both synthetic and real-life
data (physiological data and audio recordings)
that SOM-CPC outperforms strong baselines
like DL-based feature extraction, followed by
conventional dimensionality reduction techniques,
and models that jointly optimize a DL model and
a Self-Organizing Map (SOM). SOM-CPC has
great potential to acquire a better understanding
of latent patterns in high-rate data streams.

According to the manifold hypothesis, high-dimensional
real-world data lies on a low-dimensional manifold,
comprising disentangled latent factors of variation.
Dimensionality reduction techniques like Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) have conventionally been
used to reveal this manifold. However, acquiring an
interpretable representation with PCA typically requires
omitting many principle components, which may discard
important information that can not be linearly projected
on the few remaining components. Moreover, additional
clustering methods like K-means clustering, are typically
needed to find structures or clusters in the the resulting
low-dimensional projections.
A Self-Organizing Map (SOM) (Kohonen, 1990) is an
extension of K-means clustering that can be used without
the need to first project to the low-dimensional manifold. It
creates a low-dimensional interpretable visualization, while
still representing the data in multiple dimensions. However,
like PCA and K-means, SOMs typically act on features,
which need to be selected heuristically and may, therefore,
strongly depend on the use case and/or data modality.

1. Introduction
The improvement and abundance of sensor technology has
led to large amounts of high-dimensional, informationrich continuous data streams. However, gaining actionable
insights from these data is challenging due to their low
interpretability. The main objective of this study is
to develop an algorithm for acquiring a structured and
interpretable representation of high-rate time series. We
define high-rate time series as data streams that are sampled

Deep learning (DL) models have become popular general
data-driven feature extractors, and the sub-area of
unsupervised representation learning, is concerned with
models that learn to represent data with a set of features,
learned without the bias of human annotations. To enhance
interpretability, latent space representations of such models
are often visualized using a t-distributed stochastic neighbor
embedding (t-SNE) (Hinton & Roweis, 2002). Albeit its
frequent use, t-SNE does not allow a direct deployment on
unseen data as it does not learn a reusable mapping between
the multi-dimensional and the low-dimensional space.

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University
of Technology, The Netherlands 2 Onera Health, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands 3 Sleep Medicine Center Kempenhaeghe,
Heeze, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Iris Huijben
<i.a.m.huijben@tue.nl>.

DL models have, therefore, also been combined with
(joint) clustering objectives in the latent space. Resulting
deep-clustering methods are, however, often designed

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

