Phase-aware Adversarial Defense for Improving Adversarial Robustness

Dawei Zhou 1 Nannan Wang 1 Heng Yang 2 Xinbo Gao 3 Tongliang Liu 4 5

Abstract
Adv. sample

Adv. noise

Phase pattern

High-frequency Low-frequency

Nat. sample
Pixel space

Nat. sample

Deep neural networks have been found to be vulnerable to adversarial noise. Recent works show
that exploring the impact of adversarial noise on
intrinsic components of data can help improve adversarial robustness. However, the pattern closely
related to human perception has not been deeply
studied. In this paper, inspired by the cognitive
science, we investigate the interference of adversarial noise from the perspective of image phase,
and find ordinarily-trained models lack enough
robustness against phase-level perturbations. Motivated by this, we propose a joint adversarial
defense method: a phase-level adversarial training mechanism to enhance the adversarial robustness on the phase pattern; an amplitude-based
pre-processing operation to mitigate the adversarial perturbation in the amplitude pattern. Experimental results show that the proposed method can
significantly improve the robust accuracy against
multiple attacks and even adaptive attacks. In
addition, ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our defense strategy.

Figure 1. The illustrations of the low-frequency component, highfrequency component and phase pattern. Nat. and Adv. samples
denote natural and adversarial samples. The noise is crafted by
PGD attack (Madry et al., 2018).

cations (LeCun et al., 1998; He et al., 2016; Zagoruyko &
Komodakis, 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Kaiming
et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2021), and thus may lead to a lack of
trustworthiness in deep learning.
To alleviate the vulnerability, in addition to improving regularization terms in loss functions (Zhang et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2019), recent works study the impact of adversarial
noise on the different intrinsic components of the data. The
work in Tsipras et al. (2018) explores the different distributions of adversarial noise on the background and objects.
Some works (Yin et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Olivier
et al., 2021; Song & Deng, 2021) analyze the destructiveness of perturbations in the high-frequency component or
the low-frequency component, respectively. They then guide
the model to focus on more robust components to enhance
the adversarial robustness at the source. However, these
components usually do not sufficiently and explicitly reflect
structural information (see Figure. 1), and are not perceivable to humans (Wang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). The
studies in (Biederman, 1987; Landau et al., 1998; Geirhos
et al., 2018; Samuelson & Smith, 2005; Schmidt et al., 2020)
show that the human vision mainly relies on structural semantics to robustly distinguish objects. We thus expect to
mine a component that is closely related to human perception to help defend against adversarial noise.

1. Introduction
Many studies have demonstrated that deep neural networks
(DNNs) are easily fooled by imperceptible but misleading
perturbations, i.e, carefully crafted adversarial noise (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2019; Croce & Hein, 2020b; Wu et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2022b). This vulnerable behavior has seriously threatens many decision-critical deep learning appli1

School of Telecommunications Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University,
Xian, Shaanxi, China 2 Shenzhen AiMall Tech, Shenzhen, China
3
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition, Chongqing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Masdar
City, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 5 University of Sydney,
Darlington, NSW, Australia. Correspondence to: Nannan Wang
<nnwang@xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The image signal in the pixel space can be converted into the
frequency signal by Fourier transform, and further decou1

