MyoDex: A Generalizable Prior for Dexterous Manipulation

Vittorio Caggiano 1 Sudeep Dasari 2 Vikash Kumar 1

Abstract

manipulation abilities. New skills do not form by simple
random exploration of all possible behaviors. Instead, human motor system relies on previous experience (Heldstab
et al.) to build “behavioral priors” that allow rapid skill
learning (Yang et al.; Dominici et al.; Cheung et al.).

Human dexterity is a hallmark of motor control
behaviors. Our hands can rapidly synthesize new
behaviors despite the complexity (multi-articular
and multi-joints, with 23 joints controlled by more
than 40 muscles) of mosculoskeletal control. In
this work, we take inspiration from how human
dexterity builds on a diversity of prior experiences, instead of being acquired through a single task. Motivated by this observation, we set
out to develop agents that can build upon previous experience to quickly acquire new (previously unattainable) behaviors. Specifically, our
approach leverages multi-task learning to implicitly capture a task-agnostic behavioral priors (MyoDex) for human-like dexterity, using a physiologically realistic human hand model – MyoHand.
We demonstrate MyoDex’s effectiveness in fewshot generalization as well as positive transfer to
a large repertoire of unseen dexterous manipulation tasks. MyoDex can solve approximately 3x
more tasks and it can accelerate the achievement
of solutions by about 4x in comparison to a distillation baseline. While prior work has synthesized
single musculoskeletal control behaviors, MyoDex is the first generalizable manipulation prior
that catalyzes the learning of dexterous physiological control across a large variety of contact-rich
behaviors.

The key to learning such a prior might reside in the complexity of the actuation. Manipulation behaviors are incredibly
sophisticated as they evolve in a high-dimensional search
space (overactuated musculoskeletal system) populated with
intermittent contact dynamics between the hands’ degrees of
freedom and the object. The human motor system deals with
this complexity by activating different muscles as a shared
unit. This phenomenon is known as a “muscle synergy”
(Bizzi & Cheung). Synergies allow the biological motor
system – via the modular organization of the movements in
the spinal cord (Bizzi & Cheung; Caggiano et al., a) – to
simplify the control problem, solving tasks by building on a
limited number of shared solutions (d’Avella et al.; d’Avella
& Bizzi). Those shared synergies are suggested to be the
fundamental building blocks for quickly learning new and
more complex motor behaviors (Yang et al.; Dominici et al.;
Cheung et al.). Is it possible for us to learn similar building blocks (i.e. a behavioral prior) for general dexterous
manipulation on a simulated musculoskeletal hand?
In this work, we present MyoDex, a behavioral prior that
allows agents to quickly build dynamic, dexterous, contactrich manipulation behaviors with multiple objects and a
variety of tasks – e.g. drinking from a cup or playing with
toys (see Figure 1). While we do not claim to have solved
physiological dexterous manipulation, the manipulation abilities demonstrated here significantly advance the state of
the art of the bio-mechanics and neuroscience fields. More
specifically, our main contributions are: (1) We (for the first
time) demonstrate control of a (simulated) musculoskeletal
human hand to accomplish 57 different contact-rich skilled
manipulation behaviors, despite the complexity (high degrees of freedom, third-order muscle dynamics, etc.). (2)
We recover a task agnostic physiological behavioral prior
– MyoDex – that exhibits positive transfer while solving
unseen out-of-domain tasks. Leveraging MyoDex, we are
able to solve 37 previously unsolved tasks. (3) Our ablation
study reveals a tradeoff between the generality and specialization of the MyoDex prior. The final system is configured
to maximize generalization and transfer instead of zero-shot

Webpage: https://sites.google.com/view/myodex

1. Introduction
Human dexterity (and its complexity) is a hallmark of intelligent behavior that set us apart from other primates species
(Sobinov & Bensmaia). Human hands are complex and require the coordination of various muscles to impart effective
1
FAIR, Meta AI 2 CMU. Correspondence to: Vittorio Caggiano <caggiano@gmail.com>, Sudeep Dasari
<sdasari@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Vikash Kumar <vikashplus@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

