Everyone’s Preference Changes Differently:
A Weighted Multi-Interest Model for Retrieval

Hui Shi 1 Yupeng Gu 2 Yitong Zhou 2 Bo Zhao 2 Sicun Gao 1 Jishen Zhao 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
User embeddings (vectorized representations of
a user) are essential in recommendation systems.
Numerous approaches have been proposed to construct a representation for the user in order to find
similar items for retrieval tasks, and they have
been proven effective in industrial recommendation systems. Recently people have discovered
the power of using multiple embeddings to represent a user, with the hope that each embedding
represents the user’s interest in a certain topic.
With multi-interest representation, it’s important
to model the user’s preference over the different topics and how the preference changes with
time. However, existing approaches either fail
to estimate the user’s affinity to each interest or
unreasonably assume every interest of every user
fades at an equal rate with time, thus hurting the
performance of candidate retrieval. In this paper,
we propose the Multi-Interest Preference (MIP)
model, an approach that not only produces multiinterest for users by using the user’s sequential
engagement more effectively but also automatically learns a set of weights to represent the preference over each embedding so that the candidates
can be retrieved from each interest proportionally.
Extensive experiments have been done on various industrial-scale datasets to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach. 1

Today, the recommendation system is widely used in online
platforms to help users discover relevant items and deliver
a positive user experience. In industrial recommendation
systems, there are usually billions of entries in the item catalog, which makes it impossible to calculate the similarity
between a user and every item. The common approach is,
illustrated in Figure 1, retrieving only hundreds or thousands of candidate items based on their similarity to the user
embedding on an approximate level (e.g. inverted indexes,
locality-sensitive hashing) without consuming too much
computational power, and then sending the retrieved candidates to the more nuanced ranking models. Thus, finding
effective user embedding is fundamental to the recommendation quality.
The user representations learned from the neural networks
are proven to work well on large-scale online platforms,
such as Google (Cheng et al., 2016), YouTube (Covington
et al., 2016), and Alibaba (Wang et al., 2018). Mostly, the
user embeddings are learned by aggregating the item embeddings from the user engagement history, via sequential
models (Hidasi et al., 2015; Quadrana et al., 2017; Kang
& McAuley, 2018; You et al., 2019). These works usually
rely on the sequential model, e.g. a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model or an attention mechanism, to produce
a single embedding that summarizes the user’s one or more
interests from recent and former actions.
Recently researchers (Epasto & Perozzi, 2019; Weston et al.,
2013; Pal et al., 2020; Li et al., 2005) have discovered the
importance of having multiple embeddings for an individual,
especially in the retrieval phase, with the hope that they can
capture a user’s multiple interests. The intuition is quite
clear: if multiple interests of a user are collapsed into a
single embedding, though this embedding could be similar
to and can be decoded to all the true interests of the user,
directly using the single collapsed embedding to retrieve the
closest items might result in items that the user is not quite
interested in, as illustrated in Figure 1.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, United States, {hshi, jzhao,
sicung}@ucsd.edu 2 Pinterest, San Francisco, United States, {yupeng, yzhou, bozhao}@pinterest.com. Correspondence to: Hui
Shi <hshi@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
The code is available at: https://github.com/
shihui2010/MIP

Though, conventional sequential models like RNN or the
Transformer network do not naturally produce multiple
sequence-level embeddings as desired in the multi-interest
1

