Cyclic Block Coordinate Descent With Variance Reduction
for Composite Nonconvex Optimization

Xufeng Cai 1 Chaobing Song 1 Stephen J. Wright 1 Jelena Diakonikolas 1

Abstract

sum structure, giving rise to stochastic, possibly variancereduced optimization methods. In this work, we explore
both these types of structure to develop novel optimization
methods with fast convergence.

Nonconvex optimization is central in solving
many machine learning problems, in which blockwise structure is commonly encountered. In this
work, we propose cyclic block coordinate methods for nonconvex optimization problems with
non-asymptotic gradient norm guarantees. Our
convergence analysis is based on a gradient Lipschitz condition with respect to a Mahalanobis
norm, inspired by a recent progress on cyclic
block coordinate methods. In deterministic settings, our convergence guarantee matches the
guarantee of (full-gradient) gradient descent, but
with the gradient Lipschitz constant being defined
w.r.t. a Mahalanobis norm. In stochastic settings,
we use recursive variance reduction to decrease
the per-iteration cost and match the arithmetic
operation complexity of current optimal stochastic full-gradient methods, with a unified analysis
for both finite-sum and infinite-sum cases. We
prove a faster linear convergence result when a
Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ) condition holds. To our
knowledge, this work is the first to provide nonasymptotic convergence guarantees — variancereduced or not — for a cyclic block coordinate
method in general composite (smooth + nonsmooth) nonconvex settings. Our experimental
results demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed
cyclic scheme in training deep neural nets.

We focus on nonconvex optimization problems of the form
min F (x) = f (x) + r(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where x ∈ Rd can be partitioned into m disjoint
blocks x =
Pm
(x1 , . . . , xm ) with xj ∈ Rdj for j ∈ [m] and j=1 dj = d;
Pm
f (x) is a smooth nonconvex function; r(x) = j=1 rj (xj )
is block separable, extended-valued, closed convex function
such that each rj (·) (and thus the separable sum r) admits
an efficiently computable proximal operator. We consider
in particular the finite-sum variant of (1):
n

min F (x) = f (x) + r(x) =

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x) + r(x), (2)
n i=1

in which f (x) is nonconvex and smooth and n is usually
very large. Without loss of generality, due to the central limit
theorem, we use n = +∞ in (2) to refer to the following
stochastic (infinite-sum) optimization setting:
min F (x) = Eξ∼D [f (x; ξ)] + r(x),

x∈Rd

(3)

where ξ is a random variable from an unknown distribution
D. Problems of the form (2) and (3) commonly arise in
machine learning, especially in (regularized, empirical, or
population) risk minimization.
1.1. Motivation and Related Work

1. Introduction

Both block coordinate and variance-reduced stochastic gradient methods are prevalent in machine learning, due to
their effectiveness in handling large problem instances; see
e.g., Gorbunov et al. (2020); Wright (2015); Allen-Zhu
et al. (2016); Nesterov (2012); Allen-Zhu (2017); Johnson
& Zhang (2013); Diakonikolas & Orecchia (2018); Nakamura et al. (2021); Li et al. (2021); Beck & Tetruashvili
(2013); Hong et al. (2017); Xu & Yin (2015); Chen & Gu
(2016) and references therein.

Exploiting structural information in machine learning (ML)
problems is key to enabling optimization at extreme scale.
Important examples of such structure are block separability,
giving rise to block coordinate methods, and finite/infinite
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Xufeng Cai
<xcai74@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Block coordinate methods can be classified into three main
categories according to the order in which blocks of coor1

