BLIP-2: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training
with Frozen Image Encoders and Large Language Models
Junnan Li 1 Dongxu Li 1 Silvio Savarese 1 Steven Hoi 1
https://github.com/salesforce/LAVIS/tree/main/projects/blip2
Vision-and-Language
Representation Learning

Abstract
The cost of vision-and-language pre-training has
become increasingly prohibitive due to end-toend training of large-scale models. This paper
proposes BLIP-2, a generic and efficient pretraining strategy that bootstraps vision-language
pre-training from off-the-shelf frozen pre-trained
image encoders and frozen large language models. BLIP-2 bridges the modality gap with a
lightweight Querying Transformer, which is pretrained in two stages. The first stage bootstraps vision-language representation learning
from a frozen image encoder. The second stage
bootstraps vision-to-language generative learning
from a frozen language model. BLIP-2 achieves
state-of-the-art performance on various visionlanguage tasks, despite having significantly fewer
trainable parameters than existing methods. For
example, our model outperforms Flamingo80B by
8.7% on zero-shot VQAv2 with 54x fewer trainable parameters. We also demonstrate the model’s
capabilities of zero-shot image-to-text generation
that can follow natural language instructions.

Image
Encoder

Q-Former
Querying Transformer

Text

…

Queries
Bootstrapping Pre-trained
Image Models

Vision-to-Language
Generative Learning

Large
Language
Model
(LLM)

Write a romantic message
that goes along this photo.
Love is like a sunset, it’s
hard to see it coming but
when it does it’s so beautiful.

Bootstrapping Pre-trained
Large Language Models (LLMs)

Figure 1. Overview of BLIP-2’s framework. We pre-train a
lightweight Querying Transformer following a two-stage strategy to bridge the modality gap. The first stage bootstraps visionlanguage representation learning from a frozen image encoder. The
second stage bootstraps vision-to-language generative learning
from a frozen LLM, which enables zero-shot instructed image-totext generation (see Figure 4 for more examples).

that vision-language models can harvest from the readilyavailable unimodal models from the vision and natural language communities. In this paper, we propose a generic and
compute-efficient VLP method by bootstrapping from offthe-shelf pre-trained vision models and language models.
Pre-trained vision models offer high-quality visual representation. Pre-trained language models, in particular large language models (LLMs), offer strong language generation and
zero-shot transfer abilities. To reduce computation cost and
counteract the issue of catastrophic forgetting, the unimodal
pre-trained models remain frozen during the pre-training.

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) research has witnessed
a rapid advancement in the past few years, where pre-trained
models with increasingly larger scale have been developed
to continuously push the state-of-the-art on various downstream tasks (Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; 2022;
Wang et al., 2022a; Alayrac et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b).
However, most state-of-the-art vision-language models incur a high computation cost during pre-training, due to
end-to-end training using large-scale models and datasets.

In order to leverage pre-trained unimodal models for VLP,
it is key to facilitate cross-modal alignment. However, since
LLMs have not seen images during their unimodal pretraining, freezing them makes vision-language alignment
in particular challenging. In this regard, existing methods
(e.g. Frozen (Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021), Flamingo (Alayrac
et al., 2022)) resort to an image-to-text generation loss,
which we show is insufficient to bridge the modality gap.

Vision-language research sits at the intersection between
vision and language, therefore it is naturally expected

To achieve effective vision-language alignment with frozen
unimodal models, we propose a Querying Transformer (QFormer) pre-trained with a new two-stage pre-training strategy. As shown in Figure 1, Q-Former is a lightweight transformer which employs a set of learnable query vectors to
extract visual features from the frozen image encoder. It
acts as an information bottleneck between the frozen image

1
Salesforce Research. Correspondence to: Junnan Li <junnan.li@salesforce.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

