Conditional Graph Information Bottleneck for Molecular Relational Learning

Namkyeong Lee 1 Dongmin Hyun 2 Gyoung S. Na 3 Sungwon Kim 1 Junseok Lee 1 Chanyoung Park 1
(a) Increase Solubility

Abstract

R

Molecular relational learning, whose goal is to
learn the interaction behavior between molecular pairs, got a surge of interest in molecular
sciences due to its wide range of applications.
Recently, graph neural networks have recently
shown great success in molecular relational learning by modeling a molecule as a graph structure,
and considering atom-level interactions between
two molecules. Despite their success, existing
molecular relational learning methods tend to
overlook the nature of chemistry, i.e., a chemical
compound is composed of multiple substructures
such as functional groups that cause distinctive
chemical reactions. In this work, we propose a
novel relational learning framework, called CGIB,
that predicts the interaction behavior between a
pair of graphs by detecting core subgraphs therein.
The main idea is, given a pair of graphs, to find
a subgraph from a graph that contains the minimal sufficient information regarding the task at
hand conditioned on the paired graph based on the
principle of conditional graph information bottleneck. We argue that our proposed method mimics
the nature of chemical reactions, i.e., the core substructure of a molecule varies depending on which
other molecule it interacts with. Extensive experiments on various tasks with real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of CGIB over state-ofthe-art baselines. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Namkyeong/CGIB.

R

H
Hydroxyl Group

F
C

C

OH OH OH H

H

O

F
F

C-CF3 Structure

C

OH

H

H

Alcohol

Interaction

OH O

C

C

C

H

H

H OH H

C

C

C

H

Glucose

(b) Decrease Solubility
Water

(c) Unknown
Oil

Figure 1: (a) Molecules with hydroxyl group tend to have
high aqueous solubility. (b) C-CF3 structure decreases the
solubility of molecules in water. (c) However, it may not be
crucial in determining the solubility of molecules in oil.
the main focus of this paper. For example, predicting optical
and photophysical properties of chromophores with various
solvents (i.e., chromophore-solvent pair) is important in designing and synthesizing new colorful materials (Joung et al.,
2021). Moreover, it is crucial to determine how medications
will dissolve in various solvents (i.e., medication-solvent
pair) and how different drug combinations will interact with
each other (i.e., drug-drug pair) (Pathak et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2021). Due to the expensive time/financial costs
of exhaustively conducting experiments to test the interaction behavior between all possible molecular pairs (Preuer
et al., 2018), machine learning approaches have been rapidly
adopted for relational learning in molecular sciences (Joung
et al., 2021; Pathak et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021).
In this paper, we propose a novel molecular relational learning framework inspired by the nature of chemistry: a chemical compound is composed of multiple substructures such
as functional groups that cause distinctive chemical reactions. That is, a certain functional group is known to induce
the same or similar chemical reactions regardless of other
components that exist in the chemical, and thus considering functional groups facilitates a systematic prediction of
chemical reactions and the behavior of chemical compounds
(Book, 2014; Jerry, 1992). For example, as shown in Figure
1(a), alcohol and glucose commonly contain hydroxyl group,
which increases the polarity of molecules. Thus, alcohol
and glucose tend to have high aqueous solubility due to the
hydroxyl group (Delaney, 2004). In this regard, it is crucial
for a model to detect the core substructures of chemicals
to improve its generalization ability. However, detecting

1. Introduction
Relational learning (Rozemberczki et al., 2021), which aims
to predict the interaction behavior between entity pairs, got
a surge of interest among researchers due to its wide range
of applications, especially in molecular science, which is
1
KAIST 2 POSTECH 3 KRICT. Correspondence to: Chanyoung
Park <cy.park@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

