Primal and Dual Analysis of Entropic Fictitious Play for Finite-sum Problems

Atsushi Nitanda 1 2 Kazusato Oko 3 2 Denny Wu 4 5 Nobuhito Takenouchi 1 Taiji Suzuki 3 2

Abstract

Solving the objective (1) is closely related to the optimization of neural networks in the mean-field regime, which
attracts attention because it captures the representation learning capacity of neural networks (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2020; Abbe et al., 2022; Ba et al., 2022). A key ingredient of the mean-field analysis is the connection between
gradient descent on the wide neural network and the Wasserstein gradient flow in the space of measures, based on which
the global convergence of training dynamics can be shown
by exploiting the convexity of the loss function (Nitanda
& Suzuki, 2017; Mei et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018;
Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020). However, most of these existing analyses do not
prove a convergence rate for the studied dynamics.

The entropic fictitious play (EFP) is a recently
proposed algorithm that minimizes the sum of
a convex functional and entropy in the space of
measures — such an objective naturally arises in
the optimization of a two-layer neural network in
the mean-field regime. In this work, we provide a
concise primal-dual analysis of EFP in the setting
where the learning problem exhibits a finite-sum
structure. We establish quantitative global convergence guarantees for both the continuous-time
dynamics and discrete-time & finite-particle algorithm, based on properties of a proximal Gibbs
measure introduced in Nitanda et al. (2022). Furthermore, our primal-dual framework entails a
memory-efficient particle-based implementation
of the EFP update, and also suggests a connection
to gradient boosting methods. We illustrate the
efficiency of our novel implementation in experiments including neural network optimization and
image synthesis.

The entropy term in (1) leads to a noisy gradient descent
update, where the injected Gaussian noise encourages exploration (Mei et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019). Recent works have
shown that this added regularization entails exponential convergence of the continuous dynamics (termed the mean-field
Langevin dynamics) under a logarithmic Sobolev inequality
condition that is easily verified in regularized empirical risk
minimization problems with neural networks (Nitanda et al.,
2022; Chizat, 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Suzuki et al., 2023).
Moreover, novel update rules that optimize (1) have also
been proposed in Nitanda et al. (2021); Oko et al. (2022);
Nishikawa et al. (2022), for which quantitative convergence
guarantees can be shown by adapting classical convex optimization theory into the space of measures.

1. Introduction
In this work we consider the optimization of an entropyregularized convex functional in the space of measures:
min {F (µ) + λEnt(µ)} .

µ∈P2

(1)

An important observation behind the design of these new
algorithms is a self-consistent condition of the global optimum (Hu et al., 2019), namely, the optimal solution to the
objective (1) must satisfy


1 δF (µ)
(x) , (2)
µ = µ̂, where µ̂(x) ∝ exp −
λ δµ

R
Note that when F is a linear functional, i.e., F (µ) = f dµ,
then the above objective admits a unique minimizer µ∗ ∝
exp(−λ−1 f ), samples from which can be obtained using
various methods such as Langevin Monte Carlo. In the more
general setting of nonlinear F , efficiently optimizing (1) becomes more challenging, and existing algorithms typically
take the form of an interacting-particle update.
1
Kyushu Institute of Technology 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project 3 University of Tokyo 4 University of Toronto 5 Vector
Institute for Artificial intelligence. Correspondence to: Atsushi
Nitanda <nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp>.

in which δF
δµ denotes the first-variation of F . Following
Nitanda et al. (2022), we refer to µ̂ as the proximal Gibbs
distribution. Based on properties of µ̂, Oko et al. (2022) and
Nitanda et al. (2022) established a primal-dual formulation
of the optimization problem in the finite-sum setting.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we analyze a different update rule that optimizes (1) recently proposed in Ren & Wang (2022) termed
the entropic fictitious play (EFP). The EFP update is inspired
1

