On Many-Actions Policy Gradient

Michal Nauman 1 2 Marek Cygan 1 3

Abstract

On-policy sample efficiency (ie. the number of environment
interactions needed to achieve a certain performance level)
is particularly affected by variance, as the gradient must be
evaluated over long sequences in order to produce a sufficient quality of the SPG estimate (Mnih et al., 2016). As
such, a variety of methods for SPG variance reduction have
been proposed. The most widely used is baseline variance
reduction, which has been shown to improve algorithms
stability and became indispensable to contemporary SPG
implementations (Peters & Schaal, 2006; Schulman et al.,
2015b). Alternative approaches include Q-value bootstrapping (Gu et al., 2017), reducing the effect of long-horizon
stochasticity via small discount (Baxter & Bartlett, 2001), increasing number of samples via parallel agents (Mnih et al.,
2016) or using many-actions estimator (Asadi et al., 2017;
Kool et al., 2019b; Petit et al., 2019; Ciosek & Whiteson,
2020).

We study the variance of stochastic policy gradients (SPGs) with many action samples per
state. We derive a many-actions optimality condition, which determines when many-actions SPG
yields lower variance as compared to a singleaction agent with proportionally extended trajectory. We propose Model-Based Many-Actions
(MBMA), an approach leveraging dynamics models for many-actions sampling in the context of
SPG. MBMA addresses issues associated with
existing implementations of many-actions SPG
and yields lower bias and comparable variance
to SPG estimated from states in model-simulated
rollouts. We find that MBMA bias and variance
structure matches that predicted by theory. As
a result, MBMA achieves improved sample efficiency and higher returns on a range of continuous
action environments as compared to model-free,
many-actions, and model-based on-policy SPG
baselines.

In many-actions SPG (MA), the gradient is calculated using
more than one action sample per state, without including the
follow-up states of additional actions. The method builds
upon conditional Monte-Carlo and yields variance that is
smaller or equal to that of single-action SPG given fixed
trajectory length (Bratley et al., 2011). These additional
action samples can be drawn with (Ciosek & Whiteson,
2020) or without replacement (Kool et al., 2019b) and can
be generated through rewinding the environment (Schulman
et al., 2015a) or using a parametrized Q-value approximator
(Asadi et al., 2017). However, drawing additional action
samples from the environment is unacceptable in certain
settings, while using a Q-network may introduce bias to
the gradient estimate. Furthermore, a diminishing variance
reduction effect can be achieved by extending the trajectory.
This leads to the following questions:

1. Introduction
Stochastic policy gradient (SPG) is a method of optimizing
stochastic policy through gradient ascent in the context of
reinforcement learning (RL) (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al.,
1999; Peters & Schaal, 2006). When paired with powerful
function approximators, SPG-based algorithms have proven
to be one of the most effective methods for achieving optimal performance in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
with unknown transition dynamics (Schulman et al., 2017).
Unfortunately, the exact calculation of the gradient is unfeasible and thus the objective has to be estimated (Sutton
et al., 1999). Resulting variance is known to impact learning
speed, as well as performance of the trained agent (Konda
& Tsitsiklis, 1999; Tucker et al., 2018).

1. Given fixed trajectory length and cost of sampling actions, is SPG variance more favorable when sampling
additional actions or extending the trajectory?
2. Given that more samples translate to smaller variance,
what is the bias associated with simulating such additional samples via neural networks?

1

Informatics Institute, University of Warsaw 2 Ideas National
Centre for Research and Development 3 Nomagic. Correspondence
to: Michal Nauman <nauman.mic@gmail.com>.

The contributions of this paper are twofold. Firstly, we analyze SPG variance theoretically. We quantify the variance
reduction stemming from sampling multiple actions per state

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

