Data Poisoning Attacks Against Multimodal Encoders

Ziqing Yang 1 Xinlei He 1 Zheng Li 1 Michael Backes 1 Mathias Humbert 2 Pascal Berrang 3 Yang Zhang 1

Abstract

et al., 2021); instead, multimodal models have gained increasing attention. Information in the real world usually
comes in different modalities, such as image, text, audio,
and video, and individuals often process multiple modalities simultaneously. Multimodal models are a group of
ML models that use information from multiple modalities
and thus more closely match the perception of individuals.
Multimodal learning has shown great promise by achieving excellent performance in many applications, such as
image classification (Radford et al., 2021), image captioning (Laina et al., 2019; Mokady et al., 2021), image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a), and video
recognition (Akbari et al., 2021).

Recently, the newly emerged multimodal models,
which leverage both visual and linguistic modalities to train powerful encoders, have gained increasing attention. However, learning from a
large-scale unlabeled dataset also exposes the
model to the risk of potential poisoning attacks,
whereby the adversary aims to perturb the model’s
training data to trigger malicious behaviors in
it. In contrast to previous work, only poisoning visual modality, in this work, we take the
first step to studying poisoning attacks against
multimodal models in both visual and linguistic
modalities. Specially, we focus on answering
two questions: (1) Is the linguistic modality also
vulnerable to poisoning attacks? and (2) Which
modality is most vulnerable? To answer the two
questions, we propose three types of poisoning
attacks against multimodal models. Extensive
evaluations on different datasets and model architectures show that all three attacks can achieve
significant attack performance while maintaining
model utility in both visual and linguistic modalities. Furthermore, we observe that the poisoning effect differs between different modalities.
To mitigate the attacks, we propose both pretraining and post-training defenses. We empirically show that both defenses can significantly reduce the attack performance while preserving the
model’s utility. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/zqypku/mm_poison/.

Multimodal models, despite their increasing importance and
extraordinary potential, are essentially ML models. Recent works have shown that ML models are vulnerable to
a variety of security and privacy attacks, such as inference
attacks (Shokri et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2022; Li & Zhang,
2021; Li et al., 2022b; He et al., 2022; He & Zhang, 2021),
adversarial attacks (Ilyas et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019), and
poisoning attacks (Wang et al., 2022). Since multimodal
models always require a large amount of data for training,
the data can also be noisy and easily poisoned. To the best
of our knowledge, Carlini et al. (Carlini & Terzis, 2022)
proposed the only existing work exploring poisoning and
backdoor attacks against multimodal models. We emphasize
here that they mainly focus on poisoning image encoders
so that the encoders perform exceptionally in downstream
image classification tasks, i.e., primarily targeting the visual
modality and neglecting the linguistic modality.
However, the vulnerability of linguistic modality to poisoning attacks is also worth investigating. Recently, text-toimage generation (Ding et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2022a) and text-image retrieval (Cao et al., 2022)
have made great progress and are applied to various applications. Imagine a user searches for images given the text “a
lovely kid playing with a dog” on an image search engine.
If the engine is maliciously poisoned by an adversary, the
user could get plenty of hateful images containing violence,
sex, or racial discrimination. Thus it is worthwhile, and
even crucial, for us to explore the risks posed by the poisoning attack, such as is linguistic modality also vulnerable
to poisoning attacks? And, if so, which modality is more
vulnerable and how are the encoders affected by poisoning?

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning (ML) models using a single modality have gradually become unsatisfactory (Radford
1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany 2 University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland 3 University of Birmingham, Birmingham, England, UK. Correspondence to: Ziqing Yang
<ziqing.yang@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

