Synthetic Data for Model Selection

Alon Shoshan 1 Nadav Bhonker 1 Igor Kviatkovsky 1 Matan Fintz 1 Gérard Medioni 1

Abstract

is not helpful for selection of models that were trained on
the entire data. As the optimal hyper-parameters depend
on the number of training data samples and since models
sharing the exact same hyper-parameters may exhibit large
variance in accuracy, this may eventually lead to selecting a
sub-optimal model.

Recent breakthroughs in synthetic data generation
approaches made it possible to produce highly
photorealistic images which are hardly distinguishable from real ones. Furthermore, synthetic
generation pipelines have the potential to generate
an unlimited number of images. The combination
of high photorealism and scale turn synthetic data
into a promising candidate for improving various machine learning (ML) pipelines. Thus far, a
large body of research in this field has focused on
using synthetic images for training, by augmenting and enlarging training data. In contrast to
using synthetic data for training, in this work we
explore whether synthetic data can be beneficial
for model selection. Considering the task of image classification, we demonstrate that when data
is scarce, synthetic data can be used to replace
the held out validation set, thus allowing to train
on a larger dataset. We also introduce a novel
method to calibrate the synthetic error estimation
to fit that of the real domain. We show that such
calibration significantly improves the usefulness
of synthetic data for model selection.

In this work we propose to substitute the held out validation
set with synthetic data, allowing for model selection even
when training on the entire dataset. The synthetic validation set is created using generative models trained on the
immediately available data, and without reliance on external
knowledge or tools (e.g., additional data sources, 3D rendering engines). This makes our approach self-sufficient and
applicable to a wide range of problems.
Recent advances in the quality of synthetic data generation
pipelines (Karras et al., 2019b; 2020; 2021a; Peng et al.,
2018; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Saharia et al., 2022) have
reduced the synthetic-to-real domain gap enough to successfully utilize the generated data for training deep models (Besnier et al., 2020). Other works have focused on analyzing and quantifying various characteristics of the domain
gap (Sajjadi et al., 2018; Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019). That
said, to the best of our knowledge, the specific task of model
selection with synthetic data was not addressed. When using synthetic data for training a model, one’s goal is to
minimize the generalization gap w.r.t. the real domain (BenDavid et al., 2010). Solving for generalization in presence
of a synthetic-to-real domain gap is challenging. However,
for model selection, one’s goal is to use synthetic data for
ranking a set of trained models, while requiring rank preservation in the real domain. In this work, we introduce a
sufficient condition for cross-domain rank preservation and
empirically validate its value for model selection. We perform extensive experiments on the CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009) dataset showing that indeed we are able to improve overall accuracy by selecting better models using synthetic data. Furthermore, we introduce a novel calibration
approach to improve the ranking capabilities of synthetic
data on rich visual domains such as ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009).

1. Introduction
Traditionally, in supervised ML pipelines, the data used
to train a model is divided into two sets: the training set
and the validation set. The former is used to train various
models, while the latter is used for ranking and selecting the
best performing one, i.e., the best architecture and hyperparameters. Eventually, a final model with the selected
configuration is trained on the entire data, including the
training and the validation sets. Test data is inaccessible to
the training pipeline, especially for model selection. The
training-validation split provides means to estimate the models’ error rate, which can be used for ranking. However, it
1
Amazon. Correspondence to:
shos@amazon.com>.

Alon Shoshan <alon-

We summarize our contributions as following:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We show that the error rank of models evaluated on
1

