A Hybrid Quantum-Classical Approach based on the Hadamard Transform for
the Convolutional Layer

Hongyi Pan 1 Xin Zhu 1 Salih Atici 1 Ahmet Enis Cetin 1

Abstract

while quantum computers’ basic computing unit, which is
called the qubit, can be both 0 and 1 at the same time. It allows the co-existence of “superposition states” and thus has
more powerful parallel capabilities. Therefore, a quantum
computer could perform certain calculations exponentially
faster than any modern classical computer.

In this paper, we propose a novel Hadamard Transform (HT)-based neural network layer for hybrid quantum-classical computing. It implements
the regular convolutional layers in the Hadamard
transform domain. The idea is based on the HT
convolution theorem which states that the dyadic
convolution between two vectors is equivalent
to the element-wise multiplication of their HT
representation. Computing the HT is simply the
application of a Hadamard gate to each qubit individually, so the HT computations of our proposed
layer can be implemented on a quantum computer. Compared to the regular Conv2D layer, the
proposed HT-perceptron layer is computationally
more efficient. Compared to a CNN with the same
number of trainable parameters and 99.26% test
accuracy, our HT network reaches 99.31% test accuracy with 57.1% MACs reduced in the MNIST
dataset; and in our ImageNet-1K experiments,
our HT-based ResNet-50 exceeds the accuracy of
the baseline ResNet-50 by 0.59% center-crop top1 accuracy using 11.5% fewer parameters with
12.6% fewer MACs.

However, quantum neural networks (QNN) use as many
qubits as the size of the input, which makes it unlikely to be
implemented on current quantum computers to solve realworld problems. Therefore, researchers investigate hybrid
quantum-classical neural networks instead of pure quantum
domain computing.
Fourier convolution theorem states that the convolution of
two vectors in the one-dimensional (1D) time domain and
the two-dimensional (2D) spatial domain is equivalent to the
element-wise multiplication in the Fourier domain. However, Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is a complex transform and it is difficult to implement it using quantum computing. On the other hand, Hadamard Transform (HT) is
a binary transform and also holds a similar convolution
transform. The Hadamard convolution theorem, which will
be reviewed in Section 2.2, inspires us to design a hybrid
quantum-classical implementable convolutional layer for
deep neural networks. The HT of a vector can be computed
in O(1) time using the quantum Hadamard gates. In this
paper, we use a hybrid quantum-classical method that takes
O(N ) time to compute the HT for a N -length vector, while
the classical fast HT algorithm takes O(N log2 N ) time.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the rapid progress in quantum computing
hardware, implementing deep neural networks on a quantum
computer such as IBM Quantum System (IBM-Q) become
feasible for researchers (Matsuo et al., 2019; Koppenhöfer
et al., 2020). On the microscopic scale, a quantum is indivisible. All well-known microscopic particles such as
electrons and photons are manifestations of the quantum.
Classical computers use 0 and 1 to store and process data,

In this work, we propose a hybrid quantum-classical neural
network layer based on the HT, and the proposed layer can
be used to replace the classical Conv2D layer. It reduces
the computational cost significantly by producing comparable or better accuracy results than the baseline classical
convolutional model. Our proposed layer is trained as the
classical neural network layers using the back-propagation
algorithm as it can also be implemented in a purely classical
manner.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence
to: Hongyi Pan <hpan21@uic.edu>, Ahmet Enis Cetin <aecyy@uic.edu>.

Related works include the following:
WHT-Based Neural Networks Walsh-Hadamard Transform (WHT) is the permuted version of the HT. In (Zhao
et al., 2021), authors use WHT is used to assist their ”ZerO

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

