From Temporal to Contemporaneous Iterative Causal Discovery
in the Presence of Latent Confounders
Raanan Y. Rohekar 1 Shami Nisimov 1 Yaniv Gurwicz 1 Gal Novik 1

Abstract

distinct time stamps. Contemporaneous causal relations are
causal relations between simultaneously measured variables
(within the same measurement time-window), or between
a latent variable and those variables. In this work we assume stationary, structural vector auto-regression (SVAR),
with latent confounders as the data-generating process, and
the sole presence of observational data. In addition, we
assume faithfulness (Spirtes et al., 2000) and causal Markov
assumptions (Pearl, 2009). We do not assume any parametric assumptions, such as linear relations and normally
distributed variables. We assume the causal structure is a
DAG over observed and latent variables, where stationarity
is represented by a graph over observed variables, containing
temporal and contemporaneous relations, repeating in time.
Under these assumptions, constraint-based causal-discovery
algorithms perform a series of conditional independence
(CI) tests for determining if two variables are independent
conditioned on a set of variables, and then detect the entailed
causal relations (Spirtes et al., 2000; Zhang, 2008b; Pearl &
Verma, 1991). In general, the true underlying causal graph
cannot be recovered from pure observational data. Instead,
an equivalence class of the underlying graph is sought, such
that it includes every graph that cannot be refuted given the
observed data (or the results of CI-tests). Interestingly, it
was recently shown that an equivalence class can be used
for causal inference (Zhang, 2008a; Jaber et al., 2018; 2019)
and even for learning deep neural network structures (Rohekar et al., 2018b; 2019) and interpreting self-attention
(Nisimov et al., 2022). Richardson & Spirtes (2002) derived
ancestral graphs for representing the equivalence class in
the presence of latent confounders, where they showed that
these graphs are closed under marginalization and conditioning. In this paper, we consider learning this equivalence
class for representing temporal and contemporaneous relations in the SVAR setting with finite order—a dynamic
partial-ancestral-graph (Malinsky & Spirtes, 2018).

We present a constraint-based algorithm for learning causal structures from observational timeseries data, in the presence of latent confounders.
We assume a discrete-time, stationary structural
vector autoregressive process, with both temporal
and contemporaneous causal relations. One may
ask if temporal and contemporaneous relations
should be treated differently. The presented algorithm gradually refines a causal graph by learning long-term temporal relations before shortterm ones, where contemporaneous relations are
learned last. This ordering of causal relations to
be learnt leads to a reduction in the required number of statistical tests. We validate this reduction
empirically and demonstrate that it leads to higher
accuracy for synthetic data and more plausible
causal graphs for real-world data compared to
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Automated discovery of causal structures from observational
time-series is an important goal in empirical science (Pearl,
2010; Spirtes, 2010; Peters et al., 2017). In many cases,
the use of interventional experiments to reason about the
underlying causal structure is unethical, impossible due to
technical reasons, or expensive. Another challenge is to reason about the structure when latent confounders may exist.
In this paper we consider a set of variables, measured simultaneously and repeatedly over time, resulting in discretetime series. It is desired to identify temporal (lagged), as
well as contemporaneous causal relations among the variables. A temporal causal relation exists if the value of a
variable effects its own future values, or the future values
of other variables. Alternatively, a latent (hidden) variable
may effect the values of two variables, measured at two
1
Intel Labs. Correspondence to:
<raanan.yehezkel@intel.com>.

2. Related Work
Constraint-based algorithms for causal discovery were
mostly pioneered by Spirtes et al. (2000) with the PC and
FCI algorithms, and by Pearl & Verma (1991). They are
generally sound and complete when a perfect CI-test is used
(e.g., a statistical test in the large sample limit). That is,

Raanan Y. Rohekar

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

