Invariance in Policy Optimisation and
Partial Identifiability in Reward Learning

Joar Skalse * 1 2 Matthew Farrugia-Roberts * 3 Stuart Russell 4 Alessandro Abate 1 Adam Gleave 5

Abstract

jectories (Christiano et al., 2017), and many others (Jeon
et al., 2020). These algorithms can learn a reward function
for tasks where it would be infeasible to specify a reward
manually (e.g., Abbeel et al., 2010; Christiano et al., 2017;
Singh et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020).

It is often very challenging to manually design
reward functions for complex, real-world tasks.
To solve this, one can instead use reward learning to infer a reward function from data. However, there are often multiple reward functions
that fit the data equally well, even in the infinitedata limit. This means that the reward function
is only partially identifiable. In this work, we
formally characterise the partial identifiability of
the reward function given several popular reward
learning data sources, including expert demonstrations and trajectory comparisons. We also analyse
the impact of this partial identifiability for several
downstream tasks, such as policy optimisation.
We unify our results in a framework for comparing data sources and downstream tasks by their
invariances, with implications for the design and
selection of data sources for reward learning.

There will often be multiple reward functions that are consistent with a given data source, even in the limit of infinite
data. For example, two reward functions may induce exactly the same expert behaviour; in that case, no amount
of expert demonstrations can distinguish them. Similarly,
two reward functions may induce exactly the same preferences over trajectories; in that case, no amount of preference
data can distinguish them. This means that the reward function is ambiguous, or partially identifiable, based on these
data sources. For most data sources, this issue has been
acknowledged, but its extent has not been characterised. In
this work, we formally characterise the ambiguity of the
reward function for several popular data sources, including
expert demonstrations (§3.1) and trajectory comparisons
(§3.3). Our results describe the infinite-data bounds for the
information that can be recovered from these types of data.

1. Introduction

Identifying a reward function uniquely is often unnecessary,
because all plausible reward functions might lead to the
same outcome in a given application. For example, if we
want to learn a reward function in order to compute an optimal policy, then it is enough to learn a reward function that
has the same optimal policies as the true reward function.
In general, ambiguity is not problematic if all compatible
reward functions lead to identical downstream outcomes.
Therefore, we also characterise the ambiguity tolerance for
various applications (especially policy optimisation). This
allows us to evaluate whether or not the ambiguity of a given
data source is problematic for a given application.

Many problems can be represented as sequential decisionmaking tasks, where the goal is to maximise a numerical
reward function over several steps (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
However, for real-world tasks, it is often challenging to design a reward function that reliably incentivizes the right
behaviour (Amodei et al., 2016; Leike et al., 2018; DulacArnold et al., 2019). One approach to solving this problem
is to use reward learning algorithms, which aim to learn a
reward function from data. Reward learning algorithms can
be based on many different data sources, including expert
demonstrations (Ng & Russell, 2000), preferences over tra*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Oxford University 2 Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford University
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, the University of
Melbourne 4 Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence,
University of California, Berkeley 5 FAR AI, Inc. Correspondence
to: Joar Skalse <joar.skalse@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Matthew FarrugiaRoberts <matt.farrugia@unimelb.edu.au>.

Ambiguity and ambiguity tolerance are formally related.
Both concern invariances of objects that can be computed
from reward functions to transformations of those reward
functions. Thus, our main contribution is to catalogue the
invariances of various mathematical objects derived from
the reward function. In Section 2.1, we explore a partial
order on these invariances and its implications for selecting
and evaluating data sources, addressing an open problem in
reward learning (Leike et al., 2018, §3.1).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

