Metagenomic Binning using Connectivity-constrained Variational Autoencoders

Andre Lamurias 1 2 Alessandro Tibo 1 Katja Hose 1 3 Mads Albertsen 4 Thomas Dyhre Nielsen 1

Abstract

ration of DNA of entire communities of organisms. This is
a complex problem since i) current high-throughput DNA
sequencing technologies only produce fragmented genome
reads and ii) due to the incompleteness of current reference
databases, the full genome of most microbes in environmental samples remains unknown (Pasolli et al., 2019).

Current state-of-the-art techniques for metagenomic binning only utilize local features for the individual DNA sequences (contigs), neglecting additional information such as the assembly graph,
in which the contigs are connected according to
overlapping reads, and gene markers identified in
the contigs. In this paper, we propose the use of a
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) tailored to leverage auxiliary structural information about contig
relations when learning contig representations for
subsequent metagenomic binning. Our method,
CCVAE, improves on previous work that used
VAEs for learning latent representations of the
individual contigs, by constraining these representations according to the connectivity information
from the assembly graph. Additionally, we incorporate into the model additional information in
the form of marker genes to better differentiate
contigs from different genomes. Our experiments
on both simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate that CCVAE outperforms current state-ofthe-art techniques, thus providing a more effective
method for metagenomic binning.

One of the key challenges in metagenomics is the ability
to accurately group DNA subsequences according to their
genomic origin, a process known as metagenomic binning.
In general, binning is a two-step process, where the first
step defines a notion of similarity between DNA sequences
and the second step consists of grouping these sequences
into clusters, which are referred to as bins.1 The input to the
binning process is a set of assembled contiguous DNA sequences (contigs). Contigs are obtained by representing the
fragmented sequences as a graph, called an assembly graph,
where each node represents a contig and the edges represent overlaps between contigs. Most binners only use local
features of the individual contigs (Yang et al., 2021), thus
failing to take full advantage of the relational information
embedded within the assembly graph. Since, by construction, connected contigs share similar DNA sub-fragments,
we hypothesize that the assembly graph holds potentially important information that can be exploited during the binning
process.
The contribution of this work is a novel ConnectivityConstrained variational AutoEncoder (CCVAE) combining the advantages of existing binning approaches based
only on local contig representations with domain-specific
knowledge from the assembly graph and gene markers.
Our model builds on top of the Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) model proposed by Nissen et al. (2021), which we extend with domain-specific
relational contig information. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first approach to leverage information from both
the assembly graph and marker gene features within a probabilistic model for metagenomics binning. We report on
extensive experiments using both simulated and real-world
datasets for evaluating the performance of CCVAE and
compare our approach to current state-of-the-art techniques.
The results show that CCVAE outperforms current tech-

1. Introduction
Microbes influence all aspects of life, from our health to
the production of enzymes and materials. Studying the
genomes, functions, and interactions of microbial communities is beneficial to human life and our environment. As
we only know the genomes of a small percentage of all
existing microbes, more advanced methods are necessary
for increasing the genome recovery rate. Metagenomics is
a rapidly growing field focusing on the analysis and sepa1
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark 2 NOVA LINCS, NOVA School of Science and
Technology, Lisbon, Portugal 3 Institute of Logic and Computation,
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria 4 Center for Microbial Communities,
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. Correspondence to: Andre
Lamurias <a.lamurias@fct.unl.pt>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In the remainder of this paper, the terms clusters and bins will
be used interchangeably.

1

