An Adaptive Entropy-Regularization Framework for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Woojun Kim 1 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract

efficient exploration has been one of the core problems of
RL. Furthermore, the given time for learning is limited in
real-world problems. Hence, the learner cannot just do
exploration only but needs to exploit its own policy based
on its experiences so far. For better overall learning, the
learner should balance exploration and exploitation over
time. This is called exploration-exploitation trade-off in
RL, which has been a challenging topic in single-agent RL.

In this paper, we propose an adaptive entropyregularization framework (ADER) for multi-agent
reinforcement learning (RL) to learn the adequate
amount of exploration of each agent for entropybased exploration. In order to derive a metric for
the proper level of exploration entropy for each
agent, we disentangle the soft value function into
two types: one for pure return and the other for
entropy. By applying multi-agent value factorization to the disentangled value function of pure
return, we obtain a metric to determine the relevant level of exploration entropy for each agent,
given by the partial derivative of the pure-return
value function with respect to (w.r.t.) the policy
entropy of each agent. Based on this metric, we
propose the ADER algorithm based on maximum
entropy RL, which controls the necessary level of
exploration across agents over time by learning
the proper target entropy for each agent. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme
significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art
multi-agent RL algorithms.

The problem of exploration-exploitation trade-off becomes
more challenging in multi-agent RL (MARL) because the
volume of state-action space grows exponentially as the
number of agents increases. Furthermore, the necessity and
benefit of exploration at a gvien time can be different across
agents and even one agent’s exploration can hinder other
agents’ exploitation, resulting in a situation in which simultaneous exploration of multiple agents can make learning
unstable. Thus, the balance of exploration and exploitation
across multiple agents should also be considered for MARL
in addition to that across the typical time dimension. We
refer to this problem as multi-agent exploration-exploitation
trade-off. In order to handle the problem of multi-agent
exploration-exploitation trade-off, we need to control the
amount of exploration of each agent adaptively and learn
this amount across agents (i.e., agent dimension) and over
time (i.e., time dimension).

1. Introduction and Motivation

To see the necessity
of
such
adaptive explorationexploitation trade-off
control in MARL,
let us consider a
modified continuous
cooperative
matrix
game (Peng et al.,
2021), described in
Figure 1. Reward surface in the conFig. 1. As seen in
sidered matrix game.
Fig. 1, there is a
connected narrow path
from the origin (0, 0) to (0.6, 0.55), consisting of two
subpaths: one from (0, 0) to (0.6, 0) and the other from
(0.6, 0) to (0.6, 0.55). There is a circle with center at
(0.6, 0.6) and radius 0.05. The goal of this game is to

RL is an effective approach to solving decision-making
problems such as robot control (Hester et al., 2012; Ebert
et al., 2018), traffic light control (Wei et al., 2018; Wu
et al., 2020) and games (Mnih et al., 2015b; Silver et al.,
2017). The goal of RL is to find an optimal policy that
maximizes expected return. To guarantee convergence of
model-free RL, the assumption that each element in the
joint state-action space should be visited infinitely often is
required (Sutton & Barto, 2018), but this is impractical due
to large state-action spaces in real-world problems. Thus,
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon 34141,
Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

