Global optimality of Elman-type RNNs in the mean-field regime

Andrea Agazzi 1 2 Jianfeng Lu 2 3 Sayan Mukherjee 2 4 5 6

Abstract

instance, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Jordan, 1997;
Rumelhart et al., 1985) and more specifically Long-Short
Term Memory (LSTM) RNNs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Gers et al., 2000) and Gated Recurrent Units (Cho
et al., 2014) have dramatically increased the predictive performance of machine learning in this context. These models
take as input temporal sequences of data and act iteratively
on the elements of such sequences, storing the information
about previous timepoints into the hidden state of the network. This structure allows to learn datasets with strong
time-correlations using relatively few parameters, and has
provided benchmarks for state-of-the-art time-series learning algorithms for over a decade. However, despite the
groundbreaking success of these models in practice, the theoretical underpinnings of such success remain elusive to the
computer science community. More specifically, many questions about the theoretical reasons for the performance of
these models applied far into the overparametrized regime,
such as for example explanations for their optimal behavior
and their generalization error, remain open.
Only recently, a theory of neural network learning has
started to emerge in the context of wide, single-layer neural networks. The two main theoretical frameworks are
based on either understanding mean-field training dynamics
(Chizat & Bach, 2018a; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018;
Mei et al., 2018; Wojtowytsch, 2020; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2021; Agazzi & Lu, 2020; Chizat & Bach, 2020)
or based on linearized dynamics in the overparametrized
regime (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018b; Ghorbani et al., 2021). These two frameworks provide contrasting explanations for the success of neural networks. On
one hand the linearized dynamics gives strong convergence
guarantees for the training process but fails to explain the
feature-learning properties of neural networks. On the other
hand the the mean-field framework is better at accurately
capturing the highly nonlinear dynamics arguably resulting
in feature-learning (Ghorbani et al., 2019), but the resulting
training process is typically harder to analyze. Consequently,
it remains a challenge to extend the mean-field results listed
above to more realistic structures such as RNNs.
This paper aims to extend the mean-field framework to
Elman-type RNNs. Specifically, we aim to establish optimality of the fixed points of the training dynamics for
wide RNNs trained with classical gradient descent. This

We analyze Elman-type Recurrent Reural Networks (RNNs) and their training in the mean-field
regime. Specifically, we show convergence of
gradient descent training dynamics of the RNN
to the corresponding mean-field formulation in
the large width limit. We also show that the fixed
points of the limiting infinite-width dynamics are
globally optimal, under some assumptions on the
initialization of the weights. Our results establish
optimality for feature-learning with wide RNNs
in the mean-field regime.

1. Introduction
During the last decade, artificial intelligence and in particular deep leaning have achieved a significant series of
groundbreaking successes, partly due to the unprecedented
increase of data and computational power at our disposal.
Notably, the range of disciplines that have recently been revolutionized by machine learning is virtually unlimited: from
medicine (Rajkomar et al., 2019) to finance (Dixon et al.,
2020), from games (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019)
to image analysis (LeCun et al., 1989), to the point where
almost no domain has remained unaltered by the emergence
of these technologies.
This revolution would have been unthinkable without the
advent of deep neural networks. This extremely flexible
family of function approximators has outperformed classical methods in almost every domain where it has been
applied. A discipline that has been profoundly revolutionized by these models is the analysis of time series and, more
generally, the problem of learning dynamical systems. For
1
Department of Mathematics, University of Pisa, Pisa (IT)
Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham, NC
(USA) 3 Department of Physics and Department of Chemistry,
Duke University, Durham, NC (USA) 4 Department of Statistical
Science, Department of Computer Science, Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC 5 Center
for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence, Universität
Leipzig, Leipzig (DE) 6 Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in
the Sciences, Leipzig, DE. Correspondence to: Andrea Agazzi
<andrea.agazzi@unipi.it>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

