Inverse Reinforcement Learning without Reinforcement Learning

Gokul Swamy 1 David Wu 2 Sanjiban Choudhury 2 3 J. Andrew Bagnell 3 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract

Inverse RL

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is a powerful set of techniques for imitation learning that
aims to learn a reward function that rationalizes
expert demonstrations. Unfortunately, traditional
IRL methods suffer from a computational weakness: they require repeatedly solving a hard reinforcement learning (RL) problem as a subroutine.
This is counter-intuitive from the viewpoint of
reductions: we have reduced the easier problem
of imitation learning to repeatedly solving the
harder problem of RL. Another thread of work
has proved that access to the side-information of
the distribution of states where a strong policy
spends time can dramatically reduce the sample
and computational complexities of solving an RL
problem. In this work, we demonstrate for the first
time a more informed imitation learning reduction
where we utilize the state distribution of the expert to alleviate the global exploration component
of the RL subroutine, providing an exponential
speedup in theory. In practice, we find that we
are able to significantly speed up the prior art on
continuous control tasks.

NRMM
E

E

MMDP
E

t
t+1
t+2

r

r

r

Figure 1: Traditional Inverse RL methods (left) repeatedly
solve RL problems with adversarially chosen rewards in
their inner loop which can be rather computationally expensive. We introduce two exponentially faster methods for
IRL. NRMM (No-Regret Moment Matching, center) resets
the learner to states from the expert demonstrations before
comparing trajectory suffixes. MMDP (Moment Matching
by Dynamic Programming, right) optimizes a sequence of
policies backwards in time. Both methods avoid solving the
global exploration problem inherent in RL.

as methods to imitate (Ziebart et al., 2008a) or forecast
(Kitani et al., 2012) expert behavior.

1. Introduction

There are three key benefits to the IRL approach to imitation. The first is policy space structuring: effectively, IRL
reduces our (often large) policy class to just those policies
that are (approximately) optimal under some member of
our (relatively small) reward function class. The second is
transfer across problems: for many practical applications
(e.g. robotics (Silver et al., 2010; Ratliff et al., 2009; Kolter
et al., 2008; Ng et al., 2006; Zucker et al., 2011), computer
vision (Kitani et al., 2012), and human-computer interaction
(Ziebart et al., 2008b; 2012)), one is able to learn a single
reward function across multiple instances and then use it
to forecast or imitate expert behavior in new problems that
arise at test time. As Ng et al. (2000) put it, “the entire
field of reinforcement learning is founded on the presupposition that the reward function, rather than the policy is the
most succinct, robust, and transferable definition of the task”
(italics ours). The third is robustness to compounding errors:

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), also known as Inverse Optimal Control (Kalman, 1964; Bagnell, 2015) or
Structural Estimation (Rust, 1994), is the problem of finding a reward function that rationalizes (i.e. makes optimal) demonstrated behavior. Such approaches build on the
lengthy history of trying to understand intelligent behavior
(Muybridge, 1887) as approximate optimization of some
cost function (Wolpert et al., 1995). While economists (Rust,
1994) and cognitive scientists (Baker et al., 2009) are often
interested in analyzing the recovered reward function, it is
more common in machine learning to view IRL algorithms
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Cornell University 3 Aurora Innovation. Correspondence to: Gokul Swamy <gswamy@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

