Probabilistic Unrolling: Scalable, Inverse-Free Maximum
Likelihood Estimation for Latent Gaussian Models
Alexander Lin 1 Bahareh Tolooshams 1 Yves Atchadé 2 Demba Ba 1

Abstract

The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster
et al., 1977) is a popular way to optimize the parameters
by maximum likelihood estimation. One variant called gradient EM (Lange, 1995) implements the M-step through a
single iteration of gradient descent. For problems with highdimensional latent variables and many training examples,
gradient EM scales poorly due to the need to invert as many
large covariance matrices as the number of examples.

Latent Gaussian models have a rich history in
statistics and machine learning, with applications
ranging from factor analysis to compressed sensing to time series analysis. The classical method
for maximizing the likelihood of these models
is the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm.
For problems with high-dimensional latent variables and large datasets, EM scales poorly because it needs to invert as many large covariance
matrices as the number of data points. We introduce probabilistic unrolling, a method that combines Monte Carlo sampling with iterative linear
solvers to circumvent matrix inversion. Our theoretical analyses reveal that unrolling and backpropagation through the iterations of the solver
can accelerate gradient estimation for maximum
likelihood estimation. In experiments on simulated and real data, we demonstrate that probabilistic unrolling learns latent Gaussian models
up to an order of magnitude faster than gradient
EM, with minimal losses in model performance.

Advances in numerical linear algebra have demonstrated, in
various contexts, that iterative solvers often provide a much
faster alternative to matrix inversion (Saad, 2003; Ubaru
et al., 2017; Gardner et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2022b). A
separate, burgeoning literature on unrolled optimization has
shown theoretical and practical benefits to differentiating
through the iterations of deterministic optimizers (Maclaurin et al., 2015; Shaban et al., 2019; Ablin et al., 2020;
Tolooshams & Ba, 2022; Malézieux et al., 2021). This literature begs questions as to the potential benefits, in a latent
variable setting, of unrolling the iterations of a sampler (i.e.
stochastic solver), and differentiating through them.
Contributions We introduce probabilistic unrolling, a computational framework that accelerates maximum likelihood
estimation for large-scale, high-dimensional LGMs. Our
method provides a way to run gradient EM without matrix
inversions. Specifically, we design iterative linear solvers
to yield the probabilistic quantities needed by the EM algorithm (i.e. posterior means and covariance samples). Our
method reduces the complexity of gradient EM from a cubic
function of the latent dimension to a quadratic function in
the general case, and a linear function in special cases.

1. Introduction
Latent variable models with Gaussian prior and Gaussian
likelihood, i.e. latent Gaussian models (LGMs), are popular
and powerful tools within statistics and machine learning.
They have found applications in many settings, such as factor analysis (Basilevsky, 2009), sparse Bayesian learning
(Tipping, 2001), state-space models (Durbin & Koopman,
2012), and neural linear models (Ober & Rasmussen, 2019).
In these models, the means and/or covariances of the Gaussian distributions are functions of parameters that must be
optimized to fit observed data.

We theoretically analyze the faithfulness of probabilistic
unrolling to gradient EM when encountering two sources
of error: (a) the statistical error from using a finite number
of covariance samples, and (b) the optimization error from
stopping the solver before convergence. We provide bounds
for both of these factors, producing insights on how to pick
the number of samples and the number of solver iterations.
Finally, we show that our method can further improve its
approximation to the true EM gradient by backpropagating
through the unrolled iterations of the solver.

1
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Alexander Lin <alin@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Probabilistic unrolling can be viewed as training a recurrent network in which each layer applies a matrix operation
1

