Second-order regression models exhibit progressive sharpening to the edge of
stability

Atish Agarwala 1 Fabian Pedregosa 1 Jeffrey Pennington 1

Abstract

ODE which allows for explicit characterization of the network outputs (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Yang,
2021). This approach has been used across the board to gain
insights into wide neural networks, but it suffers a major limitation: the model is linear in the parameters, so it describes
a regime with relatively trivial dynamics that cannot capture
feature learning and cannot accurately represent the types
of complex training phenomena often observed in practice.

Recent studies of gradient descent with large step
sizes have shown that there is often a regime with
an initial increase in the largest eigenvalue of the
loss Hessian (progressive sharpening), followed
by a stabilization of the eigenvalue near the maximum value which allows convergence (edge of
stability). These phenomena are intrinsically nonlinear and do not happen for models in the constant Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) regime, for
which the predictive function is approximately
linear in the parameters. As such, we consider the
next simplest class of predictive models, namely
those that are quadratic in the parameters, which
we call second-order regression models. For
quadratic objectives in two dimensions, we prove
that this second-order regression model exhibits
progressive sharpening of the NTK eigenvalue towards a value that differs slightly from the edge of
stability, which we explicitly compute. In higher
dimensions, the model generically shows similar
behavior, even without the specific structure of a
neural network, suggesting that progressive sharpening and edge-of-stability behavior aren’t unique
features of neural networks, and could be a more
general property of discrete learning algorithms
in high-dimensional non-linear models.

While other large-width scaling regimes can preserve some
non-linearity and allow for certain types of feature learning (Bordelon & Pehlevan, 2022; Yang et al., 2022), such
approaches tend to focus on the small learning-rate or
continuous-time dynamics. In contrast, recent empirical
work has highlighted a number of important phenomena arising from the non-linear discrete dynamics in training practical networks with large learning rates (Neyshabur et al.,
2017; Gilmer et al., 2022; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Foret et al.,
2022). In particular, many experiments have shown the
tendency for networks to display progressive sharpening
of the curvature towards the edge of stability, in which the
maximum eigenvalue of the loss Hessian increases over
the course of training until it stabilizes at a value equal to
roughly two divided by the learning rate, corresponding
to the largest eigenvalue for which gradient descent would
converge in a quadratic potential (Wu et al., 2018; Giladi
et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2022a;b).
In order to build a better understanding of this behavior, we
introduce a class of quadratic regression models which display all the relevant phenomenology yet are simple enough
to admit numerical and analytic understanding. Models
of this type have been investigated previously in order to
understand other phemomena that occur beyond the NTK
regime (Zhu et al., 2022a; Roberts et al., 2022). In a particular low-dimensional setting, we prove that the maximum
NTK eigenvalue converges to (near) the edge of stability,
and we demonstrate empirically that progressive sharpening
to the edge of stability occurs generically in the large datapoint, large model limit. Finally, we conduct a numerical
analysis on the properties of a real neural network and use
tools from our theoretical analysis to show that edge-ofstability behavior “in the wild” shows some of the same
patterns as the theoretical models.

1. Introduction
A recent trend in the theoretical understanding of deep learning has focused on the linearized regime, where the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) controls the learning dynamics (Jacot
et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019). The NTK describes learning
dynamics of all networks over short enough time horizons,
and can describe the dynamics of wide networks over large
time horizons. In the NTK regime, there is a function-space
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Atish Agarwala
<thetish@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

