Understanding and Defending Patched-based Adversarial Attacks for Vision
Transformer
Liang Liu 1 Yanan Guo 1 Youtao Zhang 2 Jun Yang 1

Abstract

CNN networks with a comparable model size(Paul & Chen,
2022; Naseer et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2022). The later research
further showed that by adopting adversarial enhancements
such as Image Augmentation(Mao et al., 2022) and Adversarial Training(Herrmann et al., 2022), ViTs achieve even
higher robustness than CNN. However, recent studies (Gu
et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2022; Lovisotto et al., 2022) found
an exception in that ViT can be crushed by attention-based
adversarial patch attacks. Attackers inject the adversarial token to alter the attention of ViT, which perturbs only 1∼3%
area of the input and degrades the model accuracy drastically, e.g., 0% (Lovisotto et al., 2022). In contrast, a 20 ∼
30% of input area should be patched for the state-of-the-art
attack in CNN to achieve a similar degradation (Brown et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2021).

Vision Transformer (ViT) is an attention-based
model architecture that has demonstrated superior performance on many computer vision tasks.
However, its security properties, in particular, the
robustness against adversarial attacks, are yet to
be thoroughly studied. Recent works have shown
that ViT is vulnerable to attention-based adversarial patch attacks, which covers 1∼3% area of
the input image using adversarial patches and degrades the model accuracy to 0%.
This work generally studies the attention-based
patch attack. First, we experimentally observe
that adversarial patches only activate in a few
layers and become lazy during attention updating.
According to experiments, we study how a small
adversarial patch perturbates the whole model.
Based on understanding adversarial patch attacks,
we propose a simple but efficient defense that
correctly detects more than 95%.

The main strategy of existing defenses toward such attentionbased attacks is adopting Derandomized Smoothing to ViT
(Salman et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022), which infers randomly sampled images 1,000 times and statistically votes
the model outputs. Such defenses introduce 1,000 times
computational overhead but only achieve 40 ∼ 50% adversarial robustness. Another defense deploys a mask in the
attention block, filtering the largest element (Mu & Wagner,
2021) as they are likely related to adversarial inputs. Attention mask achieves ∼ 60% robustness but compromises the
benign accuracy from ∼ 85% to ∼ 75%.

1. Introduction
The recent research discovers that the attention-based transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) achieves a remarkable outcome on computer vision, known as Vision Transformers
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and its variants, e.g., DeiT (Touvron et al., 2021b), etc. However, ViTs do not present strong
robustness and are vulnerable to security attacks such as adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013). Adversarial attacks
exploit the model gradient and construct an imperceptible
background noise onto the input images that can fool the
models into malfunctioning.

In this work, we first design two experiments to deeply understand why such a small-size patch can crash the entire
ViT model. In the experiment, we remove the connection
of attention blocks. We observe that about 40% of adversarial patches are neutralized by removing the attention
block in only one layer, where there are a total of 12 layers. Moreover, we observe that layer-wise attention updates
of adversarial tokens are about 50% smaller than benign
tokens. Through observations, we uncover that the adversarial token only activates for a few layers. Further, we
analyze the attention via the Key/Query product. We discover that the adversarial patch fabricates its key close to
queries of noise features, elevates the column of its score
matrix, and propagates its adversarial pattern to the benign
tokens. According to the behavior of the adversarial token
in different layers, we divide this process into three stages:
the inactivate stage; the activate stage, where the score of

Early studies show that in defending background-noisedbased adversarial attacks, ViTs are more robust than classic
1

Department of ECE, University of Pittsburgh 2 Department
of CS, University of Pittsburghy. Correspondence to: Liang Liu
<lil125@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

