Distributed Contextual Linear Bandits
with Minimax Optimal Communication Cost

Sanae Amani 1 Tor Lattimore 2 András György 2 Lin F. Yang 1

Abstract

the goal of learning a policy that maximizes their total reward over time. This model captures simple reinforcement
learning tasks in which the agent must learn to make highquality decisions in an uncertain environment, but does not
need to engage in long-term planning. Contextual bandit
algorithms are deployed in online personalization systems
such as medical trials and product recommendation in ecommerce (Agarwal et al., 2016; Tewari and Murphy, 2017).
For example, by modelling personalized recommendation
of articles as a contextual bandit problem, a learning algorithm sequentially selects articles to be recommended to
users based on contextual information about the users and
articles, while continuously updating its article-selection
strategy based on user-click feedback to maximize total user
clicks (Li et al., 2010).
Distributed cooperative learning is a paradigm where multiple agents collaboratively learn a shared prediction model.
More recently, researchers have explored the potential of
contextual bandit algorithms in distributed systems, such
as in robotics, wireless networks, the power grid and
medical trials (Li et al., 2013; Avner and Mannor, 2019;
Berkenkamp et al., 2016; Sui et al., 2018). For example, in sensor/wireless networks (Avner and Mannor, 2019)
and channel selection in radio networks (Liu and Zhao,
2010a;b;c), a collaborative behavior is required for decisionmakers/agents to select better actions as individuals.
While a distributed nature is inherent in certain systems,
distributed solutions might also be preferred in broader settings, as they can lead to speed-ups of the learning process.
This calls for extensions of the traditional single-agent bandit setting to networked systems. In addition to speeding
up the learning process, another desirable goal of each distributed learning algorithm is communication efficiency. In
particular, keeping the communication as rare as possible in
collaborative learning is of importance. The notion of communication efficiency in distributed learning paradigms is
directly related to the issue of efficient environment queries
made in single-agent settings. In many practical singleagent scenarios, where the agent sequentially makes active
queries about the environment, it is desirable to limit these
queries to a small number of rounds of interaction, which
helps to increase the parallelism of the learning process and
reduce the management cost. In recent years, to address

We study distributed contextual linear bandits
with stochastic contexts, where N agents act cooperatively to solve a linear bandit-optimization
problem with d-dimensional features over the
course of T rounds. For this problem, we derive
the first ever information-theoretic lower bound
Ω(dN ) on the communication cost of any algorithm that performs optimally in a regret minimization setup. We then propose a distributed
batch elimination version of the LinUCB algorithm, DisBE-LUCB, where the agents share information among each other through a central
server. We prove that the communication cost
of DisBE-LUCB matches our lower bound up to
logarithmic factors. In particular, for scenarios
with known context distribution, the communication cost of DisBE-LUCB
is only Õ(dN ) and its
√
regret is Õ( dN T ), which is of the same order
as that incurred by an optimal single-agent algorithm for N T rounds. We also provide similar
bounds for practical settings where the context
distribution can only be estimated. Therefore, our
proposed algorithm is nearly minimax optimal
in terms of both regret and communication cost.
Finally, we propose DecBE-LUCB, a fully decentralized version of DisBE-LUCB, which operates
without a central server, where agents share information with their immediate neighbors through a
carefully designed consensus procedure.

1. Introduction
In the contextual bandit problem, a learning agent repeatedly makes decisions based on contextual information, with
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles. 2 DeepMind,
London. Correspondence to: Sanae Amani <samani@ucla.edu>,
Tor Lattimore <lattimore@google.com>, András György <agyorgy@deepmind.com>, Lin F. Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

