Bayes-optimal Learning of Deep Random Networks of Extensive-width

Hugo Cui 1 Florent Krzakala 2 Lenka Zdeborová 1

Abstract

sian input data and specific target functions with known
functional forms. Of particular interest is the rich class
of functions given by random neural networks. The lowest achievable test error is known to be obtained through
Bayesian inference of the parameters of the target function,
assuming (as we will) the distribution of the parameters
is given. The Bayes-optimal test error corresponds to the
information-theoretically minimal test error that any algorithm can achieve. In the context of Gaussian data, with
target functions being single-layer random neural networks
the problem was studied as early as in (Opper & Haussler,
1991; Seung et al., 1992; Watkin et al., 1993; Schwarze,
1993). More recently, (Barbier et al., 2017) provide a rigorous characterization of the Bayes-optimal error in the
asymptotic proportional regime, where the number of samples is proportional to the input dimension and both of them
are large with a fixed ratio α. These results were then extended in (Schwarze, 1993; Aubin et al., 2018) to neural
networks with one narrow hidden layer, whose width remains of order one in the above limit of large dimension
and a proportional number of samples.

We consider the problem of learning a target function corresponding to a deep, extensive-width,
non-linear neural network with random Gaussian
weights. We consider the asymptotic limit where
the number of samples, the input dimension and
the network width are proportionally large. We
propose a closed-form expression for the Bayesoptimal test error, for regression and classification tasks. We further compute closed-form expressions for the test errors of ridge regression,
kernel and random features regression. We find,
in particular, that optimally regularized ridge regression, as well as kernel regression, achieve
Bayes-optimal performances, while the logistic
loss yields a near-optimal test error for classification. We further show numerically that when the
number of samples grows faster than the dimension, ridge & kernel methods become suboptimal,
while neural networks achieve test error close to
zero from quadratically many samples.

In practice, neural networks are trained using Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM) methods, and it is hence also important to know whether those methods are able to achieve
the Bayes-optimal error. (Thrampoulidis et al., 2018; Montanari et al., 2019; Hastie et al., 2019; Mei & Montanari,
2019; Aubin et al., 2020; Loureiro et al., 2021), between
others, addressed this question for Gaussian data, providing
closed-form formulas for the ERM test error for generalized
linear models for target functions corresponding to singlelayer neural network with random weights from a number
of samples proportional to the dimension.

1. Introduction
Learning with neural networks has proven to be an extraordinarily versatile tool to approximate (learn) non-trivial functions from data. Many fundamental theoretical questions,
however, remain open. For instance, the determination, for a
given target function, of just how many training data samples
are needed in order to learn the target to a given precision?
This is tantamount to determining the minimal error that can
be achieved from a training set of a given size.

Here, we pursue these lines of work and study a target function given by a deep non-linear neural network with random
weights, in the limit where the layers-widths and the input
dimension are comparably large, hereafter referred to as the
extensive-width regime. We call such target function the
deep extensive-width random network. We consider Gaussian input data. Our main question is the characterization of
the test error that can be achieved information-theoretically
from a given number of samples, as well as its reachability
with ERM approaches. While the assumptions of Gaussian
input data and the prescribed target function seem far from
current machine-learning practice, from a theoretical point

While for a generic target function and generic training
set this question is very challenging, valuable insight can
be accessed by studying simplified settings with Gaus1

Statistical Physics Of Computation lab, Institute of Physics,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 Information Learning and Physics lab, Institute of
Electrical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Hugo Cui
<hugo.cui@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

