The Unintended Consequences of Discount Regularization:
Improving Regularization in Certainty Equivalence Reinforcement Learning

Sarah Rathnam 1 Sonali Parbhoo 2 Weiwei Pan 1 Susan A. Murphy 1 Finale Doshi-Velez 1

Abstract

as mobile health (Liao et al. (2020), Trella et al. (2022)),
medicine (Oh et al. (2022), Awasthi et al. (2022), Durand
et al. (2018)), and education (Cai et al. (2021), Qi et al.
(2018)).

Discount regularization, using a shorter planning
horizon when calculating the optimal policy, is
a popular choice to restrict planning to a less
complex set of policies when estimating an MDP
from sparse or noisy data (Jiang et al., 2015). It
is commonly understood that discount regularization functions by de-emphasizing or ignoring
delayed effects. In this paper, we reveal an alternate view of discount regularization that exposes
unintended consequences. We demonstrate that
planning under a lower discount factor produces
an identical optimal policy to planning using any
prior on the transition matrix that has the same distribution for all states and actions. In fact, it functions like a prior with stronger regularization on
state-action pairs with more transition data. This
leads to poor performance when the transition
matrix is estimated from data sets with uneven
amounts of data across state-action pairs. Our
equivalence theorem leads to an explicit formula
to set regularization parameters locally for individual state-action pairs rather than globally. We
demonstrate the failures of discount regularization
and how we remedy them using our state-actionspecific method across simple empirical examples
as well as a medical cancer simulator.

In this paper, we analyze discount regularization in the context of certainty equivalence RL. This means that the agent
takes the estimated model as true when calculating the optimal policy (Goodwin & Sin, 1984). While planning using a
reduced discount factor leads to better-performing policies
in many cases (Jiang et al., 2015; Amit et al., 2020), our
main contribution is to present a deeper conception of this
method that reveals limitations. We do so by first proving
that discount regularization produces the same optimal policy as averaging the transition matrix for each action with a
transition matrix in which all rows are the same. This can
also be viewed in terms of a prior on the transition matrix.
As further contributions, we utilize our reframing to expose
unintended consequences. One such consequence is that the
magnitude of the prior implied by discount regularization
is higher for state-action pairs with more transition observations in the data and vice versa. This is generally not
desirable as we want stronger regularization on states that
we have observed less, and want to rely on the data in states
where we have more. Another negative aspect we expose
is the assumption of equal transition distributions for all
state-action pairs, which is inappropriate in many contexts.
We also offer solutions to the problems exposed above in order to tailor regularization to the task at hand– both the data
set and the environment. To mitigate the issue of inconsistent prior magnitudes in data sets with uneven exploration,
we derive a state-action specific formula for the regularization parameter. Furthermore, the method by which we
derive this parameter can be adapted to other priors to match
the transition dynamics of the environment.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), planning under a shorter
horizon is a common form of regularization. In the most
extreme case, a discount factor of zero results in a contextual
bandit setting. Using a reduced or zero discount factor
for planning is common in real-world applications such

Finally, we demonstrate our results empirically on tabular
examples and on a medical cancer dynamics simulator. First,
we empirically confirm that discount regularization and a
uniform prior on the transition matrix yield identical optimal policies. We then demonstrate that a uniform prior with
fixed magnitude across state-action pairs outperforms discount regularization across environments. We also show that

1

Harvard University, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, MA USA 2 Imperial College
London, London UK. Correspondence to: Sarah Rathnam
<sarah rathnam@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

