Predicting Ordinary Differential Equations with Transformers

Sören Becker 1 Michal Klein 2 * Alexander Neitz 3 † Giambattista Parascandolo 4 † Niki Kilbertus 1 5

Abstract

also more challenging—task is to infer dynamical laws. We
represent a dynamical law as an ODE ẏ := dy/dt = f (y),
which is fully determined by f . In this setting, the goal is
to infer f from (noisy, irregular) samples (ti , yi )ni=1 , where
y is a solution of the ODE (and yi denotes the observed
value for y(ti )). Compared to symbolic regression for functional relationships, relatively little work exists on directly
inferring dynamical laws (see Section 2 for details). In principle, any functional symbolic regression method may be
applied to (yi , ẏˆi )ni=1 , where ẏˆi are estimated derivatives at
the observed time points ti , to obtain f . This naturally raises
the question whether methods tailored to directly inferring
dynamical laws yields better results.

We develop a transformer-based sequence-tosequence model that recovers scalar ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in symbolic form from
irregularly sampled and noisy observations of a
single solution trajectory. We demonstrate in extensive empirical evaluations that our model performs better or on par with existing methods in
terms of accurate recovery across various settings.
Moreover, our method is efficiently scalable: after
one-time pretraining on a large set of ODEs, we
can infer the governing law of a new observed
solution in a few forward passes of the model.

In this work, we develop Neural Symbolic Ordinary
Differential Equation (NSODE), a transformer based
sequence-to-sequence model specifically tailored to inferring dynamics directly in an end-to-end fashion from (ti , yi )
samples of a single solution trajectory. NSODE leverages
large scale pre-training for efficient inference at test time.
We first (randomly) generate a total of >3M scalar, autonomous, non-linear, first-order ODEs, together with a total
of >63M numerical solutions from various (random) initial
conditions. All solutions are carefully checked for convergence of the numerical integration. Code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/soerenab/
nsode23.

1. Introduction
Researchers in the natural sciences increasingly turn to machine learning (ML) to aid the discovery of natural laws
from observational data alone, which is often abundantly
available, hoping to bypass expensive and cumbersome targeted experimentation. While there may be fundamental
limitations to what can be extracted from observations alone,
recent successes of ML provide ample reason for excitement.
Partially fueled by these promises, interest in symbolic regression (SR) has received renewed attention (La Cava et al.,
2021; Makke & Chawla, 2022). A symbolic representation
of a law has several advantages over black-box representations in that they are typically parsimonious and directly
interpretable as well as amenable to analytic analysis.

NSODE, an encoder-decoder transformer, is then trained
in a supervised fashion to map observed trajectories, i.e.,
numeric sequences of the form (ti , yi )ni=1 , directly to symbolic equations as strings, e.g., "y**2+1.64*cos(y)",
which is the prediction for f . This example directly highlights the benefit of symbolic representations in that the
y 2 and cos(y) terms tell us something about the fundamental dynamics of the observed system; the constant 1.64
will have semantic meaning in a given context. NSODE
combines and innovates on technical advances regarding
input representations and an efficiently optimizable loss formulation. Our model outperforms most existing methods
and is more efficient at inference time than models with
competitive performance.

Numerous symbolic regression methods have been proposed
recently to infer functional relationships, i.e., to infer a function f symbolically given (noisy) examples (xi , f (xi ))ni=1
(La Cava et al., 2021). Arguably, a more interesting—but
*
Work done while at Helmholtz Center Munich.† Work
done while at Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems.
1
Helmholtz AI, Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany.
2
Apple, Paris, France. 3 DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. 4 OpenAI, San Francisco, United States. 5 Technical
University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Sören
Becker <soeren.becker@helmholtz-munich.de>, Niki Kilbertus
<niki.kilbertus@helmholtz-munich.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

