D2Match: Leveraging Deep Learning and Degeneracy for Subgraph Matching

Xuanzhou Liu 1 2 † Lin Zhang 2 Jiaqi Sun 1 Yujiu Yang 1 * Haiqin Yang 2 *

Abstract

et al., 2020), temporal alignment of time series (Zhou &
Torre, 2009), and motif matching (Milo et al., 2002; Peng
et al., 2020), etc.

Subgraph matching is a fundamental building
block for graph-based applications and is challenging due to its high-order combinatorial nature. Existing studies usually tackle it by combinatorial optimization or learning-based methods.
However, they suffer from exponential computational costs or searching the matching without
theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we develop
D2 Match by leveraging the efficiency of Deep
learning and Degeneracy for subgraph matching.
More specifically, we first prove that subgraph
matching can degenerate to subtree matching, and
subsequently is equivalent to finding a perfect
matching on a bipartite graph. We can then yield
an implementation of linear time complexity by
the built-in tree-structured aggregation mechanism on graph neural networks. Moreover, circle structures and node attributes can be easily
incorporated in D2 Match to boost the matching
performance. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments to show the superior performance of
our D2 Match and confirm that our D2 Match indeed exploits the subtrees and differs from existing GNNs-based subgraph matching methods
that depend on memorizing the data distribution
divergence.

Existing studies for subgraph matching can be divided into
two main streams: combinatorial optimization (CO)-based
and learning-based methods (Vesselinova et al., 2020). Early
algorithms often formulate subgraph matching as a CO problem that aims to find all exact matches in a target graph.
Unfortunately, this leads to an NP-complete issue (Ullmann,
1976; Cordella et al., 2004), which suffers from exponential
time costs. To alleviate the computational cost, researchers
have employed approximate techniques to seek inexact solutions (Mongiovı̀ et al., 2010; Yan et al., 2005; Shang et al.,
2008), which yield suboptimal matchings. An alternative
solution is to frame subgraph matching as a supervised learning problem (Bai et al., 2019; Rex et al., 2020; Bai et al.,
2020), which utilizes the Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
However, the learning-based or GNN-based methods mainly
aim to optimize the representations in a black-box way. The
lack of theoretical guarantees makes them inexplicable and
often cannot seek the exact match subgraphs.
In order to tackle the above challenges, we propose a whitebox GNN-based solution, D2 Match, to leverage the efficiency of Deep GNNs and Degeneracy for subgraph matching. With rigorous theoretical proofs, we provide explainable results at each learning step. We first prove that finding
the matched nodes between the query graph and the target
one can degenerate to check whether the corresponding subtrees rooted at these two nodes are subtree isomorphic. This
degeneration allows us to check whether a perfect matching
exists on a bipartite graph, which results in a polynomial
time complexity solution. The above two steps convert subgraph matching into computing an indicator matrix whose
elements represent the subtree isomorphic relationship between nodes in the query graph and the target one. Hence,
the matching matrix required by the CO-based methods
for subgraph matching degenerates to seeking an indicator matrix, which is computed by GNNs via its intrinsic
tree-structured aggregation mechanism.

1. Introduction
Subgraph isomorphism, or subgraph matching at the node
level (McCreesh et al., 2018), is a critical yet particularly
challenging graph-related task. It aims to determine whether
a query graph is isomorphic to a subgraph of a large target
graph. It is an essential building block for various graphbased scenarios, e.g., alignment of cross-domain data (Chen
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China 2 International Digital Economy Academy
(IDEA). †Work done when Xuanzhou was interned at IDEA. Correspondence to: Yujiu Yang <yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Haiqin Yang <hqyang@ieee.org>.

Note that this implementation battles the matching mechanism directly by GNNs rather than optimizing the representations of GNNs as in the existing work. Our implementation allows us to reduce the time cost of perfect matching

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

