The Regret of Exploration and the Control of Bad Episodes in Reinforcement
Learning

Victor Boone * 1 Bruno Gaujal * 1
episode are used to update the confidence region. A new
policy is computed from the updated estimate and is used
for the next episode.

Abstract
The first contribution of this paper is the introduction of a new performance measure of a RL
algorithm that is more discriminating than the regret, that we call the regret of exploration that
measures the asymptotic cost of exploration. The
second contribution is a new performance test
(PT) to end episodes in RL optimistic algorithms.
This test is based on the performance of the current policy with respect to the best policy over the
current confidence set. This is in contrast with all
existing RL algorithms whose episode lengths are
only based on the number of visits to the states.
This modification does not harm the regret and
brings an additional property. We show that while
all current episodic RL algorithms have a linear
regret of exploration, our method has a O(log T )
regret of exploration for non-degenerate deterministic MDPs.

This paper focuses on model-based algorithms following
the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty, that pick
the policy achieving maximal gain in the confidence region.
Model based optimistic algorithms originate with UCRL
(Auer & Ortner, 2006), which is itself an adaptation to RL
of the celebrated UCB algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) for
multi-armed bandits. Episodes, understand time-windows
where the algorithm sticks to a single policy,1 were added
to the UCB template for the following reason: If the lengths
of episodes are uniformly bounded (e.g., by 1 just like in
UCB), then there exist MDPs over which the regret will
grow linearly (see Example 1 in (Ortner, 2010a)). Therefore, every model-based RL algorithm uses episodes with
lengths increasing with time. The popular UCRL2 (Auer
et al., 2009) and its variants (Fruit et al., 2020; Tossou et al.,
2019b; Bourel et al., 2020; Filippi et al., 2010) use the doubling trick: An episode terminates when the visit count of a
transition doubles. Some other papers do not use the doubling trick. For example (Tossou et al., 2019a) uses what
is called the extended doubling trick (the sum of the visits
to all the states doubles at each episode). In the Bayesian
context (Ouyang et al., 2017) uses episodes whose length
grows by one at each step. However, up to our knowledge,
in all cases, the lengths of all the episodes grow to infinity –
with a few exceptions, e.g. the recent IMED-RL (Pesquerel
& Maillard, 2022), but this one is not episodic nor optimistic, and limited to the ergodic setting. This grow also
concerns bad episodes (i.e., where a sub-optimal policy is
used), hence all current episodic algorithms behave arbitrarily bad, for arbitrarily long episodes. To illustrate this, let us
consider the following simple example, given in Figure 1.

1. Introduction and Motivation
In infinite horizon undiscounted reinforcement learning
(RL), an algorithm dynamically learns a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) by picking actions. Its performance is measured by the regret that aggregates the rewards and compare
this accumulated score to the best achievable score of an
algorithm that knows the MDP in hindsight. An algorithm
is no-regret if its regret is sublinear, i.e., its average performance is asymptotically optimal.
Many RL algorithms are model-based, meaning that they
maintain a confidence region for the underlying unknown
MDP modeling the reward mechanism. These model-based
algorithms use episodes over which the policy is fixed. At
the end of each episode, the observations made during the

a1 , r = 1

Equal contribution 1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence
to: Victor Boone <victor.boone@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>, Bruno
Gaujal <bruno.gaujal@inria.fr>.

1

a2 , r = 0.9

*

Figure 1: (Two-arm bandit) A MDP with one state and two
actions, rewards of the two actions are both Gaussian distributed
with unit variance and respective means r(a1 ) = 1 and r(a2 ) = 0.9.

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Our use of the term “episode” is the same as in (Auer et al.,
2009) and is not to be confused with the broader use of (Sutton &
Barto, 2018), that call “episode” the inner part of generic loops.

1

