LongCoder: A Long-Range Pre-trained Language Model for Code Completion

Daya Guo * 1 Canwen Xu * 2 Nan Duan 3 Jian Yin 1 Julian McAuley 2

Abstract

An efficient model that can scale to such long input can be
suitable for code completion that contains long context.

In this paper, we introduce a new task for code
completion that focuses on handling long code
input and propose a sparse Transformer model,
called LongCoder, to address this task. LongCoder employs a sliding window mechanism for
self-attention and introduces two types of globally accessible tokens — bridge tokens and memory tokens — to improve performance and efficiency. Bridge tokens are inserted throughout
the input sequence to aggregate local information
and facilitate global interaction, while memory
tokens are included to highlight important statements that may be invoked later and need to be
memorized, such as package imports and definitions of classes, functions, or structures. We conduct experiments on a newly constructed dataset
that contains longer code context and the publicly
available CodeXGLUE benchmark. Experimental results demonstrate that LongCoder achieves
superior performance on code completion tasks
compared to previous models while maintaining
comparable efficiency in terms of computational
resources during inference.

In this paper, we propose a new pre-trained language model,
named LongCoder, for long code modeling. As shown
in Figure 1, LongCoder features a sparse attention mechanism that reduces the computational complexity (to linear). LongCoder exploits a sliding window mechanism for
self-attention that attends only to local context. To allow
LongCoder to maintain an understanding of the entire code
file, we introduce bridge attention and global attention, with
the corresponding two types of globally accessible tokens,
bridge tokens and memory tokens. Bridge attention aggregates the information of a code snippet and allows it to be
accessed from a long distance. Bridge tokens are inserted
throughout the input sequence and can attend to a fixed
length of context. Memory tokens provide global attention
to statements that include a package import, definitions of
classes, functions, or structures. The scope of these statements is often global and invoked later, which means they
have a longer impact than other statements, making them
worth memorizing. By referring to these statements, the
model can exploit long context while maintaining linear
complexity.
To evaluate the effectiveness of LongCoder and encourage
future research on Long Code Completion, we construct a
new dataset called LCC by filtering code from GitHub based
on length, with the goal of focusing on longer code examples. On average, the examples in LCC are 5× longer than
those in existing datasets (Lu et al., 2021). We benchmark
several baselines, LongCoder and OpenAI Codex (Chen
et al., 2021) on LCC. Our experimental results demonstrate
that code completion can benefit from taking longer context
into consideration, and our LongCoder achieves superior
performance compared to existing models with comparable
computational costs.

1. Introduction
Code completion is a crucial task in software development
that helps developers save time and effort by suggesting
and auto-completing code based on context. With the advancement of large language models, Transformer-based
models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have demonstrated impressive results in code completion (Chen et al., 2021). However,
the computational cost of these models grows quadratically
with the length of input, making them less suitable for modeling long code context. On the other hand, modeling long
code can potentially improve the accuracy of code completion and enable applications on a file and even project level.

Overall, our contributions are as follows:

Equal contribution 1 Sun Yat-sen University 2 University of
California, San Diego 3 Microsoft Research Asia. Correspondence
to: Daya Guo <guody5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn>.

• We construct a new dataset (LCC) for code completion
tasks that requires long code modeling to encourage
more research in such scenarios.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We propose two types of sparse attention, motivated by
observations on attention patterns of existing models
and how human programmers write code.

*

1

