Efficient Online Reinforcement Learning with Offline Data

Philip J. Ball * 1 Laura Smith * 2 Ilya Kostrikov * 2 Sergey Levine 2
All D4RL AntMaze Tasks

Abstract
100

Normalized Return

Sample efficiency and exploration remain major
challenges in online reinforcement learning (RL).
A powerful approach that can be applied to address these issues is the inclusion of offline data,
such as prior trajectories from a human expert
or a sub-optimal exploration policy. Previous
methods have relied on extensive modifications
and additional complexity to ensure the effective use of this data. Instead, we ask: can we
simply apply existing off-policy methods to leverage offline data when learning online? In this
work, we demonstrate that the answer is yes; however, a set of minimal but important changes to
existing off-policy RL algorithms are required
to achieve reliable performance. We extensively
ablate these design choices, demonstrating the
key factors that most affect performance, and arrive at a set of recommendations that practitioners
can readily apply, whether their data comprise a
small number of expert demonstrations or large
volumes of sub-optimal trajectories. We see that
correct application of these simple recommendations can provide a 2.5× improvement over
existing approaches across a diverse set of competitive benchmarks, with no additional computational overhead. We have released our code here:
github.com/ikostrikov/rlpd.

40
20

IQL + Finetuning
SAC + Offline Data
RLPD (Ours)

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Environment steps (£10 3 )

Figure 1. Our approach, RLPD, extends standard off-policy RL
and achieves reliable state-of-the-art online performance on a number of tasks using offline data. Here we show the difficult D4RL
AntMaze domain (10 seeds, 1 std. shaded), averaged over all 6
tasks. We run RLPD for 300k steps due to early convergence.

on having large amounts of online interaction with an environment, which is usually made feasible through the use of
simulators. In real-world problems, however, we are often
confronted with scenarios where samples are expensive, and
furthermore, rewards are sparse, often exacerbated by high
dimensional state and action spaces.
One promising way to resolve this issue is via the inclusion of data generated by a previous policy or human expert
when training deep RL algorithms (often referred to as offline data (Levine et al., 2020)), as evidenced theoretically
(Wagenmaker & Pacchiano, 2022; Song et al., 2023) and in
real-world examples by Cabi et al. (2019); Nair et al. (2020);
Lu et al. (2021). This can alleviate challenges due to sample efficiency and exploration by providing the algorithm
with an initial dataset to “kick-start” the learning process,
either in the form of high-quality expert demonstrations,
or even low-quality but high-coverage exploratory trajectories. This also provides us with an avenue to leverage large
pre-collected datasets in order to learn useful policies.

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved success in
a number of complex domains, such as Atari (Mnih et al.,
2015) and Go (Silver et al., 2016), as well as real-world
applications like Chip Design (Mirhoseini et al., 2021) and
Human Preference Alignment (Ouyang et al., 2022). In
many of these settings, strong RL performance is predicated
1

60

0

1. Introduction

*

80

Some prior work has focused on using this data through pretraining, while other approaches introduce constraints when
training online to handle issues with distribution shift. However, each approach has its drawbacks, such as additional
training time and hyperparamters, or limited improvement
beyond the behavior policy respectively. Taking a step back,
we note that standard off-policy algorithms should be able
to take advantage of this offline data, and furthermore issues

2

Equal contribution University of Oxford UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Philip J. Ball <ball@robots.ox.ac.uk>,
Laura Smith <smithlaura@berkeley.edu>, Ilya Kostrikov
<kostrikov@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

