IncDSI: Incrementally Updatable Document Retrieval

Varsha Kishore 1 Chao Wan 1 Justin Lovelace 1 Yoav Artzi 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract

a nearest neighbor search given the query and document
embeddings. The other paradigm that is gaining significant
interest recently is differentiable search indexing (DSI; Tay
et al., 2022), in which all information about a collection of
documents is encoded in the parameters of a neural network
model. Given a query, the model directly returns the ID of
the relevant document, either via classification over all IDs
or by generating the ID with a decoder.

Differentiable Search Index is a recently proposed paradigm for document retrieval, that encodes information about a corpus of documents
within the parameters of a neural network and directly maps queries to corresponding documents.
These models have achieved state-of-the-art performances for document retrieval across many
benchmarks. These kinds of models have a significant limitation: it is not easy to add new
documents after a model is trained. We propose IncDSI, a method to add documents in real
time (about 20-50ms per document), without retraining the model on the entire dataset (or even
parts thereof). Instead we formulate the addition of documents as a constrained optimization
problem that makes minimal changes to the network parameters. Although orders of magnitude faster, our approach is competitive with retraining the model on the whole dataset and enables the development of document retrieval systems that can be updated with new information
in real-time. Our code for IncDSI is available at
https://github.com/varshakishore/IncDSI.

The two paradigms are quite different and have complementary advantages. It is straightforward to add new documents
to dual encoder systems by mapping them into the joined
space using the trained document encoder and including the
resulting embedding vectors in the nearest neighbor search.
DSI systems, on the other hand, shine in offering higher
flexibility to learn the retrieval encoding of a document.
Here, documents are not encoded through a shared encoder,
but instead their implicit representation (i.e., within the network parameters) is induced during training. DSI methods
are also relatively simple, consisting of a single unified
model instead of different encoders and search procedures;
DSI models perform retrieval with a single forward pass.
However, DSI systems are harder to extend to new documents. Naively training the model with new document risks
catastrophic forgetting of existing documents (McCloskey
& Cohen, 1989; Toneva et al., 2018; Mehta et al., 2022) and
retraining on old and new data on a regular basis is costly.

1. Introduction

Most search engines retrieve documents from dynamic corpora that can grow over time. Consider a search engine for
arXiv papers or social media, for instance. As new documents are uploaded, they should become available as soon
as possible—ideally in real time. Figure 1 illustrates the
setting where a document retrieval model is first trained
on an initial set of documents, after which new documents
arrive and must be incorporated into the document index as
soon as possible. Although a DSI system can be retrained
periodically, its extension to the real-time setting has so far
remained an open problem.

Information retrieval (IR) systems map user queries, often
expressed in natural language, to relevant documents. They
are the core technology underlying search engines, and are
only becoming more critical as the information available to
users grows in complexity and volume. Current retrieval
methods largely align with one of two paradigms. The dual
encoder methods train separate encoders for queries and
documents that map the two into a shared embedding space.
The training loss encourages that queries are closest to their
respective target documents (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Xiong
et al., 2020) and one can perform retrieval by conducting

We develop IncDSI, an approach that allows for rapidly
adding new documents to a trained DSI model, while preserving the unmatched flexibility and performance of such
models. Although in DSI the retrieval process happens
inside the neural network, it is possible to formulate a constrained optimization problem that allows us to update and

1

School of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA.
Correspondence to: Varsha Kishore <vk352@cornell.edu>, Justin
Lovelace <jl3353@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

