Banker Online Mirror Descent:
A Universal Approach for Delayed Online Bandit Learning

Jiatai Huang * 1 Yan Dai * 1 Longbo Huang 1

Abstract

mined by the environment. The agent’s objective is to minimize the expected difference between his/her total loss and
the total loss of a fixed best arm, which is called the regret.

We propose Banker Online Mirror Descent
(Banker-OMD), a novel framework generalizing the classical Online Mirror Descent (OMD)
technique in the online learning literature. The
Banker-OMD framework almost completely decouples feedback delay handling and the taskspecific OMD algorithm design, thus facilitating the design of new algorithms capable of efficiently and robustly handling feedback delays.
Specifically, it√offers√a general methodology for
e T + D)-style regret bounds in
achieving O(
online bandit learning tasks with delayed feedback, where T is the number of rounds and D
is the total feedback delay. We demonstrate the
power of Banker-OMD by applications to two
important bandit learning scenarios with delayed
feedback, including delayed scale-free adversarial Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) and delayed adversarial linear bandits. Banker-OMD leads to
the first delayed scale-free
adversarial
√
√
√ MAB ale KL( T + D)) regret
gorithm achieving O(
and the first delayed adversarial
√ linear√bandit algoe
rithm achieving O(poly(n)(
T + D)) regret.
As a
√ corollary, the first application also implies
e
O( KT L) regret for non-delayed scale-free adversarial
MABs, which is the first to match the
√
Ω( KT L) lower bound up to logarithmic factors
and can be of independent interest.

Among the many techniques successfully applied to MAB
algorithm design, Online Mirror Descent (OMD) (Warmuth
and Jagota, 1997) and Follow-The-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) (Gordon, 1999) have been proven to be powerful
tools, especially in adversarial MAB settings — where at
each round t, an adversary arbitrarily picks a loss for each
arm when the agent is making a decision. The OMD/FTRL
perspective offers an alternative algorithmic form of classical adversarial MAB algorithms originating from the idea of
exponential weighting, particularly the well-known EXP3
algorithm (Auer et al., 2002b). It also leads to the development of new MAB algorithms such as Tsallis-INF (Zimmert
and Seldin, 2019) and BROAD-OMD (Wei and Luo, 2018)
by using different regularizers. At last, the OMD/FTRL perspective also generalizes to other online learning tasks, e.g.,
adversarial linear bandits (Abernethy et al., 2008; Audibert
et al., 2014) or Markov Decision Processes (Jin et al., 2020).
However, in many important practical learning problems,
action feedback may not arrive immediately after execution.
For instance, in the web advertisement scenario (Li et al.,
2010), after the server selects a set of ads and renders the
page for a user, the signal about user reactions may arrive
after the server picks ads for other incoming users. Similar
situations can also happen in parallel computing (Chen and
Xu, 2019) where jobs need to be allocated to some work
node before previous jobs finish or medical experiments
(Wason and Trippa, 2014) where patients need to get treated
before the information of previous treatment is gathered.

1. Introduction

In such cases where feedback is arbitrarily delayed, the classical OMD approach can no longer be directly applied to
guarantee similar performance. Technically, this is because
the classical OMD/FTRL framework heavily relies on techniques to rearrange potential terms into a telescoping sum so
that terms from adjacent rounds cancel. Thus, delayed feedback makes this real-time cancellation impossible. While
it is still possible to design algorithms for delayed MABs
(Zimmert and Seldin, 2020; Gyorgy and Joulani, 2021) or
delayed MDPs (Jin et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022) using OMD
or similar ideas, one naturally asks the following question:

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a classical online learning
problem with partial information feedback. In the MAB
problem, an agent is given a set of arms and needs to choose
one each time, after which the agent suffers a loss deter*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Longbo Huang <longbohuang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

