Delayed Feedback in Kernel Bandits

Sattar Vakili 1 Danyal Ahmed 1 Alberto Bernacchia 1 Ciara Pike-Burke 2

Abstract

ity, the kernel bandit problem has become very popular in
practice. In particular, it enables us to sequentially learn to
optimise a variety of different functions without needing to
know many details about the functional form.

Black box optimisation of an unknown function
from expensive and noisy evaluations is a ubiquitous problem in machine learning, academic
research and industrial production. An abstraction of the problem can be formulated as a kernel
based bandit problem (also known as Bayesian
optimisation), where a learner aims at optimising a kernelized function through sequential noisy
observations. The existing work predominantly
assumes feedback is immediately available; an
assumption which fails in many real world situations, including recommendation systems, clinical trials and hyperparameter tuning. We consider
a kernel bandit problem under stochastically delayed
p feedback, and propose an algorithm with
Õ( Γk (T )T + E[τ ]) regret, where T is the number of time steps, Γk (T ) is the maximum information gain of the kernel with T observations, and
τ is the delay random variable. This represents
a significant improvement over
√ the state of the
art regret bound of Õ(Γk (T ) T + E[τ ]Γk (T ))
reported in Verma et al. (2022). In particular, for
very non-smooth kernels, the information gain
grows almost linearly in time, trivializing the existing results. We also validate our theoretical
results with simulations.

However, in many settings where we may want to use kernel
bandits, we also have to deal with delayed observations.
For example, consider using kernel bandits to sequentially
learn to select the optimal conditions for a chemical experiment. The chemical reactions may not be instantaneous,
but instead take place at some random time in the future. If
we start running a sequence of experiments, we can start
new experiments before receiving the stochastically delayed
feedback from the previous ones. However, in this situation
we have to update the conditions for future experiments
before receiving all the feedback from previous experiments.
Similar situations arise in recommendation systems, clinical
trials and hyperparameter tuning, so it is of practical relevance that we design kernel bandit algorithms that are able
to deal with delayed feedback. Moreover, a big challenge
for existing kernel bandit algorithms is the computational
complexity. Generally speaking, in each round t, algorithms
for kernel bandits require fitting a kernel model to the t
observed data points which can have an O(t3 ) complexity.
To reduce the complexity, there has been a recent interest
in considering batch versions of kernel bandit algorithms.
These algorithms select τ input values using the same model
then update the model after receiving all observations in the
batch. This corresponds to a delay of at most τ in receiving
each observation, and thus can be thought of as an instance
of delayed feedback in kernel bandits.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we study the kernel bandit problem with
stochastically delayed feedback. We propose Batch Pure Exploration with Delays (BPE-Delay) —an adaptation of the
Batch Pure Exploration algorithm (Li and Scarlett, 2022)
to the delayed feedback setting—, and show that, under
mild assumptions on the unknown delay distribution, BPEDelay achieves near optimal regret. Indeed,
we prove that
p
BPE-Delay enjoys regret scaling as Õ( Γk (T )T + E[τ ]),1
where T is the number of time steps, Γk (T ) is the maximum
information gain of the kernel k with T observations (see
Section 2), and τ is the delay random variable. This result

The kernel bandit problem is a flexible framework which
captures the problem of learning to optimise an unknown
function through successive input queries. Typically, the
game proceeds in rounds where in each round the learner selects an input point to query and then immediately receives
a noisy observation of the function at that point. This observation can be used immediately to improve the learners
decision of which point to query next. Due to its general1
MediaTek Research 2 Imperial College London. Correspondence to: Sattar Vakili <sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We use the notation O and Õ to denote order and order up to
logarithmic factors, respectively.

1

