SemSup-XC: Semantic Supervision for Zero and Few-shot
Extreme Classification
Pranjal Aggarwal 1 Ameet Deshpande 2 Karthik Narasimhan 2

Abstract

to millions (Agrawal et al., 2013; Bengio et al., 2019; Bhatia et al., 2015; Chang et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2014; Jiang
et al., 2021). This paradigm has multiple real-world applications including movie and product recommendation,
search-engines, and e-commerce product tagging. In many
of these applications, models are required to handle the addition of new classes on a regular basis, which has been
the subject of recent work on zero-shot and few-shot extreme classification (ZS-XC and FS-XC) (Gupta et al., 2021;
Xiong et al., 2022; Simig et al., 2022). These setups are
challenging because of (1) the presence of a large number of
fine-grained classes which are often not mutually exclusive,
(2) limited or no labeled data per class, and (3) increased
computational expense and model size due to the large label space. While the aforementioned works have tried to
tackle the latter two issues, they lack a semantically rich
representation of classes, and instead rely on class names or
hierarchies to represent them.

Extreme classification (XC) involves predicting
over large numbers of classes (thousands to millions), with real-world applications like news article classification and e-commerce product tagging.
The zero-shot version of this task requires generalization to novel classes without additional supervision. In this paper, we develop SemSup-XC,
a model that achieves state-of-the-art zero-shot
and few-shot performance on three XC datasets
derived from legal, e-commerce, and Wikipedia
data. To develop SemSup-XC, we use automatically collected semantic class descriptions to represent classes and facilitate generalization through
a novel hybrid matching module that matches input instances to class descriptions using a combination of semantic and lexical similarity. Trained
with contrastive learning, SemSup-XC significantly outperforms baselines and establishes stateof-the-art performance on all three datasets considered, gaining up to 12 precision points on zeroshot and more than 10 precision points on oneshot tests, with similar gains for recall@10. Our
ablation studies highlight the relative importance
of our hybrid matching module and automatically
collected class descriptions.1

In this work, we leverage semantic supervision
(SEMSUP) (Hanjie et al., 2022) for developing models for extreme classification. SemSup-XC represents
classes using multiple diverse class descriptions, which
allows it to generalize naturally to novel classes when
provided with corresponding descriptions. However,
SEMSUP as proposed in (Hanjie et al., 2022) cannot be
naively applied to XC for several reasons: (1) SEMSUP
requires encoding descriptions of all classes for each
training batch, which is prohibitively computationally
expensive for large label spaces, (2) it uses semantic
similarity only at the sentence level between the instance
and label description, and (3) it requires human intervention
to collect descriptions, which is expensive for extremely
large label spaces we are dealing with.

1. Introduction
Extreme classification (XC) studies the problem of predicting over a large space of classes, ranging from thousands
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, Delhi, India 2 Department of Computer
Science, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Pranjal Aggarwal <pranjal2041@gmail.com>, Ameet Deshapande, Karthik
Narasimhan <{ asd, karthik}@cs.princeton.edu>.

We remedy these deficiencies by developing SemSup-XC, a
model that scales to large class spaces in XC and establishes
a new state-of-the-art using three innovations. First, we use
a novel hybrid lexical-semantic similarity model (HybridMatch) that combines semantic similarity of sentences with
relaxed lexical-matching between all token pairs. Second,
we propose SEMSUP - WEB – an automatic pipeline with precise heuristics to discover high-quality descriptions. Finally,
we use a contrastive learning objective that samples a fixed
number of negative label descriptions, improving computa-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code and demo are available at https://
github.com/princeton-nlp/semsup-xc
and
https://huggingface.co/spaces/Pranjal2041/
SemSup-XC/.

1

