Opponent-Limited Online Search for Imperfect Information Games

Weiming Liu * 1 Haobo Fu * 1 Qiang Fu 1 Wei Yang 1
in improving online performance. Take heads-up no-limit
Texas hold’em as an example. A common approach is to
first generate a blueprint strategy using Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) algorithms (Zinkevich et al., 2007;
Lanctot et al., 2009; Tammelin et al., 2015) and abstraction techniques (Gilpin & Sandholm, 2007; Gilpin et al.,
2007). When playing online, subgame-solving techniques
(Burch et al., 2014; Moravcik et al., 2016; Brown & Sandholm, 2017; Brown et al., 2018; Zhang & Sandholm, 2021)
are used to refine the blueprint strategy, making it less exploitable and hopefully more profitable.

Abstract
In recent years, online search has been playing
an increasingly important role in imperfect information games (IIGs). Previous online search
is known as common-knowledge subgame solving, which has to consider all the states in a
common-knowledge closure. This is only computationally tolerable for medium size games,
such as poker. To handle larger games, order-1
Knowledge-Limited Subgame Solving (1-KLSS)
only considers the states in a knowledge-limited
closure, which results in a much smaller subgame.
However, 1-KLSS is unsafe. In this paper, we
first extend 1-KLSS to Safe-1-KLSS and prove
its safeness. To make Safe-1-KLSS applicable to
even larger games, we propose Opponent-Limited
Subgame Solving (OLSS) to limit how the opponent reaches a subgame and how it acts in the
subgame. Limiting the opponent’s strategy dramatically reduces the subgame size and improves
the efficiency of subgame solving while still preserving some safety in the limit. Experiments
in medium size poker show that Safe-1-KLSS
and OLSS are orders of magnitude faster than
previous common-knowledge subgame solving.
Also, OLSS significantly improves the online performance in a two-player Mahjong game, whose
game size prohibits the use of previous commonknowledge subgame-solving methods.

While it is straightforward to construct and solve a subgame
for any state encountered online in PIGs, online search in
IIGs is much more difficult. This is because one has to
consider a subgame under common knowledge to keep the
updated strategy safe, i.e., not more exploitable than the
blueprint strategy. Prior approaches (Burch et al., 2014;
Moravcik et al., 2016; Brown & Sandholm, 2017) usually
enumerate the entire common-knowledge closure, which is
the smallest set of states that the current state is in according to public information. Afterward, they construct and
solve the common-knowledge subgame, which is a set of
trees rooted at the states in the closure. For example, in
two-player Texas hold’em, community cards and betting
history are public information,
 and
a common-knowledge
50
closure contains around 52
×
2
2 states that enumerate
every possible hole-card assignment of both players. These
approaches work well in Texas hold’em but are computationally incapable of games with larger common-knowledge
closure, e.g., dark chess.
The recently proposed Order-1 Knowledge-Limited Subgame Solving (1-KLSS) (Zhang & Sandholm, 2021) reduces the subgame size dramatically by only considering an
order-1 knowledge-limited subgame, instead of the commonknowledge subgame. However, 1-KLSS is unsafe if applied independently to every state in the same commonknowledge closure (Zhang & Sandholm, 2021). Besides, the
computational complexity of 1-KLSS is still unbearable in
IIGs with large order-1 subgames, e.g., two-player Mahjong
(Fu et al., 2022a) and Stratego (Perolat et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has demonstrated superhuman
performance in many large-scale Perfect Information Games
(PIGs, e.g., Go and chess) and Imperfect Information Games
(IIGs, e.g., Taxes hold’em) (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Brown
& Sandholm, 2018; Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2019). In most AIs, online search has been critical
*
Equal contribution 1 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Haobo Fu <haobofu@tencent.com>.

In this paper, we first revisit knowledge-limited subgame
solving and propose Safe-1-KLSS. Specifically, we reformulate the common-knowledge subgame margin (Moravcik

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

