Nearly Minimax Optimal Regret for Learning Linear Mixture
Stochastic Shortest Path
Qiwei Di 1 Jiafan He 1 Dongruo Zhou 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

more suitable to many modern applications such as Atari
games, GO games, and navigation (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017; Nasiriany et al., 2019).

We study the Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) problem with a linear mixture transition kernel, where
an agent repeatedly interacts with a stochastic environment and seeks to reach certain goal state
while minimizing the cumulative cost. Existing
works often assume a strictly positive lower bound
of the cost function or an upper bound of the expected length for the optimal policy. In this paper,
we propose a new algorithm to eliminate these
restrictive assumptions. Our algorithm is based
on extended value iteration with a fine-grained
variance-aware confidence set, where the variance is estimated recursively from high-order√moO(dB∗ K)
ments. Our algorithm achieves an e
regret bound, where d is the dimension of the feature mapping in the linear transition kernel, B∗
is the upper bound of the total cumulative cost
for the optimal policy, and K is the number of
episodes.
√ Our regret upper bound matches the
Ω(dB∗ K) lower bound of linear mixture SSPs
in Min et al. (2022), which suggests that our algorithm is nearly minimax optimal.

For an SSP, since the agent only stops after reaching a goal
state, the length of the episode usually depends on the current policy and can be different from episode to episode.
Therefore, learning an SSP is usually more difficult than
learning episodic MDPs and infinite-horizon MDPs. In
recent years, there has been a sequence of works developing efficient algorithms for learning SSPs. We use regret
to measure each algorithm, which is defined as the difference between the total cost and the lowest expected cost
achieved by the optimal policy. For the tabular SSP setting where the state space and action space are finite, Tarbouriech et al.
p(2020) proposed an algorithm with a regret
e 3/2 S AK/cmin ), where D is the smallest expected
of O(D
hitting time from any starting state to the goal state and cmin
is the assumed positive lower bound of the cost function.
Rosenberg√
et al. (2020) proposed an algorithm with a regret
e ∗ S AK) and showed that every algorithm should
of O(B
√
suffer from an Ω(B∗ SAK) regret. Later, Cohen et al.
(2021) developed an algorithm reduced from algorithms for
episodic MDPs, which achieves the minimax lower bound.
Tarbouriech et al. (2021b) made significant contributions
to the study of SSP. One of their notable achievements is
the development of an algorithm that does not rely on the
assumption that cmin > 0. This√algorithm achieves a nearly
e ∗ SAK). Furthermore, they
optimal regret bound of O(B
introduced the algorithms that do not require knowledge of
T∗ or B∗ as well.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) (Bertsekas, 2012) is a type
of reinforcement learning problem where the agent aims
to reach a predefined goal state while minimizing the total
expected cost. In an SSP, for each episode, the agent starts
at a specific initial state, chooses an action from the action
set, receives some cost from the environment, and transits to
the next state. The agent will stop at a fixed goal state (i.e.,
terminal state) and ends the current episode. Compared with
episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and infinitehorizon MDPs, the SSP model is more general and thus

Many modern RL problems work with a large state and
action spaces. In these cases, linear function approximation
can be employed as a tool to make RL scalable to large state
and action spaces (Bradtke & Barto, 1996). For the SSP
setting, Vial et al. (2022) is the first one to consider linear
function approximation on it. They proposed
p a computationally inefficient algorithm with an e
O( d3 B∗3 K/cmin )
regret, where d is the dimension of the linear representation
used in the algorithm. Later, Chen et al. (2022) proposed
a computationally
efficient algorithm with an improved rep
gret of e
O( d3 B∗2 T∗ K) using the fact that T∗ ≤ B∗ /cmin .
Min et al. (2022) considered the linear mixture SSP setting and proposed an algorithm LEVIS+ with a regret of

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

