Adversarial Collaborative Learning on Non-IID Features

Qinbin Li 1 2 Bingsheng He 2 Dawn Song 1

Abstract

effectiveness and simpleness. Most existing FL approaches
are designed based on FedAvg.

Federated Learning (FL) has been a popular approach to enable collaborative learning on multiple parties without exchanging raw data. However, the model performance of FL may degrade
a lot due to non-IID data. While many FL algorithms focus on non-IID labels, FL on nonIID features has largely been overlooked. Different from typical FL approaches, the paper proposes a new learning concept called ADCOL
(Adversarial Collaborative Learning) for non-IID
features. Instead of adopting the widely used
model-averaging scheme, ADCOL conducts training in an adversarial way: the server aims to train
a discriminator to distinguish the representations
of the parties, while the parties aim to generate
a common representation distribution. Our experiments show that ADCOL achieves better performance than state-of-the-art FL algorithms on
non-IID features.

However, as shown in many existing studies (Hsu et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2020; 2021a), the performance of FedAvg
and its alike algorithms may be significantly degraded in
non-IID data among parties. While many studies try to
improve FedAvg on non-IID data, most of them (Li et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2020b; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Acar
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2020a) focus on
the label imbalance setting, where the parties have different
label distributions. In their experiments, they usually simulate the federated setting by unbalanced partitioning the
dataset into multiple subsets according to labels.
As summarized in (Hsieh et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2019),
besides the label distribution skew, feature imbalance is also
an important case of non-IID data. In the feature imbalance setting, the feature distribution Pi (x) varies across
parties. This setting widely exists in reality, e.g., people
have different stroke width and slant when writing the same
word. Another example in practice is that images collected
by different cameras have different intensity and contrast.
However, compared with non-IID labels, FL on non-IID
features has been less explored. Most existing studies on
non-IID data are still based on the model-averaging scheme
(Li et al., 2020; Collins et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b; Fallah
et al., 2020), which implicitly assumes that the local knowledge Pi (y|x) is common across parties and is not applicable
in the non-IID feature setting. For example, FedRep (Collins
et al., 2021) learns a common base encoder among parties,
which will output very different representation distributions
across parties in the non-IID feature case even though for the
data from the same class. Such a model-sharing design fails
to achieve good model accuracy for application scenarios
with non-IID features. Therefore, we need a fundamentally
new approach to address the technical challenges of non-IID
features.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is data hungry. While data are always dispersed in multiple parties (e.g., mobile devices, hospitals)
in reality, data are not allowed to transfer to a central server
for training due to privacy concerns and data regulations.
Collaborative learning among multiple parties without the
exchange of raw data has been an important research topic.
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2016; Kairouz
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019b;a) has been a popular form of
collaborative learning without exchanging raw data. A basic
FL framework is FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2016), which
uses a model-averaging scheme. In each round, the parties
update their local models and send them to the server. The
server averages all local models to update the global model,
which is sent back to the parties as the new local model in
the next round. FedAvg has been widely used due to its

In this paper, we think out of the model-averaging scheme
used in FL, and propose a novel learning concept called
adversarial collaborative learning. While the feature distribution of each party is different, we aim to extract the
common representation distribution that is sufficient for the
prediction task. Instead of averaging the local models, we
apply adversarial learning to match the representation distri-

1
UC Berkeley 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Qinbin Li <liqinbin1998@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

