Deep Temporal Sets with Evidential Reinforced Attentions for Unique
Behavioral Pattern Discovery

Dingrong Wang 1 Deep Shankar Pandey 1 Krishna Prasad Neupane 1 Zhiwei Yu 1
Ervine Zheng 1 Zhi Zheng 1 Qi Yu 1

Abstract

of medical conditions and treatment planning (Washington
et al., 2020). However, there are still important bottlenecks.
Meaningful observations of patients lead to multimodal data
where complex spatiotemporal patterns are hidden and hard
to catch (Cai et al., 2019). Collections of data may be incomplete and noisy, and thus lead to erroneous predictions
(Le Glaz et al., 2021). In addition, health research requires
a higher level of interpretability on the analytical results,
making many existing models (e.g., deep neural networks)
unsuitable since their black-box nature cannot provide insights about the data.

Machine learning-driven human behavior analysis
is gaining attention in behavioral/mental healthcare, due to its potential to identify behavioral
patterns that cannot be recognized by traditional
assessments. Real-life applications, such as digital behavioral biomarker identification, often require the discovery of complex spatiotemporal
patterns in multimodal data, which is largely
under-explored. To fill this gap, we propose a
novel model that integrates uniquely designed
Deep Temporal Sets (DTS) with Evidential Reinforced Attentions (ERA). DTS captures complex
temporal relationships in the input and generates
a set-based representation, while ERA captures
the policy network’s uncertainty and conducts
evidence-aware exploration to locate attentive regions in behavioral data. Using child-computer
interaction data as a testing platform, we demonstrate the effectiveness of DTS-ERA in differentiating children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
and typically developing children based on sequential multimodal visual and touch behaviors.
Comparisons with baseline methods show that our
model achieves superior performance and has the
potential to provide objective, quantitative, and
precise analysis of complex human behaviors.

To address these challenges, we propose novel integration
of uniquely designed Deep Temporal Sets with Evidential
Reinforced Attentions (DTS-ERA) to identify signature behavioral patterns (SBPs) based on multimodal behavioral
dynamics. To evaluate the performance of the proposed
model, we applied it to analyze complex spatiotemporal
datasets collected from a series of computer games designed
to identify the unique visual and touch behavioral patterns
in response to sensory stimuli for children with Autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is a prevalent (1 in 100
worldwide (Zeidan et al., 2022) and 1 in 44 in the U.S.
(Maenner et al., 2021)) developmental disorder characterized by challenges in social communications as well as
restricted and repetitive behaviors (APA, 2013). Humancomputer interaction systems have been developed to study
responsive behaviors through controlled stimuli delivery and
high-resolution behavioral data collection (Bozgeyikli et al.,
2017; Koirala et al., 2021), which generates important but
complex spatiotemporal patterns hiding in an overwhelming
amount of data points (Noel et al., 2017). In addition, users
may not attend to the whole interaction, causing noises and
incomplete data. Existing sequential models that process
the step-wise time series data may fail to achieve satisfactory performance and extract interpretive embeddings facing
these unique challenges, because the informative features
and noises are weighted equally.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has been widely applied to detecting and
analyzing human behaviors (Chen et al., 2021), with recent
advances in behavioral/mental health care (Thieme et al.,
2020). Digital technologies enable the collection of big and
high-resolution data, which further empower machine learning and artificial intelligence in the automated recognition
1
Rochester Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Qi Yu
<qi.yu@rit.edu>.

In the new DTS-ERA model, the DTS first extracts temporal
features from the raw behavioral data and transforms the
step-wise observations into a series of latent representations.
Such representations can capture the sequential dependen-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

