Parallel Neurosymbolic Integration with Concordia

Jonathan Feldstein * 1 2 Modestas Jurčius * 1 3 Efthymia Tsamoura 4

Abstract

An alternative to stratified is parallel integration. In contrast
to stratified frameworks, parallel integration applies in settings in which the same task can be solved both symbolically
and sub-symbolically and the aim is to increase the accuracy of the end task by distilling knowledge from the logic
component into the neural one and vice versa. Two parallel
neurosymbolic frameworks have been proposed recently:
Teacher-Student (T-S) by Hu et al. (Hu et al., 2016a;b) and
Deep Probabilistic Logic (DPL) by Wang and Poon (Wang
& Poon, 2018). T-S is based on posterior regularization
(Ganchev et al., 2010) to build a teacher network which is
later used to train the neural module. DPL defines a joint
distribution after making the assumption of independence
between the logical theory and the deep network and uses
this distribution to regularize the deep model.

Parallel neurosymbolic architectures have been
applied effectively in NLP by distilling knowledge from a logic theory into a deep model. However, prior art faces several limitations including
supporting restricted forms of logic theories and
relying on the assumption of independence between the logic and the deep network. We present
Concordia, a framework overcoming the limitations of prior art. Concordia is agnostic both to
the deep network and the logic theory offering
support for a wide range of probabilistic theories.
Our framework can support supervised training
of both components and unsupervised training of
the neural component. Concordia has been successfully applied to tasks beyond NLP and data
classification, improving the accuracy of stateof-the-art on collective activity detection, entity
linking and recommendation tasks.

Problem. Stratified approaches focus on separating the
pattern recognition and the reasoning to allow for more
complex reasoning and querying. However, the approaches
named above tend to suffer from high computational complexity. In this work, we focus in particular on how neurosymbolic AI can help to reduce the need of (labelled) data.
To this end, we focus on parallel approaches which are more
tailored to this problem as they enhance the neural model.
However, both T-S and DPL come with several limitations.
Firstly, the adopted formulations do not support settings in
which the inputs and the targets abide by more complex
relations. In particular, they only support rules expressing
constraints directly relating the input with the output data
and do not support recursive formulas. However, in practical scenarios, the relationships between the inputs and the
outputs may be modelled only via richer logical formulas
that reference latent information, i.e., information that is
not available either in the input or output data. Additionally,
with regards to DPL, the integration is based on the assumption of independence between the two components, which
generally does not hold as they both depend upon the same
input data. Finally, DPL is bound to Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) (Richardson & Domingos, 2006) limiting its
applicability to classification only.

1. Introduction
Motivation. To overcome the limitations of deep networks,
such as dependence on significant amount of labelled training data, researchers proposed to integrate logical theories, a computational paradigm known as neurosymbolic
AI (d’Avila Garcez et al., 2002). One way to integrate the
components is in a staged or stratified fashion. Stratified
neurosymbolic frameworks find applications in problems
admitting well-separable symbolic and subsymbolic tasks
– to name a toy example, performing mathematical operations using symbolic models over MNIST digits identified
by a neural model. One of the first stratified architectures
was DeepProbLog (Manhaeve et al., 2018). More followed:
NeurASP (Yang et al., 2020), ABL (Dai et al., 2019), RNMs
(Marra et al., 2020) and NeuroLog (Tsamoura et al., 2021).
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom 2 BENNU.AI, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
3
Mintis AI, Kaunas, Lithuania 4 Samsung AI, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jonathan Feldstein
<jonathan.feldstein@bennu.ai>.

Contribution. We present Concordia1 , a parallel neurosymbolic framework that overcomes the above limitations. Concordia adopts probabilistic logics due to their flexibility to

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Available on https://github.com/jonathanfeldstein/Concordia

