On the Identifiability and Estimation of Causal Location-Scale Noise Models

Alexander Immer 1 2 Christoph Schultheiss 3 Julia E Vogt 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 2
Peter Bühlmann 3 Alexander Marx 1 4

Abstract

Causal Direction

We study the class of location-scale or heteroscedastic noise models (LSNMs), in which
the effect Y can be written as a function of the
cause X and a noise source N independent of X,
which may be scaled by a positive function g over
the cause, i.e., Y = f (X) + g(X)N . Despite the
generality of the model class, we show the causal
direction is identifiable up to some pathological
cases. To empirically validate these theoretical
findings, we propose two estimators for LSNMs:
an estimator based on (non-linear) feature maps,
and one based on neural networks. Both model
the conditional distribution of Y given X as a
Gaussian parameterized by its natural parameters.
When the feature maps are correctly specified, we
prove that our estimator is jointly concave, and a
consistent estimator for the cause-effect identification task. Although the the neural network does
not inherit those guarantees, it can fit functions of
arbitrary complexity, and reaches state-of-the-art
performance across benchmarks.

Anticausal Direction

2.5

Cause X

Effect Y

2.5
0.0

−2.5

LSNM
ANM

0.0

−2.5
−2.5

0.0

2.5

−2.5

0.0

2.5

Cause X
Effect Y
Figure 1. Location-scale and additive noise model fits on MNU
pair 55. Both models show a similar mean regression but the
LSNM can model the scale of the variance. Therefore, the LSNM
correctly identifies the causal direction with a log-likelihood difference of ≈ 0.155 while the ANM identifies the wrong direction
with difference ≈ −0.001.

model expresses the effect Y as a function of the cause X
and an independent noise term N , that is, Y = f (X, N ).
There exists a vast literature that derived assumptions under
which restricted SCMs are identifiable. That is, there exists
no backward model which fulfills the same modeling assumptions as the assumed forward model. For simple linear
additive noise models (ANMs), for example, it has been
shown that if the data are non-Gaussian, then there exists
no backward model, such that the cause can be modeled
as a linear function of the effect and an additive independent noise term (Shimizu et al., 2006). Instead, for all such
backward models, the noise will depend on the effect. Apart
from linear models, identifiability results have been established for non-linear ANMs (Hoyer et al., 2009; Bühlmann
et al., 2014), where Y = f (X) + N and post non-linear
(PNL) noise models (Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009; Zhang
et al., 2015), where Y = f2 (f1 (X) + N ). Besides identifiability, it has also been shown that consistent estimators for
ANMs exist (Kpotufe et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Distinguishing cause from effect, given only observational
data, is a fundamental problem in many natural sciences
such as medicine or biology, and lies at the core of causal
discovery. Without any prior knowledge, distinguishing
whether X causes Y (X → Y ), or whether Y causes X
(Y → X) is unattainable (Pearl, 2000). When assuming a
properly restricted structural causal model (SCM), however,
the true graph that generated the data is identifiable (Peters
et al., 2011). In its most general form, a structural causal
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Seminar for Statistics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 4 AI Center, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Alexander
Immer <alexander.immer@inf.ethz.ch>, Alexander Marx <alexander.marx@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Here, we focus on location-scale noise models (LSNMs)
or heteroscedastic noise models,1 where the effect Y is ex1
Heteroscedastic noise refers to the setting where the variance
of the noise is non-constant and depends on the value of X. To
emphasize that we model N as an independent source scaled by a
function over X, we use the notion of location-scale noise.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

