Cross-Entropy Loss Functions:
Theoretical Analysis and Applications

Anqi Mao 1 Mehryar Mohri 2 1 Yutao Zhong 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Cross-entropy is a widely used loss function in
applications. It coincides with the logistic loss
applied to the outputs of a neural network, when
the softmax is used. But, what guarantees can
we rely on when using cross-entropy as a surrogate loss? We present a theoretical analysis of a
broad family of loss functions, comp-sum losses,
that includes cross-entropy (or logistic loss), generalized cross-entropy, the mean absolute error
and other cross-entropy-like loss functions. We
give the first H-consistency bounds for these loss
functions. These are non-asymptotic guarantees
that upper bound the zero-one loss estimation error in terms of the estimation error of a surrogate
loss, for the specific hypothesis set H used. We
further show that our bounds are tight. These
bounds depend on quantities called minimizability gaps. To make them more explicit, we give
a specific analysis of these gaps for comp-sum
losses. We also introduce a new family of loss
functions, smooth adversarial comp-sum losses,
that are derived from their comp-sum counterparts by adding in a related smooth term. We
show that these loss functions are beneficial in the
adversarial setting by proving that they admit Hconsistency bounds. This leads to new adversarial
robustness algorithms that consist of minimizing
a regularized smooth adversarial comp-sum loss.
While our main purpose is a theoretical analysis,
we also present an extensive empirical analysis
comparing comp-sum losses. We further report
the results of a series of experiments demonstrating that our adversarial robustness algorithms outperform the current state-of-the-art, while also
achieving a superior non-adversarial accuracy.

Most current learning algorithms rely on minimizing the
cross-entropy loss to achieve a good performance in a classification task. This is because directly minimizing the zeroone classification loss is computationally hard. But, what
guarantees can we benefit from when using cross-entropy
as a surrogate loss?
Cross-entropy coincides with the (multinomial) logistic loss
applied to the outputs of a neural network, when the softmax is used. It is known that the logistic loss is Bayes
consistent (Zhang, 2004a). Thus, asymptotically, a nearly
optimal minimizer of the logistic loss over the family of
all measurable functions is also a nearly optimal optimizer
of the zero-one classification loss. However, this does not
supply any information about learning with a typically restricted hypothesis set, which of course would not contain
all measurable functions. It also provides no guarantee for
approximate minimizers (non-asymptotic guarantee) since
convergence could be arbitrarily slow. What non-asymptotic
guarantees can we rely on when minimizing the logistic loss
with a restricted hypothesis set, such as a family of neural
networks?
Recent work by Awasthi, Mao, Mohri, and Zhong (2022b;a)
introduced the notion of H-consistency bounds. These are
upper bounds on the zero-one estimation error of any predictor in a hypothesis set H in terms of its surrogate loss estimation error. Such guarantees are thus both non-asymptotic and
hypothesis set-specific and therefore more informative than
Bayes consistency guarantees (Zhang, 2004a; Bartlett et al.,
2006; Steinwart, 2007; Tewari & Bartlett, 2007). For multiclass classification, the authors derived such guarantees
for the so-called sum-losses, such as the sum-exponential
loss function of Weston & Watkins (1998), and constrained
losses, such as the loss function of Lee et al. (2004), where
the scores (logits) must sum to zero. To the best of our
knowledge, no such guarantee has been given for the more
widely used logistic loss (or cross-entropy).

1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY;
Google Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Anqi Mao
<aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>, Mehryar Mohri <mohri@google.com>,
Yutao Zhong <yutao@cims.nyu.edu>.
2

This paper presents the first H-consistency bounds for the
logistic loss, which can be used to derive directly guarantees for current algorithms used in the machine learning
community. More generally, we will consider a broader

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

