Homomorphism Autoencoder — Learning Group Structured Representations
from Observed Transitions
Hamza Keurti 1 2 3 Hsiao-Ru Pan 1 Michel Besserve 1 Benjamin Grewe 2
Bernhard Schölkopf 1
actions. Humans acquire such internal models by interacting with the world, but the learning principles allowing it
remain elusive. We investigate how Machine Learning (ML)
can shed light on this question, as it moves towards representations that carry more than just observational information
(Sutton & Barto, 2015; Schölkopf et al., 2021) and develops
tools for interactive and geometric structure learning (Cohen
& Welling, 2016; Eslami et al., 2018),

Abstract
How can agents learn internal models that veridically represent interactions with the real world
is a largely open question. As machine learning
is moving towards representations containing not
just observational but also interventional knowledge, we study this problem using tools from representation learning and group theory. We propose methods enabling an agent acting upon the
world to learn internal representations of sensory
information that are consistent with actions that
modify it. We use an autoencoder equipped with
a group representation acting on its latent space,
trained using an equivariance-derived loss in order
to enforce a suitable homomorphism property on
the group representation. In contrast to existing
work, our approach does not require prior knowledge of the group and does not restrict the set of
actions the agent can perform. We motivate our
method theoretically, and show empirically1 that
it can learn a group representation of the actions,
thereby capturing the structure of the set of transformations applied to the environment. We further
show that this allows agents to predict the effect
of sequences of future actions with improved accuracy.

Our setting is inspired by neuroscientific evidence that, as
animals use their motor apparatus to act, efference copies of
motor signals are sent to the brain’s sensory system where
they are integrated with incoming sensory observations to
predict future sensory inputs (Keller et al., 2012). We argue that such efference copies can be useful for learning
structured latent representations of sensory observations
and for disentangling the key latent factors of behavioral
relevance. This view is also in line with hypotheses formulated by developmental psychology (Piaget, 1964), stating
that perceiving an object is not creating a mental copy of it
but rather internalizing an understanding of how this object
transforms under different interventions. We translate this
idea into an artificial setting in which an agent has to build
an internal representation of a novel environment through
an interactive process. To intervene on its environment, the
agent is allowed to perform a set of transformations, while
observing the impact of its actions. The agent is provided
with a value of the efference copy associated with each
transformation, but does not have prior knowledge on how
they are structured and how they affect the environment.

1. Introduction
One of the most enigmatic questions addressed by mammalian intelligence is how to build an internal model of the
external world that represents all behavior-relevant information to efficiently anticipate the consequences of future

In reinforcement learning (RL), interaction probes the structure of the environment and can be leveraged to learn predictive world models that capture the effect of actions (Ha &
Schmidhuber, 2018). While RL heavily relies on a reward
signal, this does not cover all forms of human learning, and
other objectives compatible with biological evidence have
been proposed, such as predictive coding (Rao & Ballard,
1999; Pezzulo et al., 2022). Our approach, too, aims to
complement rather than utilize RL.

1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Institute of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
3
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems. Correspondence
to: Hamza Keurti <hamza.keurti@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code can be found at https://github.com/
hamzakeurti/homomorphismvae

We will aim to learn a type of correspondence (mathematically, a homomorphism) between the interventional structure of the world and our representation thereof. To this end,
1

