Data Structures for Density Estimation

Anders Aamand * 1 Alexandr Andoni 2 Justin Y. Chen 1 Piotr Indyk 1 Shyam Narayanan 1 Sandeep Silwal 1

Abstract

1985), Devroye-Lugosi (Devroye & Lugosi, 2001) showed
that O(log(k)/ε2 ) samples are sufficient to solve the improper version of the problem for some constant C > 1
with a constant probability in O(k 2 log(k)/ε2 ) time. Recently Acharya et al (Acharya et al., 2018) improved the
time to O(k log(k)/ε2 ) time.

We study statistical/computational tradeoffs for
the following density estimation problem: given
k distributions v1 , . . . , vk over a discrete domain
of size n, and sampling access to a distribution p,
identify vi that is “close” to p. Our main result is
the first data structure that, given a sublinear (in
n) number of samples from p, identifies vi in time
sublinear in k. We also give an improved version
of the algorithm of (Acharya et al., 2018) that
reports vi in time linear in k. The experimental
evaluation of the latter algorithm shows that it
achieves a significant reduction in the number of
operations needed to achieve a given accuracy
compared to prior work.

Despite the generality of the formulation, this approach
yields almost optimal sampling bounds for many natural classes of distributions such as mixtures of Gaussians (Daskalakis & Kamath, 2014; Suresh et al., 2014;
Diakonikolas et al., 2019), see also the survey (Diakonikolas, 2016). Furthermore, the method has been extended to
enable various forms of privacy (Canonne et al., 2019; Bun
et al., 2019; Gopi et al., 2020; Kamath et al., 2020).
When the domain U is a discrete set of size n, the problem
can be viewed as a variant of approximate nearest neighbor
search over n-dimensional vectors under the L1 norm, a
problem that has been studied extensively (Andoni et al.,
2018). Specifically, given a set of k distributions v1 , . . . , vk ,
the goal of C-approximate nearest neighbor search is to
build a data structure that, given any query distribution p,
returns vi such that ∥p − vi ∥1 ≤ C · minj ∥p − vj ∥1 .

1. Introduction
Finding the hypothesis that best matches a given set of samples, i.e., the density estimation problem, is a fundamental
task in statistics and machine learning. In the finite setting,
this task can be formulated as follows: given k distributions
v1 , . . . , vk over some domain U and access to samples from
a distribution p over U , output vi that is “close” to p. In the
“proper” case, we assume that p = vj for some 1 ≤ j ≤ k,
and the goal is to output vi such that ∥p − vi ∥1 ≤ ε for some
error parameter ε > 0. In the more general “improper” case,
p is arbitrary and the goal is to report vi such that

However, in the density estimation problem, the query distribution p is not specified fully, but instead the algorithm is
given only samples from p. This makes the problem substantially richer and more complex, as in addition to the usual
computational resources (data structure space, query time),
one also needs to consider the number of samples taken
from p, a statistical resource. Thus, designing data structures for this problem involves making tradeoffs between
the computational and statistical resources, with the known
algorithms forming the endpoints of the tradeoff curve. In
particular:

∥p − vi ∥1 ≤ C · min ∥p − vj ∥1 + ε
j

for some constant C > 1 and error parameter ε > 0.
The density estimation problem has been studied extensively.
The work of Scheffe (Scheffe, 1947), Yatracos (Yatracos,
∗
Authors listed alphabetically. 1 Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 2 Data Science Institute, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10027, USA. Correspondence to:
Anders Aamand <aamand@mit.edu>, Alexandr Andoni <andoni@mit.edu>, Justin Y. Chen <justc@mit.edu>, Piotr Indyk
<indyk@mit.edu>, Shyam Narayanan <shyamsn@mit.edu>,
Sandeep Silwal <silwal@mit.edu>.

• If the goal is to optimize the computational efficiency
of the data structure, one can learn the query distribution p up to an additive error of ε using O(n/ε2 ) samples (Kamath et al., 2015), and use any c-approximate
nearest neighbor algorithm for the L1 norm. In particular, the algorithm of (Andoni & Razenshteyn,
2015) yields (roughly) O(nk + k 1+1/(2c−1) ) space
and O(nk 1/(2c−1) ) query time. This leads to an algorithm with polynomial space and sublinear (in k) query

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

