Federated Linear Contextual Bandits with User-level Differential Privacy

Ruiquan Huang 1 Huanyu Zhang 2 Luca Melis 2 Milan Shen 2 Meisam Hejazinia 3 Jing Yang 1

Abstract

Bianchi, 2012; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; 2013), and have
proposed several federated bandits models and learning algorithms (Shi & Shen, 2021; Shi et al., 2021; Dubey &
Pentland, 2020; Huang et al., 2021; He et al., 2022a). Under
the classical MAB model, a player chooses to play one out
of a set of arms at each time slot. An arm, if played, will
generate a reward that is randomly drawn from a fixed but
unknown distribution. With all previous observations, the
player needs to decide which arm to pull in each time in
order to maximize the cumulative expected reward. MAB
thus represents an online learning model that naturally captures the intrinsic exploration-exploitation tradeoff in many
sequential decision-making problems. Under the new realm
of federated bandits, each client is facing a local bandits
model with shared parameters. While classical MAB allows immediate access to the sequentially generated data
for decision-making, in federated bandits, local data streams
are generated and analyzed at the clients, with periodic information exchange among clients. Such a model is naturally
motivated by a corpus of applications, such as recommender
systems, clinical trials, and cognitive radio, where the sequential decision-making involves multiple clients and is
distributed by nature.

This paper studies federated linear contextual bandits under the notion of user-level differential privacy (DP). We first introduce a unified federated
bandits framework that can accommodate various definitions of DP in the sequential decisionmaking setting. We then formally introduce userlevel central DP (CDP) and local DP (LDP) in
the federated bandits framework, and investigate
the fundamental trade-offs between the learning
regrets and the corresponding DP guarantees in
a federated linear contextual bandits model. For
CDP, we propose a federated algorithm termed as
ROBIN and show that it is near-optimal in terms
of the number of clients M and the privacy budget
ε by deriving nearly-matching upper and lower
regret bounds when user-level DP is satisfied. For
LDP, we obtain several lower bounds, indicating
that learning under user-level (ε, δ)-LDP must suffer a regret√blow-up
√ factor at least min{1/ε, M }
or min{1/ ε, M } under different conditions.

Meanwhile, user-level differential privacy (DP) has emerged
as a stronger but more realistic notion of privacy, which
guarantees the privacy of a user’s entire contribution of data
instead of individual samples. Roughly speaking, user-level
DP requires that the output of an algorithm does not significantly change when a user’s entire contribution has been
changed. While user-level DP has been studied in applications involving static datasets, such as discrete distribution
estimation (Acharya et al., 2022; Cummings et al., 2021),
learning (Levy et al., 2021; Ghazi et al., 2021), and federated
learning (Girgis et al., 2022), to the best of our knowledge,
it has not been studied in the online setting, where data is
generated sequentially as decisions are made and outcomes
are observed.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017a) has become a trending distributed machine learning paradigm
where numerous clients collaboratively train a prediction
model under the coordination of a central server while keeping the local training data at each client. FL is motivated by
various applications where real-world data are exogenously
generated at edge devices, and it is desirable to protect the
privacy of local data by only sharing model updates instead
of the raw data.
While the majority of FL studies focus on the supervised
learning setting, recently, a few researchers begin to extend FL to the multi-armed bandits (MAB) framework (Lai
& Robbins, 1985; Auer et al., 2002; Bubeck & Cesa-

In this work, we take an initial effort to incorporate userlevel DP into the framework of federated bandits, where M
clients work collaboratively to learn a shared bandits model
through a central server. We note that ensuring user-level
DP in federated bandits setting is extremely challenging,
mainly due to the following reasons. First, due to the interactive sequential decision-making nature of bandits, we do

1

School of EECS, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA 2 Meta, USA 3 Google, USA. Correspondence
to: Jing Yang <yangjing@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

