Actor-Critic Alignment for Offline-to-Online Reinforcement Learning

Zishun Yu 1 Xinhua Zhang 1

Abstract

Unfortunately, it has been long observed that a direct offlineto-online (O2O) transfer often leads to catastrophic degradation of performance in the online stage, which is unacceptable in critical applications including medical treatment
and autonomous driving. A key cause lies in the significant shift of state distribution at online phase compared
with the offline data (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al.,
2019; Fu et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020a). As a result, the
Bellman backup suffers a compounded error (Farahmand
et al., 2010; Munos, 2005), because the Q-value has not
been well estimated for the state-actions lying outside the
offline distribution.

Deep offline reinforcement learning has recently
demonstrated considerable promises in leveraging
offline datasets, providing high-quality models
that significantly reduce the online interactions
required for fine-tuning. However, such a benefit
is often diminished due to the marked state-action
distribution shift, which causes significant bootstrap error and wipes out the good initial policy.
Existing solutions resort to constraining the policy
shift or balancing the sample replay based on their
online-ness. However, they require online estimation of distribution divergence or density ratio. To
avoid such complications, we propose deviating
from existing actor-critic approaches that directly
transfer the state-action value functions. Instead,
we post-process them by aligning with the offline
learned policy, so that the Q-values for actions
outside the offline policy are also tamed. As a
result, the online fine-tuning can be simply performed as in the standard actor-critic algorithms.
We show empirically that the proposed method improves the performance of the fine-tuned robotic
agents on various simulated tasks.

A number of solutions have been developed to address this
issue. The most straightforward approach is importance
sampling (Laroche et al., 2019; Gelada & Bellemare, 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020; Huang & Jiang, 2020), which requires an
additional effort of estimating the behavior policy, and suffers from high variance, especially when it differs markedly
from the learned policy (a more realistic issue for the offline
setting than the conventional off-policy setting). The modelbased approach, on the other hand, also suffers from the
distribution shift in state marginals and actions (Mao et al.,
2022; Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020; Janner et al.,
2019). It may exploit the model to pursue out-of-distribution
(OOD) states and actions where the model mis-believes to
yield a high return. So they also require detecting and quantifying the shift. In addition, they suffer from standard
challenges plaguing model-based RL algorithms such as
long horizon and high dimensionality.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) provides a novel tool
that allows offline batch data to be leveraged by RL algorithms without having to interact with the environment
(Levine et al., 2020). This opens up new opportunities for
important scenarios such as health care decision making,
and goal-directed dialog learning. Due to the limitation of
offline data, it generally remains beneficial and necessary to
fine-tune the learned model through online interactions, and
ideally the latter will enjoy a faster learning curve thanks to
the favorable initialization.

Dynamic programming proffers lower variance and directly
learns the value functions and policy. Several approaches
have been proposed to combat distribution shift. A natural
idea is to constrain the policy to the proximity of the behavior policy, and this has been implemented with probability
divergences in AWAC (Nair et al., 2020) and Siegel et al.
(2020); Peng et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2019); Kumar et al.
(2019), or by behavior cloning regularization (Zhao et al.,
2021; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). A second class of approaches
resort to pessimistic under-estimate of the state-action values (Kumar et al., 2020b; Kostrikov et al., 2021), especially
for OOD actions that could have an unjustified high value.
Conservative Q-learning (CQL, Kumar et al., 2020b) has
been shown to produce a relatively safer O2O transfer in balanced replay (Lee et al., 2022), which further prioritizes the

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA. Correspondence to: Zishun Yu
<zyu32@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

