Why Is Public Pretraining Necessary for Private Model Training?

Arun Ganesh 1 Mahdi Haghifam 2 Milad Nasr 1 Sewoong Oh 1 3 Thomas Steinke 1 Om Thakkar 1
Abhradeep Thakurta 1 Lun Wang 1

Abstract

vacy leakage in training a model with two scalar parameters:
ε > 0 and δ ∈ [0, 1]. By introducing enough randomness
in the training, one can ensure that the model does not depend too much on each individual training example. This
provides plausible deniability to the participants and evades
privacy attacks, achieving strong DP with small values of
(ε, δ). We give a formal definition in Definition 1.1.

In the privacy-utility tradeoff of a model trained
on benchmark language and vision tasks, remarkable improvements have been widely reported
when the model is pretrained on public data.
Some gain is expected as these models inherit
the benefits of transfer learning, which is the standard motivation in non-private settings. However,
the stark contrast in the gain of pretraining between non-private and private machine learning
suggests that the gain in the latter is rooted in a
fundamentally different cause. To explain this
phenomenon, we hypothesize that the non-convex
loss landscape of a model training necessitates the
optimization algorithm to go through two phases.
In the first, the algorithm needs to select a good
“basin” in the loss landscape. In the second, the
algorithm solves an easy optimization within that
basin. The former is a harder problem to solve
with private data, while the latter is harder to solve
with public data due to a distribution shift or data
scarcity. Guided by this intuition, we provide theoretical constructions that provably demonstrate
the separation between private training with and
without public pretraining. Further, systematic experiments on CIFAR10 and Librispeech provide
supporting evidence for our hypothesis.

One of the main challenges in training on private data is that,
without pretraining on some publicly available data, utility
and privacy trades off unfavorably on standard benchmark
tasks. Given a target task, such as table-to-text generation,
on a private dataset, say E2E dataset (Novikova et al., 2017),
state-of-the-art techniques suffer from significant performance degradation to achieve even an acceptable level of
privacy. For example, a weak privacy guarantee of ε = 8 significantly deteriorates the performance of the trained model
compared to the one trained without privacy, i.e. ε = ∞
(second row of Table 1). Perhaps surprisingly, there is one
simple change to the training algorithm that can significantly
reduce this cost of privacy: pretraining the model on some
public data (first row of Table 1).

with public pretrain
without public pretrain
gain of public pretraining

ε=∞
69.46
65.73
3.73

ε=8
63.19
24.25
38.94

cost of
privacy
6.27
41.48

Table 1. BLEU score for generating descriptions of table entries on
E2E dataset reported in (Li et al., 2022b, Table 2) with δ = 10−5 .
The first row is pretrained on GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
As modern machine learning models are increasingly capable of memorizing the training data, membership inference
attacks and data reconstruction attacks have successfully
demonstrated the vulnerability of releasing models trained
on sensitive data. Differential Privacy (DP), introduced by
Dwork et al. (2006), is now a gold standard measure of pri-

Such remarkable gain of public pretraining has been widely
observed in standard benchmark vision and language tasks,
which we survey in Appendix B. This includes CIFAR-10,
MNIST, and Fashion MNIST in (Tramer & Boneh, 2020),
CIFAR-100, ImageNet, and Places-365 in (De et al., 2022),
text generation with E2E and DART in (Li et al., 2022b),
and next word prediction on Reddit dataset (Kerrigan et al.,
2020). Note that in all these cases, the public data distribution differs from the target task distribution. Nevertheless,
we expect some gain from public pretraining, drawing analogy from its success in non-private training of large models
(e.g., first column in Table 1). However, the stark difference

*
Equal contribution 1 Google. 2 University of Toronto. Part
of this work done while the author was an intern at Google.
3
University of Washington.. Correspondence to: Arun Ganesh
<arunganesh@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

