Fully Dynamic Submodular Maximization over Matroids

Paul Dütting * 1 Federico Fusco * 2 Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Ashkan Norouzi-Fard * 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam * 1

Abstract

One fundamental limitation of these algorithms is that they
are not well-suited to handle highly dynamic datasets, where
elements are added and deleted continuously. Many realworld applications exhibit such dynamic behaviour; for example, Dey et al. (2012) crawled two snapshots of 1.4 million New York City Facebook users several months apart
and reported that 52% of the users changed their profile
privacy settings during this period. Similarly, TikTok processes millions of video uploads and deletions each day,
while also Snapchat processes millions of message uploads
and deletions daily. In such settings, it is essential to quickly
perform basic machine learning tasks, such as active learning or data summarization, so it is crucial to design fully
dynamic algorithms that can efficiently process streams containing not only insertions but also an arbitrary number of
deletions, with small processing time per update.

Maximizing monotone submodular functions under a matroid constraint is a classic algorithmic
problem with multiple applications in data mining
and machine learning. We study this classic problem in the fully dynamic setting, where elements
can be both inserted and deleted in real-time. Our
main result is a randomized algorithm that maintains an efficient data structure with an Õ(k 2 )
amortized update time (in the number of additions and deletions) and yields a 4-approximate
solution, where k is the rank of the matroid.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the ubiquitous nature of “diminishing returns”
functions, submodular maximization is a central problem in
unsupervised learning with multiple applications in different
fields, including video analysis (Zheng et al., 2014), data
summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011; Bairi et al., 2015),
sparse reconstruction (Bach, 2010; Das & Kempe, 2011),
and active learning (Golovin & Krause, 2011; Amanatidis
et al., 2022).

For these reasons, many problems have been studied in the
dynamic setting, even if it is notoriously difficult to obtain
efficient algorithms in this model. For monotone submodular maximization with a cardinality constraint, a (2 + ε)approximation algorithm with poly-logarithmic amortized
update time (with respect to the length of the stream) was
designed by Lattanzi et al. (2020); subsequently, this result
has been proved to be tight by Chen & Peng (2022). In the
case of submodular maximization with matroid constraints,
algorithms have been proposed only for specialized dynamic
settings, namely sliding windows (Chen et al., 2016; Epasto
et al., 2017) and deletion robustness (Dütting et al., 2022;
Mirzasoleiman et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2022b).

Given a submodular function f , a universe of elements
V , and a family F ⊆ 2V of subsets of V the submodular maximization problem consists in finding a set S ∈ F
that maximizes f (S). A classic choice for F are the capacity constraints (a.k.a. k-uniform matroid constraints)
where every subset S of cardinality at most k is feasible.
Another common restriction that generalizes capacity constraints and comes up in many real-world scenarios are matroid constraints. Submodular maximization under matroid
constraints is NP-hard, although efficient approximation
algorithms exist for this task in both the centralized and
streaming setting (Fisher et al., 1978; Călinescu et al., 2011;
Chakrabarti & Kale, 2015; Ene & Nguyen, 2019).

Our contribution. In this paper we propose the first fully
dynamic algorithm for submodular maximization under a
matroid constraint with amortized running time that is sublinear in the length of the stream. Our randomized algorithm
processes a stream of arbitrarily interleaved insertions and
deletions with an (expected) amortized time per update that
is Õ(k 2 )∗ . Crucially, it also continuously maintains a solution whose value is (deterministically), after each update, at
least 14 of the optimum on the available elements.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering “Antonio Ruberti”,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. Correspondence to:
Federico Fusco <fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it>.

Technical challenges. While many algorithms are known
to handle insertions-only streams, it is challenging to efficiently handle deletions: removing one element from a

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

∗
In this work, Õ hides factors poly-logarithmic in n (the number of elements in the stream) and k (the rank of the matroid).

1

