Fast Online Node Labeling for Very Large Graphs

Baojian Zhou 1 2 Yifan Sun 3 Reza Babanezhad 4

Abstract

user proceeds to purchase the recommended product. In this
context, leveraging local information, such as recommendations from friends, becomes a viable strategy. However, this
presents a significant challenge as we need to generate periteration predictions within microseconds while managing
large-scale graphs comprising millions or even billions of
nodes. Due to their computational complexity, traditional
methods that require solving linear systems of order O n3
are ill-suited for this task where n is the number of nodes.
This issue is not only critical in web-spam classification
(Herbster et al., 2008b), product recommendation (Ying
et al., 2018), and community detection (Leung et al., 2009),
but also permeates many other graph-based applications.

This paper studies the online node classification problem under a transductive learning setting. Current methods either invert a graph kernel matrix with O(n3 ) runtime and O(n2 ) space
complexity or sample a large volume of random
spanning trees, thus are difficult to scale to large
graphs. In this work, we propose an improvement based on the online relaxation technique
introduced by a series of works (Rakhlin et al.,
2012; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2015;
√ 2017). We first
prove an effective regret O( n1+γ ) when suitable parameterized graph kernels are chosen, then
propose an approximate
algorithm FAST ONL en√
joying O(k n1+γ ) regret based on this relaxation. The key of FAST ONL is a generalized
local push method that effectively approximates
inverse matrix columns and applies to a series of
popular kernels. Furthermore, the per-prediction
cost is O(vol (S) log 1/ϵ) locally dependent on
the graph with linear memory cost. Experiments
show that our scalable method enjoys a better
tradeoff between local and global consistency.

Previous studies in this area have fallen into two categories.
The first involves sampling the spanning tree from the graph
and then predicting labels via a weighted majority-like
method (Herbster et al., 2008b; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2009;
2013). Such methods require repeated spanning tree samplings and often suffer a large variance issue. The second
family of methods designs a loss function and builds feature
vectors from different graph kernels (Herbster et al., 2005;
Herbster & Pontil, 2006; Herbster & Lever, 2009; Herbster
et al., 2015; Gentile et al., 2013; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2015;
2016b; 2017). These kernel-based methods can successfully
capture the label smoothness of graphs but need to invert
the graph kernel matrices, severely limiting their scalability.

1. Introduction

Several classical and modern graph representation learning
works (Zhu et al., 2003; Blum et al., 2004; Kipf & Welling,
2017) suggest that graph kernel-based methods are more
effective in real-world applications. We focus on a significant line of work based on online relaxation (Rakhlin &
Sridharan, 2015; 2016a;b; 2017), which achieves linear time
per-iteration cost. However, two challenges remain. First,
the choice of the used graph kernel matrix affects performance, and it is unclear how to make this choice optimally
and obtain an effective regret. Second, the previous relaxation method (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2017) assumes that the
inverse of the graph kernel matrix is readily available, which
is not reasonable in practice. Note that a vanilla approach to
computing a matrix inverse of a graph kernel involves O(n3 )
computational cost and O(n2 ) space complexity. Approximate matrix inverse techniques are required, but the regret
guarantee for utilizing such schemes does not yet exist. The
key question, then, is whether there exists an online node

This paper explores the online node labeling problem within
a transductive learning framework. Specifically, we consider the scenario where multi-category node labels yt enter
online, and our goal is to predict future labels yt+1 under
constraints imposed by an underlying graph. To illustrate
this, consider the example of online product recommendations on platforms such as Amazon. At each time step t,
the task is to recommend one of k products to a user (node)
based on their relationships (edges) with other users. The
success of these recommendations is gauged by whether the
1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University 3 Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, USA 4 Samsung-SAIT AI lab, Montreal, Canada.
Correspondence to: Baojian Zhou <bjzhou@fudan.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

