Scaling Laws for Generative Mixed-Modal Language Models

Armen Aghajanyan * 1 Lili Yu * 1 Alexis Conneau 1 Wei-Ning Hsu 1 Karen Hambardzumyan 2 Susan Zhang 1
Stephen Roller 1 Naman Goyal 1 Omer Levy 1 Luke Zettlemoyer 1 3

Abstract

2022), images (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yasunaga et al., 2022),
and molecules or proteins (Chilingaryan et al., 2022; Hsu
et al., 2022). Recent work has also introduced unified models (Aghajanyan et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Zellers et al., 2022) that can simultaneously model
multiple modalities. One advantage of generative modeling in these cases is that the models scale well in practice;
adding data, compute, or parameters typically improves
model quality. These scaling trends have been carefully
studied for uni-modal models (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) and some recent work focuses on pairs of
modalities (Droppo & Elibol, 2021; Henighan et al., 2020).
However, the scaling behavior of larger number of modalities remains largely unstudied.

Generative language models define distributions
over sequences of tokens that can represent essentially any combination of data modalities (e.g.,
any permutation of image tokens from VQ-VAEs,
speech tokens from HuBERT, BPE tokens for language or code, and so on). To better understand
the scaling properties of such mixed-modal models, we conducted over 250 experiments using
seven different modalities and model sizes ranging from 8 million to 30 billion, trained on 5100 billion tokens. We report new mixed-modal
scaling laws that unify the contributions of individual modalities and the interactions between
them. Specifically, we explicitly model the optimal synergy and competition due to data and
model size as an additive term to previous unimodal scaling laws. We also find four empirical
phenomena observed during the training, such as
emergent coordinate-ascent style training that naturally alternates between modalities, guidelines
for selecting critical hyper-parameters, and connections between mixed-modal competition and
training stability. Finally, we test our scaling law
by training a 30B speech-text model, which significantly outperforms the corresponding unimodal
models. Overall, our research provides valuable
insights into the design and training of mixedmodal generative models, an important new class
of unified models that have unique distributional
properties.

We present an extensive empirical study of scaling laws
for mixed-modal generative language models over tokens.
We assume that every modality can be represented as a
sequence of tokens (e.g. VQ-VAEs for images (Esser et al.,
2020) or HuBERT for speech (Hsu et al., 2021)). With this
assumption, we can train a single discrete language model to
represent data with arbitrary subsets of modalities presented
in arbitrary orders. Such mixed-modal models are very
general, but it is an open question the extent to which scale
alone will be enough to overcome the inherent competition
that comes as we add more modalities to a single model.
Through extensive experimentation, including over 250 individual experiments with seven modalities and model sizes
ranging from 8 million to 30 billion, we have identified
a scaling law that reflects the contributions of individual
modalities and an additional term that captures the interaction between modalities (whether it be one of competition
or synergy). We develop mixed-modal scaling laws that directly model competition between modalities and correctly
predict data and model regimes where competition between
modalities during training progresses into synergy. Specifically, we showed that our scaling laws correctly predicted
the compute regime (30B model size, 45B token size), where
we saw the complete reduction of modality competition for
the Speech and Text modalities.

1. Introduction
Generative language models have been developed for a wide
range of data modalities, including natural language text
(Brown et al., 2020), code (Chen et al., 2021; Fried et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 FAIR 2 YerevaNN 3 University of Washington.
Correspondence to: Armen Aghajanyan <armenag@meta.com>.

We also report a number of new empirical phenomena that
arise during the training of mixed-modal models, including
the tendency for the models to prioritize the optimization

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

