Improved Algorithms for White-Box Adversarial Streams

Ying Feng 1 David P. Woodruff 1

Abstract

going additive updates to its coordinates. Formally, there
is an underlying n-dimensional vector x, which could be
a flattened matrix or tensor, which is initialized to 0n and
evolves via an arbitrary sequence of m ≤ poly(n) additive updates to its coordinates. These updates are fed into
a streaming algorithm, and the t-th update has the form
(it , δt ), meaning xit ← xit + δt . Here it ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}
and δt ∈ {−M, −M + 1, . . . , M − 1, M } for an M ≤
poly(n)1 . Throughout the stream, x is promised to be in
{−M, −M + 1, . . . , M − 1, M }n . A streaming algorithm
makes one pass over the stream of updates and uses limited
memory to approximate a function of x.

We study streaming algorithms in the white-box
adversarial stream model, where the internal state
of the streaming algorithm is revealed to an adversary who adaptively generates the stream updates,
but the algorithm obtains fresh randomness unknown to the adversary at each time step. We incorporate cryptographic assumptions to construct
robust algorithms against such adversaries. We
propose efficient algorithms for sparse recovery
of vectors, low rank recovery of matrices and tensors, as well as low rank plus sparse recovery of
matrices, i.e., robust PCA. Unlike deterministic
algorithms, our algorithms can report when the input is not sparse or low rank even in the presence
of such an adversary. We use these recovery algorithms to improve upon and solve new problems
in numerical linear algebra and combinatorial optimization on white-box adversarial streams. For
example, we give the first efficient algorithm for
outputting a matching in a graph with insertions
and deletions to its edges provided the matching
size is small, and otherwise we declare the matching size is large. We also improve the approximation versus memory tradeoff of previous work for
estimating the number of non-zero elements in a
vector and computing the matrix rank.

A large body of work on streaming algorithms has been
designed for oblivious streams, for which the sequence of
updates may be chosen adversarially, but it is chosen independently of the randomness of the streaming algorithm. In
practical scenarios, this assumption may not be reasonable;
indeed, even if the stream is not generated by an adversary
this may be problematic. For example, if one is running an
optimization procedure, then one may feed future data into
a streaming algorithm based on past outputs of that algorithm, at which point the inputs depend on the algorithm’s
randomness and there is no guarantee of correctness. This
is also true in recommendation systems, where a user may
choose to remove suggestions based on previous queries.
There is a growing body of work on streaming algorithms
that are robust in the black-box adversarial streaming model
(Ben-Eliezer & Yogev, 2020; Ben-Eliezer et al., 2021; Hassidim et al., 2020; Woodruff & Zhou, 2021; Alon et al.,
2021; Kaplan et al., 2021; Braverman et al., 2021; Menuhin
& Naor, 2021; Attias et al., 2021; Ben-Eliezer et al., 2022;
Chakrabarti et al., 2022), in which the adversary can monitor only the output of the streaming algorithm and choose
future stream updates based on these outputs. While useful
in a number of applications, there are other settings where
the adversary may also have access to the internal state of
the algorithm, and this necessitates looking at a stronger
adversarial model known as white-box adversarial streams.

1. Introduction
The streaming model captures key resource requirements
of algorithms for database, machine learning, and network
tasks, where the size of the data is significantly larger than
the available storage, such as for internet and network traffic, financial transactions, simulation data, and so on. This
model was formalized in the work of Alon, Matias, and
Szegedy (Alon et al., 1996), which models a vector under1
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Ying
Feng <yingfeng@andrew.cmu.edu>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.

1
All bounds can be generalized to larger m and M ; this is only
for convenience of notation. Also, our streaming model, which
allows for both positive and negative updates, is referred to as the
(standard) turnstile streaming model in the literature.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

