LIV: Language-Image Representations and Rewards for Robotic Control

Yecheng Jason Ma 1 Vikash Kumar 2 Amy Zhang 2 Osbert Bastani 1 Dinesh Jayaraman 1

Abstract

ciency right off the shelf. Then, it must be able to quickly
and robustly adapt to the specifics of the user’s home, conditioning its language understanding in the particular visual
context of its new habitat. Finally, it must be able to autonomously learn arbitrary new skills specified by its user,
most naturally in plain language.

We present Language-Image Value learning
(LIV), a unified objective for vision-language representation and reward learning from action-free
videos with text annotations. Exploiting a novel
connection between dual reinforcement learning
and mutual information contrastive learning, the
LIV objective trains a multi-modal representation
that implicitly encodes a universal value function
for tasks specified as language or image goals.
We use LIV to pre-train the first control-centric
vision-language representation from large human
video datasets such as EpicKitchen. Given only
a language or image goal, the pre-trained LIV
model can assign dense rewards to each frame in
videos of unseen robots or humans attempting that
task in unseen environments. Further, when some
target domain-specific data is available, the same
objective can be used to fine-tune and improve
LIV and even other pre-trained representations
for robotic control and reward specification in that
domain. In our experiments on several simulated
and real-world robot environments, LIV models
consistently outperform the best prior input state
representations for imitation learning, as well as
reward specification methods for policy synthesis. Our results validate the advantages of joint
vision-language representation and reward learning within the unified, compact LIV framework.
Project website: penn-pal-lab.github.io/LIV

Motivated by such considerations, we identify three key
desiderata for control-aware vision-language representations. The first two deal with qualities of the trained representation: (1) It must align the two modalities to permit
grounding language specifications for effective task representation, and (2) It must capture task-directed progress
grounded in language to supply intermediate learning signals for autonomous skill acquisition. The last desideratum is concerned with how these control-aware VLMs
must be trained. Language grounding is commonly contextdependent, so effective representations must be domainaware. On the flip side, domain-specific data is typically
expensive to collect and therefore scarce in robotics settings,
making any domain-specific fine-tuning of large models
challenging. Our third criterion for our vision-language representation then is that: (3) It must permit both extensive
domain-generic pre-training as well as domain-specific
fine-tuning on small datasets.
To achieve all three criteria, we propose Language-Image
Value Learning (LIV), a unified objective for joint visionlanguage representation and reward learning. LIV can flexibly pre-train representations on arbitrary video activity
datasets with text annotations, even including purely observational datasets of human activity, for which there are
several large and conveniently available options (Damen
et al., 2018; Grauman et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2017). Afterwards, the very same objective can be used to fine-tune
those representations on small datasets of in-domain robot
data, to overcome domain gaps and ground language in
context-specific ways.

1. Introduction
What are the key machine learning challenges in building
a general-purpose robot? Consider a home robot for nonexpert end users. Such a robot must acquire common-sense
knowledge applicable to generic homes, permitting it to
operate from visual observations with some minimal profi-

At a technical level, LIV builds on our prior work ValueImplicit Pre-Training (VIP) (Ma et al., 2022b), a selfsupervised approach for learning visual goal-conditioned
value functions and representations from videos, generalizing it to learning multi-modal, vision-language values
and representations from language-aligned videos, as described above. Interestingly, we show that LIV is a more

1
University of Pennsylvania 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to:
Jason Ma <jasonyma@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

