Oracles & Followers: Stackelberg Equilibria in Deep Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Matthias Gerstgrasser 1 2 David Parkes 1 3

Abstract

wishes to choose an optimal strategy considering attackers
will adapt to it (An et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2018). In mechanism design, a designer wants to allocate resources in an
efficient manner, knowing that participants may strategize
(Nisan & Ronen, 1999; Swamy, 2007; Brero et al., 2021a).
More broadly, many multi-agent system design problems
can be viewed as Stackelberg equilibrium problems: we
as the designer take on the role of the Stackelberg leader,
wishing to design a system that is robust to agent behavior.

Stackelberg equilibria arise naturally in a range
of popular learning problems, such as in security games or indirect mechanism design, and
have received increasing attention in the reinforcement learning literature. We present a general
framework for implementing Stackelberg equilibria search as a multi-agent RL problem, allowing
a wide range of algorithmic design choices. We
discuss how previous approaches can be seen as
specific instantiations of this framework. As a key
insight, we note that the design space allows for
approaches not previously seen in the literature,
for instance by leveraging multitask and meta-RL
techniques for follower convergence. We propose one such approach using contextual policies,
and evaluate it experimentally on both standard
and novel benchmark domains, showing greatly
improved sample efficiency compared to previous approaches. Finally, we explore the effect of
adopting algorithm designs outside the borders of
our framework.

In this paper, we are particularly interested in Stackelberg equilibria in sequential decision making settings, i.e.,
stochastic Markov games, and using multi-agent reinforcement learning to learn these equilibria. We make two key
contributions:
1. We introduce a new theoretical framework for framing
Stackelberg equilibria as a multi-agent reinforcement
learning problem.
(a) We give a theorem (Theorem 1) that unifies
and generalizes several prior algorithmic design
choices in the literature.
(b) Complementing this, we show that algorithm designs outside our framework can provably fail
(Theorem 2). In particular, we give to our knowledge the first demonstration that reinforcement
learning (RL) against best-responding opponents
can provably diverge.

1. Introduction
Stackelberg equilibria are an important concept in economics, and in recent years have received increasing attention in computer science and specifically in the multiagent
learning community. They model an asymmetric setting:
a leader who commits to a strategy, and one or more followers who respond. The leader aims to maximize their
reward, knowing that followers in turn will best-respond
to the leader’s choice of strategy. These equilibria appear
in a wide range of settings. In security games, a defender

2. Inspired by Theorem 1, we introduce a novel approach
to accelerating follower best-response convergence,
borrowing ideas from multitask and meta-RL, including an experimental evaluation on existing and new
benchmark domains.
Our theoretical framework (Section 3) allows a black-box
reduction from learning Stackelberg equilibria into separate
leader and follower learning problems. This theory encompasses and generalizes several prior approaches from the
literature, in particular Brero et al. (2021a), and gives a large
design space beyond what has been explored previously.
In particular, our broader framework generalizes beyond
learning Stackelberg equilibria along with follower learning
dynamics to general, query-based follower algorithms. The

1

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Computer
Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
3
Deepmind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Matthias Gerstgrasser <matthias@seas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

