Pareto Manifold Learning: Tackling multiple tasks via ensembles of single-task
models
Nikolaos Dimitriadis 1 Pascal Frossard 1 François Fleuret 2

Abstract

baselines. Apart from the promise of superior performance
and some theoretical benefits (Ruder, 2017), such as generalization properties for the learned representation, modeling multiple tasks jointly has practical benefits as well,
e.g., lower training and inference times and memory requirements. However, building machine learning models
presents a multifaceted host of decisions for multiple and
often competing objectives, such as model complexity, runtime and generalization. Conflicts arise since optimizing
for one metric often leads to the deterioration of other(s).
A single solution satisfying optimally all objectives rarely
exists and practitioners must balance the inherent trade-offs.

In Multi-Task Learning (MTL), tasks may compete and limit the performance achieved on each
other, rather than guiding the optimization to a solution, superior to all its single-task trained counterparts. Since there is often not a unique solution
optimal for all tasks, practitioners have to balance tradeoffs between tasks’ performance, and
resort to optimality in the Pareto sense. Most
MTL methodologies either completely neglect
this aspect, and instead of aiming at learning a
Pareto Front, produce one solution predefined by
their optimization schemes, or produce diverse
but discrete solutions. Recent approaches parameterize the Pareto Front via neural networks, leading to complex mappings from tradeoff to objective space. In this paper, we conjecture that
the Pareto Front admits a linear parameterization in parameter space, which leads us to propose Pareto Manifold Learning, an ensembling
method in weight space. Our approach produces
a continuous Pareto Front in a single training
run, that allows to modulate the performance on
each task during inference. Experiments on multitask learning benchmarks, ranging from image
classification to tabular datasets and scene understanding, show that Pareto Manifold Learning outperforms state-of-the-art single-point algorithms,
while learning a better Pareto parameterization
than multi-point baselines.

The notion of tradeoffs is formally defined as Pareto
optimality. In contrary to single-task learning, where one
metric governs the comparison between methods (e.g.,
top-1 accuracy in ImageNet), multiple models can be
optimal in MTL; e.g., model X yields superior performance
on task A compared to model Y, but the reverse holds true
for task B; thus, there is not a single better model among
the two. Intuitively, improvement on an individual task
performance can come only at the expense of another task.
In this paper, we develop a novel method, Pareto Manifold
Learning, which casts MTL problems as learning an
ensemble of single-task predictors by interpolating among
(ensemble) members during training. By operating in the
convex hull of the members’ weight space, each single-task
model infuses and benefits from representational knowledge
to and from the other members. During training, the
losses are weighted in tandem with the interpolation, i.e.,
a monotonic relationship is imposed between the degree
of a single-task predictor participation and the weight of the
corresponding task loss. Consequently, the ensemble as a
whole engenders a (weight) subspace that explicitly encodes
tradeoffs and results in a continuous parameterization of the
Pareto Front. We identify challenges in guiding the ensemble to such subspaces, designated Pareto subspaces, and
propose solutions regarding balancing the loss contributions,
and regularizing the Pareto properties of the subspaces and
adapting the interpolation sampling distribution.

1. Introduction
In Multi-Task Learning (MTL), multiple tasks are learned
concurrently within a single model, striving towards infusing inductive bias that will help outperform the single-task
1
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland 2 University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Nikolaos Dimitriadis <nikolaos.dimitriadis@epfl.ch>.

Our method is based on a novel geometrical perspective;
multiple Pareto stationary points lie in close proximity
and are connected by simple paths whose parameterization

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

