BNN-DP: Robustness Certification of Bayesian Neural Networks via Dynamic
Programming

Steven Adams 1 Andrea Patanè 2 Morteza Lahijanian 3 Luca Laurenti 1

Abstract

paradigm compared to their deterministic counterpart (Carbone et al., 2020; McAllister et al., 2017). While retaining
the advantages intrinsic to deep learning (e.g., representation
learning), BNNs enable principled evaluation of model uncertainty, which can be used for flagging out-of-distribution
samples and robust decision making (Kahn et al., 2017).
However, existing methods that formally (i.e., with certified
bounds) evaluate the robustness of BNNs (Berrada et al.,
2021; Wicker et al., 2020; Lechner et al., 2021) are limited
to posterior distributions with bounded support, thus not
supporting the majority of the algorithms commonly employed to train BNNs (Blundell et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2018a; Osawa et al., 2019) and lack scalability to BNNs
with non-negligible posterior variance estimates.

In this paper, we introduce BNN-DP, an efficient
algorithmic framework for analysis of adversarial
robustness of Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs).
Given a compact set of input points T ⊂ Rn ,
BNN-DP computes lower and upper bounds on
the BNN’s predictions for all the points in T .
The framework is based on an interpretation of
BNNs as stochastic dynamical systems, which
enables the use of Dynamic Programming (DP)
algorithms to bound the prediction range along the
layers of the network. Specifically, the method
uses bound propagation techniques and convex
relaxations to derive a backward recursion procedure to over-approximate the prediction range of
the BNN with piecewise affine functions. The algorithm is general and can handle both regression
and classification tasks. On a set of experiments
on various regression and classification tasks and
BNN architectures, we show that BNN-DP outperforms state-of-the-art methods by up to four orders of magnitude in both tightness of the bounds
and computational efficiency.

In this paper, we present BNN-DP, a novel algorithmic
framework that quantifies the adversarial robustness of
BNNs with formal (strong) guarantees. BNN-DP is scalable
and supports posterior distributions of unbounded support,
as commonly used in BNNs, e.g., Gaussian distributions.
We consider both regression and classification settings. For
a compact set of input points T ⊂ Rn0 , we study the robustness of the BNN’s decision, i.e., argmax of the expectation
of the softmax in case of classification and expectation of the
output of the BNN for regression, for all the points in T. As
exact computation of these quantities is infeasible (Berrada
et al., 2021), we focus on computing piecewise affine (PWA)
upper and lower bounds. Inspired by Marchi et al. (2021),
we take a unique view of BNNs as stochastic dynamical systems that evolve over the layers of the neural network and
show that the computation of the BNN robustness can be
formulated as the solution of a Dynamic Program (DP). This
allows us to break the computation of adversarial robustness
into a set of simpler sub-problems (one for each layer of
the BNN). Critically, while each of these problems is still
possibly non-convex, we show that accurate and efficient
PWA relaxations can be derived for each by relying on tools
from Gaussian processes and convex optimizations.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks (small and often imperceptible perturbations to input points that can trigger incorrect decisions)
have raised serious concerns about the robustness of models
learned from data (Biggio & Roli, 2018; Goodfellow et al.,
2015). Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs), i.e., neural networks with distributions placed over their parameters, have
been proposed as a potentially more robust machine learning
1

Delft Center for Systems and Control, Technical University of Delft, Delft, 2628 CD, The Netherlands 2 School
of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 2, Ireland 3 Departement of Aerospace Engineering Sciences and Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80303, USA. Correspondence to: Steven Adams
<s.j.l.adams@tudelft.nl>.

We validate our framework on several regression and classification tasks, including the Kin8nm, MNIST, Fashion
MNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets, and a range of BNN architectures. For all tasks, the results show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art competitive approaches in both

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

