Cooperative Open-ended Learning Framework for Zero-shot Coordination

Yang Li * 1 Shao Zhang * 2 Jichen Sun 2 Yali Du 3 Ying Wen 2 Xinbing Wang 2 Wei Pan 1

Abstract

strategies by playing against oneself. While SP can converge
to an equilibrium of the game (Fudenberg et al., 1998), the
strategies often form specific behaviours and conventions to
achieve higher payoffs (Hu et al., 2020). As a result, a fully
converged SP strategy may not be adaptable to coordinating
with unseen strategies (Lerer & Peysakhovich, 2018; Hu
et al., 2020).

Zero-shot coordination in cooperative artificial
intelligence (AI) remains a significant challenge,
which means effectively coordinating with a wide
range of unseen partners. Previous algorithms
have attempted to address this challenge by optimizing fixed objectives within a population to
improve strategy or behaviour diversity. However, these approaches can result in a loss of
learning and an inability to cooperate with certain strategies within the population, known as
cooperative incompatibility. To address this issue, we propose the Cooperative Open-ended
LEarning (COLE) framework, which constructs
open-ended objectives in cooperative games with
two players from the perspective of graph theory
to assess and identify the cooperative ability of
each strategy. We further specify the framework
and propose a practical algorithm that leverages
knowledge from game theory and graph theory.
Furthermore, an analysis of the learning process
of the algorithm shows that it can efficiently overcome cooperative incompatibility. The experimental results in the Overcooked game environment demonstrate that our method outperforms
current state-of-the-art methods when coordinating with different-level partners. Our demo is
available at https://sites.google.com/
view/cole-2023/.

To overcome the limitations of SP, most ZSC methods focus
on promoting strategic or behavioural diversity by introducing population-based training (PBT) to improve strategies’ adaptive ability (Carroll et al., 2019; Canaan et al.,
2022; Zhao et al., 2021; Lupu et al., 2021). PBT aims to
improve cooperative outcomes with other strategies in the
population to promote zero-shot coordination with unseen
strategies. This is achieved by maintaining a set of strategies to break the conventions of SP (Tesauro, 1994) and
optimizing the rewards for each pair in the population. Most
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods attempt to pre-train a diverse population (Strouse et al., 2021; Lupu et al., 2021) or
introduce hand-crafted methods (Canaan et al., 2022; Zhao
et al., 2021), which are used to master cooperative games
by optimizing fixed objectives within the population. These
methods have shown to be efficacious in addressing intricate
cooperative tasks such as Overcooked (Carroll et al., 2019)
and Hanabi (Bard et al., 2020).
However, when optimizing a fixed population-level objective, such as expected rewards within population (Strouse
et al., 2021; Lupu et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021) , the coordination ability of strategies within the population may
not be improved. Specifically, while overall performance
may improve, the coordination ability within the population may not be promoted in a simultaneous manner. This
phenomenon, which we term “cooperative incompatibility”,
highlights the importance of considering the trade-offs between overall performance and coordination ability when
attempting to optimize a fixed population-level objective.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) is a major challenge of cooperative AI to train agents that have the ability to coordinate with a wide range of unseen partners (Legg & Hutter, 2007; Hu et al., 2020). The traditional method of selfplay (SP) (Tesauro, 1994) involves iterative improvement of

In addressing the problem of cooperative incompatibility,
we reformulate cooperative tasks as Graphic-Form Games
(GFGs). In GFGs, strategies are characterized as nodes,
with the weight of the edges between nodes representing
the mean cooperative payoffs of the two associated strategies. Additionally, by utilizing sub-graphs of GFGs referred
to as preference Graphic-Form Games (P-GFGs), we are

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Manchester 2 Shanghai
Jiao Tong University 3 King’s College London. Correspondence to: Ying Wen <ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn>, Wei Pan
<wei.pan@manchester.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

