Learning useful representations for shifting tasks and distributions

Jianyu Zhang 1 Léon Bottou 2 1

Abstract

enough, as illustrated by the Perceptron. Other researchers
preferred to manually design features using substantive
knowledge of the problem (Simon, 1989). This changed
when Rumelhart et al. (1986) showed the possibility of feature learning as a side effect of the risk optimization. Despite
reasonable concerns about the optimization of nonconvex
cost functions, feature discovery through optimization has
driven the success of deep learning methods.

Does the dominant approach to learn representations (as a side effect of optimizing an expected
cost for a single training distribution) remain a
good approach when we are dealing with multiple distributions? Our thesis is that such scenarios are better served by representations that are
richer than those obtained with a single optimization episode. We support this thesis with simple
theoretical arguments and with experiments utilizing an apparently naïve ensembling technique:
concatenating the representations obtained from
multiple training episodes using the same data,
model, algorithm, and hyper-parameters, but different random seeds. These independently trained
networks perform similarly. Yet, in a number of
scenarios involving new distributions, the concatenated representation performs substantially better
than an equivalently sized network trained with a
single training run. This proves that the representations constructed by multiple training episodes
are in fact different. Although their concatenation carries little additional information about the
training task under the training distribution, it becomes substantially more informative when tasks
or distributions change. Meanwhile, a single training episode is unlikely to yield such a redundant
representation because the optimization process
has no reason to accumulate features that do not
incrementally improve the training performance.

There are however many cues suggesting that learning features no longer can be solely understood through the optimization of the expected error for a single data distribution.
First, adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014) and shortcut learning (Geirhos et al., 2020) illustrate the need to make
learning systems that are robust to certain changes of the
underlying data distribution and therefore involve multiple
expected errors. Second, the practice of transferring features
across related tasks (Bottou, 2011; Collobert et al., 2011;
Oquab et al., 2014) is now viewed as foundational (Bommasani et al., 2021) and intrinsically involves multiple data
distributions and cost functions. It is therefore timely to
question whether the optimization of a single cost function
creates and accumulates features in ways that make the most
sense in this broader context.
This contribution reports on experiments showing how the
out-of-distribution performance of a deep learning model
benefits from internal representations that are richer and
more diverse than those computed with a single optimization
episode. More precisely, although optimization can produce
diverse features, a single run is unable to collect them all
into a rich representation that performs better when tasks or
distributions change. In a time where many organizations
deploy considerable resources training huge foundational
models, this observation should be sobering.

1. Introduction
Although the importance of features in machine learning
systems was already clear when the Perceptron was invented
(Rosenblatt, 1957), learning features from examples was
often considered a hopeless task (Minsky and Papert, 1969).
Some researchers hoped that random features were good

Organization of the manuscript Section 3 provides
simple theoretical tools to discuss the value of features,
discusses their consequences in-distribution and out-ofdistribution, and approaches the notion of feature redundancy and feature richness. Sections 4, 5, 6, and 7, present
experimental results pertaining respectively to supervised
transfer learning, self-supervised transfer learning, metalearning, and out-of-distribution learning.

1

New York University, New York, NY, USA. 2 Facebook AI
Research, New York, NY, USA.. Correspondence to: Jianyu Zhang
<jianyu@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

