Topologically Faithful Image Segmentation
via Induced Matching of Persistence Barcodes

Nico Stucki * 1 2 3 Johannes C. Paetzold * 4 Suprosanna Shit * 1 5 6 Bjoern H. Menze 6 Ulrich Bauer 1 2 3

Abstract
Segmentation models predominantly optimize
pixel-overlap-based loss, an objective that is actually inadequate for many segmentation tasks. In
recent years, their limitations fueled a growing
interest in topology-aware methods, which aim
to recover the topology of the segmented structures. However, so far, existing methods only
consider global topological properties, ignoring
the need to preserve topological features spatially,
which is crucial for accurate segmentation. We
introduce the concept of induced matchings from
persistent homology to achieve a spatially correct matching between persistence barcodes in
a segmentation setting. Based on this concept,
we define the Betti matching error as an interpretable, topologically and feature-wise accurate
metric for image segmentations, which resolves
the limitations of the Betti number error. Our
Betti matching error is differentiable and efficient
to use as a loss function. We demonstrate that it
improves the topological performance of segmentation networks significantly across six diverse
datasets while preserving the performance with
respect to traditional scores. Our code is publicly
available1 .

(a)

Image

(b)

Ground truth

(c)

Prediction 1 (d)

Prediction 2

𝛽0𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 0
𝛽1𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 0
𝜇0𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 2
µ1𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 2

𝛽0𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 0
𝛽1𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 0
µ𝑒𝑟𝑟
=0
0
µ1𝑒𝑟𝑟 = 0

Figure 1: Exemplary segmentations of identical Dice scores from
models trained with Wasserstein loss (c) and Betti matching loss
(d). Dice and Betti number error (β err ) are indecisive between both
predictions. On the other hand, our Betti matching error (µerr )
favors the superior segmentation in (d).

1. Introduction
Topology studies properties of shapes that are related to their
connectivity and that remain unchanged under deformations,
translations, and twisting. Some topological concepts, such
as cubical complexes, homology, and Betti numbers (which
in dimenion 2 count connected components and holes), form
interpretable descriptions of shapes in space that can be efficiently computed. Naturally, the topology of physical structures is highly relevant in machine learning tasks, where
the preservation of its connectivity is crucial, a prominent
example being image segmentation. Recently, a number of
methods have been proposed to improve topology preservation in image segmentation for a wide range of applications.

*
Equal contribution 1 TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
Munich Data Science Institute, Germany 3 Munich Center for
Machine Learning, Germany 4 Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom 5 Department of Neuroradiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Germany 6 Department
of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Nico Stucki <nico.stucki@tum.de>, Johannes C. Paetzold <j.paetzold@ic.ac.uk>, Suprosanna Shit
<suprosanna.shit@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/nstucki/
Betti-matching/

While spatial agreement between image and segmentation
is a critical aspect of segmentations, all existing topology1

