Improving Medical Predictions by Irregular Multimodal Electronic Health
Records Modeling

Xinlu Zhang * 1 Shiyang Li * 1 Zhiyu Chen 1 Xifeng Yan 1 Linda Ruth Petzold 1

Abstract
MISTS

Heart Rate

Health conditions among patients in intensive care
units (ICUs) are monitored via electronic health
records (EHRs), composed of numerical time series and lengthy clinical note sequences, both
taken at irregular time intervals. Dealing with
such irregularity in every modality, and integrating irregularity into multimodal representations
to improve medical predictions, is a challenging
problem. Our method first addresses irregularity
in each single modality by (1) modeling irregular
time series by dynamically incorporating handcrafted imputation embeddings into learned interpolation embeddings via a gating mechanism, and
(2) casting a series of clinical note representations
as multivariate irregular time series and tackling
irregularity via a time attention mechanism. We
further integrate irregularity in multimodal fusion
with an interleaved attention mechanism across
temporal steps. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to thoroughly model irregularity
in multimodalities for improving medical predictions. Our proposed methods for two medical
prediction tasks consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art (SOTA) baselines in each single modality
and multimodal fusion scenarios. Specifically,
we observe relative improvements of 6.5%, 3.6%,
and 4.3% in F1 for time series, clinical notes, and
multimodal fusion, respectively. These results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods and
the importance of considering irregularity in multimodal EHRs. 1 .

Temperature
Glucose
Clinical notes

0:59 AM: 86

5:48 AM: 128.0
3:59 AM: 36.6
9:32 AM: … 62
year old man with
diffuse rales…

Figure 1: An example of a patient’s ICU stay includes
MISTS with three features and a series of clinical notes.
For MISTS, heart rate and temperature are monitored regularly with different frequencies, and glucose is a laboratory
test ordered at irregular time intervals based on doctors’
decisions. Clinical notes are free text, collected with much
sparser irregular time points than clinical measurements.

1. Introduction
ICUs admit patients with life-threatening conditions, e.g.
trauma (Tisherman & Stein, 2018), sepsis (Alberti et al.,
2002), and organ failure (Afessa et al., 2007). Care in the
first few hours after admission is critical to patient outcomes.
This period is also more prone to medical decision errors
than later times (Otero-López et al., 2006). Automated
tools with effective and real-time predictions can be much
beneficial in assisting clinicians in providing appropriate
treatments. Recently, the health conditions of patients in
ICUs have been recorded in EHRs (Adler-Milstein et al.,
2015), bringing the possibility of applying deep neural networks to healthcare (Xiao et al., 2018; Shickel et al., 2017),
e.g. mortality prediction (Zhang et al., 2021a) and phenotype classification (Harutyunyan et al., 2019). EHRs contain
multivariate irregularly sampled time series (MISTS) and
irregular clinical note sequences, as shown in Figure 1. The
multimodal structure and complex irregular temporal nature
of the data present challenges for prediction. This leads us
to formulate two research objectives:

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Santa Barbara.
Correspondence to: Xinlu Zhang <xinluzhang@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code is released at https://github.com/
XZhang97666/MultimodalMIMIC

1. Tackling irregularity in both time series and
clinical notes
2. Integrating irregularity into multimodal representation learning
1

