Multi-Layer Neural Networks as Trainable Ladders of Hilbert Spaces

Zhengdao Chen 1

Abstract

represented by NNs. This question has been studied fruitfully in the literature for shallow (a.k.a. two-layer) NNs
(Barron, 1993; Bengio et al., 2005; Bach, 2017a; E et al.,
2019), but remains mostly open for multi-layer NNs.

To characterize the functions spaces explored by
multi-layer neural networks (NNs), we introduce
Neural Hilbert Ladders (NHLs), a collection of
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSes) that
are defined iteratively and adaptive to training.
First, we prove a correspondence between functions expressed by L-layer NNs and those belonging to L-level NHLs. Second, we prove generalization guarantees for learning the NHL based on
a new complexity measure. Third, corresponding
to the training of multi-layer NNs in the infinitewidth mean-field limit, we derive an evolution of
the NHL characterized by the dynamics of multiple random fields. Finally, we examine linear
and shallow NNs from the new perspective and
complement the theory with numerical results.

Meanwhile, to study the sample complexity of learning
NNs, prior works have proved generalization guarantees
that are based on not the number of parameters but certain
norms of them (e.g., Bartlett, 1998; Neyshabur et al., 2015),
which could serve as a complexity measure of NNs from a
generalization point of view. Then, an important question
is whether there is a complexity measure associated with
width-limited multi-layer NNs that unifies the perspectives
of approximation and generalization.
Another critical aspect of deep learning is the training of
NNs, which involves a non-convex optimization problem
but can often be solved sufficiently well by variants of gradient descent (GD). Although remarkable progress has been
made to prove optimization guarantees for various settings,
it remains intriguing what kind of exploration in function
space is induced by the training of NNs. The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) analysis provides a candidate theory
via a linearized approximation of NN training (Jacot et al.,
2018), which treats NNs as representing functions in a predetermined reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). However, the NTK theory is unable to model the feature learning
that occurs in the training of actual NNs (Chizat et al., 2019;
Woodworth et al., 2020), which is crucial to the success of
deep learning.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been significant interests in understanding how neural networks (NNs) work in deep learning.
In the supervised setup, NNs can be seen as parameterizing
a particular family of functions on the input domain, within
which a suitable one is searched for by training. Thus, to
explain what is special about NNs, it is crucial to investigate
the hypothesis class (i.e. space of functions) they represent.
As modern NNs often involve huge numbers of parameters, it is especially interesting to understand the space of
functions that can be represented by NNs with unlimited
width. As a foundational result, the universal approximation
theorem (e.g., Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989) shows
that, given enough width, NNs are capable of approximating
virtually all reasonable functions, suggesting the vastness of
this space. A deeper question, though, is to find a complexity
measure of functions that quantify their representation cost
in terms of the rate of approximation error, which would
yield insights on what kind of functions are more naturally

Hence, the present work is motivated by the following questions, which are central yet largely open:
• How to characterize the hypothesis space corresponding to multi-layer NNs that undergo training?
• Can we associate with it a complexity measure that
governs both approximation and generalization?
To answer these questions, we propose to model an L-layer
NN as a ladder of RKHS with L-levels, leading to a function
space F (L) and a complexity measure C (L) that satisfy:

1
Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Zhengdao Chen <zhengdao.c3@gmail.com>.

i. Any L-layer NN represents a function in F (L) ;

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

ii. Any function f in F (L) can be approximated by an
L-layer NN at a cost that depends on C (L) (f );
1

