PLay: Parametrically Conditioned Layout Generation using Latent Diffusion

Chin-Yi Cheng 1 Forrest Huang 1 Gang Li 1 Yang Li 1

Abstract
Layout design is an important task in various design fields, including user interface, document,
and graphic design. As this task requires tedious
manual effort by designers, prior works have attempted to automate this process using generative
models, but commonly fell short of providing intuitive user controls and achieving design objectives.
In this paper, we build a conditional latent diffusion model, PLay, that generates parametrically
conditioned layouts in vector graphic space from
user-specified guidelines, which are commonly
used by designers for representing their design
intents in current practices. Our method outperforms prior works across three datasets on metrics including FID and FD-VG, and in user study.
Moreover, it brings a novel and interactive experience to professional layout design processes.

Figure 1. Sample results. The red lines on the left of each example
represent the guideline conditions, and the generated layout is
on the right. The generated layouts are also placed under the
guidelines to visualize their alignments to the guidelines.

ficult for users to adopt in realistic applications. A large
number of unconditionally, randomly generated layouts are
not useful in practice since it requires users to manually
check each of them on whether the original objectives and
constraints have been met. More importantly, for users to
enjoy co-designing with generative models and trust the generated layouts, they need to be able to express their design
ideas and drive the generation process (Louie et al., 2020).
Therefore, a model conditioned on user inputs would help
their adoption in users’ workflows, and the type of supported
inputs should represent design intention and constraints.

1. Introduction
Layouts are important artifacts that represent the design and
arrangements of their encapsulated elements. They are used
extensively in creative fields ranging from design to engineering, supporting the authoring processes of numerous
downstream products, such as user interfaces (UIs), documents, posters, architectural floorplans, and even printed
circuit boards (PCBs). Designing a good layout requires
thorough consideration of different aspects, such as the function, aesthetics, and domain-specific conditions and rules.
Moreover, many of these aspects and objectives cannot be
easily and explicitly evaluated and computed. Therefore,
layout design has been a time-consuming, iterative, and
manual process.

The key towards achieving our goal of conditional generation that can be widely adopted is to choose an adequate type
of condition for generating design layouts. Different types
of conditions have been explored in image-based generative
models, such as text (Saharia et al., 2022b; Rombach et al.,
2022; Ramesh et al., 2022) and semantic segments (Park
et al., 2019), but these might not be ideal choices for layout
generation. Text conditions have shown to be powerful for
artistic purposes, but they cannot provide exact and detailed
control critical for design. On the other hand, conditioning
on semantic segments allows for precise control, but is tedious and time-consuming for users to manually author all
segments in the scene, which is equivalent to hand-drawing
the entire layout in our case of layout design.

Several recent works have tried to improve the layout design
process by automating it using generative models. However,
these models are typically unconditional, making them dif1

Google Research, Mountain View, United States. Correspondence to: Chin-Yi Cheng <cchinyi@google.com>, Yang
Li <liyang@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we investigate layout design workflows in
1

