Extending Kernel PCA through Dualization:
Sparsity, Robustness and Fast Algorithms

Francesco Tonin * 1 Alex Lambert * 1 Panagiotis Patrinos 1 Johan A.K. Suykens 1
of linear PCA exist (see (Gemp et al., 2021) and references
therein), but they cannot deal with infinite-dimensional feature spaces.

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to revisit Kernel Principal
Component Analysis (KPCA) through dualization
of a difference of convex functions. This allows
to naturally extend KPCA to multiple objective
functions and leads to efficient gradient-based algorithms avoiding the expensive SVD of the Gram
matrix. Particularly, we consider objective functions that can be written as Moreau envelopes,
demonstrating how to promote robustness and
sparsity within the same framework. The proposed method is evaluated on synthetic and realworld benchmarks, showing significant speedup
in KPCA training time as well as highlighting the
benefits in terms of robustness and sparsity.

From an optimization standpoint, the KPCA problem can be
formulated as variance maximization under orthonormality
constraints. Such problem belongs to the wider family of
differences of convex functions (DC) problems, which has
received a great deal of attention in multiple applications
(e.g., see (Tao & An, 1997)). In particular, in (Beck &
Teboulle, 2021), PCA was investigated as a DC problem,
but only in the case of linear PCA, i.e., not considering (potentially infinite-dimensional) feature mappings, and only
for the simpler problem of finding the first component where
the orthogonality constraints become void.
Enforcing desirable properties to the solution, such as sparsity or robustness, is a long-standing open problem in KPCA.
While many works have investigated robust/sparse KPCA
(e.g., robust KPCA in (Nguyen & Torre, 2008; Kim & Klabjan, 2020; Wang & Tanaka, 2020a; Fan & Chow, 2020) and
sparse KPCA in (Wang & Tanaka, 2016; Guo et al., 2019b;
Tipping, 2000; Smola et al., 2002)), they use several different ad-hoc approaches or heuristics such as weighting
schemes (Alzate & Suykens, 2008), leading to a multitude
of different optimization problems. In (Thiao et al., 2010),
a DC program for the specific problem of sparse linear PCA
was explained, but is not extended to also handle robust
losses within the same framework; notably, it does not deal
with nonlinear feature maps nor with more than one component. The idea of using infimal convolution to design
sparse or robust losses is exploited notably in Sangnier et al.
(2017); Laforgue et al. (2020) for regression problems, and
is known to work well in duality settings.

1. Introduction
Kernel Principal Components Analysis (KPCA, Schölkopf
et al. (1998)) stands as one of the most widely used tools for
unsupervised learning, with applications to dimensionality
reduction, denoising, or features extraction. By embedding
the data in some higher dimensional space thanks to a feature map, KPCA aims at finding orthogonal directions in
the feature space that allow to best reconstruct the empirical
covariance operator.
The classical way to solve the KPCA problem is to compute the singular values decomposition (SVD) of the Gram
matrix, a costly O(n3 ) operation whose complexity scales
cubicly with respect to the number n of datapoints. This prevents KPCA from being used in large-scale scenarios, and,
while some solutions exist, they mostly boil down to subsampling in fixed-size schemes to approximate the nonlinear
mapping (Langone & Suykens, 2017) or focus on the online
learning setting (Günter et al., 2007; Chin & Suter, 2007;
Honeine, 2012). Works on speeding up the simpler problem

In this paper, we derive a general dual-based formulation
for KPCA leading to a difference of convex function objective which encompasses both the variance and robust/sparse
objective functions in the same framework. We derive efficient optimization algorithms showing significant speedups
compared to the standard SVD solvers for KPCA. In particular, our approach allows to solve infinite-dimensional
KPCA problems in the dual. We focus on objectives that
can be written as Moreau envelopes, which include the Huber and ϵ-insensitive losses, inducing robustness and spar-

*

1
Equal contribution
ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven, Belgium.
Correspondence to:
Francesco Tonin
<francesco.tonin@esat.kuleuven.be>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

