I LLUME: Rationalizing Vision-Language Models through Human Interactions

Manuel Brack * 1 2 Patrick Schramowski * 1 2 3 4 Björn Deiseroth 2 3 5 Kristian Kersting 1 2 3 6

Abstract
Bootstrapping from pre-trained language models has been proven to be an efficient approach
for building vision-language models (VLM) for
tasks such as image captioning or visual question
answering. However, outputs of these models
rarely align with user’s rationales for specific answers. In order to improve this alignment and reinforce commonsense reasons, we propose a tuning
paradigm based on human interactions with machine generated data. Our I LLUME executes the
following loop: Given an image-question-answer
prompt, the VLM samples multiple candidate rationales, and a human critic provides feedback via
preference selection, used for fine-tuning. This
loop increases the training data and gradually
carves out the VLM’s rationalization capabilities that are aligned with human intent. Our exhaustive experiments demonstrate that I LLUME is
competitive with standard supervised fine-tuning
while using significantly fewer training data and
only requiring minimal feedback.1
Figure 1: I LLUME fine-tuning scheme to transfer reasoning capabilities from language models to vision-language
models. Based on a VQA input, (1) we sample multiple
rationales using VLM, and (2) let an annotator choose fitting
reasons. (3) The model is fine-tuned—aligned to the human
preferences—on all selected rationales where at least one
fitting explanation exists. This process is iterated until, for
each sample, a fitting reason is generated or no progress can
be observed. Note that direct user feedback can be replaced
by automatic reward systems. However, this could require
prior expensive human labor and is inherently limited.

1. Introduction
Recent vision-language models (VLM) are predominantly
built on pre-trained large language models (LM) (Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021; Eichenberg et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022). However, the behavior of LMs is
often not aligned with human intent on a given task (Bommasani et al., 2021; Tamkin et al., 2021). Consequently,
the bootstrapped VLMs inherit this misalignment. In this
work, we propose a human-in-the-loop learning scheme to
bridge this gap. Specifically, we combine pre-existing ca*

Equal contribution 1 German Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 2 Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt
3
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI) 4 LAION 5 Aleph Alpha
6
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt. Correspondence to:
<{brack,schramowski}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.

pabilities inherent to large-scale LMs with interactions on
machine generated data. This achieves both transfer of existing commonsense knowledge to the downstream VLM and
alignment with human rationalization in a single process.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code available at:
https://github.com/ml-research/ILLUME

This paradigm is called I LLUME (InteractiveLy RationaLizing Vision-LangUage ModEls) as illustrated in
Fig. 1. During the interactive process, the model’s performance improves solely based on machine generated samples
1

