Do Machine Learning Models Learn Statistical Rules Inferred from Data?

Aaditya Naik 1 Yinjun Wu 1 Mayur Naik 1 Eric Wong 1

Abstract
Machine learning models can make critical errors that are easily hidden within vast amounts
of data. Such errors often run counter to rules
based on human intuition. However, rules based
on human knowledge are challenging to scale or
to even formalize. We thereby seek to infer statistical rules from the data and quantify the extent
to which a model has learned them. We propose
a framework SQRL that integrates logic-based
methods with statistical inference to derive these
rules from a model’s training data without supervision. We further show how to adapt models at
test time to reduce rule violations and produce
more coherent predictions. SQRL generates up
to 300K rules over datasets from vision, tabular,
and language settings. We uncover up to 158K
violations of those rules by state-of-the-art models for classification, object detection, and data
imputation. Test-time adaptation reduces these violations by up to 68.7% with relative performance
improvement up to 32%. SQRL is available at
https://github.com/DebugML/sqrl.

Figure 1: The bounding box predicted as a car illustrates
a basic error by EfficientPS, a top performing model for
panoptic segmentation in the Cityscapes challenge.
bates this problem. The net result is that the most critical
errors are easily hidden within vast amounts of data.
As an example, consider Figure 1, where the green bounding box spanning across the frame is predicted to be a car
by EfficientPS (Mohan & Valada, 2021), a top-performing
model for panoptic segmentation on the Cityscapes dataset
(Cordts et al., 2016). This prediction is an instance of a fundamental error since it obviously defies reasonable notions
of the shapes of cars. Such an error may even cause the
autonomous vehicle’s controller to halt the vehicle abruptly
with harmful consequences.

1. Introduction

These errors often run counter to rules based on human intuition (e.g., intuition about the width of a typical car with
respect to its height). We can therefore cast the problem of
estimating such errors in terms of finding rule violations.
Such rules can not only help in estimating these errors but
also in preventing them by improving the model’s predictions with respect to the rules.

Machine learning models can make a variety of errors due
to factors such as noisy data, poor model generalizability,
and domain shift. Understanding a model’s performance
with respect to such errors typically involves the use of
quantitative metrics such as accuracy or F1-score.
While these metrics assess a model’s performance in an
overall sense, they lack the ability to distinguish fundamental errors from mundane ones. Indeed, a model with lower
accuracy could even make more coherent predictions than a
model with higher accuracy. Making datasets and models
even bigger to improve upon these metrics further exacer-

A central challenge concerns how to identify such rules at
scale. On one hand, the rules must be statistically valid with
a well-defined meaning to avoid reporting uninteresting or
false violations (i.e., false positives). On the other hand, the
rules must go beyond basic concepts and express complex
phenomena in the data to avoid missing interesting violations (i.e., false negatives). Even human experts may fail
to come up with or agree upon such a set of rules, including identifying relevant statistics, their bounds, and logical
predicates over them.

1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Aaditya Naik
<asnaik@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our key insight is to synthesize a set of statistical quantile
1

