Text-To-4D Dynamic Scene Generation

Uriel Singer * Shelly Sheynin * Adam Polyak * Oron Ashual Iurii Makarov Filippos Kokkinos Naman Goyal
Andrea Vedaldi Devi Parikh Justin Johnson Yaniv Taigman

Figure 1: Samples generated by MAV3D along the temporal and viewpoint dimensions. Left: “A corgi playing with a ball”.
Right top:“A knight chopping wood”. Right bottom: “A kangaroo cooking a meal”.

Abstract

given a text description. Generated samples can
be viewed at make-a-video3d.github.io.

We present MAV3D (Make-A-Video3D), a
method for generating three-dimensional dynamic
scenes from text descriptions. Our approach uses
a 4D dynamic Neural Radiance Field (NeRF),
which is optimized for scene appearance, density,
and motion consistency by querying a Text-toVideo (T2V) diffusion-based model. The dynamic
video output generated from the provided text can
be viewed from any camera location and angle,
and can be composited into any 3D environment.
MAV3D does not require any 3D or 4D data and
the T2V model is trained only on Text-Image pairs
and unlabeled videos. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach using comprehensive
quantitative and qualitative experiments and show
an improvement over previously established internal baselines. To the best of our knowledge, our
method is the first to generate 3D dynamic scenes

1. Introduction
Generative models have seen tremendous recent progress,
and can now generate realistic images from natural language
prompts (Ramesh et al., 2022; Gafni et al., 2022; Rombach
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Sheynin
et al., 2022). This success has been extended beyond
2D images both temporally to synthesize videos (Singer
et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022) and spatially to produce 3D
shapes (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Nichol et al.,
2022b). However, these two categories of generative models
have been studied in isolation to date.
In this paper we combine the benefits of video and 3D
generative models and propose a novel system for text-to-4D
(3D+time) generation. Our method, named MAV3D (MakeA-Video3D), takes as input a natural-language description
and outputs a dynamic 3D scene representation which can
be rendered from arbitrary viewpoints. Such a method could
be used to generate animated 3D assets for video games,
visual effects, or augmented and virtual reality.

*
Equal contribution. Meta AI.
Correspondence to: Uriel Singer <urielsinger@meta.com>,
Shelly Sheynin <shellysheynin@meta.com>, Adam Polyak
<adampolyak@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Differently from image and video generation where one
can train on large quantities of captioned data, there is no
1

