Denoising MCMC for Accelerating Diffusion-Based Generative Models

Beomsu Kim 1 Jong Chul Ye 1

Abstract

synthesizing new high-quality data (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021), and so on. Typical examples of traditional scorebased samplers are Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods such as Langevin dynamics (Langevin, 1908) and
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Neal, 2011).

The sampling process of diffusion models can
be interpreted as solving the reverse stochastic
differential equation (SDE) or the ordinary differential equation (ODE) of the diffusion process,
which often requires up to thousands of discretization steps to generate a single image. This has
sparked a great interest in developing efficient integration techniques for reverse-S/ODEs. Here,
we propose an orthogonal approach to accelerating score-based sampling: Denoising MCMC
(DMCMC). DMCMC first uses MCMC to produce initialization points for reverse-S/ODE in the
product space of data and diffusion time. Then, a
reverse-S/ODE integrator is used to denoise the
initialization points. Since MCMC traverses close
to the data manifold, the cost of producing a clean
sample for DMCMC is much less than that of
producing a clean sample from noise. Denoising
Langevin Gibbs, an instance of DMCMC, successfully accelerates all six reverse-S/ODE integrators
considered in this work, and achieves state-of-theart results: in the limited number of score function evaluation (NFE) setting on CIFAR10, we
have 3.25 FID with ≈ 10 NFE and 2.49 FID with
≈ 16 NFE. On CelebA-HQ-256, we have 6.99
FID with ≈ 160 NFE, which beats the current
best record of Kim et al. (2022a) among scorebased models, 7.16 FID with 4000 NFE. Code:
https://github.com/1202kbs/DMCMC

Recent developments in score matching with deep neural
networks (DNNs) have made it possible to estimate scores
of high-dimensional distributions such as those of natural images (Song & Ermon, 2019). However, natural data
distributions are often sharp and multi-modal, rendering
naı̈ve application of traditional MCMC methods impractical. Specifically, MCMC methods tend to skip over or get
stuck at local high-density modes, producing biased samples
(Levy et al., 2018).
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021a) depart from MCMC and use the
concept of diffusion, the process of gradually corrupting
data into noise, to generate samples. Song et al. (2021b)
observed that for each diffusion process, there is a reverse
stochastic differential equation (SDE) and an ordinary differential equation (ODE). Hence, given a noise sample, integrating the reverse-S/ODE produces a data sample. Only
a time-dependent score function of the data during the diffusion process is required to simulate the reverse process.
This discovery generated great interest in finding better
ways to integrate reverse-S/ODEs. For instance, Song et al.
(2021b) uses black-box ODE solvers with adaptive step sizes
to accelerate sampling. Moreover, multitude of recent works
on score-based generative modeling focus on improving
reverse-S/ODE integrators (Jolicoeur-Martineau et al., 2021;
Lu et al., 2022; Karras et al., 2022; Zhang & Chen, 2022).

1. Introduction

In this work, we develop an orthogonal approach to accelerating score-based sampling. Specifically, we propose
Denoising MCMC (DMCMC) which combines MCMC
with reverse-S/ODE integrators. MCMC is used to generate
initialization points {(xn , tn )} in the product space of data
x and diffusion time t. Since all modes are connected in the
product space, MCMC mixes well. Then, a reverse-S/ODE
integrator solves the reverse-S/ODE starting at xn from time
t = tn to t = 0. Since MCMC explores high-probability
regions, the MCMC chain stays close to the data manifold,
so tn tends to be close to 0, i.e., noise level tends to be small
(see Fig. 1 top and bottom panels). Thus, integrating the

Sampling from a probability distribution given its score
function, i.e., the gradient of the log-density, is an active
area of research in machine learning. Its applications range
far and wide, from Bayesian learning (Welling & Teh, 2011)
to learning energy-based models (Song & Kingma, 2021),
1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to: Jong Chul Ye <jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

