A Critical View of Vision-Based Long-Term Dynamics Prediction
Under Environment Misalignment

Hanchen Xie 1 2 Jiageng Zhu 1 3 Mahyar Khayatkhoei 1 Jiazhi Li 1 3 Mohamed E. Hussein 1 4
Wael AbdAlmageed 1 2 3

Abstract

Environment Misalignment
Source Environment

Dynamics prediction, which is the problem of
predicting future states of scene objects based
on current and prior states, is drawing increasing attention as an instance of learning physics.
To solve this problem, Region Proposal Convolutional Interaction Network (RPCIN), a visionbased model, was proposed and achieved stateof-the-art performance in long-term prediction.
RPCIN only takes raw images and simple object
descriptions, such as the bounding box and segmentation mask of each object, as input. However, despite its success, the model’s capability
can be compromised under conditions of environment misalignment. In this paper, we investigate
two challenging conditions for environment misalignment: Cross-Domain and Cross-Context by
proposing four datasets that are designed for these
challenges: SimB-Border, SimB-Split, BlenBBorder, and BlenB-Split. The datasets cover two
domains and two contexts. Using RPCIN as a
probe, experiments conducted on the combinations of the proposed datasets reveal potential
weaknesses of the vision-based long-term dynamics prediction model. Furthermore, we propose a
promising direction to mitigate the Cross-Domain
challenge and provide concrete evidence supporting such a direction, which provides dramatic alleviation of the challenge on the proposed datasets.

SimB-Border

SimB-Split

BlenB-Border
: Cross-Domain

BlenB-Split
: Cross-Context

Figure 1. Illustration of two Environment Misalignment challenges: Cross-Domain and Cross-Context, and samples of four
proposed datasets: SimB-Border, SimB-Split, BlenB-Border, and
BlenB-Split. We adjusted images resolution and only display the
ground-truth paths of the ball with displacement over time for
better visualization.

1. Introduction
In addition to identifying the visual patterns observed in a
scene, such as in object detection (Ren et al., 2015; Redmon
et al., 2016) and segmentation (Long et al., 2015; He et al.,
2017), recently, increasing attention has been drawn to learning the underlining mechanisms of scene generation, such
as learning the laws of physics (Battaglia et al., 2016; Chang
et al., 2017; Yi* et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2021). An intuitive instance of learning physics is dynamics prediction (Ye
et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2021), in which the future states of
discrete objects are predicted from the observations of reference states. A number of approaches has been proposed
to solve the dynamics prediction problem. Object-centric
models (Chang et al., 2017; Janner et al., 2019) along with
interaction networks (Battaglia et al., 2016; Watters et al.,
2017) focus on extracting representations and modeling
dynamics of each object.

1
USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, USA
USC Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, Los Angeles USA 3 USC Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Los Angeles, USA 4 Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt. Correspondence to: Hanchen Xie
<hanchenx@isi.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

One stream of approaches models the dynamics by incorporating human defined physics models (Todorov et al.,
1

