Adaptive Smoothing Gradient Learning for Spiking Neural Networks
Ziming Wang 1 Runhao Jiang 1 Shuang Lian 1 Rui Yan 2 Huajin Tang 1 3

Abstract

2019). Instead of the expensive multiply-accumulation
(MAC) operations presented in ANNs, SNNs operate with
binary spikes asynchronously and offer sparse accumulation
(AC) operations with lower energy costs. Additionally, existing research has revealed that SNNs promise to realize
machine intelligence, especially on sparse spatio-temporal
patterns (Roy et al., 2019). Nevertheless, such bio-mimicry
with the all-or-none firing characteristics of spikes brings
inevitably difficulties to supervised learning in SNNs.

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) with biologically
inspired spatio-temporal dynamics demonstrate
superior energy efficiency on neuromorphic architectures. Error backpropagation in SNNs is prohibited by the all-or-none nature of spikes. The
existing solution circumvents this problem by a
relaxation on the gradient calculation using a continuous function with a constant relaxation degree, so-called surrogate gradient learning. Nevertheless, such a solution introduces additional
smoothing error on spike firing which leads to
the gradients being estimated inaccurately. Thus,
how to adaptively adjust the relaxation degree and
eliminate smoothing error progressively is crucial.
Here, we propose a methodology such that training a prototype neural network will evolve into
training an SNN gradually by fusing the learnable
relaxation degree into the network with random
spike noise. In this way, the network learns adaptively the accurate gradients of loss landscape
in SNNs. The theoretical analysis further shows
optimization on such a noisy network could be
evolved into optimization on the embedded SNN
with shared weights progressively. Moreover,
The experiments on static images, dynamic event
streams, speech, and instrumental sounds show
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance across all the datasets with remarkable
robustness on different relaxation degrees.

Error backpropagation is the most promising methodology
to develop deep neural networks. However, the existence
of nondifferentiable spike firing poses a hindrance to the direct application of backpropagation in SNNs. To tackle this
challenge, two families of gradient-based training methods
are developed: (1) surrogate gradient learning (Shrestha &
Orchard, 2018; Wu et al., 2018; Neftci et al., 2019) and (2)
Time-based learning (Mostafa, 2017; Zhang & Li, 2020).
For surrogate gradient learning, it adopts a smooth curve
to estimate the ill-defined derivative of the Heaviside function in SNNs. The backpropagation, in this way, could be
tractable at both spatial and temporal domains in an iterative manner. Additionally, surrogate gradient learning could
substantially benefit from the complete ecology of deep
learning. It has been widely used to solve complex pattern
recognization tasks (Zenke & Vogels, 2021; Neftci et al.,
2019). However, the adoption of a smooth curve causes
the gradient of a single spike to be distributed into a group
of analog items in temporal neighbors (Zhang & Li, 2020),
resulting in a discrepancy with the inherent dynamics of
spiking neurons. This discrepancy is referred to as gradient
mismatching in this paper. As a result, most parameters
are updated in a biased manner within surrogate gradient
learning, thus impeding the performance of SNNs. Besides,
the level of smoothness exhibited by surrogate functions can
significantly impact the network performance (Hagenaars
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b; Leng et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), composed of biologically
plausible spiking neurons, present high potential for fast inference and low power consumption on neuromorphic architectures (Akopyan et al., 2015; Davies et al., 2018; Pei et al.,

The time-based method is the other appealing approach. By
estimating the gradients based on the exact spike times, the
time-based method naturally circumvents the issues of gradient mismatching encountered in surrogate gradient learning. However, to obtain the exact expression of spike time,
most works (Mostafa, 2017; Zhang & Li, 2020) assume
that the firing count of each neuron remains unchanged
during training (Yang et al., 2021), which is challenging

1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University 2 College of
Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology 3 Research
Center for Intelligent Computing Hardware, Zhejiang Lab. Correspondence to: Huajin Tang <htang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

