A Unified Optimization Framework of ANN-SNN Conversion: Towards Optimal
Mapping from Activation Values to Firing Rates

Haiyan Jiang 1 Srinivas Anumasa 1 Giulia De Masi 2 3 Huan Xiong 1 4 Bin Gu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have gained
significant attention for their energy-efficient and
fast-inference capabilities, but training SNNs
from scratch can be challenging due to the discrete
nature of spikes. One alternative method is to convert an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) into an
SNN, known as ANN-SNN conversion. Currently,
existing ANN-SNN conversion methods often involve redesigning the ANN with a new activation function, rather than utilizing the traditional
ReLU, and converting it to an SNN. However,
these methods do not take into account the potential performance loss between the regular ANN
with ReLU and the tailored ANN. In this work,
we propose a unified optimization framework for
ANN-SNN conversion that considers both performance loss and conversion error. To achieve
this, we introduce the SlipReLU activation function, which is a weighted sum of the thresholdReLU and the step function. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that conversion error can be
zero on a range of shift values δ ∈ [−0.5, 0.5]
rather than a fixed shift term 0.5. We evaluate
our SlipReLU method on CIFAR datasets, which
shows that SlipReLU outperforms current ANNSNN conversion methods and supervised training
methods in terms of accuracy and latency. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first ANNSNN conversion method that enables SNN inference using only 1 time step. Code is available
at https://github.com/HaiyanJiang/
SNN_Conversion_unified.

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are biologically-inspired
neural networks based on biologically plausible spiking neuron models to process real-time signals (Hodgkin & Huxley,
1952; Izhikevich, 2003). Due to the significant advantages
of low power consumption and fast inference on neuromorphic hardware (Roy et al., 2019), SNNs are becoming a
primary candidate to run large-scale deep artificial neural
networks (ANNs) in real-time. The most commonly used
neuron model in SNNs is the Integrate-and-Fire (IF) neuron
model (Liu & Wang, 2001). In this model, each neuron in
the SNN emits a spike only when its accumulated membrane
potential exceeds the threshold voltage. Otherwise, it stays
inactive in the current time step. This setting makes SNNs
more similar to biological neural networks. Compared to
ANNs, event-driven SNNs have binarized/spiking activation
values, which results in low energy consumption when implemented on specialized neuromorphic hardware. Another
significant property of SNNs is the pseudo-simultaneity of
their inputs and outputs for making inferences in a spatialtemporal paradigm. Compared to conventional ANNs that
present a whole input vector at once and process layer-bylayer to produce one output value, the forwarding pass in
SNN can efficiently process streaming time-varying inputs.
Generally, there are two main methods for obtaining an
SNN: (1) training an SNN from scratch (Wu et al., 2018;
Neftci et al., 2019; Zenke & Vogels, 2021), and (2) ANNSNN conversion (Cao et al., 2015; Diehl et al., 2015; Deng
& Gu, 2021), i.e., converting an ANN to an SNN. Training
from scratch uses a gradient-based supervised optimization
method, such as back-propagation, treating SNNs as specialized ANNs. Due to the non-differentiability of the binary
activation function in SNNs, surrogate gradients are usually
used (Neftci et al., 2019). However, this method can only
train SNNs on small to moderate-size datasets (Li et al.,
2021). On the other hand, ANN-SNN conversion is an effective method for obtaining deep SNNs with comparable
performance to ANNs on large-scale datasets. There are
two main types of ANN-SNN conversion mechanisms: (1)
one-step conversion, which converts the pre-trained ANN to
an SNN without changing the architecture of the pre-trained
ANN, for example Diehl et al. (2015); Li et al. (2021), and

1

Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed
University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 2 ARRC,
Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE 3 BioRobotics
Institute, Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy
4
IASM, Harbin Institute of Technology, China. Correspondence to: Huan Xiong <huan.xiong.math@gmail.com>, Bin Gu
<bin.gu@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

