Repository-Level Prompt Generation for Large Language Models of Code

Disha Shrivastava 1 2 Hugo Larochelle 1 2 3 4 Daniel Tarlow 1 5 3

Abstract

As opposed to the pretrain-finetune paradigm, prompting
these LLMs have been found to yield good performance
even with few-examples (Liu et al., 2021a). Besides providing a mechanism to control and evaluate a LM, prompts
have been shown to elicit emergent behaviour as well. Examples of this behavior include GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)
doing better in tasks it has never seen during training and
improved reasoning capabilities with few-shot (Wei et al.,
2022) and zero-shot (Kojima et al., 2022) prompts that encourage a chain of thoughts. These factors highlight the
importance of designing an effective task-specific prompt.
However, currently we have a limited understanding of how
to do this (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021). LLMs have also
been used for modeling source code with impressive results (Austin et al., 2021; Fried et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022a).
In particular, one of the best performing LLM, Codex (Chen
et al., 2021), has been deployed as part of GitHub Copilot 1 ,
a state-of-the-art in-IDE code assistant. Despite the growing
popularity of LLMs of code, there is no work that systematically tackles different aspects of prompt generation in
relation to source code. One such aspect is that when it
comes to code, the relevant context to be put in the prompt
can come from not just the current file, but also from outside, such as imports, parent classes, files within the same
directory, and API documentation. Also, depending on the
scenario, the relevant context can be scattered across multiple locations. Since the LLMs have a limited context length
available for the prompt, it becomes increasingly crucial for
our domain-specific understanding to guide the selection
of relevant context. Currently, it is not clear how to integrate this domain knowledge of what constitutes a relevant
context, into the generation of prompts. Addressing this
question has potential benefits in other domains such as
question answering (Liu et al., 2022) and multi-document
summarization (Xiao et al., 2022), where domain-specific
structured retrieval of context can be useful.

With the success of large language models
(LLMs) of code and their use as code assistants
(e.g. Codex (Chen et al., 2021) used in GitHub
Copilot), techniques for introducing domainspecific knowledge in the prompt design process
become important. In this work, we propose a
framework called Repo-Level Prompt Generator
that learns to generate example-specific prompts
using prompt proposals. The prompt proposals
take context from the entire repository, thereby
incorporating both the structure of the repository
and the context from other relevant files (e.g.
imports, parent class files). Our technique doesn’t
require any access to the weights of the LLM,
making it applicable in cases where we only
have black-box access to the LLM. We conduct
experiments on the task of single-line code
auto-completion using code repositories taken
from Google Code archives. We demonstrate
that an oracle constructed from our prompt
proposals gives a relative improvement of
36% over Codex, showing the quality of these
proposals. Further, we show that when we
train a model to predict a prompt proposal, we
can achieve significant performance gains over
Codex and other baselines. We release our
code, data, and trained checkpoints at https:
//github.com/shrivastavadisha/
repo_level_prompt_generation.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in natural language processing
tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022), textto-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al.,
2021) and even as a generalized agent (Reed et al., 2022).

In this work, we address this problem by proposing RepoLevel Prompt Generator (RLPG), a framework that while
generating the prompt, incorporates both the structure of the
repository as well as the relevant context in the files in the
repository. In RLPG, the choice of where from and what
to take from the repository is specified by a set of prompt
proposals. For example, one of the prompt proposals can be

1

Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 Google 4 CIFAR Associate
Fellow 5 McGill University. Correspondence to: Disha Shrivastava
<dishu.905@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

https://copilot.github.com/

