Hierarchies of Reward Machines
Daniel Furelos-Blanco 1 Mark Law 1 2 Anders Jonsson 3 Krysia Broda 1 Alessandra Russo 1
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL; Barto & Mahadevan, 2003) frameworks, such as options (Sutton et al.,
1999), have been used to exploit RMs by learning policies
at two levels of abstraction: (i) select a formula (i.e., subgoal) from a given RM state, and (ii) select an action to
(eventually) satisfy the chosen formula (Toro Icarte et al.,
2018; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021). The subtask decomposition powered by HRL enables learning at multiple scales
simultaneously, and eases the handling of long-horizon and
sparse reward tasks. In addition, several works have considered the problem of learning the RMs themselves from
interaction (e.g., Toro Icarte et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020;
Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021; Hasanbeig et al., 2021). A common problem among methods learning minimal RMs is that
they scale poorly as the number of states grows.

Abstract
Reward machines (RMs) are a recent formalism
for representing the reward function of a reinforcement learning task through a finite-state machine
whose edges encode subgoals of the task using
high-level events. The structure of RMs enables
the decomposition of a task into simpler and independently solvable subtasks that help tackle longhorizon and/or sparse reward tasks. We propose
a formalism for further abstracting the subtask
structure by endowing an RM with the ability to
call other RMs, thus composing a hierarchy of
RMs (HRM). We exploit HRMs by treating each
call to an RM as an independently solvable subtask using the options framework, and describe
a curriculum-based method to learn HRMs from
traces observed by the agent. Our experiments
reveal that exploiting a handcrafted HRM leads
to faster convergence than with a flat HRM, and
that learning an HRM is feasible in cases where
its equivalent flat representation is not.

In this work, we make the following contributions:
1. Enhance the abstraction power of RMs by defining
hierarchies of RMs (HRMs), where constituent RMs
can call other RMs (Section 3). We prove that any
HRM can be transformed into an equivalent flat HRM
that behaves exactly like the original RMs. We show
that under certain conditions, the equivalent flat HRM
can have exponentially more states and edges.

1. Introduction
More than a decade ago, Dietterich et al. (2008) argued for
the need to “learn at multiple time scales simultaneously,
and with a rich structure of events and durations”. Finitestate machines (FSMs) are a simple yet powerful formalism
for abstractly representing temporal tasks in a structured
manner. One of the most prominent recent types of FSMs
used in reinforcement learning (RL; Sutton & Barto, 2018)
are reward machines (RMs; Toro Icarte et al., 2018; 2022),
which compactly represent state-action histories in terms of
high-level events; specifically, each edge is labeled with (i) a
formula over a set of high-level events that capture a task’s
subgoal, and (ii) a reward for satisfying the formula. Hence,
RMs fulfill the need for structuring events and durations,
and keep track of the achieved and pending subgoals.

2. Propose an HRL algorithm to exploit HRMs by treating
each call as a subtask (Section 4). Learning policies
in HRMs further fulfills the desiderata posed by Dietterich et al. since (i) there is an arbitrary number of
time scales to learn across (not only two), and (ii) there
is a richer range of increasingly abstract events and
durations. Besides, hierarchies enable modularity and,
hence, the reusability of the RMs and policies. Empirically, we show that leveraging a handcrafted HRM enables faster convergence than an equivalent flat HRM.
3. Introduce a curriculum-based method for learning
HRMs from traces given a set of composable tasks
(Section 5). In line with the theory (Contribution 1),
our experiments reveal that decomposing an RM into
several is crucial to make its learning feasible (i.e., the
flat HRM cannot be efficiently learned from scratch)
since (i) the constituent RMs are simpler (i.e., they have
fewer states and edges), and (ii) previously learned
RMs can be used to efficiently explore the environment
in the search for traces in more complex tasks.

1

Imperial College London, UK 2 ILASP Limited, UK
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain. Correspondence to: Daniel
Furelos-Blanco <d.furelos-blanco18@imperial.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

