A Coupled Flow Approach to Imitation Learning

Gideon Freund 1 Elad Sarafian 1 Sarit Kraus 1

Abstract

only by the ability of the agent to reproduce the expert’s
behavior.

In reinforcement learning and imitation learning,
an object of central importance is the state distribution induced by the policy. It plays a crucial
role in the policy gradient theorem, and references to it—along with the related state-action
distribution—can be found all across the literature. Despite its importance, the state distribution is mostly discussed indirectly and theoretically, rather than being modeled explicitly. The
reason being an absence of appropriate density
estimation tools. In this work, we investigate applications of a normalizing flow-based model for
the aforementioned distributions. In particular,
we use a pair of flows coupled through the optimality point of the Donsker-Varadhan representation of the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence,
for distribution matching based imitation learning.
Our algorithm, Coupled Flow Imitation Learning
(CFIL), achieves state-of-the-art performance on
benchmark tasks with a single expert trajectory
and extends naturally to a variety of other settings,
including the subsampled and state-only regimes.

Central to both RL and IL are the state and state-action
distributions induced by the policy. Their importance cannot
be overstated, with the state distribution forming the basis of
policy gradient methods through the policy gradient theorem
(Sutton et al., 2000), and the state-action distribution being
core to the common distribution matching formulation of
IL (Ke et al., 2020; Ghasemipour et al., 2020). They are
also foundational to other applications, like curiosity-based
exploration (Pathak et al., 2017), constrained RL (Qin et al.,
2021) and Batch RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019), some of which
have recently been unified under the umbrella of convex RL
(Zhang et al., 2020; Zahavy et al., 2021; Mutti et al., 2022),
which studies objectives that are convex functions of the
state distribution.
Despite their ubiquity across the literature, explicit modeling
of the distributions is scarce. Instead, they mostly find use
as a theoretical tool for derivations. This is, of course,
barring some approaches that do attempt to model them
(Hazan et al., 2019; Qin et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2021b) or their ratios (Nachum et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2018; Gangwani et al., 2020), further discussion of which
is delegated to the related work. The reason for this lack
of modeling is due to the difficulty of density estimation,
especially in the case of complex and high-dimensional
distributions. This is where normalizing flows (NF) (Dinh
et al., 2014; 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2017), a recent
approach to density estimation, will be of service.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) concerns the optimization of an agent’s behavior in an environment. Its characterizing difficulties of exploration vs
exploitation and credit assignment, stem from its typical incarnations where the agent must learn from sparse feedback.
In order to provoke desired behavior, one may need to craft
a sophisticated reward function or provide demonstrations
for the agent to imitate. Imitation Learning (IL) deals precisely with the latter: learning from expert demonstrations.
Although RL and IL share the same ultimate goal of producing a good policy, they differ fundamentally in that RL is
guided by the environment’s feedback, while IL is guided

We believe there is no shortage of applications for such
modeling, but we focus on imitation learning, a quite natural
and suitable place, given its modern formulation as stateaction distribution matching (Ghasemipour et al., 2020).
Many approaches to distribution matching based imitation
have been presented (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Fu et al., 2017;
Kostrikov et al., 2018; Ke et al., 2020; Ghasemipour et al.,
2020; Kostrikov et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2021; Kim et al.,
2021b; Dadashi et al., 2020; Schroecker, 2020). The common theme for such methods begins with the selection of
a divergence, followed by the development of a unique approach. This may involve a direct attack on the objective
by reformulating it (Kostrikov et al., 2019), or by derivation
of a surrogate objective (Zhu et al., 2020; Dadashi et al.,

1
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel.
Correspondence to: Gideon Freund <gideonfreund@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

