A Two-Stage Active Learning Algorithm for k-Nearest Neighbors

Nick Rittler 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract

ticularly relevant. This work considers active learning when
the underlying classifier is the k-nearest neighbor (k-NN)
classifier.

k-nearest neighbor classification is a popular nonparametric method because of desirable properties like automatic adaption to distributional scale
changes. Unfortunately, it has thus far proved difficult to design active learning strategies for the
training of local voting-based classifiers that naturally retain these desirable properties, and hence
active learning strategies for k-nearest neighbor
classification have been conspicuously missing
from the literature. In this work, we introduce
a simple and intuitive active learning algorithm
for the training of k-nearest neighbor classifiers,
the first in the literature which retains the concept of the k-nearest neighbor vote at prediction
time. We provide consistency guarantees for a
modified k-nearest neighbors classifier trained
on samples acquired via our scheme, and show
that when the conditional probability function
P(Y = y|X = x) is sufficiently smooth and
the Tsybakov noise condition holds, our actively
trained classifiers converge to the Bayes optimal
classifier at a faster asymptotic rate than passively
trained k-nearest neighbor classifiers.

The previous work on active learning for nearest neighbors
algorithms is surprisingly sparse. (Dasgupta, 2012) gives
asymptotic consistency guarantees for k-NN under a wide
class of active strategies, but does not provide any finite
sample guarantees. (Kontorovich et al., 2018) uses a compression approach to give guarantees for a 1-nearest neighbor classifier trained on a subset of an actively acquired
training sample; while their algorithm does not use many
label queries, it does not come with consistency guarantees
ensuring convergence to the Bayes-risk in the large sample
limit, and also relies on a somewhat computationally intensive algorithm to determine which labels are to be queried.
(Njike & Siebert, 2021) gives an algorithm that, similar to
(Kontorovich et al., 2018), outputs the prediction of a 1-NN
classifier trained on sample points which have been actively
determined to be informative. That said, the schemes of
both (Kontorovich et al., 2018) and (Njike & Siebert, 2021)
do not retain the natural adaptivity to scale changes in the
distribution and local de-noising properties of the k-NN
vote – which, for one, allow for local estimation of conditional probabilities – instead resorting to various complex
algorithmic subroutines to ensure good performance. Our
main contribution is thus the exposition of the only active
learning scheme that retains the concept of the k-NN vote
at prediction time, resulting in a much more direct approach
that admits significant convergent rate speed-ups.

1. Introduction
In active learning, the learner has access to unlabeled training data from the target distribution, and can ask an annotator to selectively label a subset of this data. The learner’s
goal is to develop an accurate classifier while querying as
few labels as possible. A significant body of work has
demonstrated the power of active learning to lower label
complexities versus passive approaches, wherein every point
from the underlying distribution is labeled (Balcan et al.,
2006; Hanneke, 2007; Beygelzimer et al., 2008; Zhang &
Chaudhuri, 2014). In cases where human annotation is a
driving cost in supervised training, such guarantees are par-

Active learning usually relies on some inductive bias or distributional assumption that can exploited to reduce the need
for labeled data. The canonical example is that of learning a
linear classifier in the realizable case, wherein the a priori
knowledge allows the learner to avoid querying examples
when one of the possible labelings would be inconsistent
with any possible linear classifier and the labels queried so
far. The main challenge in actively learning non-parametric
classifiers such as nearest neighbors is that this inductive
bias is harder to characterize. To facilitate our investigation,
we operate under one of the most common distributional
assumptions in the non-parametric active learning literature
– a smoothness condition on the conditional probability function P(Y = y|X = x) (Castro & Nowak, 2008; Minsker,
2012). Specifically, we assume that the conditional proba-

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California - San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Nick Rittler <nrittler@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

