TAN Without a Burn: Scaling Laws of DP-SGD

Tom Sander 1 2 Pierre Stock 2 Alexandre Sablayrolles 2

Abstract
Differentially Private methods for training Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) have progressed recently, in particular with the use of massive
batches and aggregated data augmentations for a
large number of training steps. These techniques
require much more computing resources than their
non-private counterparts, shifting the traditional
privacy-accuracy trade-off to a privacy-accuracycompute trade-off and making hyper-parameter
search virtually impossible for realistic scenarios. In this work, we decouple privacy analysis
and experimental behavior of noisy training to
explore the trade-off with minimal computational
requirements. We first use the tools of Rényi
Differential Privacy (RDP) to highlight that the
privacy budget, when not overcharged, only depends on the total amount of noise (TAN) injected
throughout training. We then derive scaling laws
for training models with DP-SGD to optimize
hyper-parameters with more than a 100× reduction in computational budget. We apply the proposed method on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet and, in
particular, strongly improve the state-of-the-art on
ImageNet with a +9 points gain in top-1 accuracy
for a privacy budget ε = 8.

Low Compute
HP search

ε=8

x128 FLOPS

Figure 1. Training from scratch with DP-SGD on ImageNet. All
points are obtained at constant number of steps S = 72k and
constant ratio σ/B, with σref = 2.5 and Bref = 16384. The
dashed lines are computed using a linear regression on the crosses,
and the dots and stars illustrate the predictive power of TAN. We
perform low compute hyper-parameter (HP) search at batch size
128 and extrapolate our best setup for a single run at large batch
size: stars show our reproduction of the previous SOTA from (De
et al., 2022) and improved performance obtained under the privacy
budget ε = 8 with a +6 points gain in top-1 accuracy. The shaded
blue areas denote 2 standard deviations over three runs.

also introduces a potential privacy risk for data that gets incorporated. Indeed, AI models not only learn about general
statistics or trends of their training data distribution (such
as grammar for language models), but also remember verbatim information about individual points (e.g., credit card
numbers), which compromises their privacy (Carlini et al.,
2019; 2021). Access to a trained model thus potentially
leaks information about its training data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become a fundamental
tool of modern artificial intelligence, producing cutting-edge
performance in many domains such as computer vision (He
et al., 2016), natural language processing (Devlin et al.,
2018) or speech recognition (Amodei et al., 2016). The
performance of these models generally increases with their
training data size (Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021;
Ramesh et al., 2022), which encourages the inclusion of
more data in the model’s training set. This phenomenon

The gold standard of disclosure control for individual information is Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006).
Informally, DP ensures that the training does not produce
very different models if a sample is added or removed from
the dataset. Motivated by applications in deep learning,
DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016) is an adaptation of Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) that clips individual gradients and
adds Gaussian noise to their sum. Its DP guarantees depend
on the privacy parameters: the sampling rate q = B/N
(where B is the batch size and N is the number of training
samples), the number of gradient steps S, and the noise σ 2 .

1

CMAP, École polytechnique, Palaiseau, France 2 Meta
AI, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Tom Sander <tomsander@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

