Abstract-to-Executable Trajectory Translation for One-Shot Task Generalization

Stone Tao 1 Xiaochen Li 1 Tongzhou Mu 1 Zhiao Huang 1 Yuzhe Qin 1 Hao Su 1

Abstract

is challenging for Reinforcement Learning (RL) based approaches (Yu et al., 2020; Savva et al., 2019; Shen et al.,
2021; Mu et al., 2021). The state/action spaces are usually
high-dimensional, requiring many samples to learn policies
for various tasks. One promising idea is to decouple plan
generation and plan execution. In classical robotics, a highlevel planner generates an abstract trajectory using symbolic
planning with simpler state/action space than the original
problem while a low-level agent executes the plan in an
entirely physical environment (Kaelbling & Lozano-Pérez,
2013; Garrett et al., 2020b). In our work, we promote the
philosophy of abstract-to-executable via a learning-based
approach through RL. By providing robots with an abstract
trajectory, robots can aim for one-shot task generalization.
Instead of memorizing all the high-dimensional policies for
different tasks, the robot can leverage the power of planning
in the low-dimensional abstract space and focus on learning
low-level executors.

Training long-horizon robotic policies in complex
physical environments is essential for many applications, such as robotic manipulation. However, learning a policy that can generalize to unseen tasks is challenging. In this work, we propose to achieve one-shot task generalization by
decoupling plan generation and plan execution.
Specifically, our method solves complex longhorizon tasks in three steps: build a paired abstract environment by simplifying geometry and
physics, generate abstract trajectories, and solve
the original task by an abstract-to-executable trajectory translator. In the abstract environment,
complex dynamics such as physical manipulation are removed, making abstract trajectories
easier to generate. However, this introduces a
large domain gap between abstract trajectories
and the actual executed trajectories as abstract
trajectories lack low-level details and are not
aligned frame-to-frame with the executed trajectory. In a manner reminiscent of language
translation, our approach leverages a seq-to-seq
model to overcome the large domain gap between
the abstract and executable trajectories, enabling
the low-level policy to follow the abstract trajectory. Experimental results on various unseen longhorizon tasks with different robot embodiments
demonstrate the practicability of our methods to
achieve one-shot task generalization. Videos and
more details can be found on the project page:
https://trajectorytranslation.github.io/.

The two-level framework works well for classical robotics
tasks like motion control for robot arms, where a motion
planner generate a kinematics motion plan at a high level
and a PID controller execute the plan step by step. However,
such a decomposition and abstraction is not always trivial for
more complex tasks. In general domains, it either requires
expert knowledge (e.g., PDDL (Garrett et al., 2020b;a)) to
design this abstraction manually or enormous samples to
distill suitable abstractions automatically (e.g., HRL (Bacon
et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al., 2017)). We refer (Abel, 2022)
for an in-depth investigation into this topic.
On the other side, designing imperfect high-level agents
whose state space does not precisely align with the low-level
executor could be much easier and more flexible. High-level
agents can be planners with abstract models and simplified
dynamics in the simulator (by discarding some physical features, e.g., enabling a “magic” gripper (Savva et al., 2019;
Torabi et al., 2018)) or utilizing an existing “expert” agent
such as humans or pre-trained agents on different manipulators. Though imperfect, their trajectories still contain
meaningful information to guide the low-level execution
of novel tasks. For example, different robots may share a
similar procedure of reaching, grasping, and moving when
manipulating a rigid box with different grasping poses. As a
trade-off, executing their trajectories by the low-level executors becomes non-trivial. As will be shown by an example

1. Introduction
Training long-horizon robotic policies in complex physical
environments is important for robot learning. However, directly learning a policy that can generalize to unseen tasks
*
Equal contribution 1 UC San Diego. Correspondence to: Stone
Tao <stao@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

