Relevant Walk Search for Explaining Graph Neural Networks

Ping Xiong 1 2 Thomas Schnake 1 2 Michael Gastegger 1 Grégoire Montavon 3 2 Klaus-Robert Müller 1 2 4 5 6
Shinichi Nakajima 1 2 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful machine
learning tools to solve tasks on graph datasets, such as social
networks (Yanardag & Vishwanathan, 2015) and molecules
(Kazius et al., 2005; Schütt et al., 2018). Various GNN
models have been proposed (Wu et al., 2021a), while the
rationale of prediction—for example, which node features
or which parts of the input graph are (jointly) contributing to the prediction—cannot be directly extracted from
the model. The GNN therefore acts as a black box and its
prediction is hard to comprehend without further investigation. To address this challenge, many explainability methods
emerged in recent years (Schnake et al., 2022; Ying et al.,
2019), which can be generally categorized into model-level
and instance-level methods (Yuan et al., 2020b): modellevel methods generate representative graphs for different
predictions, while instance-level methods focus on single
predictions and find relevant features in the corresponding
input graphs.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become
important machine learning tools for graph analysis, and its explainability is crucial for safety,
fairness, and robustness. Layer-wise relevance
propagation for GNNs (GNN-LRP) evaluates the
relevance of walks to reveal important information flows in the network, and provides higherorder explanations, which have been shown to
be superior to the lower-order, i.e., node-/edgelevel, explanations. However, identifying relevant
walks by GNN-LRP requires exponential computational complexity with respect to the network
depth, which we will remedy in this paper. Specifically, we propose polynomial-time algorithms for
finding top-K relevant walks, which drastically
reduces the computation and thus increases the applicability of GNN-LRP to large-scale problems.
Our proposed algorithms are based on the maxproduct algorithm—a common tool for finding
the maximum likelihood configurations in probabilistic graphical models—and can find the most
relevant walks exactly at the neuron level and approximately at the node level. Our experiments
demonstrate the performance of our algorithms at
scale and their utility across application domains,
i.e., on epidemiology, molecular, and natural language benchmarks. We provide our codes under
github.com/xiong-ping/rel walk gnnlrp.

This paper focuses on the instance-level explanation, for
which most of the existing methods, e.g., GNNExplainer
(Ying et al., 2019), PGExplainer (Luo et al., 2020) and
methods in Pope et al. (2019), only consider lower-order
features, i.e., nodes and edges, ignoring higher-order interactions. Recently, Schnake et al. (2022) proposed layer-wise
relevance propagation for GNNs (GNN-LRP) as a decomposition of the model into contributions of input features
that jointly give rise to the prediction. In particular, this
leads us to a higher-order explanation method that measures
the relevance of walks on the input graph. GNN-LRP can
be used in two ways: (1) identifying relevant walks that
reveal important information flows in the network, and (2)
aggregating walk relevances within subgraphs or substructures in the input graph to attribute them. In either way,
GNN-LRP captures interactions between features across the
network layers, and has shown its superior performance to
the lower-order methods.

1

Technische Universität Berlin (TU Berlin) 2 BIFOLD – Berlin
Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data 3 Freie Universität Berlin (FU Berlin) 4 Department of Artificial Intelligence,
Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea 5 Max Planck Institut
für Informatik, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany 6 Google Research,
Brain team, Berlin 7 RIKEN Center for AIP, Japan. Correspondence to: Shinichi Nakajima <nakajima@tu-berlin.de>.

Despite its ability to enable higher-order explanation, the
GNN-LRP algorithm faces computational issues: both its
relevant walk identification and the subgraph attribution require exponentially many walks to be evaluated. Therefore
naive implementations can cope only with small-scale prob-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

