Conditionally Strongly Log-Concave Generative Models

Florentin Guth * 1 Etienne Lempereur * 1 Joan Bruna 2 Stéphane Mallat 3

Abstract

high-dimensional data, it is highly challenging to control all
errors with polynomial-time algorithms. Overcoming the
curse of dimensionality requires exploiting structural properties of the probability distribution. For instance, theoretical
guarantees can be obtained with restrictive assumptions of
log-concavity, or with low-dimensional parameterized models. In contrast, recent deep-learning-based approaches such
as diffusion models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022) have obtained impressive results for distributions which do not satisfy these assumptions.
Unfortunately, in such cases, theoretical guarantees are lacking, and diffusion models have been found to memorize
their training data (Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al.,
2022), which is inappropriate for scientific applications.
The disparity between these two approaches highlights the
need for models which combine theoretical guarantees with
sufficient expressive power. This paper contributes to this
objective by defining the class of conditionally strongly logconcave distributions. We show that it is sufficiently rich to
model the probability distributions of complex multiscale
physical fields, and that such models can be sampled with
fast algorithms with provable guarantees.

There is a growing gap between the impressive
results of deep image generative models and classical algorithms that offer theoretical guarantees.
The former suffer from mode collapse or memorization issues, limiting their application to scientific data. The latter require restrictive assumptions such as log-concavity to escape the curse of
dimensionality. We partially bridge this gap by
introducing conditionally strongly log-concave
(CSLC) models, which factorize the data distribution into a product of conditional probability distributions that are strongly log-concave.
This factorization is obtained with orthogonal
projectors adapted to the data distribution. It
leads to efficient parameter estimation and sampling algorithms, with theoretical guarantees, although the data distribution is not globally logconcave. We show that several challenging multiscale processes are conditionally log-concave using wavelet packet orthogonal projectors. Numerical results are shown for physical fields such as
the φ4 model and weak lensing convergence maps
with higher resolution than in previous works.

Sampling and learning guarantees. While the theory
for sampling log-concave distributions is well-developed
(Chewi, 2023), simultaneous learning and sampling guarantees for general non-log-concave distributions are less
common. Block et al. (2020) establish a fast mixing rate of
multiscale Langevin dynamics under a manifold hypothesis. Koehler et al. (2022) studies the asymptotic efficiency
of score-matching compared to maximum-likelihood estimation under a global log-Sobolev inequality, which is
not quantitative beyond globally log-concave distributions.
Chen et al. (2022b;a) establish polynomial sampling guarantees for a reverse score-based diffusion, given a sufficiently accurate estimate of the time-dependent score.
Sriperumbudur et al. (2013); Sutherland et al. (2018);
Domingo-Enrich et al. (2021) study density estimation with
energy-based models under different infinite-dimensional
parametrizations of the energy. They use various metrics
including score-matching to establish statistical guarantees
that avoid the curse of dimensionality, under strong smoothness or sparsity assumptions of the target distribution. Finally, Balasubramanian et al. (2022) derive sampling guarantees in Fisher divergence of Langevin Monte-Carlo beyond

1. Introduction
Generative modeling requires the ability to estimate an accurate model of a probability distribution from a training
dataset, as well as the ability to efficiently sample from
this model. Any such procedure necessarily introduces errors, due to limited expressivity of the model class, learning
errors of selecting the best model within that class, and sampling errors due to limited computational resources. For
*

1

Equal contribution Département d’informatique, École Nor2
male Supérieure, Paris, France Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Data Science, New York Uni3
versity, USA Collège de France, Paris, France, and Flatiron Institute, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Florentin Guth <florentin.guth@ens.fr>, Etienne Lempereur <etienne.lempereur@ens.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

