Variational Curriculum Reinforcement Learning
for Unsupervised Discovery of Skills

Seongun Kim * 1 Kyowoon Lee * 2 Jaesik Choi 1

Abstract

To scale a learning agent to the real-world, it is crucial to
achieve such ability of learning skills without supervision.
Recent studies on unsupervised RL suggest ways to alleviate
the need for human effort. Most of these approaches focus
on reducing the burden of designing objective functions by
incorporating intrinsic motivation objectives or leveraging
concepts from information theory. In this work, we further reconcile with the need not only to manually engineer
objective functions but to craft the order of training skills.

Mutual information-based reinforcement learning
(RL) has been proposed as a promising framework
for retrieving complex skills autonomously without a task-oriented reward function through mutual information (MI) maximization or variational
empowerment. However, learning complex skills
is still challenging, due to the fact that the order of
training skills can largely affect sample efficiency.
Inspired by this, we recast variational empowerment as curriculum learning in goal-conditioned
RL with an intrinsic reward function, which we
name Variational Curriculum RL (VCRL). From
this perspective, we propose a novel approach to
unsupervised skill discovery based on information
theory, called Value Uncertainty Variational Curriculum (VUVC). We prove that, under regularity
conditions, VUVC accelerates the increase of entropy in the visited states compared to the uniform
curriculum. We validate the effectiveness of our
approach on complex navigation and robotic manipulation tasks in terms of sample efficiency and
state coverage speed. We also demonstrate that
the skills discovered by our method successfully
complete a real-world robot navigation task in a
zero-shot setup and that incorporating these skills
with a global planner further increases the performance.

Empowerment or MI-based RL (Klyubin et al., 2005; Salge
et al., 2014) has gained traction in recent years as a means
of unsupervised skill discovery due to its intuitive interpretation and empirical successes (Eysenbach et al., 2019;
Sharma et al., 2019; Jabri et al., 2019). However, the common empowerment approach has been to either fix or parameterize the distribution of skills (Nair et al., 2018; Pong
et al., 2020; Campos et al., 2020). The efficiency of learning
skills with respect to the number of required training samples is rather limited when the agent learns complex skills
from a fixed skill distribution without an organized order.
The notion of curriculum studies the effectiveness of the
order of training skills. By selecting the order of appropriate
skills, a learning agent may achieve a variety of complex
skills (Florensa et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2019). However, it
is both necessary to define a set of tasks that can be used to
generate curriculum (Klink et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020)
and specify a form of reward functions (Racaniere et al.,
2019; Ren et al., 2019; Narvekar & Stone, 2019).
To rectify this issue, we interpret empowerment as a unifying framework for curriculum learning in goal-conditioned
RL (GCRL). Recasting variational empowerment as curriculum learning in GCRL with intrinsic reward function, interestingly our Variational Curriculum RL (VCRL) framework
encapsulates most of the prior MI-based approaches (Nair
et al., 2018; Pong et al., 2020; Campos et al., 2020). In this
regard, we derive a new approach to information-theoretic
skill discovery, Value Uncertainty Variational Curriculum
(VUVC) that allows us to automatically generate curriculum
goals which maximize the expected information approximated as the uncertainty in predictions of an ensemble of
value functions. We analyze asymptotic behavior of the

1. Introduction
Intelligent creatures are able to efficiently explore the environments and learn useful skills in the absence of external
supervision. By utilizing these skills, they can quickly accomplish tasks when they are later faced with specific tasks.
*
Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of
AI, KAIST 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UNIST. Correspondence to: Jaesik Choi <jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Codes are available at github.com/seongun-kim/vcrl.

1

