DP-Fast MH: Private, Fast, and Accurate Metropolis-Hastings
for Large-Scale Bayesian Inference

Wanrong Zhang * 1 Ruqi Zhang * 2

Abstract

The Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm (Metropolis et al.,
1953; Hastings, 1970) is one of the most commonly used
MCMC methods, where it works by conducting an accept/reject step to ensure the target distribution as its equilibrium distribution. By its construction, MH is guaranteed
to converge asymptotically to the true posterior.

Bayesian inference provides a principled framework for learning from complex data and reasoning under uncertainty. It has been widely applied
in machine learning tasks such as medical diagnosis, drug design, and policymaking. In these
common applications, data can be highly sensitive. Differential privacy (DP) offers data analysis
tools with powerful worst-case privacy guarantees and has been developed as the leading approach in privacy-preserving data analysis. In this
paper, we study Metropolis-Hastings (MH), one
of the most fundamental MCMC methods, for
large-scale Bayesian inference under differential
privacy. While most existing private MCMC algorithms sacrifice accuracy and efficiency to obtain
privacy, we provide the first exact and fast DP MH
algorithm, using only a minibatch of data in most
iterations. We further reveal, for the first time,
a three-way trade-off among privacy, scalability
(i.e. the batch size), and efficiency (i.e. the convergence rate), theoretically characterizing how privacy affects the utility and computational cost in
Bayesian inference. We empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness and efficiency of our algorithm
in various experiments.

In many applications of Bayesian inference, privacy becomes a crucial consideration as the data can be highly
sensitive. For example, doctors may use Bayesian inference
to analyze past patient data and find a pattern to make accurate predictions in medical diagnosis; tech companies may
use Bayesian methods to classify spam emails by looking at
features in customers’ emails. In these tasks, we need new
Bayesian inference methods that can give useful inference
results under the privacy constraint.
Differential privacy (DP) has emerged as the gold standard
for privacy-preserving data analytics. It is a statistical notion of privacy, which ensures that the output distribution
of a computation is robust when we arbitrarily change one
person’s data. DP algorithms hide individuals’ data by introducing randomness. While there exists a few DP MCMC
algorithms, they have significant limitations on their utility
and applicability. In particular, most work has no guarantees
on the asymptotic convergence or the convergence speed,
thus could diverge far away from the target posterior in
practice (Heikkilä et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2021). Some work significantly scarifies the convergence
rate for privacy and can not scale to large datasets (Yıldırım
& Ermiş, 2019). Moreover, most existing methods operate
on the belief that there are trade-offs among privacy, efficiency (i.e. the convergence rate), and scalability (i.e. the
batch size) in private Bayesian inference, but none of them
formally characterize these trade-offs.

1. Introduction
Bayesian inference is one of the most powerful tools in
data analytics and has been applied on a wide variety of
data tasks (Gelman et al., 1995). In practice, computing the
posterior is often intractable and thus requires approximation methods, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).

In this work, we solve all the above issues by providing a
simple yet powerful DP MCMC algorithm, DP-Fast MH,
with theoretically guarantees on privacy, utility, and scalability. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the first
exact minibatch DP MCMC algorithm, which enables private and accurate Bayesian inference on large-scale datasets.
Built upon TunaMH (Zhang et al., 2020) which is a nonprivate exact minibatch MH method, we developed DP-Fast
MH by injecting an appropriate amount of Gaussian noise in

*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University . Correspondence to: Wanrong Zhang <wanrongzhang@fas.harvard.edu>, Ruqi Zhang
<ruqiz@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

