PCA-based Multi-Task Learning: a Random Matrix Approach

Malik Tiomoko 1 Romain Couillet 2 Frédéric Pascal 3

Abstract

datasets. Several heuristics have been proposed, which may
be split into two groups: parameter- versus feature-based
MTL. In parameter-based MTL, the tasks are assumed to
share common hyperparameters (Evgeniou & Pontil, 2004;
Xu et al., 2013) (e.g., separating hyperplanes in a support
vector machine (SVM) flavor) or hyperparameters derived
from a common prior distribution (Zhang & Yeung, 2012;
2014). Classical learning mechanisms (SVM, logistic regression, etc.) can be appropriately turned into an MTL
version by enforcing parameter relatedness: (Evgeniou &
Pontil, 2004; Xu et al., 2013; Parameswaran & Weinberger,
2010) respectively adapt the SVM, least square-SVM (LSSVM), and large margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) methods
into an MTL paradigm. In feature-based MTL, the data
are instead assumed to share a common low-dimensional
representation, which needs to be identified: through sparse
coding, deep neural network embeddings, principal component analysis (PCA) (Argyriou et al., 2008; Maurer et al.,
2013; Zhang et al., 2016; Pan et al., 2010) or simply by
feature selection (Obozinski et al., 2006; Wang & Ye, 2015;
Gong et al., 2012).

The article proposes and theoretically analyses
a computationally efficient multi-task learning
(MTL) extension of popular principal component analysis (PCA)-based supervised learning
schemes (Barshan et al., 2011; Bair et al., 2006).
The analysis reveals that (i) by default, learning
may dramatically fail by suffering from negative
transfer, but that (ii) simple counter-measures on
data labels avert negative transfer and necessarily
result in improved performances. Supporting experiments on synthetic and real data benchmarks
show that the proposed method achieves comparable performance with state-of-the-art MTL methods but at a significantly reduced computational
cost.

1. Introduction
From single to multiple task learning. Advanced supervised machine learning algorithms require large amounts
of labelled samples to achieve high accuracy, which is often too demanding in practice. Multi-task learning (MTL)
(Caruana, 1997; Zhang & Yang, 2018; 2021) and transfer
learning provide a potent workaround by appending extra
somewhat similar datasets to the scarce available dataset of
interest. The additional data possibly being of a different
nature, MTL effectively solves multiple tasks in parallel
while exploiting task relatedness to enforce collaborative
learning.

The negative transfer plague. A strong limitation of
MTL methods is their lack of theoretical tractability: as
a result, the biases inherent to the base methods (SVM,
LS-SVM, deep nets) are exacerbated in MTL. A major
consequence is that many of these heuristic MTL schemes
suffer from negative transfer, i.e., cases where MTL performs worse than a single-task approach (Rosenstein et al.,
2005; Long et al., 2013); this often occurs when task relatedness is weaker than assumed, and MTL enforces fictitious
similarities.

State-of-the-art of MTL. To proceed, MTL solves multiple related tasks and introduces shared hyperparameters
or feature spaces optimized to improve the performance
of the individual tasks. The crux of efficient MTL lies
in both enforcing and, most importantly, evaluating task
relatedness: this, in general, is highly non-trivial as this
implies theoretically identifying the common features of the

A large dimensional analysis to improve MTL. To fill
these gaps, this work focuses on a large dimensional random matrix setting (El Karoui, 2018) to provide an exact
(asymptotic) performance evaluation of an elementary (yet
powerful) PCA-based MTL approach. It is worth noticing
that although the proposed framework is asymptotic, it has
shown to be very efficient for small dimensions/small numbers of data in practice (see e.g. (Couillet & Liao, 2022)).
This analysis conveys insights into the MTL inner workings,
providing an optimal data labelling scheme to avert negative
transfer fully.

1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Paris, France 2 LIG-Lab, Université
de Grenoble Alpes, France 3 L2S Centrale-Supélec, France. Correspondence to: Malik Tiomoko <malik.tiomoko@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

More fundamentally, the choice of investigating PCA-based
1

