QuantumDARTS: Differentiable Quantum Architecture Search for
Variational Quantum Algorithms

Wenjie Wu 1 Ge Yan 1 Xudong Lu 1 Kaisen Pan 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

QAOA (Farhi et al., 2014) for combinatorial optimization,
UCCSD (Romero et al., 2017) for ground state energy estimation, etc. Recently, automatically designing a parameterized quantum circuits (PQC) for VQAs has drawn increasing
attention (Grimsley et al., 2019; Ostaszewski et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a)
which greatly reduces the labour of human experts and finds
better PQCs for certain VQA problems.

With the arrival of the Noisy Intermediate-Scale
Quantum (NISQ) era and the fast development
of machine learning, variational quantum algorithms (VQA) including Variational Quantum
Eigensolver (VQE) and quantum neural network
(QNN) have received increasing attention with
wide potential applications in foreseeable near
future. We study the problem of quantum architecture search (QAS) for VQA to automatically
design parameterized quantum circuits (PQC). We
devise a differentiable searching algorithm based
on Gumbel-Softmax in contrast to peer methods that often require numerous circuit sampling
and evaluation. Two versions of our algorithm
are provided, namely macro search and micro
search, where macro search directly searches for
the whole circuit like other literature while the
innovative micro search is able to infer the subcircuit structure from a small-scale and then transfer that to a large-scale problem. We conduct
intensive experiments on unweighted Max-Cut,
ground state energy estimation, and image classification. The superior performance shows the
efficiency and capability of macro search, which
requires little prior knowledge. Moreover, the experiments on micro search show the potential of
our algorithm for large-scale QAS problems.

The problem of QAS for VQA in this paper can be formulated as follows. Given a candidate quantum gate set G,
we find the best composition in the form of PQC and its
corresponding unitary Û(A, θ), which minimizes the loss
of the original VQA problem. Here A is the optimal circuit, θ is the best rotation parameters. U denotes the unitary
transformation for the circuit and can be calculated by Eq. 1.
One could further consider two VQA-related settings of
QAS by the criterion that if there exist input data samples
or not: i) search for VQE (without input data), namely
Variational Quantum Eigensolver: it evolves the expectation
value of the quantum system w.r.t. an observable, often
a Hamiltonian, with a classical optimizer. ii) search for
QNN (with input data and ground truth), namely quantum neural network: given a dataset with samples x and the
corresponding labels y in a way of supervised learning. This
is akin to Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Elsken et al.,
2019) or more broadly speaking, AutoML on classic computers. In this case, the goal in search directly refers to the
loss e.g. cross-entropy for a supervised quantum classifier
(or an unsupervised one when labels are unavailable).

1. Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS), which automatically
generates good neural network architectures (with parameters for training) without human labor, has achieved wide
success in real-world problems, especially in vision e.g.
image classification (Liu et al., 2018) and object detection (Wang et al., 2022c). QAS methods have long been
inspired by NAS techniques and imitated their classical
counterparts, e.g. the adoption of evolutionary algorithms
(EA) (Las Heras et al., 2016) and reinforcement learning
(RL) (Ostaszewski et al., 2021). Notably, the differentiable
architecture search paradigm (DARTS) has not been adopted
to QAS although it is dominantly popular in NAS literature (Liu et al., 2018). Instead of searching over a discrete

Over the last decade, quantum mechanics as well as quantum computing has received increasing attention and numerous studies have been conducted to seek potential
quantum supremacy. Quantum algorithms have demonstrated their supremacy over classical ones in certain
fields, e.g. Shor (Shor, 1994) for integer factorization,
1
MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

