Deep Clustering with Incomplete Noisy Pairwise Annotations: A Geometric
Regularization Approach

Tri Nguyen 1 Shahana Ibrahim 1 Xiao Fu 1

Abstract

clustering (CC) method (Wagstaff & Cardie, 2000) is one
of such weak (or semi-)supervised approaches. The CC
paradigm has many variants (see (Basu et al., 2008; Schultz
& Joachims, 2003; Yeung & Yeo, 1996; Davidson et al.,
2010; Zhang et al., 2019; 2021)). The arguably most widely
used paradigm annotates the similarity (using binary codes)
of data pairs and restrains the clustering outcomes to respect
these pairwise constraints; see, e.g., (Basu et al., 2004a;
Segal et al., 2003; Wagstaff et al., 2001; Givoni & Frey,
2009; Hsu & Kira, 2015; Manduchi et al., 2021). Note that
annotating similarity is considerably easier than annotating
the exact class labels of data, yet it was observed that such
“simple” annotations could boost the performance of data
categorization. These findings may assist designing economical annotation mechanisms in the era of data explosion.

The recent integration of deep learning and
pairwise similarity annotation-based constrained
clustering—i.e., deep constrained clustering
(DCC)—has proven effective for incorporating
weak supervision into massive data clustering:
Less than 1% of pair similarity annotations can often substantially enhance the clustering accuracy.
However, beyond empirical successes, there is a
lack of understanding of DCC. In addition, many
DCC paradigms are sensitive to annotation noise,
but performance-guaranteed noisy DCC methods
have been largely elusive. This work first takes
a deep look into a recently emerged logistic loss
function of DCC, and characterizes its theoretical properties. Our result shows that the logistic
DCC loss ensures the identifiability of data membership under reasonable conditions, which may
shed light on its effectiveness in practice. Building upon this understanding, a new loss function
based on geometric factor analysis is proposed to
fend against noisy annotations. It is shown that
even under unknown annotation confusions, the
data membership can still be provably identified
under our proposed learning criterion. The proposed approach is tested over multiple datasets to
validate our claims.

Early CC approaches are often combined with existing clustering modules like K-means (Basu et al., 2004a; Wagstaff
et al., 2001; Bilenko et al., 2004; Li et al., 2009; Kamvar
et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2014; Cucuringu et al., 2016). The
pairwise annotations are used to construct regularization
terms that are similar to graph-Laplacian based regularization. Variants using Bayesian perspectives were also
proposed (Basu et al., 2004b; Law et al., 2005). These methods were observed to largely outperform their unsupervised
counterparts, e.g., K-means and spectral clustering, even
only as few as 1% of the pairs are annotated.
In recent years, clustering modules and deep neural networkbased feature extractors are proposed to be learned jointly—
leading to the so-called end-to-end deep clustering approaches; see, e.g., (Yang et al., 2017; Caron et al., 2018).
These methods use clustering structures in the latent space
to regularize the neural networks, and the neural networks
offers enhanced transformation power to find latent spaces
where the data can be well clustered. The CC methods
also benefited from similar ideas. The so-called deep constrained clustering (DCC) approaches were proposed in
(Zhang et al., 2019; 2021; Manduchi et al., 2021), and substantial performance enhancement relative to classic CC
methods was observed.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the most prominent unsupervised
learning tasks (Jain & Dubes, 1988). Classic clustering
paradigms, e.g., K-means and spectral clustering, are designed to work without any label information. In practice,
it was observed that limited supervision may significantly
boost the clustering performance. The so-called constrained
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, OR, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Fu
<xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu>.

Although the DCC methods have enjoyed empirical successes, some notable challenges remain. First, there is a general lack of understanding to the effectiveness of DCC. It is

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

