Learning to acquire novel cognitive tasks with evolution, plasticity and
meta-meta-learning

Thomas Miconi 1

Abstract

necessarily a special case of “learning to learn”, or metalearning. Meta-learning, that is, the acquisition of learningdependent tasks, has been studied quantitatively in animals; examples include Harlow’s seminal study of memoryguided choice among pairs of objects (Harlow, 1949), or
more recently, mice learning to perform memory-guided
navigation in virtual reality mazes (Morcos & Harvey,
2016).

A hallmark of intelligence is the ability to autonomously learn new flexible, cognitive behaviors - that is, behaviors where the appropriate action depends not just on immediate stimuli (as in
simple reflexive stimulus-response associations),
but on contextual information that must be adequately acquired, stored and processed. While
many meta-learning algorithms can design agents
that autonomously learn new tasks, cognitive
tasks adds another level of learning and memory to typical “learning-to-learn” problems. Here
we evolve neural networks, endowed with plastic
connections and neuromodulation, over a sizable
set of simple cognitive tasks adapted from a computational neuroscience framework. The resulting evolved networks can automatically modify
their own connectivity to acquire a novel simple
cognitive task, never seen during evolution, from
stimuli and rewards alone, through the spontaneous operation of their evolved neural organization and plasticity system. Our results emphasize
the importance of carefully considering the multiple learning loops involved in the emergence of
intelligent behavior.

Many meta-learning algorithms exist for artificial agents
(Thrun & Pratt, 1998; Schmidhuber, 1993b; Hochreiter et al.,
2001; Finn et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016;
Bengio et al., 1991; Floreano & Urzelai, 2000; Ruppin,
2002; Soltoggio et al., 2008; Miconi, 2016; Miconi et al.,
2018; Kirsch et al., 2019; 2022). These algorithms produce agents that can successfully perform new instances of
one specific learning-dependent (meta-)task (bandits, mazesolving, foraging, etc.) Here, however, we seek something
different. Rather than use an external algorithm to train an
agent for this or that meta-task, we would like to build an
agent capable of automatically acquiring novel, cognitive
(memory/learning-dependent) tasks, including tasks never
seen before in the agent’s lifetime (or during its initial design), through the operation of its own internal machinery,
from stimuli and rewards alone - much like animals in the
experiments mentioned above.
We propose to use an evolutionary process to design a selfcontained network, endowed with plastic connections and
reward-modulated plasticity. We expect that this evolved
agent, when exposed to many episodes of a novel cognitive task, will automatically refashion its own connectivity
in order to adequately extract, store and manipulate taskrelevant information during each new episode of the task.
Importantly, we do not want the agent to merely be able
to perform tasks from a pre-defined fixed set; rather, we
want an agent that can automatically acquire novel cognitive
tasks, including tasks never encountered during evolution.

1. Introduction
An important feature of intelligent behavior is the ability to
learn not just simple, reactive tasks (associating a stimulus
with a response), but also more complex, cognitive tasks.
While “cognition” in general is difficult to define precisely,
here we operationally define “cognitive” tasks as those that
require storing and manipulating a certain unpredictable
piece of information for each new instance of the task - that
is, tasks that require working memory.
Under this definition, acquiring a new cognitive task is
1

ML Collective. Correspondence to:
<thomas.miconi@gmail.com>.

To provide a sizeable number of computationally tractable
cognitive tasks, we use the formalism of Yang et al. (2019),
which implements a large number of simple cognitive tasks
from the animal neuroscience literature (memory-guided
saccades, comparing two successive stimuli, etc.) in a common format. One advantage of these tasks is that each

Thomas Miconi

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

