Robust Budget Pacing with a Single Sample

Santiago Balseiro 1 2 Rachitesh Kumar 3 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Balasubramanian Sivan 2 Di Wang 2

Abstract

tions every day. If they participate in all such auctions, they
will likely spend far beyond their budget. This necessitates
the need for budget management, which is our focus.

Major Internet advertising platforms offer budget
pacing tools as a standard service for advertisers
to manage their ad campaigns. Given the inherent non-stationarity in an advertiser’s value and
also competing advertisers’ values over time, a
commonly used approach is to learn a target expenditure plan that specifies a target spend as a
function of time, and then run a controller that
tracks this plan. This raises the question: how
many historical samples are required to learn a
good expenditure plan? We study this question by
considering an advertiser repeatedly participating
in T second-price auctions, where the tuple of her
value and the highest competing bid is drawn from
an unknown time-varying distribution. The advertiser seeks to maximize her total utility subject to
her budget constraint. Prior work has shown the
sufficiency of T log T samples
√ per distribution
to achieve the optimal O( T )-regret. We dramatically improve this state-of-the-art and show
that just one sample per distribution
is enough
√
to achieve the near-optimal Õ( T )-regret, while
still being robust to noise in the sampling distributions.

Target spend plans to address non-stationarities. Given
the inherent non-stationarities that exist over time, in the
volume of traffic, in the demographic of users that visit, the
rates of conversion etc., an advertiser’s own value and that of
the competing advertisers’ values are also non-stationary. To
deal with this non-stationarity, budget management systems
compute a target expenditure plan (Facebook-Guide; Kumar
et al., 2022). The latter is a function of time that specifies
the recommended amount of spend at each point of time.
I.e., such a plan distributes the cumulative daily/weekly
budget into smaller chunks of time, appropriately capturing
the non-stationarity. A pacing algorithm like a controller is
used to track the plan. This raises the question: how much
data is required to come up with a good target spend plan?
Our model. We study this question by considering a budgetconstrained advertiser participating in T second-price auctions. The advertiser seeks to maximize her utility while respecting her budget (formal model in Section 2). We model
the tuple, of an advertiser’s value and that of her highest competing bid, at time t, as being generated from unknown independent time-varying distributions {Pt }Tt=1 . This is a major
departure from the stochastic budget-management/resourceallocation literature, which for the most part assumes stationary distributions—an assumption that rarely holds in
practice as daily traffic patterns are non-stationary (Zhou
et al., 2019). If nothing is known about the distributions
{Pt }t and they can be chosen adversarially, Balseiro & Gur
(2019) showed that every algorithm must incur linear regret
against the hindsight-optimal benchmark. Their impossibility result also shows that budget management does not
fall under the purview of online convex optimization (OCO)
√
and is vastly different, given that one can achieve O( T )
regret for adversarially-chosen input in OCO. Thankfully,
additional information is usually available in the form of
historical samples. For example, both intraday and interday internet activity (and consequently the user traffic in
which an advertiser is interested) tends to be similar weekon-week. However, this periodicity is never exact, i.e., it is
too stringent to assume these historical samples are drawn
from exactly the same distributions as {Pt }t . To reflect
this reality, in this work, we assume that we have samples

1. Introduction
Online advertising is the economic engine of the internet. It
allows platforms like Google, Facebook, and TikTok to fund
services that are free at the point of delivery while providing
businesses the ability to target their ads to relevant users.
When a user logs onto these platforms, an auction is run
among the interested advertisers to determine which ad is
displayed to her. Given the scale of the internet, advertisers
are typically interested in thousands (if not millions) of aucAuthors listed in alphabetical order. 1 DRO, Columbia Business
School, New York, NY, USA 2 Google Research, New York, NY,
USA 3 IEOR, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Work
done as a Student Researcher at Google Research. Correspondence
to: Rachitesh Kumar <rk3068@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

