Are Gaussian Data All You Need? The Extents and Limits of Universality
in High-Dimensional Generalized Linear Estimation

Luca Pesce 1 Florent Krzakala 1 Bruno Loureiro 2 Ludovic Stephan 1

Abstract

On the theoretical side, there have been some important recent progress in this direction in the context of generalized
linear estimation. For instance, a recent line of work on
linear regression trained on Gaussian data has shown that
good generalization can arise even in the “overparametrized
regime” where the training error is exactly zero (Bartlett
et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022; Wu & Xu, 2020). This
benign overfitting property crucially depends on the covariance structure, occurring when the signal components of the
target align with a lower-dimensional of the data, leaving
space for the noise to spread along the higher-dimensional
orthogonal subspace (Bartlett et al., 2020). Analogous conclusions hold, under similar conditions, to generalized linear
tasks (Muthukumar et al., 2021; Wang & Thrampoulidis,
2021; Shamir, 2022). Indeed, this is only one example of
many surprising insights learned from the study of generalized linear models on Gaussian data over the past few years
(Gardner & Derrida, 1988; Krogh & Hertz, 1992; Donoho
& Tanner, 2009; Candès et al., 2020). Despite the seemingly constraining assumption on the distribution of the
features, a recent line of work provides strong evidence for
the Gaussian universality of the training and generalization
errors in generalized estimation in different settings. These
includes rigorous results for non-Gaussian designs (Montanari & Nguyen, 2017; Panahi & Hassibi, 2017), random
feature maps (Mei & Montanari, 2019; Gerace et al., 2020;
Goldt et al., 2022; Hu & Lu, 2022), neural tangent features
(Montanari & Saeed, 2022), Gaussian mixtures with random
labels (Gerace et al., 2023), as well as extensive numerical
evidence for other feature maps (Goldt et al., 2022; Loureiro
et al., 2021a) and even real datasets (Loureiro et al., 2021a;
Jacot et al., 2020; Bordelon et al., 2020). These works beg
the question “When are Gaussian features a good model
for learning?”. Our aim is to give precise answers to this
question in the context of generalized linear estimation on
a popular model for multi-modal data, known to be able to
approximate any distribution (Stone, 1948): the Gaussian
mixture model.

In this manuscript we consider the problem of
generalized linear estimation on Gaussian mixture data with labels given by a single-index
model. Our first result is a sharp asymptotic expression for the test and training errors in the
high-dimensional regime. Motivated by the recent stream of results on the Gaussian universality
of the test and training errors in generalized linear
estimation, we ask ourselves the question: ”when
is a single Gaussian enough to characterize the
error?”. Our formulas allow us to give sharp answers to this question, both in the positive and
negative directions. More precisely, we show that
the sufficient conditions for Gaussian universality
(or lack thereof) crucially depend on the alignment between the target weights and the means
and covariances of the mixture clusters, which
we precisely quantify. In the particular case of
least-squares interpolation, we prove a strong universality property of the training error and show it
follows a simple, closed-form expression. Finally,
we apply our results to real datasets, clarifying
some recent discussions in the literature about
Gaussian universality of the errors in this context.

1. Introduction
It is commonsense in machine learning that structure in
the data is an important ingredient for successful learning.
Quantifying this statement and in particular, how structure
in the features impact the training and generalization errors
the most, is an important endeavor in the broad program of
“seeing through” the modern machine learning black box.
1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Information,
Learning and Physics lab. CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
2
Département d’Informatique, École Normale Supérieure - PSL &
CNRS, 45 rue d’Ulm, F-75230 Paris cedex 05, France. Correspondence to: Luca Pesce <luca.pesce@epfl.ch>.

1.1. Main Results
Our main contributions in this work are as follows:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• Exact asymptotics of GLMs: We provide the exact
1

