Policy Contrastive Imitation Learning

Jialei Huang 1 2 3 Zhaoheng Yin 4 Yingdong Hu 1 Yang Gao 1 2 3

Abstract

tion learning algorithms is the adversarial imitation learning (AIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016). AIL converts the imitation
task into a distribution matching problem and proposes to
imitate it by training a policy against an adversarial discriminator. AIL has enjoyed great success on many imitation tasks: it achieves superior performance (Ho & Ermon,
2016; Kostrikov et al., 2018), and has been experimentally
proven to alleviate some of the distributional drift issue,
and can work even without expert actions (Torabi et al.,
2018b).However, AIL is hard to train in practice, usually
involving careful tuning of discriminator neural network
sizes and learning rates (Wang et al., 2017; Kim & Park,
2018; Orsini et al., 2021). The fragility of the discriminator
(Peng et al., 2018) not only leads to poor performance but
also severely limits the applicability of AIL to a broader
range of tasks.

Adversarial imitation learning (AIL) is a popular
method that has recently achieved much success.
However, the performance of AIL is still unsatisfactory on the more challenging tasks. We find
that one of the major reasons is due to the low
quality of AIL discriminator representation. Since
the AIL discriminator is trained via binary classification that does not necessarily discriminate the
policy from the expert in a meaningful way, the resulting reward might not be meaningful either. We
propose a new method called Policy Contrastive
Imitation Learning (PCIL) to resolve this issue.
PCIL learns a contrastive representation space by
anchoring on different policies and generates a
smooth cosine-similarity-based reward. Our proposed representation learning objective can be
viewed as a stronger version of the AIL objective and provide a more meaningful comparison
between the agent and the policy. From a theoretical perspective, we show the validity of our
method using the apprenticeship learning framework. Furthermore, our empirical evaluation on
the DeepMind Control suite demonstrates that
PCIL can achieve state-of-the-art performance. Finally, qualitative results suggest that PCIL builds
a smoother and more meaningful representation
space for imitation learning.

Numerous techniques have been proposed to improve the
performance of AIL, such as using regularization and gradient penalties (Fu et al., 2017; Kostrikov et al., 2018; Gulrajani et al., 2017). Some works also propose to use different
distribution metrics (e.g., KL divergence, Wasserstein distance) (Xiao et al., 2019) for distribution matching and show
some improvements. Though these methods show encouraging results, we notice that they ignore one crucial aspect
of the problem: the representation of AIL’s discriminator.
To be specific, the discriminator in AIL is usually trained
with binary classification loss that distinguishes expert transitions from agent transitions. This discriminator is then
used to define rewards. However, since the only goal of the
discriminator is to distinguish the expert from the agent, it
does not necessarily learn a good, smooth representation
space that can provide a reasonable comparison between the
behavior of two agents.Ideal representations should be able
to provide semantically meaningful signals to compare the
expert policy and the agent policy.

1. Introduction
Imitation is one of the fundamental capabilities of an intelligent agent (Hussein et al., 2017). Animals and humans
can acquire many skills by mimicking each other (Byrne,
2009). In engineering, imitation learning also enables
many robotics applications. One mainstream class of imita-

In this paper, we propose a new algorithm called Policy
Contrastive Imitation Learning (PCIL) to achieve this goal.
Instead of training with a binary-classification objective, we
propose to train a discriminator representation space with
the contrastive learning loss. Our method differs from the
prior representation learning approach in AIL in that we perform contrastive learning between different policies. More
specifically, we push the expert’s representation together
and pull the agent policy’s representation away from them.

1

Department of IIIS, University of Tsinghua, Beijing, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China 4 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Yang Gao <gaoyangiiis@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

