Randomized Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound
with Tighter Bayesian Regret Bounds

Shion Takeno 1 2 Yu Inatsu 1 Masayuki Karasuyama 1

Abstract

The Gaussian process upper confidence bound (GP-UCB)
(Srinivas et al., 2010), which achieves a strong theoretical guarantee for cumulative regret bounds, is a seminal
work in this field. Based on this versatile framework for
the analysis, while maintaining the theoretical guarantee,
GP-UCB has been extended to various problems, which include multi-objective BO (Paria et al., 2020; Zuluaga et al.,
2016), multi-fidelity BO (Kandasamy et al., 2016; 2017),
parallel BO (Contal et al., 2013; Desautels et al., 2014),
high-dimensional BO (Kandasamy et al., 2015), and cascade BO (Kusakawa et al., 2022).

Gaussian process upper confidence bound (GPUCB) is a theoretically promising approach for
black-box optimization; however, the confidence
parameter β is considerably large in the theorem
and chosen heuristically in practice. Then, randomized GP-UCB (RGP-UCB) uses a randomized confidence parameter, which follows the
Gamma distribution, to mitigate the impact of
manually specifying β. This study first generalizes the regret analysis of RGP-UCB to a wider
class of distributions, including the Gamma distribution. Furthermore, we propose improved RGPUCB (IRGP-UCB) based on a two-parameter
exponential distribution, which achieves tighter
Bayesian regret bounds. IRGP-UCB does not require an increase in the confidence parameter in
terms of the number of iterations, which avoids
over-exploration in the later iterations. Finally,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of IRGP-UCB
through extensive experiments.

However, the choice of a confidence parameter βt , which
controls the exploitation-exploration trade-off, is a practical
challenge for GP-UCB-based methods, where t is the iteration of BO. Since the theoretical choice of βt is considerably
large and increases with t, particularly in the later iterations,
GP-UCB with the theoretical βt causes over-exploration,
which reduces the optimization performance. Therefore, in
practice, βt is often specified manually using some heuristics, which strongly affects the performance of GP-UCB.
Since this is a common problem with GP-UCB-based methods, mitigating the effect of the manual specification of βt
is an important task.

1. Introduction

To resolve this issue, Berk et al. (2020) have proposed a
randomized GP-UCB (RGP-UCB), which uses a randomized confidence parameter ζt , which follows the Gamma
distribution. Their experimental results demonstrated that
RGP-UCB performed better than the standard GP-UCB.
Although Berk et al. (2020) provided the regret analysis,
it appears to contain some technical issues, including an
unknown convergence rate (See Appendix C for details).
Therefore, the theoretical justification of RGP-UCB is still
an open problem.

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Mockus et al., 1978) has become a widely-used framework for expensive black-box optimization problems. To reduce the number of function evaluations, BO sequentially observes the noisy function value
using an acquisition function computed from a Bayesian
model. BO has been applied to many different fields, including automatic machine learning (Snoek et al., 2012; Kandasamy et al., 2018b), materials informatics (Ueno et al.,
2016), and drug design (Korovina et al., 2020; Griffiths &
Hernández-Lobato, 2020).

This study demonstrates a generalized regret bound of RGPUCB, which holds for a wider class of distributions for ζt
in the Bayesian setting, where an objective function f is
assumed to be a sample path from the GP. However, this
analysis requires an increase in ζt , as E[ζt ] ≈ βt , which implies the over-exploration cannot be avoided. Furthermore,
this generalization does not provide us the choice of the
distribution of ζt .

Theoretical guarantees for BO have also been studied extensively (e.g., Srinivas et al., 2010; Russo & Van Roy, 2014).
1

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Masayuki Karasuyama <karasuyama@nitech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

