Efficient Personalized Federated Learning via Sparse Model-Adaptation

Daoyuan Chen 1 Liuyi Yao 1 Dawei Gao 1 Bolin Ding 1 Yaliang Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) gains increasing popularity in machine learning scenarios where the data are distributed in
different places and can not be transmitted due to privacy
concerns (Muhammad et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2021; Hong
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023). Typical
FL trains a unique global model from multiple data owners
(clients) by transmitting and aggregating intermediate information with the help of a centralized server (McMahan et al.,
2017; Kairouz et al., 2021). Although using a shared global
model for all clients shows promising average performance,
the inherent statistical heterogeneity among clients challenges the existence and convergence of the global model
(Sattler et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020). Recently, there are
emerging efforts that introduce personalization into FL by
learning and deploying distinct local models (Yang et al.,
2019; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2021). The
distinct models are designed particularly to fit the heterogeneous local data distribution via techniques taking care
of relationships between the global model and personalized
local models, such as multi-task learning (Collins et al.,
2021), meta-learning (Dinh et al., 2020a), model mixture
(Li et al., 2021c), knowledge distillation (Zhu et al., 2021)
and clustering (Ghosh et al., 2020).

Federated Learning (FL) aims to train machine
learning models for multiple clients without sharing their own private data. Due to the heterogeneity of clients’ local data distribution, recent
studies explore the personalized FL that learns
and deploys distinct local models with the help of
auxiliary global models. However, the clients
can be heterogeneous in terms of not only local data distribution, but also their computation
and communication resources. The capacity and
efficiency of personalized models are restricted
by the lowest-resource clients, leading to suboptimal performance and limited practicality of
personalized FL. To overcome these challenges,
we propose a novel approach named pFedGate
for efficient personalized FL by adaptively and
efficiently learning sparse local models. With a
lightweight trainable gating layer, pFedGate enables clients to reach their full potential in model
capacity by generating different sparse models
accounting for both the heterogeneous data distributions and resource constraints. Meanwhile,
the computation and communication efficiency
are both improved thanks to the adaptability between the model sparsity and clients’ resources.
Further, we theoretically show that the proposed
pFedGate has superior complexity with guaranteed convergence and generalization error. Extensive experiments show that pFedGate achieves superior global accuracy, individual accuracy and efficiency simultaneously over state-of-the-art methods. We also demonstrate that pFedGate performs
better than competitors in the novel clients participation and partial clients participation scenarios, and can learn meaningful sparse local models
adapted to different data distributions.
1
Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to:
<yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com>.

However, the heterogeneity among clients exists not only
in local data distribution, but also in their computation and
communication resources (Chai et al., 2019; 2020; Chen
et al., 2023). The lowest-resource clients restrict the capacity and efficiency of the personalized models due to the
following reasons: (1) The adopted model architecture of
all clients is usually assumed to be the same for aggregation
compatibility and (2) The communication bandwidth and
participation frequency of clients usually determine how
much can they contribute to the model training of other
clients and how fast can they agree to meet a converged
“central point” w.r.t their local models. This resource heterogeneity is under-explored in most existing personalized FL
(PFL) works, and instead, they gain accuracy improvement
with a large amount of additional computation or communication costs. Without special design taking the efficiency
and resource heterogeneity into account, we can only gain
sub-optimal performance and limited practicality of PFL.

Yaliang Li

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To overcome these challenges, in this paper, we propose
1

