Causal Discovery with Latent Confounders Based on Higher-Order Cumulants

Ruichu Cai 1 2 Zhiyi Huang 1 Wei Chen 1 Zhifeng Hao 1 3 Kun Zhang 4 5

Abstract

L1

L

Causal discovery with latent confounders is an
important but challenging task in many scientific
areas. Despite the success of some overcomplete
independent component analysis (OICA) based
methods in certain domains, they are computationally expensive and can easily get stuck into
local optima. We notice that interestingly, by making use of higher-order cumulants, there exists a
closed-form solution to OICA in specific cases,
e.g., when the mixing procedure follows the OneLatent-Component structure. In light of the power
of the closed-form solution to OICA corresponding to the One-Latent-Component structure, we
formulate a way to estimate the mixing matrix
using the higher-order cumulants, and further propose the testable One-Latent-Component condition to identify the latent variables and determine
causal orders. By iteratively removing the share
identified latent components, we successfully extend the results on the One-Latent-Component
structure to the Multi-Latent-Component structure
and finally provide a practical and asymptotically
correct algorithm to learn the causal structure with
latent variables. Experimental results illustrate the
asymptotic correctness and effectiveness of the
proposed method.

L2

α1

α2

α1 α2 α3 β2 β3

X1

X2

X1

(a)

X2

X3

(b)

Figure 1. Two Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), where the white
node represents the latent variable and the grey node represents
the observed variable.

bility problems in learning causal structures (Spirtes et al.,
2000; Hyvärinen & Smith, 2013; Chen et al., 2021; Adams
et al., 2021). In this paper, we consider the problem of
causal discovery with latent confounders in which observed
variables may be directly dependent.
Various methods, such as FCI (Spirtes et al., 1995), RFCI
(Colombo et al., 2012), and their variants (Colombo &
Maathuis, 2014) are proposed to solve the above problem,
but they cannot go beyond the well-known Markov equivalence class. By utilizing linear and non-Gaussian models
(Hoyer et al., 2008; Hyvärinen & Smith, 2013; Tashiro et al.,
2014; Chen et al., 2021; Salehkaleybar et al., 2020; Wang &
Drton, 2020b;a), one is able to identify the causal structure
even in the presence of latent confounders. One typical
model is the Latent-Variable Linear, non-Gaussian Acyclic
Model (lvLiNGAM) (Hoyer et al., 2008), which utilizes the
Overcomplete Independent Component Analysis (OICA)
(Eriksson & Koivunen, 2004; Lewicki & Sejnowski, 2000)
to estimate the mixing matrix from the data, and then obtain
the causal structure through the estimated mixing matrix. In
practice, many existing OICA algorithms aim to maximize
the likelihood of the data. As a result, OICA algorithms often rely on the Expectation-Maximization (EM) procedure
along with approximate inference techniques, like Gibbs
sampling (Olshausen & Millman, 1999) and mean-field approximation (Højen-Sørensen et al., 2002). Overall, OICA
is hard to compute and may get stuck in local optima.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery with latent confounders is needed in many
scientific discovery fields because we are usually unable
to collect or measure all the underlying causal variables.
Such latent confounders generally pose serious identifia1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen,
China 3 College of Engineering, Shantou University, Shantou,
China 4 Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of
Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Correspondence to: Wei Chen <chenweiDelight@gmail.com>.

Accordingly, one practical issue with causal discovery
with latent confounders in the linear, non-Gaussian case
is how to estimate the mixing matrix and then recover
causal relationships without making use of the traditional
OICA procedure. Interestingly, by assuming the causal
model is linear and leveraging the higher-order cumulants

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

