On Distribution Dependent Sub-Logarithmic Query Time of Learned Indexing

Sepanta Zeighami 1 Cyrus Shahabi 1

Abstract

attribute (e.g., we filter students only based on grade), and
that data is sorted based on this attribute, binary search finds
the answer in O(log n) for an ordered dataset with n records.
Experimental results, however, show that learning a model
(called a learned index (Kraska et al., 2018)) that predicts
the location of the query in the array can provide accurate
estimates of the query answers orders of magnitude faster
than binary search (and other non-learned approaches). The
goal of this paper is to present a theoretical grounding for
such empirical observations.

A fundamental problem in data management is
to find the elements in an array that match a
query. Recently, learned indexes are being extensively used to solve this problem, where they
learn a model to predict the location of the items
in the array. They are empirically shown to outperform non-learned methods (e.g., B-trees or binary
search that answer queries in O(log n) time) by
orders of magnitude. However, success of learned
indexes has not been theoretically justified. Only
existing attempt shows the same query time of
O(log n), but with a constant factor improvement
in space complexity over non-learned methods,
under some assumptions on data distribution. In
this paper, we significantly strengthen this result,
showing that under mild assumptions on data
distribution, and the same space complexity as
non-learned methods, learned indexes can answer
queries in O(log log n) expected query time. We
also show that allowing for slightly larger but still
near-linear space overhead, a learned index can
achieve O(1) expected query time. Our results
theoretically prove learned indexes are orders of
magnitude faster than non-learned methods, theoretically grounding their empirical success.

More specifically, we are interested in answering exact
match and range queries over a sorted array A. Exact match
queries ask for the elements in A exactly equal to the query
q (e.g., grade=q), while range queries ask for elements that
match a range [q, q ′ ] (e.g., grade is between q and q ′ ). Both
queries can be answered by finding the index of the largest
element in A that is smaller than or equal to q, which we call
the rank of q, rank(q). Range queries require the extra step,
after obtaining rank(q), of scanning the array sequentially
from q up to q ′ to obtain all results. The efficiency of methods answering range and exact match queries depends on
the efficiency of answering rank(q), which is the operation
analyzed in the rest of this paper.
In the worst-case, and without further assumption on the
data, binary search finds rank(q) optimally, and in O(log n)
operations. Materializing the binary search tree and variations of it, e.g., B-Tree (Bayer & McCreight, 1970) and
CSS-trees (Rao & Ross, 1999), utilize caching and hardware properties to improve the performance in practice but
theoretical number of operations remains O(log n) (we consider data in memory and not external storage). On the other
hand, learned indexes have been empirically shown to outperform non-learned methods by orders of magnitude. Such
approaches learn a model that predicts rank(q). At query
time, a model inference provides an estimate of rank(q), and
a local search is performed around the estimate to find the
exact index. An example is shown in Fig. 1, where for the
query 13, the model returns index 3, while the correct index
is 5. Then, assuming the maximum model error is ϵ, a binary
search on ϵ elements of A within the model prediction (i.e.,
the purple sub-array in Fig. 1) finds the correct answer. The
success of learned models is attributed to exploiting patterns
in the observed data to learn a small model that accurately
estimates the rank of a query in the array.

1. Introduction
It has been experimentally observed, but with little theoretical backing, that the problem of finding an element in an
array has very efficient learned solutions (Galakatos et al.,
2019; Kraska et al., 2018; Ferragina & Vinciguerra, 2020;
Ding et al., 2020). In this fundamental problem in data
management, the goal is to find, given a query, the elements
in the dataset that match the query (e.g., find the student
with grade=q, for a number q, where “grade=q” is the query
on a dataset of students). Assuming the query is on a single
1

Univerisity of Southern California. Correspondence to:
Sepanta Zeighami <zeighami@usc.edu>, Cyrus Shahabi <shahabi@usc>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

