Self-Interpretable Time Series Prediction with Counterfactual Explanations

Jingquan Yan 1 Hao Wang 1

Abstract

tions from DL models.
On the other hand, many existing explanation methods are
based on assigning importance scores for different parts
of the input to explain model predictions (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017b; Chen et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2019; Weinberger et al., 2020; Plumb et al., 2020).
However, understanding the contribution of different input
parts are usually not sufficiently informative for decision
making: people often want to know what changes made to
the input could have lead to a specific (desirable) prediction
(Wachter et al., 2017b; Goyal et al., 2019; Nemirovsky et al.,
2022). We call such changed input that could have shifted
the prediction to a specific target actionable counterfactual
explanations. Below we provide an example in the context
of time series.

Interpretable time series prediction is crucial for
safety-critical areas such as healthcare and autonomous driving. Most existing methods focus on interpreting predictions by assigning important scores to segments of time series. In
this paper, we take a different and more challenging route and aim at developing a selfinterpretable model, dubbed Counterfactual Time
Series (CounTS), which generates counterfactual
and actionable explanations for time series predictions. Specifically, we formalize the problem of time series counterfactual explanations,
establish associated evaluation protocols, and propose a variational Bayesian deep learning model
equipped with counterfactual inference capability of time series abduction, action, and prediction. Compared with state-of-the-art baselines, our self-interpretable model can generate
better counterfactual explanations while maintaining comparable prediction accuracy. Code
will be available at https://github.com/Wang-MLLab/self-interpretable-time-series.

Example 1 (Actionable Counterfactual Explanation).
Suppose there is a model that takes as input a time series of breathing signal x ∈ RT from a subject of age
u = 60 to predict the corresponding sleep stage as y pred =
‘Awake’ ∈ {‘Awake’, ‘Light Sleep’, ‘Deep Sleep’}. Typical
methods assign importance scores to each entry of x to
explain the prediction. However, they do not provide actionable counterfactual explanations on how to modify x to xcf
such that the prediction can change to y cf = ‘Deep Sleep’.
An ideal method with such capability could provide more
information on why the model make specific predictions.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has become increasingly prevalent, and
there is naturally a growing need for understanding DL predictions in many decision-making area, such as healthcare
diagnosis and public policy-making. The high-stake nature
of these areas means that these DL predictions are considered trustworthy only when they can be well explained.
Meanwhile, time-series data has been frequently used in
these areas but it is always challenging to explain a timeseries prediction due to the nature of temporal dependency
and varying patterns over time. Moreover, time-series data
often comes with confounding variables that affect both the
input and output, making it even harder to explain predic1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Jingquan Yan <jy766@rutgers.edu>.

Actionable counterfactual explanations help people understand how to achieve a counterfactual (target) output by
modifying the current model input. However, such explanations may not be sufficiently informative in practice, especially under the causal effect of confounding variables
which are often immutable. Specifically, some variables can
hardly be changed once its value has been determined, and
suggesting changing such variables are both meaningless
and infeasible (e.g., a patient age and gender when modeling
medical time series). This leads to a stronger requirement:
a good explanation should make as few changes as possible
on immutable variables; we call such explanations feasible
counterfactual explanations. Below we provide an example
in the context of time series.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Example 2 (Feasible Counterfactual Explanation). In Example 1, age u is a confounder that affects both x and
y since elderly people (i.e., larger u) are more likely to
1

