Causal Modeling of Policy Interventions From Treatment–Outcome Sequences

Çağlar Hızlı 1 ST John 1 Anne Juuti 2 Tuure Saarinen 2 Kirsi Pietiläinen 2 Pekka Marttinen 1

Abstract

To improve our policies, we must be able to assess their consequences: What is the effect of a given policy? What will
be the effect of a change to a different policy? What would
have happened if a patient had followed a different treatment policy? These questions correspond to observational,
interventional, and counterfactual queries, and answering
them is crucial, especially in domains such as public health
and healthcare, where quantifying risks and expectations
accompanying a policy decision, as well as evaluating past
policies, is essential (Schulam & Saria, 2017; Bica et al.,
2020; Oberst & Sontag, 2019; Tsirtsis & Gomez Rodriguez,
2020; Tsirtsis et al., 2021). Answering the interventional
and counterfactual queries requires modeling policy interventions using a causal model.

A treatment policy defines when and what treatments are applied to affect some outcome of
interest. Data-driven decision-making requires
the ability to predict what happens if a policy is
changed. Existing methods that predict how the
outcome evolves under different scenarios assume
that the tentative sequences of future treatments
are fixed in advance, while in practice the treatments are determined stochastically by a policy
and may depend, for example, on the efficiency of
previous treatments. Therefore, the current methods are not applicable if the treatment policy is
unknown or a counterfactual analysis is needed.
To handle these limitations, we model the treatments and outcomes jointly in continuous time,
by combining Gaussian processes and point processes. Our model enables the estimation of a
treatment policy from observational sequences of
treatments and outcomes, and it can predict the
interventional and counterfactual progression of
the outcome after an intervention on the treatment policy (in contrast with the causal effect of
a single treatment). We show with real-world and
semi-synthetic data on blood glucose progression
that our method can answer causal queries more
accurately than existing alternatives.

We want to infer a causal model of recurrent treatments
from sequential treatment–outcome data. Such data are always created by some policy, which induces dependencies
between past events and future treatments. However, the
policy itself is generally not recorded and may be known
only implicitly from the observed distribution of treatments
and outcomes. In epidemiology, this problem has been studied using linear models for discrete-time sequences (Robins,
1986; Robins & Hernán, 2009; Taubman et al., 2009; Zhang
et al., 2018), though these works are unable to capture nonlinear, long-term dependencies in real-world, continuoustime treatment–outcome sequences (Bica et al., 2021).
To handle such complex, long-term dependencies, sequential treatment–outcome models based on Bayesian nonparametrics and neural networks have been proposed (Xu et al.,
2016; Schulam & Saria, 2017; Soleimani et al., 2017; Bica
et al., 2020; Seedat et al., 2022). However, they neglect the
policy-induced link between past events and future treatments, and their causal analyses are limited to estimating
the impact of a fixed sequence of treatments set by hand or
generated by a simplistic parametric model. Such models do
not generalize beyond simulations to the analysis of realistic
treatment policies in real-world applications. Recently, Hua
et al. (2021) modeled treatments explicitly; however, they
focused on optimizing treatment strategies instead of causal
estimation and only considered a parametric model tailored
for a particular application.

1. Introduction
What policy should we adopt? In healthcare, for example,
we observe patients’ physiological markers (outcomes) that
change over time. We want to (positively) affect these outcomes by actions (treatments) such as doses of a medicine.
Sequences of outcomes and treatments are recorded as a
time series. A policy dictates what actions to take and when.
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University,
Helsinki, Finland 2 Helsinki University Hospital and University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Correspondence to: Çağlar Hızlı
<caglar.hizli@aalto.fi>.

With an appropriate causal model, we can also evaluate
treatment policies using counterfactual reasoning, which

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

