Revisiting Sampling for Combinatorial Optimization

Haoran Sun * 1 Katayoon Goshvadi 2 Azade Nova 2 Dale Schuurmans 2 Hanjun Dai 2

Abstract

A long and fruitful literature has investigated the connections between CO and sampling methods. A particularly
famous approach is simulated annealing (SA) (Kirkpatrick
et al., 1983), which leverages local thermal fluctuations enforced by Metropolis-Hastings updates (Metropolis et al.,
1953; Hastings, 1970). SA and its variants, such as tempered transitions (Neal, 1996) and parallel tempering (Iba,
2001), have demonstrated good performance in many applications (Johnson et al., 1989; 1991; Earl & Deem, 2005).
However, except for a few algorithms, such as SwedesenWang (Swendsen & Wang, 1987) and Hamze-Freitas-Selbey
(Hamze & de Freitas, 2012) that exploit special structure of
the underlying problem, sampling in general discrete spaces
has primarily relied on Gibbs sampling, which exhibits notoriously poor efficiency in high dimensional spaces. This
disadvantage has prevented sampling from being a primary
method for combinatorial optimization for quite some time.

Sampling approaches like Markov chain Monte
Carlo were once popular for combinatorial optimization, but the inefficiency of classical methods and the need for problem-specific designs
curtailed ongoing develpment. Recent work has
favored data-driven approaches that mitigate the
need for hand-craft heuristics, but these are often
not usable as out-of-the-box solvers due to dependence on in-distribution training and limited scalability to large instances. In this paper, we revisit
the idea of using sampling for combinatorial optimization, motivated by the significant recent advances of gradient-based discrete MCMC and new
techniques for parallel neighborhood exploration
on accelerators. Remarkably, we find that modern
sampling strategies can leverage landscape information to provide general-purpose solvers that
require no training and yet are competitive with
state of the art combinatorial solvers. In particular,
experiments on cover vertex selection, graph partition and routing demonstrate better speed-quality
trade-offs over current learning based approaches,
and sometimes even superior performance to commercial solvers and specialized algorithms.

A recent trend in CO has been to leverage learning for
optimization in a data-driven way, which has alleviated
the reliance on hand-crafted heuristics while being able
to leverage modern accelerators like GPUs and TPUs to
improve the efficiency. Though some learning methods
require supervised information (Li et al., 2018; Gasse et al.,
2019; Gupta et al., 2020) which can be hard to obtain, many
approaches have leveraged reinforcement learning (Khalil
et al., 2017; Kool et al., 2018; Chen & Tian, 2019) or other
unsupervised learning techniques (Karalias & Loukas, 2020;
Sun et al., 2022c; Wang et al., 2022) to broaden applicability.
However, despite obtaining better speed-quality trade-offs
for modest sized problems, the requirement of learning on
in-distribution instances typically makes it hard to use these
approaches as an out-of-the-box solver on problems drawn
from arbitrary distributions. Additionally, scaling a learned
optimizer to large problems is difficult in general without
the assistance of search algorithms (Nair et al., 2020) or
problem specific decomposition (Manchanda et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) is a core challenge in
domains like logistics, supply chain management and hardware design, and has been a fundamental problem of study
in computer science for decades. Since CO problems are
typically NP-hard, developing approximate algorithms that
can efficiently find high-quality sub-optimal solutions has
been a critical concern. For problems of this kind, sampling
based approaches offer an appealing property by providing
a simple trade-off between runtime and solution quality.

In this paper, we revisit sampling as a viable approach to
develop an out-of-the-box CO solver. Together with motivation from recent theoretical findings (Ma et al., 2019;
Dong & Tong, 2021) on the advantages of sampling for nonconvex problems, we are also motivated by the recent advances in Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) for discrete
spaces (Sun et al., 2022a). By treating sampling methods as
a simulation of Langevin dynamics in a discrete space (Sun

*

Work done during an internship at Google 1 Georgia
Tech 2 Google Deepmind. Correspondence to: Haoran Sun
<hsun349@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

