SpotEM: Efficient Video Search for Episodic Memory

Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan 1 Ziad Al-Halah 2 Kristen Grauman 1 3
Q: Did I leave the refrigerator open?

Abstract

Costly clip processing

Q

EM model

Cheap clip selection

SpotEM (ours)

Standard EM method

The goal in episodic memory (EM) is to search
a long egocentric video to answer a natural language query (e.g., “where did I leave my purse?”).
Existing EM methods exhaustively extract expensive fixed-length clip features to look everywhere
in the video for the answer, which is infeasible for
long wearable-camera videos that span hours or
even days. We propose SpotEM, an approach
to achieve efficiency for a given EM method
while maintaining good accuracy. SpotEM consists of three key ideas: 1) a novel clip selector
that learns to identify promising video regions to
search conditioned on the language query; 2) a
set of low-cost semantic indexing features that
capture the context of rooms, objects, and interactions that suggest where to look; and 3) distillation losses that address the optimization issues
arising from end-to-end joint training of the clip
selector and EM model. Our experiments on 200+
hours of video from the Ego4D EM Natural Language Queries benchmark and three different EM
models demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach: computing only 10% – 25% of the clip
features, we preserve 84% – 97% of the original
EM model’s accuracy. Project page: https://

Q

Selective clip processing

Q

EM model

Figure 1. Standard EM methods (see left) divide videos into fixedlength clips and perform costly processing of every clip. The processed clips are provided to the EM model for query-conditioned
search. We propose SpotEM, a clip-selection approach that spots
clips relevant to the query cheaply, and selectively processes these
clips to serve as inputs to the EM model (see right).

remove that cognitive load, allowing a user to ask questions
on-the-fly about their own past visual experience. Similarly,
an intelligent mobile robot could relay valuable information
about what it has seen based on people’s conversational
queries (“did anyone feed the dog yet?”).
This vision of a personal episodic memory prompts interesting new challenges in computer vision and multimodal
learning. Not only does it require recognizing objects and
activities from the first-person perspective, but also identifying which visual content is sufficient to answer a question
expressed in free-form natural language, accounting for the
fact that the correct answer may occupy only a tiny portion
of the entire video. Moreover, all this must be done in a
scalable manner, given that the visual history of a user will
ultimately span hours, days, weeks, or more.

vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/spotem

1. Introduction
The limitations of human memory can pose an obstacle for
our day-to-day activities. We forget where we put things
(“where did I leave my car keys?”), fail to notice the state
of particular objects (“did I turn off the stove? how much
milk is left in the fridge?”), and struggle to recall details
about past events (“who did I run into while jogging last
week? what was the name of the bakery where we bought
the muffins?”). First-person or “egocentric” perception from
wearable devices like augmented reality (AR) glasses could

The recently introduced Episodic Memory (EM) benchmark1 from Ego4D targets this task (Grauman et al., 2022):
given a natural language query and a long egocentric video,
identify the precise temporal window containing the answer.
The EM benchmark has attracted significant attention and
is the subject of community-wide competitions (Grauman
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022b; Hou et al.,
2022; Mo et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) attracting dozens

1
UT Austin 2 University of Utah 3 FAIR, Meta AI. Correspondence to: S. Ramakrishnan <sramakrishnan@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

In particular, we focus on Ego4D’s NLQ, the EM variant with
natural language queries, as opposed to other variants defined with
object or activity queries.

1

