Finding Generalization Measures by Contrasting Signal and Noise

Jiaye Teng * 1 Bohang Zhang * 2 Ruichen Li * 2 Haowei He * 1 Yequan Wang 3 Yan Tian 3 Yang Yuan 1 4 5

Abstract

forms on unseen data. By convention, people empirically
estimate generalization error via validation data that are
independently drawn from the population distribution. However, such validation data are obtained by splitting a portion
of training data, causing a shrink in the training set. Recently, a line of work argues that labeled validation sets are
unnecessary in predicting generalization, and proposes to
predict generalization via an unlabeled validation set, e.g.,
RATT approach (Garg et al., 2021), disagreement-based
approaches (Jiang et al., 2022). However, the additional
dataset, even unlabeled, might be expensive. This naturally
leads to a question: can we estimate generalization error
without any additional dataset?

Generalization is one of the most fundamental
challenges in deep learning, aiming to predict
model performances on unseen data. Empirically,
such predictions usually rely on a validation set,
while recent works showed that an unlabeled validation set also works. Without validation sets, it
is extremely difficult to obtain non-vacuous generalization bounds, which leads to a weaker task
of finding generalization measures that monotonically relate to generalization error. In this paper,
we propose a new generalization measure REF
Complexity (RElative Fitting degree between signal and noise), motivated by the intuition that a
given model-algorithm pair may generalize well
if it fits signal (e.g., true labels) fast while fitting noise (e.g., random labels) slowly. Empirically, REF Complexity monotonically relates
to test accuracy in real-world datasets without
accessing additional validation sets, achieving
−0.988 correlation on CIFAR-10 and −0.960
correlation on CIFAR-100. We further theoretically verify the utility of REF Complexity under three different cases, including convex and
smooth regimes with stochastic gradient descent,
smooth regimes (not necessarily convex) with
stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, and linear regimes with gradient descent. The code is
available at https://github.com/96208
6838/REF-complexity.

Directly answering the question can be extremely challenging (Jiang et al., 2020a). As a surrogate, people consider a
weaker task of finding generalization measures that monotonically relate to generalization error (Jiang et al., 2020b;
Dziugaite et al., 2020). Unlike the predicting task that calculates the exact value of generalization error, generalization
measures are only required to sketch its trend. Such relaxation is meaningful in many scenarios, e.g., model selection
tasks (Zucchini, 2000; Johnson & Omland, 2004; EmmertStreib & Dehmer, 2019).
There are various types of generalization measures in the
existing literature, which can be roughly split into four
branches (Jiang et al., 2020b): (a) empirical measures, (b)
norm-based measures, (c) PAC-Bayesian and informationbased measures, (d) stability-based measures. However, (a)
may imply a spurious causal relationship between the measure and generalization (Dziugaite & Roy, 2017), (b) even
negatively correlate with generalization error (Jiang et al.,
2020b), (c) only applies in stochastic models instead of standard training scenarios. Therefore, (d) stands out due to
its algorithm-dependent property and is considered a potential approach to generalization measure analysis (Nagarajan
& Kolter, 2019; Jiang et al., 2020b). Existing works have
proposed meaningful generalization measures based on algorithmic stability. For example, Hardt et al. (2016) theoretically study algorithmic stability and argue that “train faster,
generalize better”, and Jiang et al. (2020b) observe that the
initial phase of optimization benefits the final generalization. Although these arguments perform well empirically,
there still exist phenomena that the existing stability-based
measures cannot explain. For example, stochastic gradi-

1. Introduction
Generalization is one of the most fundamental mysteries
in deep learning, measuring how the trained model per*
1
Equal contribution
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Peking University 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing, China 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
5
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Correspondence to: Yang Yuan
<yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

