Beyond the Universal Law of Robustness:
Sharper Laws for Random Features and Neural Tangent Kernels

Simone Bombari 1 Shayan Kiyani 2 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract

of adversarial training methods has been developed (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2017; Madry et al., 2018;
Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wong & Kolter, 2018). In a parallel effort, a recent line of theoretical work has focused on
providing a principled understanding to the phenomenon
of adversarial robustness, see e.g. (Dohmatob, 2022; Zhu
et al., 2022; Javanmard et al., 2020; Donhauser et al., 2021)
and the review in Section 2. Specifically, the recent paper by Bubeck & Sellke (2021) has highlighted the role of
over-parameterization as a necessary condition to achieve
robustness: while interpolation requires the number of parameters p of the model to be at least linear in the number of
data samples N , smooth interpolation (namely, robustness)
requires p > dN , where d is the input dimension. We note
that the law of robustness put forward by Bubeck & Sellke
(2021) is “universal” in the sense that it holds for any parametric model. Furthermore, an earlier conjecture by Bubeck
et al. (2021) posits that there exists a model of two-layer
neural network such that robustness is successfully achieved
with this minimal number of parameters; i.e., the condition
p > dN is both necessary and sufficient for robustness. This
state of affairs leads to the following natural question:

Machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, and a thought-provoking
paper by Bubeck and Sellke has analyzed
this phenomenon through the lens of overparameterization: interpolating smoothly the data
requires significantly more parameters than simply memorizing it. However, this “universal” law
provides only a necessary condition for robustness, and it is unable to discriminate between
models. In this paper, we address these gaps by focusing on empirical risk minimization in two prototypical settings, namely, random features and
the neural tangent kernel (NTK). We prove that,
for random features, the model is not robust for
any degree of over-parameterization, even when
the necessary condition coming from the universal law of robustness is satisfied. In contrast, for
even activations, the NTK model meets the universal lower bound, and it is robust as soon as the
necessary condition on over-parameterization is
fulfilled. This also addresses a conjecture in prior
work by Bubeck, Li and Nagaraj. Our analysis decouples the effect of the kernel of the model from
an “interaction matrix”, which describes the interaction with the test data and captures the effect of
the activation. Our theoretical results are corroborated by numerical evidence on both synthetic
and standard datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10).

When does over-parameterization become a sufficient
condition to achieve adversarial robustness?
In this paper, we consider a sensitivity1 measure proportional to ∥∇z f (z, θ)∥2 , where z is the test data point and
f is the model with parameters θ whose robustness is investigated. This quantity is closely related to notions of
sensitivity appearing in related works (Dohmatob, 2022;
Dohmatob & Bietti, 2022; Bubeck & Sellke, 2021), and it
leads to a more stringent requirement on the robustness than
the perturbation stability considered by Zhu et al. (2022),
see also the discussion in Section 3. For such a sensitivity
measure, we show that the answer to the question above
depends on the specific model at hand. Specifically, we will
focus on the solution yielded by empirical risk minimization
(ERM) in two prototypical settings widely analyzed in the
theoretical literature: (i) Random Features (RF) (Rahimi
& Recht, 2007), and the (ii) Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
(Jacot et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Despite the deployment of deep neural networks in a wide
set of applications, these models are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial perturbations (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy
et al., 2014), which raises serious concerns about their robustness guarantees. To address these issues, a wide variety
1

Institute of Science and Technology, Austria 2 University
of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Simone Bombari <simone.bombari@ista.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

The sensitivity can be interpreted as the non-robustness.

