Distributed Linear Bandits under Communication Constraints
Sudeep Salgia 1 Qing Zhao 1

Abstract

dressed in the literature.

We consider distributed linear bandits where M
agents learn collaboratively to minimize the overall cumulative regret incurred by all agents. Information exchange is facilitated by a central server,
and both the uplink and downlink communications are carried over channels with fixed capacity, which limits the amount of information that
can be transmitted in each use of the channels.
We investigate the regret-communication tradeoff by (i) establishing information-theoretic lower
bounds on the required communications (in terms
of bits) for achieving a sublinear regret order; (ii)
developing an efficient algorithm that achieves the
minimum sublinear regret order offered by centralized learning using the minimum order of communications dictated by the information-theoretic
lower bounds. For sparse linear bandits, we show
a variant of the proposed algorithm offers better
regret-communication trade-off by leveraging the
sparsity of the problem.

1.1. Main Results
In this paper, we address the above questions within the
scope of distributed linear bandits. We consider a system
of M distributed agents whose actions generate random rewards governed by a common unknown mean θ∗ ∈ Rd . The
agents aim to optimize their actions over time to minimize
the overall cumulative regret incurred by all agents over a
horizon of length T . Communications across agents are facilitated by a central server. To quantify the communication
cost to the bit level, we assume that both the uplink and
downlink channels have a capacity of R bits per channel
use.
Our main results are twofold. First, we establish an
information-theoretic lower bound on the required communications for achieving a sublinear regret order. Second, we develop an efficient algorithm that achieves the optimal regret
order offered by centralized learning using the minimum order of communications dictated by the information-theoretic
lower bound. For sparse linear bandits, we show a variant of
the proposed algorithm offers better regret-communication
trade-off by leveraging the sparsity of the problem.

1. Introduction

For the distributed linear bandit
problem, to achieve the
√
optimal regret order of Ω(d M T ) in both M and T as offered by centralized learning, the agents need to cooperate
in learning the underlying reward vector θ∗ . In addition to a
policy for choosing reward-generating actions at each time,
a distributed learning algorithm also includes a communication strategy that governs when to communicate and what
and how to send it (i.e., quantization and encoding) over
the finite-capacity channels. To minimize the total regret
that is accumulating over time and aggregating over the
agents while using a minimum amount of communications,
the communication strategy needs to work in tandem with
action selection to ensure a continual flow of information
available at all agent for decision-making.

The tension between learning efficiency and communication
cost is evident in many distributed learning problems. If
distributed agents can share all their locally obtained information and fully coordinate their actions, the problem
effectively reduces to a centralized problem, and the greatest
learning efficiency defined by the centralized counterpart is
trivially achieved at the price of high communication cost.
What is the minimum amount (in terms of bits) of communications needed to achieve the learning efficiency offered by
centralized learning? How one might design a distributed
learning algorithm that operates at such an optimal point
in the communication-learning efficiency trade-off curve?
These fundamental questions have not been adequately ad-

The key idea of the proposed algorithm is an progressive
learning and sharing (PLS) structure that systematically
coordinates the collective exploration of θ∗ and the information sharing of the estimates of θ∗ over finite-capacity
channels. Specifically, the PLS algorithm progresses as
each agent learns and shares one-bit information about θ∗

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Sudeep Salgia
<ss3827@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

