An Instrumental Variable Approach to Confounded Off-Policy Evaluation

Yang Xu 1 Jin Zhu 2 3 Chengchun Shi 4 Shikai Luo 3 Rui Song 1

Abstract

existence of unobserved variables that could potentially confound either the action-reward or action-next-state pair. This
assumption, however, can be violated in some real-world
applications such as healthcare and technological industries.

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) aims to estimate the
return of a target policy using some pre-collected
observational data generated by a potentially different behavior policy. In many cases, there exist
unmeasured variables that confound the actionreward or action-next-state relationships, rendering many existing OPE approaches ineffective.
This paper develops an instrumental variable (IV)based method for consistent OPE in confounded
sequential decision making. Similar to singlestage decision making, we show that IV enables
us to correctly identify the target policy’s value
in infinite horizon settings as well. Furthermore,
we propose a number of policy value estimators
and illustrate their effectiveness through extensive
simulations and real data analysis from a worldleading short-video platform.

Our paper is partly motivated by the need to evaluate the
long-term treatment effects of certain app download ads
from a short-video platform. At each time, the platform
may bid with many other companies to show their own ads
to potential consumers. Unmeasured confounding poses a
significant challenge in this data generating process. This is
because other companies may win the auction and it remains
unknown which ad is ultimately shown to the consumer. In
addition, if the competitor’s ad is displayed, the consumer
may download their app instead. This lack of observability
violates the no unmeasured confounders assumption, making it difficult to evaluate the effects of the ads consistently.
Recently, IV-based methods have stood out as a powerful
approach to account for unmeasured confounding and measurement errors and have been applied in a range of studies
(Angrist et al., 1996; Aronow & Carnegie, 2013; Tchetgen &
Vansteelandt, 2013; Ogburn et al., 2015; Wang & Tchetgen,
2018; Qiu et al., 2021; Cui & Tchetgen Tchetgen, 2021).
However, these methods are typically used in a single-stage
setting and cannot be directly applied to general sequential
decision making which is commonly encountered in the RL
literature.

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) estimates the discounted cumulative reward following a given target policy with an
offline dataset collected from another (possibly unknown)
behavior policy. OPE is important in situations where it is
impractical or too costly to directly evaluate the target policy via online experimentation, including robotics (Quillen
et al., 2018), precision medicine (Murphy, 2003; Kosorok &
Laber, 2019; Tsiatis et al., 2019), economics (Chernozhukov
et al., 2018), quantitative social science (Abadie & Cattaneo,
2018), recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010; Kiyohara
et al., 2022), etc.

To fill in this gap, we propose an IV-based approach to OPE
in confounded sequential decision making. The advances
and contributions of our proposal are multi-fold.
First, to the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first
papers to systematically examine the use of IVs for policy
evaluation in infinite or long-horizon settings. Our proposal covers a range of models, including Markov decision
processes with unmeasured confounders (MDPUCs), highorder MDPs with unmeasured confounders and POMDPs,
allowing the Markov assumption to be potentially violated
at different levels. Existing IV-based RL approaches are
mainly designed for the purpose of policy optimization, not
policy evaluation. Moreover, related studies either rely on
the Markov assumption (Liao et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2021;
Fu et al., 2022) or finite horizon settings with a few decision
stages (Chen & Zhang, 2021). This narrows the scope of
their findings.

Despite a large body of literature on OPE (see Section 2
for detailed discussions), many of them rely on the assumption of no unmeasured confounders (NUC), excluding the
1

Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, USA 2 Sun Yat-sen University, China 3 ByteDance, China
4
Department of Statistics, London School of Economics and
Political Science, London, UK. Correspondence to: Rui Song
<songray@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

