Towards Robust Graph Incremental Learning on Evolving Graphs

Junwei Su 1 Difan Zou 1 Zijun Zhang 2 Chuan Wu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Humans are capable of acquiring new information continuously while retaining previously obtained knowledge. This
seemingly natural capability, however, is difficult but important for deep neural networks (DNNs) to acquire (Wu
et al., 2021). Incremental learning, also known as continual learning or life-long learning, studies machine learning
approaches that allow a model to continuously acquire new
knowledge while retaining previously obtained knowledge.
This is important because it allows the model to adapt to
new information without forgetting past knowledge. In
the general formulation of incremental learning, a stream
of tasks arrive sequentially and the model goes through
rounds of training sessions to accumulate knowledge for
a particular objective (such as classification). The goal is
to find a learning algorithm that can incrementally update
the model’s parameters based on the new task without suffering from catastrophic forgetting (Delange et al., 2021),
which refers to the inability to retain previously learned
information when learning new tasks. Incremental learning
is crucial for the practicality of machine learning systems
as it allows the model to adapt to new information without
the need for frequent retraining, which can be costly.

Incremental learning is a machine learning approach that involves training a model on a sequence of tasks, rather than all tasks at once.
This ability to learn incrementally from a stream
of tasks is crucial for many real-world applications. However, incremental learning is a challenging problem on graph-structured data, as
many graph-related problems involve prediction
tasks for each individual node, known as Nodewise Graph Incremental Learning (NGIL). This
introduces non-independent and non-identically
distributed characteristics in the sample data generation process, making it difficult to maintain
the performance of the model as new tasks are
added. In this paper, we focus on the inductive
NGIL problem, which accounts for the evolution
of graph structure (structural shift) induced by
emerging tasks. We provide a formal formulation
and analysis of the problem, and propose a novel
regularization-based technique called StructuralShift-Risk-Mitigation (SSRM) to mitigate the impact of the structural shift on catastrophic forgetting of the inductive NGIL problem. We show
that the structural shift can lead to a shift in the input distribution for the existing tasks, and further
lead to an increased risk of catastrophic forgetting. Through comprehensive empirical studies
with several benchmark datasets, we demonstrate
that our proposed method, Structural-Shift-RiskMitigation (SSRM), is flexible and easy to adapt
to improve the performance of state-of-the-art
GNN incremental learning frameworks in the inductive setting.

While incremental learning has been extensively studied for
Euclidean data (such as images and text) (Biesialska et al.,
2020; Pfülb & Gepperth, 2019), there has been relatively
little research on incremental learning for graph-structured
data (Zhang et al., 2022). Graphs are often generated continuously in real-life scenarios, making them an ideal application for incremental learning. For example, in a citation network, new papers and their associated citations may emerge,
and a document classifier needs to continuously adapt its
parameters to distinguish the documents of newly emerged
research fields (Zhou & Cao, 2021). In social networks, the
distributions of users’ friendships and activities depend on
when and where the networks are collected (Gama et al.,
2014). In financial networks, the payment flows between
transactions and the appearance of illicit transactions have
strong correlations with external contextual factors such as
time and market (Zliobaite, 2010). Therefore, it is important to develop Graph Incremental Learning (GIL) methods that can handle new tasks over newly emerged graph
data while maintaining model performance, particularly for
highly dynamic systems such as citation networks, online

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Hong Kong
Department of Computer Science, University of Wu Han. Correspondence to: Junwei Su <junweisu@connect.hku.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
Implementation available at: https://github.com/
littleTown93/NGIL_Evolve

1

