Understanding the Complexity Gains of Single-Task RL with a Curriculum

Qiyang Li * 1 Yuexiang Zhai * 1 Yi Ma 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) problems can be
challenging without well-shaped rewards. Prior
work on provably efficient RL methods generally proposes to address this issue with dedicated exploration strategies. However, another
way to tackle this challenge is to reformulate it
as a multi-task RL problem, where the task space
contains not only the challenging task of interest but also easier tasks that implicitly function
as a curriculum. Such a reformulation opens up
the possibility of running existing multi-task RL
methods as a more efficient alternative to solving a single challenging task from scratch. In
this work, we provide a theoretical framework
that reformulates a single-task RL problem as
a multi-task RL problem defined by a curriculum. Under mild regularity conditions on the
curriculum, we show that sequentially solving
each task in the multi-task RL problem is more
computationally efficient than solving the original single-task problem, without any explicit exploration bonuses or other exploration strategies.
We also show that our theoretical insights can be
translated into an effective practical learning algorithm that can accelerate curriculum learning
on simulated robotic tasks.

Learning πω⋆ ′ from scratch

Learning πω⋆ ′ with ROLLIN

Figure 1: Illustration of ROLLIN. The red circle represents the initial state distribution. The dark curve represents the optimal policy of the preceding task ω. The
blue diamonds represent the optimal state distributions
π⋆
π⋆
dµω , dµω′ of the preceding task ω and the current ω ′ respectively. ROLLIN runs the optimal policy of the preceding task πω⋆ to obtain a better initial state distribution for
faster learning of the optimal policy of the current task πω⋆ ′ .

1. Introduction

after extensive explorations, RL problems can be exceptionally difficult (Kakade and Langford, 2002; Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Agarwal et al., 2019). This challenge is often overcome with either reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999;
Andrychowicz et al., 2017; 2020; Gupta et al., 2022) or
dedicated exploration methods (Tang et al., 2017; Stadie
et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2016; Burda et al., 2018),
but reward shaping can bias the solution away from optimal behavior, while even the best exploration methods, in
general, may require covering the entire state space before
discovering high-reward regions.

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides an appealing and
simple way to formulate control and decision-making problems in terms of reward functions that specify what an
agent should do, and then automatically train policies to
learn how to do it. However, in practice the specification of
the reward function requires great care: if the reward function is well-shaped, then learning can be fast and effective,
but if rewards are delayed, sparse, or can only be achieved
1
UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
Qiyang Li
<qcli@berkeley.edu>, Yuxiang Zhai <simonzhai@berkeley.edu>.

On the other hand, a number of recent works have proposed
multi-task learning methods in RL that involve learning
contextual policies that simultaneously represent solutions
to an entire space of tasks, such as policies that reach any

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

