CoCo: A Coupled Contrastive Framework for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Graph Classification

Nan Yin 1 Li Shen 2 Mengzhu Wang 3 Long Lan 3 Zeyu Ma 4 Chong Chen 5 Xian-Sheng Hua 5 Xiao Luo 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, graph-structured data has flourished in a number
of fields including chemistry and bioinformatics. Among
various graph-based machine learning tasks, graph classification seeks to predict the properties of whole graphs (Wang
et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2022), and a variety of machine
learning algorithms have been put forward for the problem (Yoo et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2022). These methods mostly fall under the
category of graph neural networks (GNNs). Following
the paradigm of message passing (Kipf & Welling, 2017),
GNNs learn representations in the graph by stacking multiple neural network layers, each of which transfers semantic
information from topological neighbors to centroid nodes.
A readout function eventually combines all of the node representations into a graph-level representation. In this way,
GNNs are capable of integrating graph structural information into graph representations implicitly, thus facilitating
downstream graph classification.

Although graph neural networks (GNNs) have
achieved impressive achievements in graph classification, they often need abundant task-specific labels, which could be extensively costly to acquire.
A credible solution is to explore additional labeled
graphs to enhance unsupervised learning on the
target domain. However, how to apply GNNs to
domain adaptation remains unsolved owing to the
insufficient exploration of graph topology and the
significant domain discrepancy. In this paper, we
propose Coupled Contrastive Graph Representation Learning (CoCo), which extracts the topological information from coupled learning branches
and reduces the domain discrepancy with coupled contrastive learning. CoCo contains a graph
convolutional network branch and a hierarchical graph kernel network branch, which explore
graph topology in implicit and explicit manners.
Besides, we incorporate coupled branches into
a holistic multi-view contrastive learning framework, which not only incorporates graph representations learned from complementary views for
enhanced understanding, but also encourages the
similarity between cross-domain example pairs
with the same semantics for domain alignment.
Extensive experiments on popular datasets show
that our CoCo outperforms these competing baselines in different settings generally.

In spite of their certain progress, modern GNN algorithms
are typically trained under supervision, necessitating a large
quantity of labeled data (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al.,
2019; Bodnar et al., 2021; Baek et al., 2021). However, label
annotation in the graph domain is either prohibitively expensive or even impossible to acquire (Xu et al., 2021; Suresh
et al., 2021). For instance, ascertaining the pharmacological
effect of drug molecule graphs involve costly experiments
on living animals. Due to the scarcity of labeled annotations,
the bulk of current algorithms performs poorly in practice.
To solve this issue, we observe that there are often a substantial number of graph samples from a different but relevant
domain and their labels are easily available. In this spirit,
this work studies the problem of unsupervised domain adaptive graph classification, a practical task to predict graph
properties with both labeled source graphs and unlabeled
target graphs.

1

Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 2 JD Explore
Academy, Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China 4 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China 5 Terminus Group, Beijing, China 6 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Luo <xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>.

However, designing an effective domain adaptive graph
classification framework is non-trivial due to the following
major challenges. (1) How to sufficiently extract topological information under the scarcity of labeled data? Recent
GNN algorithms (Xu et al., 2019) are trained in an end-toend manner following the paradigm of message passing,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

