DiscoBAX: Discovery of Optimal Intervention Sets
in Genomic Experiment Design

Clare Lyle * 1 2 Arash Mehrjou * † 3 Pascal Notin * 1
Andrew Jesson 1 Stefan Bauer 4 5 Yarin Gal 1 Patrick Schwab † 3

Abstract

Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) (Jehuda et al., 2018)
perturbations, are both time and resource-intensive (Dickson
& Gagnon, 2004; 2009; DiMasi et al., 2016; Berdigaliyev
& Aljofan, 2020). Therefore, an exhaustive search of the
billions of potential experimental protocols covering all possible experimental conditions, cell states, cell types, and
perturbations (Trapnell, 2015; Hasin et al., 2017; Worzfeld
et al., 2017; Chappell et al., 2018; MacLean et al., 2018;
Chappell et al., 2018) is infeasible even for the world’s
largest biomedical research institutes.

The discovery of therapeutics to treat geneticallydriven pathologies relies on identifying genes involved in the underlying disease mechanisms. Existing approaches search over the billions of potential interventions to maximize the expected
influence on the target phenotype. However, to
reduce the risk of failure in future stages of trials, practical experiment design aims to find a set
of interventions that maximally change a target
phenotype via diverse mechanisms. We propose
DiscoBAX, a sample-efficient method for maximizing the rate of significant discoveries per experiment while simultaneously probing for a wide
range of diverse mechanisms during a genomic
experiment campaign. We provide theoretical
guarantees of approximate optimality under standard assumptions, and conduct a comprehensive
experimental evaluation covering both synthetic
as well as real-world experimental design tasks.
DiscoBAX outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods for experimental design, selecting effective and diverse perturbations in biological systems.

To mitigate the chances of failure in subsequent stages of
the drug design pipeline, it is desirable for the subset of
precursors selected in the target identification stage to operate on diverse underlying biological mechanisms (Nica
et al., 2022). That way, if a promising candidate based on
in-vitro experiments triggers undesirable outcomes when
tested in-vivo (e.g., unexpected side effects), other lead
precursors relying on different pathways might be suitable
replacements that are not subject to the same issues. This
two-phase maximization problem diverges from standard
formulations of Bayesian optimization or active learning.
In particular, the noisy measurements obtained by the experimenter don’t correspond to the objective of interest, but
are only correlated with this outcome via some unknown
mechanism. Thus even in the limit of infinite intermediate
phenotype measurements, it is not possible to identify the
maximum of the objective function.

1. Introduction
Genomic experiments probing the function of genes under realistic cellular conditions are the cornerstone of modern early-stage drug target discovery and validation; moreover, they are used to identify effective modulators of one
or more disease-relevant cellular processes. These experiments, for example using Clustered Regularly Interspaced

Our first contribution is formalizing this problem in order to
identify properties of an optimal solution. Mathematically,
finding a diverse set of precursors corresponds to identifying and sampling from the different modes of the black-box
objective function mapping intervention representations to
the corresponding effects on the disease phenotype (§ 2).
Existing machine learning methods for iterative experimental design (e.g., active learning, Bayesian optimization) have
the potential to aid in efficiently exploring this vast biological intervention space. However, to our knowledge, there is
no method geared toward identifying the modes of the underlying black-box objective function to identify candidate
interventions that are both effective and diverse (§ 6).

∗
Equal contribution, † Senior authorship 1 University of
Oxford 2 Google DeepMind 3 GlaxoSmithKline 4 Helmholtz
AI 5 Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to:
Clare Lyle <clarelyle@deepmind.com>, Arash Mehrjou
<arash@distantvantagepoint.com>, Pascal Notin <pascal.notin@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To this end, we introduce DiscoBAX - a sample-efficient
1

