Modality-Agnostic Variational Compression of Implicit Neural Representations

Jonathan Richard Schwarz * 1 2 Jihoon Tack * 3 Yee Whye Teh 1 Jaeho Lee 4 Jinwoo Shin 3

Abstract

While being an undoubtedly successful approach, it has limited the transfer of algorithmic ideas between techniques
designed for different forms of data. More importantly, in
certain engineering or scientific problems, vast amounts
of data may be collected for which no generally accepted
compression technique may be available (e.g. the AR/VR
domain (Yang et al., 2022), point clouds, remote sensing or
climate data), inhibiting progress in such fields.

We introduce a modality-agnostic neural compression algorithm based on a functional view of data
and parameterised as an Implicit Neural Representation (INR). Bridging the gap between latent
coding and sparsity, we obtain compact latent representations non-linearly mapped to a soft gating
mechanism. This allows the specialisation of a
shared INR network to each data item through
subnetwork selection. After obtaining a dataset
of such latent representations, we directly optimise the rate/distortion trade-off in a modalityagnostic space using neural compression. Variational Compression of Implicit Neural Representations (VC-INR) shows improved performance
given the same representational capacity pre quantisation while also outperforming previous quantisation schemes used for other INR techniques.
Our experiments demonstrate strong results over
a large set of diverse modalities using the same
algorithm without any modality-specific inductive biases. We show results on images, climate
data, 3D shapes and scenes as well as audio and
video, introducing VC-INR as the first INR-based
method to outperform codecs as well-known and
diverse as JPEG 2000, MP3 and AVC/HEVC on
their respective modalities.

In this paper, we join a recent group of researchers (e.g.
Dupont et al., 2021; 2022b; Schwarz & Teh, 2022) in arguing for a paradigm shift: Making modality-agnosticism
a key guiding principle, we advocate for a single algorithmic workbench on which methods applicable to any type
of data represented by a coordinate and feature space are
developed. This would allow research effort to be pooled
and any jointly developed model or learning improvement
to benefit multiple downstream compression applications at
once.
A promising approach towards realising this idea is the use
of Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) or Neural Fields
(e.g. Tancik et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020). An INR
relies on a functional interpretation of data, specifically
as a mapping from coordinates to features (e.g. (x, y) →
(r, g, b) for images), which is parameterised a neural network. INRs offer various attractive properties, including
upsampling to arbitrary resolution (Chen et al., 2021) or
a pathway to new approaches to applications such as generative modeling or classification (Dupont et al., 2022a).
For our purpose, the most intriguing property of the INR
approach is its inherent modality-agnosticism, as any data
point can in theory be represented provided it is expressed
as a coordinate to feature mapping and thus learnable. Consequently, a learned INR is simply an encoding of the data
point within the weights of a neural network, the efficient
storage of which has received much attention at a time
of ever increasing model capacity. We can thus state the
second guiding principle of the work at hand: Data- as
model-compression.

1. Introduction
Data compression has become a critical problem in the modern era, as vast amounts of data is added to and transmitted
through computer networks (Clissa, 2022) at previously
unimaginable rates. While momentous progress has been
made compared to naive representations, custom compression techniques are still developed for each modality at hand,
carefully introducing inductive biases into new algorithms.
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 University College London 3 KAIST 4 POSTECH. Correspondence to: Jonathan Richard
Schwarz <schwarzjn@gmail.com>.

This second principle distinguishes our ideas from much of
the existing work on Neural Compression (e.g. Ballé et al.,
2017; 2018; Cheng et al., 2020b), which directly encodes a
given data point into a codespace, hence relying on carefully
designed modality-specific encoding and decoding networks

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

