Iterative Approximate Cross-Validation

Yuetian Luo 1 Zhimei Ren 2 Rina Foygel Barber 2

Abstract

points for training, and the remaining one for testing, and
then repeats for each of the n data points in the sample. The
resulting n cross-validation errors can be used for model
assessment or selection, tuning parameter selection, etc.

Cross-validation (CV) is one of the most popular tools for assessing and selecting predictive
models. However, standard CV suffers from high
computational cost when the number of folds is
large. Recently, under the empirical risk minimization (ERM) framework, a line of works proposed efficient methods to approximate CV based
on the solution of the ERM problem trained on
the full dataset. However, in large-scale problems, it can be hard to obtain the exact solution
of the ERM problem, either due to limited computational resources or due to early stopping as a
way of preventing overfitting. In this paper, we
propose a new paradigm to efficiently approximate CV when the ERM problem is solved via
an iterative first-order algorithm, without running
until convergence. Our new method extends existing guarantees for CV approximation to hold
along the whole trajectory of the algorithm, including at convergence, thus generalizing existing
CV approximation methods. Finally, we illustrate
the accuracy and computational efficiency of our
method through a range of empirical studies.

However, the superior performance of leave-one-out CV is
accompanied by high computational cost when n is large,
as the potentially complex model needs to be fitted n times.
To be able to run leave-one-out CV but avoid the high computational burden, several methods have been proposed to
approximate the expensive model refitting step with an inexpensive surrogate step, with much progress in the recent
literature particularly in the context of empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Obuchi & Kabashima, 2016; Beirami
et al., 2017; Giordano et al., 2019; Koh & Liang, 2017;
Wang et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2020; Rad & Maleki, 2020;
Stephenson & Broderick, 2020).
Background: approximate CV for ERM Suppose one
aims to estimate some parameter of interest θ∗ via solving
the following regularized ERM problem:
θb = arg minp F (Z; θ),
θ∈R

(1)

where, for a dataset Z of size n,

1. Introduction

F (Z; θ) :=

n
X

ℓ(Zi ; θ) + λπ(θ).

i=1

In machine learning and statistics, cross-validation (CV)
(Allen, 1974; Stone, 1974; Geisser, 1975) is one of the
most popular methods for the tasks of assessing and selecting predictive models. It is conceptually simple and
easy to implement. Among many variants of CV, one popular choice is leave-one-out CV (also called the Jackknife),
which often offers the most accurate prediction for the outof-sample risk in many practical and challenging scenarios
(Arlot & Celisse, 2010; Stephenson & Broderick, 2020; Rad
& Maleki, 2020). Leave-one-out CV uses n−1 out of n data

Here ℓ(Z; θ) is the loss function for data point Z and parameter θ, Z = {Zi }ni=1 is the set of observed data points, π(·)
is a regularization term, and λ ≥ 0 is a tuning parameter.
Under this setting, the widely used leave-one-out CV loss
for estimating the prediction performance of θb is given by
n

CV({θb−i }ni=1 ) =

1X
ℓ(Zi ; θb−i ),
n i=1

(2)

1
Data Science Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago IL
60637, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Chicago,
Chicago IL 60637, USA. Correspondence to: Yuetian Luo <yuetian@uchicago.edu>.

where θb−i := argminθ∈Rp F (Z−i ; θ) is the minimizer
Pn of the leave-one-out objective F (Z−i ; θ) :=
j=1,j̸=i ℓ(Zj ; θ) + λπ(θ).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Since computing θb−i for every i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n} is
often expensive, this motivates finding an approximation to
CV({θb−i }ni=1 ) that does not require fitting n many models.
1

