Best of Both Worlds Policy Optimization

Christoph Dann 1 Chen-Yu Wei 2 Julian Zimmert 1

Abstract

et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2020a; Zanette et al., 2020;
Luo et al., 2021). These works demonstrate an additional
robustness property of policy optimization, which is able to
handle adversarial losses or some level of corruption. Luo
et al. (2021)√
and Chen et al. (2022) even managed to obtain
the optimal T rate.
√
However, when the losses are in fact stochastic, the T
minimax regret is often overly pessimistic and log(T ) with
problem-dependent factors is the optimal rate (Lai et al.,
1985). Recently, Jin et al. (2021) obtained a best-of-bothworlds algorithm that automatically adapts to the nature of
the environment, a method which relies on FTRL with a
global regularizer over the occupancy measure.

Policy optimization methods are popular reinforcement learning algorithms in practice. Recent works have built
√ theoretical foundation for
them by proving T regret bounds even when
the losses are adversarial. Such bounds are tight
in the worst case but often overly pessimistic.
In this work, we show that in tabular Markov
decision processes (MDPs), by properly designing the regularizer, the exploration bonus and the
learning rates, one can achieve a more favorable
polylog(T ) regret when the losses are stochastic,
without sacrificing the worst-case guarantee in
the adversarial regime. To our knowledge, this
is also the first time a gap-dependent polylog(T )
regret bound is shown for policy optimization.
Specifically, we achieve this by leveraging a Tsallis entropy or a Shannon entropy regularizer in the
policy update. Then we show that under known
transitions, we can further obtain a first-order regret bound in the adversarial regime by leveraging
the log barrier regularizer.

In this work, we show that by properly assigning the bonus
and tuning the learning rates, policy optimization can also
achieve the best of both worlds, which gives a more computationally favorable solution than Jin et al. (2021) for the
same setting. Specifically, we show that policy optimization
with Tsallis entropy or Shannon entropy regularizer achieves
√
T regret in the adversarial √
regime and polylog(T ) regret
in
√ the stochastic regime. The T can further be improved to
L if the transition is known and if a log-barrier regularizer
is used, where L is the cumulative loss of the best policy.
Though corresponding results in multi-armed bandits have
been well-studied, new challenges arise in the MDP setting
which require non-trivial design for the exploration bonus
and the learning rate scheduling. The techniques we develop
to address these issues constitute the main contribution of
this work.

1. Introduction
Policy optimization methods have seen great empirical success in various domains (Schulman et al., 2017; Levine &
Koltun, 2013). An appealing property of policy optimization methods is the local-search nature, which lends itself to
an efficient implementation as a search over the whole MDP
is avoided. However, this property also makes it difficult
to obtain global optimality guarantees for these algorithms
and a large portion of the literature postulates strong and
often unrealistic assumptions to ensure global exploration
(see e.g., Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2020b;
Neu & Olkhovskaya, 2021; Wei et al., 2021). Recently, the
need for extra assumptions has been overcome by adding
exploration bonuses to the update (Cai et al., 2020; Shani

2. Related Work
For multi-armed bandits, the question whether there is a single algorithm achieving near-optimal regret bounds in both
the adversarial and the stochastic regimes was first asked
by Bubeck & Slivkins (2012). A series of followup works
refined the bounds through different techniques (Seldin &
Slivkins, 2014; Auer & Chiang, 2016; Seldin & Lugosi,
2017; Wei & Luo, 2018; Zimmert & Seldin, 2019; Ito, 2021).
One of the most successful approaches is developed by Wei
& Luo (2018); Zimmert & Seldin (2019); Ito (2021), who
demonstrated that a simple Online Mirror Descent (OMD)
or Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL) algorithm, which
was originally designed only for the adversarial case, is able

1
Google Research 2 MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society. Correspondence to: Chen-Yu Wei <chenyuw@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

