The Catalog Problem: Clustering and Ordering Variable-Sized Sets

Mateusz Jurewicz 1 2 3 Graham W. Taylor 2 4 Leon Derczynski 3 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
The ability to group members of a set and order these groups
is key to many important real-world decision-making processes. It finds applications ranging from supply chain
management (Wenzel et al., 2019) to prioritization in medical triage (Miles et al., 2020; Buchard et al., 2020). Other
application domains include petroleum exploration (Rabiller
et al., 2010), business process analytics (Le et al., 2014),
parallelization and machine part management (Bakkelund,
2022) and product catalog structuring (Jurewicz & Derczynski, 2022), where the goal is to take a set of products, group
them together and order these groups to form a coherent
product catalog. We term this problem of simultaneously
grouping and ordering a set of items the Catalog Problem.

Prediction of a varying number of ordered clusters from sets of any cardinality is a challenging
task for neural networks, combining elements of
set representation, clustering and learning to order.
This task arises in many diverse areas, ranging
from medical triage and early discharge, through
machine part management and multi-channel signal analysis for petroleum exploration to product
catalog structure prediction. This paper focuses
on that last area, which exemplifies a number of
challenges inherent to adaptive ordered clustering, referred to further as the eponymous Catalog Problem. These include learning variable
cluster constraints, exhibiting relational reasoning and managing combinatorial complexity. Despite progress in both neural clustering and set-tosequence methods, no joint, fully differentiable
model exists to-date. We develop such a modular
architecture, referred to further as Neural Ordered
Clusters (NOC), enhance it with a specific mechanism for learning cluster-level cardinality constraints, and provide a robust comparison of its
performance in relation to alternative models. We
test our method on three datasets, including synthetic catalog structures and PROCAT, a dataset
of real-world catalogs consisting of over 1.5 M
products, achieving state-of-the-art results on a
new, more challenging formulation of the underlying problem, which has not been addressed before.
Additionally, we examine the network’s ability to
learn higher-order interactions.

This paper defines the Catalog Problem and presents an
investigation into neural network approaches to it. To this
end we introduce a fully-differentiable, deep learning (DL)
model architecture that addresses the Catalog Problem. It
clusters sets of items into groups, and yields an ordering of
these groups. All of this is achieved in a supervised manner.
While clustering methods are often unsupervised (Aljalbout
et al., 2018; Ronen et al., 2022), the meaningful ordering
of clusters often requires more knowledge than is available
from the instance representation.
Similarly, learning to order is often framed as a supervised
learning task (Vinyals et al., 2015; Yin et al., 2020; Shi,
2022). Referred to further as set-to-sequence (S2S), this area
and its corresponding methods inspire the cluster-ordering
aspect of our proposed Neural Ordered Clusters (NOC)
model. Both neural clustering and set-to-sequence models have limitations. Element-wise neural clustering methods are O(n), where n1 is the cardinality of the input set.
Cluster-wise and attention-based models are more computationally efficient, but exhibit a limited ability to learn cluster
cardinality constraints (Pakman et al., 2020), integral to both
the prototypical Catalog Problem and its practical instantiations. Set-to-sequence methods, on the other hand, are
effective at learning constraints (Zhu et al., 2021) and generalizing to unseen distributions (Wen, 2022). However, they

1

Tjek A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada 3 IT University of Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science, Copenhagen, Denmark 4 University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada 5 University of
Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Mateusz Jurewicz <mateusz.jurewicz@gmail.com>, Graham Taylor <gwtaylor@uoguelph.ca>, Leon Derczynski <ld@itu.dk>.

1
O(n) can be prohibitive with large input sets (n >= 1000),
which is often the case in many interesting set-input problems such
as 3D point cloud tasks (Qi et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2018; Zhao et al.,
2021).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

