Neural Status Registers

Lukas Faber 1 Roger Wattenhofer 1

Abstract

extrapolate suggests that the model did not fully understand
how to compare the numbers but at least partially relied on
artifacts in the training set. Furthermore, other popular arithmetic architectures such as the NALU (Trask et al., 2018) or
NAU (Madsen & Johansen, 2020) cannot extrapolate either.

We study the problem of learning comparisons
between numbers with neural networks. Despite
comparisons being a seemingly simple problem,
we find that both general-purpose models such as
multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) as well as arithmetic architectures such as the Neural Arithmetic
Logic Unit (NALU) struggle with learning comparisons. Neither architecture can extrapolate to
much larger numbers than those seen in the training set. We propose a novel differentiable architecture, the Neural Status Register (NSR) to
solve this problem. We experimentally validate
the NSR in various settings. We can combine the
NSR with other neural models to solve interesting
problems such as piecewise-defined arithmetic,
comparison of digit images, recurrent problems,
or finding shortest paths in graphs. The NSR
outperforms all baseline architectures, especially
when it comes to extrapolating to larger numbers.

To address this problem, we propose a novel differentiable
neural architecture, the Neural Status Register (NSR). The
NSR mimics status registers (or condition code registers)
that we can find in virtually all hardware processors. When
a processor executes the code line if x == y:, it first
subtracts y from x and sets certain condition code bits. We
are interested in two bits for the NSR: the sign bit (if the
difference is negative) and the zero bit (if the difference is 0).
To evaluate x == y, for example, we can simply read the
zero bit after the subtraction x − y. The NSR transfers this
idea into a differentiable neural architecture that learns (i) to
pick the right x, y from the input and (ii) which comparison
to evaluate.
In isolation, we can use the NSR to learn comparisons robustly. However, it is more interesting to plug the NSR into
a larger architecture to solve problems that require comparisons. For example, we combine the NSR with GNNs which
benefit from a model that can find the minimum from a set
of numbers to compute shortest paths. We summarize our
contributions as follows:

1. Introduction
Mathematical reasoning is a cornerstone for intelligence. In
this paper, we study an innocent, yet critical part: comparisons. Nearly all species intuitively use comparisons, for
example, to find the bigger of two food sources. Also, humans subconsciously compare all the time: Even at a glance,
we can see whether two people have the same height or if
one person is taller. On the other hand, we also consciously
use comparisons in computer programs, for example in if
and while statements. Given how ubiquitous comparisons
are, we study how well neural networks can model them.

• We introduce the NSR as novel neural architecture for
comparisons. The NSR is a differentiable version of
status registers found in processors that allows end-toend training with gradient descent or in combination
with other neural architectures. The NSR shows strong
extrapolation, even to numbers many orders of magnitude larger than the training set.

We find that common neural networks like multilayer perceptrons struggle with comparisons. While they can learn
a comparison over the training set, these networks cannot
extrapolate. A model can extrapolate if it can also solve
comparisons far beyond the training set. A model failing to

• We analyze the gradient space of the NSR to propose
optimizations to make the training more stable and efficient. We show how to choose the NSR components
to obtain good gradient signals. We further propose
adding some redundancy to make the NSR less initialization dependent. We experimentally validate the
efficacy of these changes in an ablation study.

1
ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Lukas Faber
<lfaber@ethz.ch>, Roger Wattenhofer <wattenhofer@ethz.ch>.

• We experimentally evaluate the NSR in a variety of
tasks, mainly in conjunction with other architectures.
This allows learning interesting tasks such as learning

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

