Reconstructive Neuron Pruning for Backdoor Defense

Yige Li 1 Xixiang Lyu 1 Xingjun Ma 2 3 Nodens Koren 4 Lingjuan Lyu 5 Bo Li 6 Yu-Gang Jiang 2 3

Abstract

significant successes, recent works have shown that DNNs
are susceptible to different types of adversaries (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Gu et al., 2017). Backdoor attacks represent
one such type of adversary that injects malicious triggers
into victim models during training either by poisoning the
training data or manipulating the training procedure with
specifically-designed trigger patterns. A backdoored model
functions normally with clean data but predicts the prespecified backdoor class whenever the trigger patterns appear. In this era, where pre-trained models and outsourced
training via Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) are
commonly adopted to achieve optimal performance at a
minimal cost, the threats posed by backdoor attacks have
increasingly become an issue we cannot overlook.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been found
to be vulnerable to backdoor attacks, raising security concerns about their deployment in missioncritical applications. While existing defense methods have demonstrated promising results, it is
still not clear how to effectively remove backdoorassociated neurons in backdoored DNNs. In this
paper, we propose a novel defense called Reconstructive Neuron Pruning (RNP) to expose
and prune backdoor neurons via an unlearning
and then recovering process. Specifically, RNP
first unlearns the neurons by maximizing the
model’s error on a small subset of clean samples and then recovers the neurons by minimizing the model’s error on the same data. In RNP,
unlearning is operated at the neuron level while
recovering is operated at the filter level, forming an asymmetric reconstructive learning procedure. We show that such an asymmetric process
on only a few clean samples can effectively expose and prune the backdoor neurons implanted
by a wide range of attacks, achieving a new stateof-the-art defense performance. Moreover, the
unlearned model at the intermediate step of our
RNP can be directly used to improve other backdoor defense tasks including backdoor removal,
trigger recovery, backdoor label detection, and
backdoor sample detection. Code is available at
https://github.com/bboylyg/RNP.

Numerous methods have been proposed to defend against
backdoor attacks, with detection and removal methods being
the two primary types. Detection methods identify whether
a model has been backdoored (Wang et al., 2019; Guo et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021; Hu
et al., 2022) or whether a test sample contains a backdoor
trigger (Tran et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Tang et al.,
2021; Zeng et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). Removal (or
mitigation) methods are effective in purifying backdoored
models by balancing the backdoor effect and their clean performance (Liu et al., 2018a; Li et al., 2021c; Wu & Wang,
2021). It is often observed in these methods that a backdoored DNN contains both clean and backdoor neurons,
with the backdoor neurons being activated only by trigger
patterns. The study conducted in (Wu & Wang, 2021) also
shows that backdoor neurons are more sensitive to adversarial perturbations. Intuitively, if backdoor neurons can
be accurately identified from a backdoored model, we can
immediately prune those neurons to obtain a clean model.

1. Introduction

To this end, we propose a novel method called Reconstructive Neuron Pruning (RNP) to expose and prune backdoor
neurons from a backdoored model by unlearning and then
recovering the neurons. Specifically, given a backdoored
model, RNP first unlearns the model by maximizing its
error on clean samples through gradient ascent and then
recovers (relearns) the neurons by minimizing the model’s
error on the same samples. Interestingly, we find that if
the unlearning is performed at the neuron level while the
recovering is performed at the filter level, then the network
tends to relocate the backdoor neurons to compensate for

Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
demonstrated groundbreaking performance in solving various complex real-world problems. However, despite these
1

Xidian University 2 Fudan University 3 Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory 4 University of Copenhagen 5 Sony AI
6
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. Correspondence
to: Xixiang Lyu <xxlv@mail.xidian.edu.cn>, Xingjun Ma
<xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

