Sequential Strategic Screening

Lee Cohen 1 Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi 1 Kevin Stangl 1 Ali Vakilian 1 Juba Ziani 2

Abstract

steps; this allows, for example, to split a decision across
multiple independent interviewers, or across smaller and
easier-to-measure criteria and requirements.

We initiate the study of strategic behavior in
screening processes with multiple classifiers. We
focus on two contrasting settings: a “conjunctive” setting in which an individual must satisfy
all classifiers simultaneously, and a sequential setting in which an individual to succeed must satisfy
classifiers one at a time. In other words, we introduce the combination of strategic classification
with screening processes. We show that sequential screening pipelines exhibit new and surprising
behavior where individuals can exploit the sequential ordering of the tests to “zig-zag” between classifiers without having to simultaneously satisfy
all of them. We demonstrate an individual can
obtain a positive outcome using a limited manipulation budget even when far from the intersection
of the positive regions of every classifier. Finally,
we consider a learner whose goal is to design a
sequential screening process that is robust to such
manipulations, and provide a construction for the
learner that optimizes a natural objective.

Many of the decisions made by such screening processes are
high stakes. For example, university admissions can affect
an individual’s prospects for their entire life. Loan decisions
can have a long-term (sometimes even inter-generational)
effect on a family’s wealth or socio-economic status. When
these decisions are high stakes, i.e. when obtaining a positive outcome is valuable or potentially life-changing or
obtaining a negative outcome can be harmful, individuals
may want to manipulate their features to trick the classifier
into assigning them a positive outcome.
In machine learning, this idea is known as strategic classification, and was notably introduced and studied by (Brückner
& Scheffer, 2011; Hardt et al., 2016). The current work aims
to incorporate strategic classification within screening processes, taking a departure from the classical point of view in
the strategic classification literature that focuses on a single
classifier (see related work section).
The key novel idea of our model of strategic screening processes (or pipelines), compared to the strategic classification
literature, comes from the fact that i) an individual has to
pass and manipulate her way through several classifiers, and
ii) that we consider sequential screening pipelines.

1. Introduction
Screening processes (Arunachaleswaran et al., 2022; Blum
et al., 2022; Cohen et al., 2020) involve evaluating and selecting individuals for a specific, pre-defined purpose, such
as a job, educational program, or loan application. These
screening processes are generally designed to identify which
individuals are qualified for a position or opportunity, often using multiple sequential classifiers or tests. For example, many hiring processes involve multiple rounds of
interviews; university admissions can involve a combination
of standardized tests, essays, or interviews. They have substantial practical benefits, in that they can allow a complex
decision to be broken into a sequence of smaller and cheaper

In a sequential screening pipeline, once an individual (also
called Agent) has passed a test or stage of this pipeline,
she can “forget” about the said stage; whether or not she
passes the next stage depends only on her performance in
that stage. For example, a job candidate that has passed the
initial human resources interview may not need to worry
about convincing that interviewer, and can instead expand
her effort solely into preparing for the first technical round
of interviews. Alternatively, imagine a student ‘cramming’
for a sequence of final exams, where one has a finite capacity
to study that is used up over a week of tests. One wants to
achieve a minimum score on each test, with a minimum of
effort, by studying in between each test.

*
Equal contribution 1 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA 2 H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Correspondence to: Kevin Stangl <kevin@ttic.edu>.

Our goal in this work is to examine how considering a
pipeline comprised of a sequence of classifiers affects and
modifies the way a strategic agent manipulates her features
to obtain a positive classification outcome, and how a learner

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

