Improving Graph Generation by Restricting Graph Bandwidth

Nathaniel Diamant 1 Alex M. Tseng 1 Kangway V. Chuang 1 Tommaso Biancalani 1 Gabriele Scalia 1

Abstract

tive modeling has recently been proven capable of learning
both global and fine-grained structural properties, along
with their complex interdependencies (Guo & Zhao, 2023).
These results suggest many promising applications for deep
graph generative modeling, which include the biomedical
and pharmaceutical domains, where essential objects such
as molecules, gene networks, and cell-level tissue organization can be represented as graphs (Li et al., 2022). Despite
these promises, several open challenges remain.

Deep graph generative modeling has proven capable of learning the distribution of complex, multiscale structures characterizing real-world graphs.
However, one of the main limitations of existing
methods is their large output space, which limits
generation scalability and hinders accurate modeling of the underlying distribution. To overcome
these limitations, we propose a novel approach
that significantly reduces the output space of existing graph generative models. Specifically, starting
from the observation that many real-world graphs
have low graph bandwidth, we restrict graph bandwidth during training and generation. Our strategy
improves both generation scalability and quality
without increasing architectural complexity or reducing expressiveness. Our approach is compatible with existing graph generative methods, and
we describe its application to both autoregressive
and one-shot models. We extensively validate our
strategy on synthetic and real datasets, including
molecular graphs. Our experiments show that, in
addition to improving generation efficiency, our
approach consistently improves generation quality
and reconstruction accuracy. The implementation
is made available1 .

Applications in these domains require modeling graphs with
a high number of nodes N that leads to a large output space,
where the number of possible edges is in O(N 2 ). At the
same time, many real-world graphs are sparse, and they
are characterized by a small number of semantically rich
connections which need to be accurately modeled (e.g., a
small subset of chemical bonds can confer radically different
properties in a molecular graph).
Recent research has focused on accurately learning complex
dependencies leveraging generative models such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Grover et al., 2019), recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) (You et al., 2018), normalizingflow models (Shi et al., 2020) and score-based models (Niu
et al., 2020). A general limitation of these approaches is
their high time complexity and output space O(N 2 ). This
limits both their scalability and makes accurate prediction
of sparse connections challenging, as the ratio of observed
to possible edges can be extremely small.

1. Introduction

For this reason, more tractable methods have been proposed,
which leverage different architectures (Li et al., 2018; Liu
et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2020), generate coarse-grained motifs
(Jin et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2019), or change the output
representation, such as transforming graphs to sequences
(Goyal et al., 2020) or using domain-specific encodings such
as molecular SMILES (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018).
Although these approaches are more scalable, they trade-off
efficiency with model complexity, expressiveness, or have
limited applicability because of domain-specific choices.

Learning the underlying distribution of graphs for generative purposes finds important applications in diverse fields,
where objects can be naturally described through their structures (Hamilton et al., 2017). Computational approaches
to capture graph statistical properties have long been established (Albert & Barabási, 2002), whereas deep genera1
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning,
Research and Early Development, Genentech, USA. Correspondence to: Nathaniel Diamant <diamant.nathaniel@gene.com>,
Gabriele Scalia <scalia.gabriele@gene.com>.

To overcome the limitations of existing approaches, we
propose a novel strategy: BwR (Bandwidth-Restricted)
graph generation. BwR leverages a permutation of the adjacency matrix to restrict the graph bandwidth, reducing
both the time complexity and the output space from O(N 2 )
to O(N · φ̂), where φ̂ is the estimated bandwidth. As will

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/Genentech/
bandwidth-graph-generation

1

