CSP: Self-Supervised Contrastive Spatial Pre-Training
for Geospatial-Visual Representations

Gengchen Mai * 1 2 3 Ni Lao * 4 Yutong He 2 5 Jiaming Song 2 Stefano Ermon 2

Abstract
Geo-tagged images are publicly available in large
quantities, whereas labels such as object classes
are rather scarce and expensive to collect. Meanwhile, contrastive learning has achieved tremendous success in various natural image and language tasks with limited labeled data. However,
existing methods fail to fully leverage geospatial information, which can be paramount to distinguishing objects that are visually similar. To
directly leverage the abundant geospatial information associated with images in pre-training,
fine-tuning, and inference stages, we present
Contrastive Spatial Pre-Training (CSP), a selfsupervised learning framework for geo-tagged images. We use a dual-encoder to separately encode
the images and their corresponding geo-locations,
and use contrastive objectives to learn effective
location representations from images, which can
be transferred to downstream supervised tasks
such as image classification. Experiments show
that CSP can improve model performance on
both iNat2018 and fMoW dataset. Especially, on
iNat2018, CSP significantly boosts the model performance with 10-34% relative improvement with
various labeled training data sampling ratios1 .

(a) Arctic Fox

(b) Arctic Fox Locations

(c) Bat-Eared Fox

(d) Bat-Eared Fox Locations

Figure 1: The importance of geospatial information demonstrated
by two visually similar species (a)(c), and their distinct patterns in
image locations (b)(d).

main, where we usually have access to massive amounts of
unlabeled data while only limited amount of labeled data is
available. For example, users on Flickr, Google Photos, and
iNaturalist App2 upload millions of geo-tagged images every day, and multiple satellites continuously capture remote
sensing (RS) images with corresponding geo-coordinates all
over the world. These geo-tagged data form large publicly
available unlabeled datasets that are inexpensive to obtain.
In contrast, desired labels for many geospatial tasks (e.g.,
object class labels, object bounding boxes, and land use
type labels, etc.) are rather scarce and expensive to collect. Moreover, even well-curated and widely used labeled
geospatial datasets such as UC Merced Land Use Dataset
(Yang & Newsam, 2010) and BigEarthNet (Sumbul et al.,
2019) have limited sizes, geographic coverage, and potentially oversimplified label distributions. This lack of labeled
data coverage severely limits the ability to generalize, especially in a geographic sense, of models trained on these
labeled geospatial datasets (Goodchild & Li, 2021).

1. Introduction
Low-data or few-shot regimes (Zhai et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2020) is a prevalent challenge in the geospatial do*

Equal contribution 1 Spatially Explicit Artificial Intelligence Lab, Department of Geography, University of Georgia, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA 3 School of Computing, University of Georgia, USA
4
Google Inc, USA 5 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Gengchen Mai
<gengchen.mai25@uga.edu>, Ni Lao <nlao@google.com>.

Meanwhile, numerous previous studies have shown the great
potential of leveraging geospatial information as complementary information for visual cues to help improve the
model performance on various computer vision tasks (Tang
et al., 2015; Chu et al., 2019; Mac Aodha et al., 2019; Klo-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code, data, and pre-trained models are available at https:
//gengchenmai.github.io/csp-website/.

2
iNaturalist is one of the world’s most popular nature apps to
help users identify species given the uploaded images.

1

