Optimal LP Rounding and Linear-Time Approximation Algorithms for
Clustering Edge-Colored Hypergraphs

Nate Veldt 1

Abstract
We study the approximability of an existing framework for clustering edge-colored hypergraphs,
which is closely related to chromatic correlation
clustering and is motivated by machine learning
and data mining applications where the goal is to
cluster a set of objects based on multiway interactions of different categories or types. We present
improved approximation guarantees based on linear programming, and show they are tight by proving a matching integrality gap. Our results also
include new approximation hardness results, a
combinatorial 2-approximation whose runtime is
linear in the hypergraph size, and several new connections to well-studied objectives such as vertex
cover and hypergraph multiway cut.

Figure 1. The best node coloring of this edge-colored hypergraph
leaves three edges satisfied and two unsatisfied (dashed lines).

ent applications. In co-authorship (hyper)graphs, an edge
color may represent the type of publication venue or discipline (Amburg et al., 2020; Bonchi et al., 2012), which can
be used to better ascertain the academic field an author belongs to. Edges in brain networks may have color labels to
indicate differences in co-activation patterns between brain
regions (Crossley et al., 2013). In temporal graph analysis,
edges within the same time period can be associated with
the same color (Amburg et al., 2020), which provides information about how interaction patterns evolve over time.
In addition to these settings, algorithms for edge-colored
graphs and hypergraphs have been applied to cluster food
ingredients co-appearing in different recipes (where edge
colors indicate cuisine types) (Amburg et al., 2020; Klodt
et al., 2021; Xiu et al., 2022), genes in biological networks
(where edge colors indicate gene interaction types) (Bonchi
et al., 2012), and users of social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter (where edge colors indicate types of social
circles) (Klodt et al., 2021; Xiu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Partitioning a graph into well-connected clusters is a fundamental algorithmic problem in machine learning. A recent focus in the machine learning community has been
to develop algorithms for clustering problems defined over
data structures that generalize graphs and capture rich information and metadata beyond just pairwise relationships.
One direction has been to develop algorithms for clustering and learning over hypergraphs (Li & Milenkovic, 2017;
2018; Fountoulakis et al., 2021; Hein et al., 2013), which
can model multiway relationships between data objects
rather than just pairwise relationships. Another recent focus
has been to develop techniques for clustering edge-colored
graphs (and hypergraphs), where edge colors represent the
type or category of pairwise interaction modeled by the
edge (Amburg et al., 2020; Bonchi et al., 2015; Anava
et al., 2015; Klodt et al., 2021; Xiu et al., 2022; Amburg
et al., 2022). Edge color labels are relevant for many differ-

The Edge-Colored Clustering problem. Edge-Colored
Clustering (ECC) is a combinatorial optimization framework for clustering graphs and hypergraphs with edge colors. This problem is also known by other related names
such as colored clustering or categorical edge clustering.
Let H = (V, E) be a hypergraph where each hyperedge
e ∈ E is associated with one of k colors for some k ∈ N.
The goal of ECC is to assign colors to nodes in such a way
that hyperedges tend to contain nodes that all have the same
color as the hyperedge (see Figure 1). This can also be
described as a clustering problem where one forms a single
cluster of nodes for each color, and the goal is to do so
in such a way that the cluster of nodes with color c tends
to contain hyperedges with color c. Note that the nodes
in cluster c do not necessarily need to be connected in the
hypergraph in this formulation. To defined the objective

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. Correspondence
to: Nate Veldt <nveldt@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

