2D-Shapley: A Framework for Fragmented Data Valuation

Zhihong Liu * 1 Hoang Anh Just * 2 Xiangyu Chang 1 Xi Chen 3 Ruoxi Jia 2

Abstract
Data valuation—quantifying the contribution of individual data sources to certain predictive behaviors of a model—is of great importance to enhancing the transparency of
machine learning and designing incentive systems for data sharing. Existing work has
focused on evaluating data sources with the
shared feature or sample space. How to valuate fragmented data sources of which each
only contains partial features and samples remains an open question. We start by presenting a method to calculate the counterfactual
of removing a fragment from the aggregated
data matrix. Based on the counterfactual
calculation, we further propose 2D-Shapley,
a theoretical framework for fragmented data
valuation that uniquely satisfies some appealing axioms in the fragmented data context.
2D-Shapley empowers a range of new use
cases, such as selecting useful data fragments,
providing interpretation for sample-wise data
values, and fine-grained data issue diagnosis.

Figure 1: Illustration of different data valuation settings based on how training set is partitioned among
different data contributors.
ples and tracking important ones to be collected during data preparation to setting proper proprieties over
samples during training to interpret why certain behaviors of a model emerge during deployment. Determining the value of data is also central to designing
incentive systems for data sharing and implementing
current policies about the monetarization of personal
data.
Current literature of data valuation (Jia et al., 2019b;
Ghorbani & Zou, 2019) has exclusively focused on
valuing horizontally partitioned data—in other words,
each data source to be valued shares the same feature
space. How to value vertically partitioned data, where
each data source provides a different feature but shares
the same sample space, has been studied in the context
of ML interpretability (Covert et al., 2020). However,
none of these abstractions could fully capture the complexity of real-world scenarios, where data sources can
have non-overlapping features and samples (termed as
fragmented data sources hereinafter).
Example 1. Consider two banks, B1 and B2 , and two
e-commerce companies, E1 and E2 , located in Region
1 and 2. These four institutions are interested in collaboratively building an ML model to predict users’
credit scores with their data. Due to the geographical difference, B1 and E1 have a different user group
from B2 and E2 . Also, due to the difference in business, B1 and B2 provide different features than what
E1 and E2 can offer. Overall, the four institutions partition the aggregated data horizontally and vertically,
as illustrated by Figure 1(c). How to quantify each
institution’s contribution to the joint model training?
Example 2. Due to inevitable errors occurring during the data generation and collection processes, realworld data are seldom high quality. Suppose that a

1. Introduction
Data are essential ingredients for building machine
learning (ML) applications. The ability to quantify
and measure the value of data is crucial to the entire lifecycle of ML: from cleaning poor-quality sam* Equal contribution. Code repository publicly available:
https://github.com/ruoxi-jia-group/2dshapley 1 Center for
Intelligent Decision-Making and Machine Learning, Department of Information Systems and Intelligent Business, School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
Xi’an, 710049, China. 2 Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Virginia, USA. 3 Department of Technology, Operations, and
Statistics, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, 10012, USA. Correspondence to: Xiangyu Chang < xiangyuchang@xjtu.edu.cn>, Xi Chen
<xc13@stern.nyu.edu>, Ruoxi Jia <ruoxijia@vt.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023.
Copyright 2023 by the author(s).

1

