Emergence of Sparse Representations from Noise

Trenton Bricken 1 2 Rylan Schaeffer 3 Bruno Olshausen 2 Gabriel Kreiman 4

Abstract

enforces an L1 penalty on neuron activations and results in
neurons learning biological receptive fields when trained on
a reconstruction task (Olshausen & Field, 1997).

A hallmark of biological neural networks, which
distinguishes them from their artificial counterparts, is the high degree of sparsity in their activations. This discrepancy raises three questions
our work helps to answer: (i) Why are biological networks so sparse? (ii) What are the benefits of this sparsity? (iii) How can these benefits
be utilized by deep learning models? Our answers to all of these questions center around training networks to handle random noise. Surprisingly, we discover that noisy training introduces
three implicit loss terms that result in sparsely
firing neurons specializing to high variance features of the dataset. When trained to reconstruct
noisy-CIFAR10, neurons learn biological receptive fields. More broadly, noisy training presents a
new approach to potentially increase model interpretability with additional benefits to robustness
and computational efficiency.

In this work, we advance an alternative theory that the
need to handle noise is a key driver behind activation sparsity.Removing the L1 activation penalty and simply adding
random isotropic Gaussian noise to the data also produces
sparse activations and biological receptive fields.
Previous work found that by taking a first order Taylor
approximation, noisy training added a single penalty to the
loss function: minimize the Frobenius norm of the model’s
Jacobian. Formally, minθ ||δfθ (x)/δx||2F where x is the
input data and fθ (x) is any non-linear function that maps
the input to the output (Bishop, 1995; Camuto et al., 2020).
In words, this means the model outputs should be robust
with respect to small input perturbations.
However, this result leaves much unexplained. Empirically,
training networks with this additional loss term fails to produce sparsity or biological receptive fields. Theoretically,
this loss makes no predictions for how the network parameters should change and being a Taylor approximation it
only holds in the small noise limit. Moreover, because the
Frobenius norm is an L2 penalty instead of L1 , this adds to
the mystery of why noise results in sparse activations.

1. Introduction
A striking difference between biological and artificial neural
networks is activation sparsity. The brain is highly sparse,
with an estimated 15% of neurons firing at any given time
(Attwell & Laughlin, 2001), whereas deep learning models
are often dense. A unifying understanding of this difference
is elusive, since there are advantages, disadvantages and
unclear implications of sparse representations (Olshausen &
Field, 2004).

Motivated by this discrepancy, we avoid the Taylor approximation and disentangle more nuanced effects that noisy
training implicitly has on the loss function. To summarize,
noisy training adds three additional terms that the loss seeks
to maximize:
Noise Terms = Maximize([Neuron Sparsity]

A popular reason for sparsity in the brain is metabolic efficiency, since action potentials consume ∼20% of the brain’s
energy (Sterling & Laughlin, 2015; Sengupta et al., 2010).
This theory is supported by the field of sparse coding which

(1)

+ [Neuron Activation Margin]
+ [Specialized Model Weights])
The theoretical effects of Eq. 1 on what each neuron learns
are summarized in Fig. 1. The ReLU activation function
plays a key role. By default, each neuron should have a
very negative pre-activation so that it is turned off and unperturbed by any noise. When a neuron must turn on to help
in the reconstruction task, it should “jump” from being very
negative to very positive in order to maximize the margin
around the ReLU activation threshold of 0.

1

Systems, Synthetic and Quantitative Biology, Harvard University 2 Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of California, Berkeley 3 Computer Science, Stanford University 4 Programs in Biophysics and Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School. Correspondence to: Trenton Bricken <trentonbricken@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This threshold is where the noise has a non-linear effect on
1

