Coordinate Descent Methods for Fractional Minimization
Ganzhao Yuan 1

Abstract

optimization problems for minimizing the ratio of two functions are extensively investigated in the literature. They
are named according to the functions in the numerator and
denominator: (i) convex-convex fractional problems if both
functions are convex; (ii) convex-concave fractional problems if the numerator is convex and the denominator is
concave. We refer the readers to (Stancu-Minasian, 2012;
Schaible, 1995) for an overview.

We consider a class of structured fractional minimization problems, in which the numerator part
of the objective is the sum of a differentiable convex function and a convex non-smooth function,
while the denominator part is a convex or concave function. This problem is difficult to solve
since it is non-convex. By exploiting the structure of the problem, we propose two Coordinate
Descent (CD) methods for solving this problem.
The proposed methods iteratively solve a onedimensional subproblem globally, and they are
guaranteed to converge to coordinate-wise stationary points. In the case of a convex denominator,
under a weak locally bounded non-convexity condition, we prove that the optimality of coordinatewise stationary point is stronger than that of the
standard critical point and directional point. Under additional suitable conditions, CD methods
converge Q-linearly to coordinate-wise stationary
points. In the case of a concave denominator, we
show that any critical point is a global minimum,
and CD methods converge to the global minimum
with a sublinear convergence rate. We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed methods
to some machine learning and signal processing
models. Our experiments on real-world data have
shown that our method significantly and consistently outperforms existing methods in terms of
accuracy.

This paper mainly focuses on the following convex-convex
or convex-concave Fractional Minimization Problem (FMP)
(‘≜’ means define):
x̄ ∈ arg minn F (x) ≜
x∈R

f (x) + h(x)
.
g(x)

(1)

We impose the following assumptions on Problem (1)
throughout this paper. (A-i) F (x) only takes finite values for any feasible solution, and it always holds that:
f (x) + h(x) ≥ 0 and g(x) > 0 for all x. (A-ii) f (·) is
convex and differentiable, and its gradient is coordinatewise Lipschitz continuous with constant ci ≥ 0 (Nesterov,
2012; 2003), that is:
f (x + ηei ) ≤ Qi (x, η) ≜ f (x) + ∇i f (x)η +

ci 2
η
2

(2)

∀x, η, i = 1, ..., n. Here c ∈ Rn , and ei ∈ Rn is an indicator vector with one on the i-th entry and zero everywhere
else. (A-iii) h(·)
Pnis convex and coordinate-wise separable
with h(x) = i=1 hi (xi ). Typical examples of h(x) are
the ℓ1 norm function and the bound constrained function.
(A-iv) The denominator g(·) is either (i) a convex but not
necessarily differentiable function or (ii) a concave and differentiable function. Furthermore, g(·) has some special
structure such that one of the following one-dimensional
subproblems can be solved exactly and efficiently:

a + bη + 2c η 2 + hi (x + ηei )
min
,
η
g(x + ηei )


c
min a + bη + η 2 + hi (x + ηei ) − ςg(x + ηei ),
η
2

1. Introduction
Fractional optimization, referring to the problem of minimizing or maximizing an objective involving one or more
ratios of functions, has been extensively studied for decades.
Fractional optimization problem is widely used in machine
learning, signal processing, economics, wireless communication and many other fields. Two classes of fractional
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China. Correspondence to: Ganzhao
Yuan <yuangzh@pcl.ac.cn>.

for any a ∈ R, b ∈ R, c ∈ R, and ς ∈ R. Problem (1)
captures a variety of applications of interest, e.g., the sparse
recovery problem (Li et al., 2022; Li & Zhang, 2022), the
independent component analysis (Hyvärinen & Oja, 1997),
the ℓp norm eigenvalue problem (Bertsimas et al., 2022;

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

