Trainability, Expressivity and Interpretability in Gated Neural ODEs

Timothy Doyeon Kim 1 Tankut Can * 2 Kamesh Krishnamurthy * 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
How can the dynamical motifs exhibited by an artificial
or a biological network implement certain computations
required for a task? This is a long-standing question in
computational neuroscience and machine learning (Vyas
et al., 2020; Khona & Fiete, 2022). Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have often been used to probe this question (Mante et al., 2013; Vyas et al., 2020; Driscoll et al.,
2022), as they are flexible dynamical systems that can be
easily trained (Rumelhart et al., 1986) to perform computational tasks. RNNs, particularly ones that incorporate
gating interactions (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho
et al., 2014), have been wildly successful in solving complex
real-world tasks (Jozefowicz et al., 2015).

Understanding how the dynamics in biological
and artificial neural networks implement the computations required for a task is a salient open question in machine learning and neuroscience. In
particular, computations requiring complex memory storage and retrieval pose a significant challenge for these networks to implement or learn.
Recently, a family of models described by neural ordinary differential equations (nODEs) has
emerged as powerful dynamical neural network
models capable of capturing complex dynamics.
Here, we extend nODEs by endowing them with
adaptive timescales using gating interactions. We
refer to these as gated neural ODEs (gnODEs).
Using a task that requires memory of continuous quantities, we demonstrate the inductive bias
of the gnODEs to learn (approximate) continuous attractors. We further show how reduceddimensional gnODEs retain their modeling power
while greatly improving interpretability, even allowing explicit visualization of the structure of
learned attractors. We introduce a novel measure
of expressivity which probes the capacity of a
neural network to generate complex trajectories.
Using this measure, we explore how the phasespace dimension of the nODEs and the complexity
of the function modeling the flow field contribute
to expressivity. We see that a more complex function for modeling the flow field allows a lowerdimensional nODE to capture a given target dynamics. Finally, we demonstrate the benefit of
gating in nODEs on several real-world tasks.

While RNN models provide a link between dynamics and
computation, how their (typically) high-dimensional dynamics implement computation remains hard to interpret.
On this note, we may turn to neural ordinary differential
equations (nODEs), a class of dynamical models with a velocity field parametrized by a deep neural network (DNN),
which can potentially implement more complex computations in lower dimensions than classical RNNs (Chen et al.,
2018; Kidger, 2022).1 This increased complexity in lower
latent/phase-space dimensions subsequently helps in extracting interpretable, effective low-dimensional dynamics that
may underlie a dataset or task (Kim et al., 2021; Sedler et al.,
2023).
Despite their promise, nODEs remain under-explored in
the following crucial aspects. Trainability: Can we improve performance of nODEs by introducing gating interactions (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014)
to tame gradients in dynamical systems? Expressivity:
How does the structure of the neural network modeling the
velocity flow field influence a nODE’s capacity to model
complex trajectories? Interpretability: Does the capability
of low-dimensional nODEs to model complex data improve
interpretability of the dynamical computation? We con-

*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 School of Natural Sciences,
Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Joseph Henry
Laboratories of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
Correspondence to: Tankut Can <tankut@ias.edu>, Kamesh Krishnamurthy <kameshk@princeton.edu>.

1
By classical RNNs, we mean the form of RNNs often considered in the neuroscience, physics and cognitive-science literature,
where the interaction between units are additive, and the interaction strengths are represented by a matrix (McCulloch & Pitts,
1943; Sompolinsky et al., 1988; Elman, 1990; Vogels et al., 2005;
Sussillo & Abbott, 2009; Song et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2019).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

