Active Ranking of Experts
Based on their Performances in Many Tasks

El Mehdi Saad 1 Nicolas Verzelen 1 Alexandra Carpentier 2

Abstract

chosen expert on a specific task, based on the information
collected previously.

We consider the problem of ranking n experts
based on their performances on d tasks. We make
a monotonicity assumption stating that for each
pair of experts, one outperforms the other on all
tasks. We consider the sequential setting where
in each round, the learner has access to noisy
evaluations of actively chosen pair of expert-task,
given the information available up to the actual
round. Given a confidence parameter δ ∈ (0, 1),
we provide strategies allowing to recover the correct ranking of experts and develop a bound on
the total number of queries made by our algorithm
that hold with probability at least 1 − δ. We show
that our strategy is adaptive to the complexity of
the problem (our bounds are instance dependent),
and develop matching lower bounds up to a polylogarithmic factor. Finally, we adapt our strategy
to the relaxed problem of best expert identification and provide numerical simulation consistent
with our theoretical results.

In this paper, we consider such a sequential and active
ranking setting. For a positive integer N we write JN K =
{1, . . . , N }. We consider that the performance of each expert i ∈ JnK on task j ∈ JdK is modeled via random variable
following an unknown 1-sub-Gaussain distribution νij with
mean Mij - and the matrix M = (Mi,j )i,j encodes the
mean performance of each expert on each task. Samples
are collected sequentially in an active way: at each round t,
the learner chooses a pair expert-task and receives a sample
from the corresponding distribution - and we assume that
the obtained samples are mutually independent conditional
on the chosen distribution.
Our setting is related to the framework of comparisonbased ranking considered in the active learning literature
(Jamieson & Nowak, 2011; Heckel et al., 2019). This literature stream is tightly connected to the dueling bandit
setting (Yue et al., 2012; Ailon et al., 2014), where the
learner receives binary and noisy feedback on the relative
performance of any pair of experts - which is a specific
case of our setting when n = d. An important decision for
setting the ranking problem is then on defining a notion of
order between the experts based on the mean performance
M - which is ambiguous for a general M . In the active
ranking literature, as well as in the dueling bandit literature,
it is customary to define a notion of order among any two
experts, for instance, through a score as e.g. the Borda score,
or through another mechanism as e.g. Condorcet winners.
E.g. the widely used Borda scores corresponds, for each
expert i, to the average performance of expert i on all questions - so that this corresponds to ranking experts based on
their average performance across all tasks. We discuss this
literature in more detail in Section 3.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of ranking n experts based on noisy
evaluations of their performances in d tasks. This problem
arises in many modern applications such as recommender
systems (Zhou et al., 2012) and crowdsourcing (Snow et al.,
2008; Raykar et al., 2010; Karger et al., 2011; Lu et al.,
2015), where the objective is to recommend, for instance,
films, music, books, etc based on the product ratings. Sports
is another field where ranking plays an important role via
the task of player ranking based on their data-driven performances (Morgulev et al., 2018; Pappalardo et al., 2019).
In many situations, it is possible to rank experts in an active fashion by sequentially auditing the performance of a

In this paper, we are inspired by recent advances in the batch
literature on this setting - where we receive one sample for
each entry expert-task pair. Beyond the historical parametric
Bradley-Luce-Terry (BLT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952),
recent papers have proposed batch ranking algorithms in
more flexible settings, where no parametric assumption is
made, but where a monotonicity assumption, up to some
unknown permutation, is made on the matrix M . A minimal

1

INRAE, Mistea, Institut Agro, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier,
France. 2 Institut für Mathematik, Universität Potsdam, Germany..
Correspondence to: El Mehdi Saad <el-mehdi.saad@inrae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

