Hierarchical Programmatic Reinforcement Learning
via Learning to Compose Programs

Guan-Ting Liu * 1 En-Pei Hu * 1 Pu-Jen Cheng 1 Hung-Yi Lee 1 Shao-Hua Sun 1

Abstract

has achieved tremendous success in various domains, including controlling robots (Gu et al., 2017; Ibarz et al.,
2021; Lee et al., 2019; 2021), playing board games (Silver
et al., 2016; 2017), and strategy games (Vinyals et al., 2019;
Wurman et al., 2022). Yet, the black-box nature of neural
network-based policies makes it difficult for the DRL-based
systems to be interpreted and therefore trusted by human
users (Lipton, 2016; Puiutta & Veith, 2020). Moreover, policies learned by DRL methods tend to overfit and often fail
to generalize (Zhang et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019; Sun
et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2022).

Aiming to produce reinforcement learning (RL)
policies that are human-interpretable and can generalize better to novel scenarios, Trivedi et al.
(2021) present a method (LEAPS) that first learns
a program embedding space to continuously parameterize diverse programs from a pre-generated
program dataset, and then searches for a tasksolving program in the learned program embedding space when given a task. Despite the encouraging results, the program policies that LEAPS
can produce are limited by the distribution of the
program dataset. Furthermore, during searching,
LEAPS evaluates each candidate program solely
based on its return, failing to precisely reward
correct parts of programs and penalize incorrect
parts. To address these issues, we propose to learn
a meta-policy that composes a series of programs
sampled from the learned program embedding
space. By learning to compose programs, our proposed hierarchical programmatic reinforcement
learning (HPRL) framework can produce program
policies that describe out-of-distributionally complex behaviors and directly assign credits to programs that induce desired behaviors. The experimental results in the Karel domain show that our
proposed framework outperforms baselines. The
ablation studies confirm the limitations of LEAPS
and justify our design choices.

1

To address the abovementioned issues of DRL, programmatic RL methods (Bastani et al., 2018; Inala et al., 2020;
Landajuela et al., 2021; Verma et al., 2018) explore various of more structured representations of policies, such as
decision trees and state machines. In particular, Trivedi
et al. (2021) present a framework, Learning Embeddings
for lAtent Program Synthesis (LEAPS), that is designed
to produce more interpretable and generalizable policies.
Specifically, it aims to produce program policies structured
in a given domain-specific language (DSL), which can be
executed to yield desired behaviors. To this end, LEAPS
first learns a program embedding space to continuously parameterize diverse programs from a pre-generated program
dataset, and then searches for a task-solving program in the
learned program embedding space when given a task described by a Markov Decision Process (MDP). The program
policies produced by LEAPS are not only human-readable
but also achieve competitive performance and demonstrate
superior generalization ability.
Despite its encouraging results, LEAPS has two fundamental limitations. Limited program distribution: the program
policies that LEAPS can produce are limited by the distribution of the pre-generated program dataset used for learning
the program embedding space. This is because LEAPS is designed to search for a task-solving program from the learned
embedding space, which inherently assumes that such a
program is within the distribution of the program dataset.
Such design makes it difficult for LEAPS to synthesize programs that are out-of-distributionally long or complex. Poor

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) leverages the recent
advancement in deep learning by reformulating the reinforcement learning problem as learning policies or value
functions parameterized by deep neural networks. DRL
*
Equal contribution 1 National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Project page:
github.io/hprl

1

https://nturobotlearninglab.

