Optimal Online Generalized Linear Regression with Stochastic Noise
and Its Application to Heteroscedastic Bandits

Heyang Zhao 1 Dongruo Zhou 1 Jiafan He 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

ybt ∈ R on xt . Afterward, the adversary reveals yt , penalizes
the learner by the square loss (yt − ybt )2 , and enters the next
round. The goal of the learner is to minimize the total loss
of the first T rounds, which is measured by the adversarial
regret defined as follows (Bartlett et al., 2015):

We study the problem of online generalized linear regression in the stochastic setting, where
the label is generated from a generalized linear
model with possibly unbounded additive noise.
We provide a sharp analysis of the classical followthe-regularized-leader (FTRL) algorithm to cope
with the label noise. More specifically, for σ-subGaussian label noise, our analysis provides an
regret upper bound of O(σ 2 d log T ) + o(log T ),
where d is the dimension of the input vector, T
is the total number of rounds. We also prove a
Ω(σ 2 d log(T /d)) lower bound for stochastic online linear regression, which indicates that our
upper bound is nearly optimal. In addition, we extend our analysis to a more refined Bernstein noise
condition. As an application, we study generalized linear bandits with heteroscedastic noise and
propose an algorithm based on FTRL to achieve
the first variance-aware regret bound.

Radv (T ) :=

T
X
t=1

(b
yt − yt )2 − inf

µ∈Rd

T
X

(hxt , µi − yt )2 ,

t=1

The adversarial regret indicates how far the current predictor
is away from the best linear predictor in hindsight. Since the
labels {yt }t≥1 are arbitrarily chosen by the adversary in the
adversarial setting, existing results on regret upper bound
usually require {yt } to be uniformly bounded, i.e., yt ∈
[−Y, Y ] for all t ≥ 1 and sometimes {xt }t≥1 is assumed
to be known to the learner at the beginning of the learning
process (e.g., Bartlett et al., 2015). For adversarial setting,
it has been shown that the minimax-optimal regret is of
O(dY 2 log T ) (Azoury & Warmuth, 2001), which gives a
complete understanding about the statistical complexity.
It is also interesting to consider a stochastic variant of the
classic online linear regression problem where yt is generated from an underlying linear model with possibly unbounded noise t . Under this setting, the stochastic regret,
which will be formally introduced in Section 3, is defined
more intuitively as the ‘gap’ between the predicted label
and the underlying linear function fµ∗ (xt ) = hxt , µ∗ i. It
is worth noting that this stochastic setting is first studied
by Ouhamma et al. (2021), for which they studied σ-sube 2 d2 ) high-probability
Gaussian noise and attained an O(σ
regret bound. However, whether such a bound is tight or improvable remains unknown. Thus, a natural question arises:
what is the optimal regret bound for stochastic online linear
regression?

1. Introduction
Online learning (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006) plays a
crucial role in modern data analytics and machine learning,
where a learner progressively interacts with an environment,
interactively updates its prediction utilizing sequential data.
As a fundamental problem in online learning, online linear
regression has been well studied in the adversarial setting
(Littlestone et al., 1991; Azoury & Warmuth, 2001; Bartlett
et al., 2015).
In the classic adversarial setting of online linear regression
with square loss, the adversary initially generates a sequence
of feature vectors {xt }t≥1 in Rd with a sequence of labels
(i.e., responses) {yt }t≥1 in R. At each round t ≥ 1, xt is revealed to the learner and the learner then makes a prediction

Beyond the optimality of the existing regret bound, another
concern is whether the analysis for sub-Gaussian noise can
be extended to other types of zero-mean noise. Previous
analyses for online-ridge-regression and forward algorithm
provided by Ouhamma et al. (2021) highly rely on the selfnormalized concentration inequality for vector-valued martingale (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Theorem 1), which is
for sub-Gaussian random variables.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

