Why does Throwing Away Data Improve Worst-Group Error?

Kamalika Chaudhuri * 1 2 Kartik Ahuja * 1 Martin Arjovsky 3 David Lopez-Paz 1

Abstract

such, this work is concerned with the ‘worst-group-error’ of
classification rules on imbalanced data.

When facing data with imbalanced classes or
groups, practitioners follow an intriguing strategy to achieve best results. They throw away
examples until the classes or groups are balanced
in size, and then perform empirical risk minimization on the reduced training set. This opposes
common wisdom in learning theory, where the expected error is supposed to decrease as the dataset
grows in size. In this work, we leverage extreme
value theory to address this apparent contradiction. Our results show that the tails of the data
distribution play an important role in determining
the worst-group-accuracy of max-margin linear
classifiers on linearly separable data. When learning on data with heavy tails, throwing away data
restores the geometric symmetry of the resulting
classifier, and therefore improves its worst-group
generalization.

While many sophisticated methods have been proposed to
address imbalanced classification problems (Sagawa et al.,
2019), none of these offer a clear advantage to simple subsampling (Idrissi et al., 2022). In subsampling, we throw
away data from large groups until they match the smallest
group in size. Then, we perform empirical risk minimization
on the (often drastically) reduced data. This is a surprising
finding, as classical wisdom in learning theory tells us that
the expected error of classifiers should decrease as training
data grows in size. As it stands, there is no theoretical explanation as to why the popular strategy of subsampling works
so well when addressing imbalanced classification problems.
In particular, commonplace PAC-learning results (Haussler,
1990) upper-bound the error of the worst of the classifiers
correctly classifying all of the training data. While this analysis can be extended to other metrics such as worst-group
error, since throwing away examples increases the amount
of such compatible classifiers, the error bound can only
worsen, falling short in explaining the empirical benefits of
data subsampling.

1. Introduction

This work is an initial effort to resolve this apparent tension between theory and practice. More specifically, we
focus our analysis on linear maximum-margin binary classifiers (Steinwart & Christmann, 2008) on linearly separable data obtained from either logistic regression or hardmargin SVM. Under this setup, it is well known (Bennett
& Bredensteiner, 2000) that maximum-margin classifiers
are equidistant from the convex hulls delineated by each
of the two classes. In turn, the shape of these convex hulls
is determined by the extremal properties of the probability
distributions of each class. These extremal properties are
the subject of study of a branch of mathematics called extreme value theory (EVT, De Haan & Ferreira (2007)). By
borrowing results from EVT, we show that the location of
the maximum-margin classifier depends on the tail properties of the data distribution. In particular, when facing
data distributions with heavy tails, we observe geometric
imbalances when groups differ in sample size. These imbalances skew the maximum-margin classifier, leading to
suboptimal worst-group-error. This ends up being the reason why subsampling works, as balancing groups in size
restores geometric symmetry across groups.

Imbalances are ubiquitous in real-world data. On the one
hand, class imbalance is common in rare-event data such as
medical diagnosis, intrusion detection, spam classification,
or credit fraud (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). On the
other hand, imbalances may also exist within the classes of
our problem, if each of these comprises hidden groups with
different proportions. For instance, in an image classification dataset with balanced classes, most pictures for each
class are commonly taken in wealthy countries (Rojas et al.,
2022). In all of these situations, simply minimizing average
training error may result in classifiers that perform very well
on majority groups, while having poor performance on minority groups (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). For example,
the 1% test error of a classifier could mean that all examples from a particular minority group are misclassified. As
*

Equal contribution 1 FAIR (Meta AI) 2 UC San Diego
Inria. Correspondence to: Kamalika Chaudhuri <kamalika@meta.com>, Kartik Ahuja <kartikahuja@meta.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

