TGRL: An Algorithm for Teacher Guided Reinforcement Learning

Idan Shenfeld 1 Zhang-Wei Hong 1 Aviv Tamar 2 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

the imitation learning algorithm called DAgger (Ross et al.,
2011). Learning to mimic a teacher is significantly more
data-efficient than reinforcement learning because it avoids
the need to explore the consequences of different actions.

Learning from rewards (i.e., reinforcement learning or RL) and learning to imitate a teacher (i.e.,
teacher-student learning) are two established approaches for solving sequential decision-making
problems. To combine the benefits of these different forms of learning, it is common to train a policy to maximize a combination of reinforcement
and teacher-student learning objectives. However,
without a principled method to balance these objectives, prior work used heuristics and problemspecific hyperparameter searches to balance the
two objectives. We present a principled approach,
along with an approximate implementation for
dynamically and automatically balancing when to
follow the teacher and when to use rewards. The
main idea is to adjust the importance of teacher supervision by comparing the agent’s performance
to the counterfactual scenario of the agent learning without teacher supervision and only from rewards. If using teacher supervision improves performance, the importance of teacher supervision
is increased and otherwise it is decreased. Our
method, Teacher Guided Reinforcement Learning (TGRL), outperforms strong baselines across
diverse domains without hyper-parameter tuning.

However, learning from a teacher can be problematic when
the teacher is sub-optimal or when it’s impossible to perfectly mimic the teacher. In the first problematic case of a
sub-optimal teacher, because the agent attempts to mimic
the teacher’s actions perfectly, its performance is inherently
limited by the teacher’s performance. Developing methods
for training agents that surpass their sub-optimal teachers
is an active research area (Agarwal et al., 2022a; Kurenkov
et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2017). The second problem
occurs when the agent is unable to mimic the teacher. It can
happen in the common scenario when the teacher chooses
actions based on privileged information unavailable to the
agent. For example, the teacher may have access to additional sensors when training in simulation (Lee et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021; Margolis et al., 2021), external knowledge
bases (Zhang et al., 2020), or accurate state estimates during
training (Levine et al., 2015).
In some scenarios, the agent can make up for the information
gap with respect to the teacher by accumulating information
from a history of observations (Kumor et al., 2021; Swamy
et al., 2022). However, in the most general scenario, just
using the history is insufficient, and the agent must take
information-gathering actions (i.e. explore) to acquire the
information being used by the teacher before it can mimic
it. However, since the teacher never performs informationgathering actions, the agent cannot learn such actions by
mimicking the teacher. As an example, consider the "Tiger
Door" environment illustrated in Figure 1 (Littman et al.,
1995; Warrington et al., 2021). The agent is placed in a
maze with a goal cell (green), a trap cell (blue), and a button
(pink). Reaching the goal and trap cells provide positive
and negative rewards, respectively. The location of the goal
and trap cells randomly switch locations every episode. The
teacher is aware of the location of all cells, whereas the agent
(or the student) cannot observe the goal/trap cell locations.
Instead, the student can go to the pink button, an action
that reveals the goal location. In this setup, the goal-aware
teacher takes action to directly reach the goal. However, the
student must deviate from the teacher’s actions to reach the
pink button – a behavior that cannot be learned by imitation.

1. Introduction
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), an agent learns decisionmaking strategies by executing actions, receiving feedback
in the form of rewards, and optimizing its behavior to maximize cumulative rewards. Such learning by trial-and-error
can be challenging, particularly when rewards are sparse, or
under partial observability (Madani et al., 1999; Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis, 1987). A more data-efficient learning
method is to directly supervise the agent with correct actions obtained by querying a teacher, as exemplified by
1

Improbable AI Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, USA 2 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel. Correspondence to: Idan Shenfled <idanshen@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

