Deterministic equivalent and error universality
of deep random features learning

Dominik Schröder∗ 1 Hugo Cui∗ 2 Daniil Dmitriev 3 Bruno Loureiro 4

Abstract

front stemmed from the investigation of simplified settings,
which despite their limitations are often able to capture
some of the key properties of ”real life” neural networks. A
notable example is the recent stream of works on random
features (RFs), originally introduced by (Rahimi & Recht,
2007) as a computationally efficient approximation technique for kernel methods, but more recently studied as a
surrogate model for two-layers neural networks in the lazy
regime (Chizat et al., 2019; Pennington & Worah, 2019;
Mei & Montanari, 2022; Gerace et al., 2020). RFs are a
particular instance of random neural networks, whose statistical properties have been investigated in a sizeable body
of works (Lee et al., 2018; De G. Matthews et al., 2018;
Fan & Wang, 2020; Zavatone-Veth & Pehlevan, 2021; Noci
et al., 2021). The problem of training the readout layer of
such networks has been addressed in the shallow (one hidden layer) case by (Mei & Montanari, 2022; Gerace et al.,
2020), who provide sharp asymptotic characterizations for
the test error. A similar study in the generic deep case is,
however, still missing. In this manuscript, we bridge this
gap by considering the problem of learning the last layer of
a deep, fully-connected random neural network, hereafter
referred to as the deep random features (dRF) model. More
precisely, our main contributions in this manuscript are:

This manuscript considers the problem of learning a random Gaussian network function using a
fully connected network with frozen intermediate layers and trainable readout layer. This problem can be seen as a natural generalization of the
widely studied random features model to deeper
architectures. First, we prove Gaussian universality of the test error in a ridge regression setting
where the learner and target networks share the
same intermediate layers, and provide a sharp
asymptotic formula for it. Establishing this result
requires proving a deterministic equivalent for
traces of the deep random features sample covariance matrices which can be of independent interest. Second, we conjecture the asymptotic Gaussian universality of the test error in the more general setting of arbitrary convex losses and generic
learner/target architectures. We provide extensive
numerical evidence for this conjecture, which requires the derivation of closed-form expressions
for the layer-wise post-activation population covariances. In light of our results, we investigate
the interplay between architecture design and implicit regularization.

• In Section 3, we state Theorem 3.6, which proves an
asymptotic deterministic equivalent for the traces of the
product of deterministic matrices with both conjugate kernel and sample covariance matrix of the layer-wise postactivations.
• As a consequence of Thm. 3.6, in Section 4 we derive
a sharp asymptotic formula for the test error of the dRF
model in the particular case where the target and learner
networks share the same intermediate layers, and when the
readout layer is trained with the squared loss. This result
establishes the Gaussian equivalence of the test error for
ridge regression in this setting.
• Finally, we conjecture (and provide strong numerical evidence for) the Gaussian universality of the dRF model for
general convex losses, and generic target/learner network
architectures. More specifically, we provide exact asymptotic formulas for the test error that leverage recent progress
in high-dimensional statistics (Loureiro et al., 2022a) and a
closed-form formula for the population covariance of net-

1. Introduction
Despite the incredible practical progress in the applications
of deep neural networks to almost all fields of knowledge,
our current theoretical understanding thereof is still to a
large extent incomplete. Recent progress on the theoretical
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich,
8006 Zürich, Switzerland 2 Statistical Physics Of Computation lab.,
Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 3 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich and ETH AI Center, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
4
Département d’Informatique, École Normale Supérieure (ENS) PSL & CNRS, F-75230 Paris cedex 05, France. Correspondence
to: Daniil Dmitriev <daniil.dmitriev@ai.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

