Counterfactual Analysis in Dynamic Latent-State Models

Martin Haugh 1 Raghav Singal 2

Abstract

these scans should have been covered by her policy. Had
these scans gone ahead, the cancer may have been found
earlier and the patient’s life saved. Now a court wants to
know the probability that her life would have been saved
had the routine scans been permitted.

We provide an optimization-based framework to
perform counterfactual analysis in a dynamic
model with hidden states. Our framework is
grounded in the “abduction, action, and prediction” approach to answer counterfactual queries
and handles two key challenges where (1) the
states are hidden and (2) the model is dynamic.
Recognizing the lack of knowledge on the underlying causal mechanism and the possibility of infinitely many such mechanisms, we optimize over
this space and compute upper and lower bounds
on the counterfactual quantity of interest. Our
work brings together ideas from causality, statespace models, simulation, and optimization, and
we apply it on a breast cancer case study. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to compute
lower and upper bounds on a counterfactual query
in a dynamic latent-state model.

On top of the challenges posed by standard counterfactual
analysis, there are two that are particular to such a setting.
First, it’s possible the underlying state of the patient (e.g.,
stage of cancer) is hidden / latent and we only observe a
noisy signal depending on the accuracy of the scan (e.g.,
sensitivity and specificity of a mammogram). Second, the
underlying model is dynamic as the patient’s state evolves
over time. As such, our goal in this work is to perform
counterfactual analysis in dynamic latent-state models.1
Two streams of work are closely related to ours. The first
relates to works on constructing bounds on CQIs (Balke
& Pearl, 1994; Tian & Pearl, 2000; Kaufman et al., 2005;
Cai et al., 2008; Pearl, 2009b; Mueller et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2021). These papers focus on static models. We note
that despite some similarities of our work with Zhang et al.
(2021), the two approaches are quite different. In particular,
while both papers recognize the relevance of polynomial
optimization for bounding CQIs, Zhang et al. (2021) do not
solve polynomial optimization problems but instead propose
Monte-Carlo algorithms as a work-around. In contrast, we
actually solve polynomial optimization problems via sample average approximations (SAAs), which we generate via
Monte-Carlo. As such, Monte-Carlo serves as an “input” to
our polynomial programs whereas Zhang et al. (2021) use it
as a “substitute” for polynomial programs. As mentioned
above, another difference is our focus on dynamic models
whereas Zhang et al. (2021) focus on static models. The
second stream is more recent and concerns counterfactual
analysis in dynamic models (Buesing et al., 2019; Oberst &
Sontag, 2019; Lorberbom et al., 2021; Tsirtsis et al., 2021).
Except Buesing et al. (2019), none of these works allows
for latent states. In addition, these works perform counterfactual analysis by embedding assumptions that are strong
enough to restrict the underlying set of causal mechanisms to
a singleton. In particular, Buesing et al. (2019) explicitly fix

1. Introduction
Counterfactual analysis, falling on the third rung of Pearl’s
ladder of causation (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018), is a fundamental problem in causality. It requires us to imagine a
world where a certain policy was enacted with a corresponding outcome given that a different policy and outcome were
actually observed. It is performed via the 3-step framework
of abduction (conditioning on the observed data), action
(changing the policy), and prediction (computing the counterfactual quantity of interest (CQI)), and has wide-ranging
applications (Pearl, 2009a;b).
As a concrete application in healthcare and legal reasoning,
consider someone who recently died from breast cancer.
The exact progression of her disease is unknown. What
is known, however, is that over a period of time prior to
her diagnosis, her insurance company adopted a strategy of
denying her regular scans (e.g., mammograms) even though
1
Imperial College 2 Dartmouth College. Correspondence to:
MH <m.haugh@imperial.ac.uk>, RS <singal@dartmouth.edu>.

1

The key feature distinguishing a static model from a dynamic
model with T periods say, is that the single-period structure is
repeated T times. As we shall see, our framework takes advantage
of this repeated structure in several ways.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

