Markovian Gaussian Process Variational Autoencoders
Harrison Zhu 1 * Carles Balsells-Rodas 1 * Yingzhen Li 1
Filtering and smoothing operations

Abstract
s!!

Sequential VAEs have been successfully
considered for many high-dimensional time
series modelling problems, with many variant
models relying on discrete-time mechanisms
such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs). On
the other hand, continuous-time methods have
recently gained attraction, especially in the
context of irregularly-sampled time series, where
they can better handle the data than discrete-time
methods. One such class are Gaussian process
variational autoencoders (GPVAEs), where the
VAE prior is set as a Gaussian process (GP).
However, a major limitation of GPVAEs is that
it inherits the cubic computational cost as GPs,
making it unattractive to practioners. In this
work, we leverage the equivalent discrete state
space representation of Markovian GPs to enable
linear time GPVAE training via Kalman filtering
and smoothing. For our model, Markovian
GPVAE (MGPVAE), we show on a variety of
high-dimensional temporal and spatiotemporal
tasks that our method performs favourably
compared to existing approaches whilst being
computationally highly scalable.

s!!"#

s!!"$

𝜑

𝑞" 𝑠#:%

𝜙

Amortised Posterior

s!!

s!!"#

s!!"$

𝑡 ∈ (𝑡! , 𝑡!"# )

𝐬!

Figure 1: Illustration of the MGPVAE model. (Top) The
state posterior qϕ (s1:T ) is parameterised by encoder outputs
and computed using filtering and smoothing. (Bottom) At
prediction time, posterior predictive distributions can be
calculated at any t.

1. Introduction
Modelling multivariate time series data has extensive
applications in e.g., video and audio generation (Li & Mandt,
2018; Goel et al., 2022), climate data analysis (Ravuri
et al., 2021) and finance (Sims, 1980). Among existing
deep generative models for time series, a popular class
of model is sequential variational auto-encoders (VAEs)
(Chung et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2017; Fortuin et al.,
2020), which extend VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2014) to
sequential data. Originally proposed for image generation,
a VAE is a latent variable model which encodes data via an

encoder to a low-dimensional latent space and then decodes
via a decoder to reconstruct the original data. To extend
VAEs to sequential data, the latent space must also include
temporal information (it is also technically possible to place
temporal dynamics on the decoders (Chen et al., 2017), but
for our work we focus on the latent variable dynamics).
Sequential VAEs accomplish this by modelling the latent
variables as a multivariate time series, where many existing
approaches define a state-space model which governs the
latent dynamics. These state-space model-based sequential
VAE approaches can be classified into two subgroups:

*

1
Equal contribution
Imperial College London.
Correspondence to: Harrison Zhu <harrisonzhu5080@gmail.com
or hbz15@ic.ac.uk>.

• Discrete-time: The first approach relies on building a
discrete-time state-space model for the latent variables.
The transition distribution is often parameterised by a
recurrent neural network (RNN) such as Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

