Fair and Optimal Classification via Post-Processing

Ruicheng Xian 1 Lang Yin 1 Han Zhao 1

Abstract

performance as they improve model fairness (Calders et al.,
2009; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017).

To mitigate the bias exhibited by machine learning
models, fairness criteria can be integrated into the
training process to ensure fair treatment across
all demographics, but it often comes at the expense of model performance. Understanding such
tradeoffs, therefore, underlies the design of fair
algorithms. To this end, this paper provides a
complete characterization of the inherent tradeoff
of demographic parity on classification problems,
under the most general multi-group, multi-class,
and noisy setting. Specifically, we show that the
minimum error rate achievable by randomized
and attribute-aware fair classifiers is given by the
optimal value of a Wasserstein-barycenter problem. On the practical side, our findings lead to
a simple post-processing algorithm that derives
fair classifiers from score functions, which yields
the optimal fair classifier when the score is Bayes
optimal. We provide suboptimality analysis and
sample complexity for our algorithm, and demonstrate its effectiveness on benchmark datasets.

It is not immediately clear whether the degradation in performance is attributed to artifacts of the algorithm, or possibly
to the inherent tradeoff —predictive power that must be
given up for satisfying the criteria (Hardt et al., 2016; Zhao
& Gordon, 2022). Hence the design of fair algorithms necessitates the understanding of this tradeoff, which would also
provide insight to the implications of fairness in machine
learning; yet, it remains an open problem for most fairness
criteria and learning settings.
For the group fairness criterion of demographic parity (DP;
Definition 2.1), a.k.a. statistical parity, which requires statistical independence between model output and demographic
group membership (Calders et al., 2009), Le Gouic et al.
(2020) and Chzhen et al. (2020) concurrently characterized
the tradeoff between mean squared error (MSE) and fairness on regression problems. On classification problems,
the inherent tradeoff in terms of error rate has only been
studied under special cases: Denis et al. (2023) assumed
binary groups, Zeng et al. (2022a) and Gaucher et al. (2023)
assumed binary class labels, and Zhao & Gordon (2022) assumed that the data distribution is noiseless, i.e., the Bayes
error rate is zero. We will close this gap and complete the
characterization of the tradeoff of DP fairness in the most
general classification setting.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models trained on biased data have been
found to perpetuate and even amplify the bias against historically underrepresented and disadvantaged demographic
groups at inference time (Barocas & Selbst, 2016; Bolukbasi
et al., 2016). As a result, concerns of fairness have gained
significant attention, especially as applications of these models expand to high-stakes domains such as criminal justice,
healthcare, and finance (Berk et al., 2021). To mitigate the
bias, a variety of fairness criteria and algorithms have been
proposed (Barocas et al., 2023; Caton & Haas, 2020), which
impose mathematical or statistical constraints on the model
to ensure equitable treatment under the respective fairness
notions. But these algorithms typically incur a cost to model

Contributions. This paper considers learning randomized
and attribute-aware classifiers under (approximate) DP fairness in the general setting of multi-group, multi-class, and
potentially noisy data distributions. We show that:
1. The minimum classification error rate under DP is
given by the optimal value of a (relaxed) Wassersteinbarycenter problem (Section 3.1).
2. This characterization reveals that the optimal fair
classifier—one that satisfies DP while achieving the
minimum error—is given by the composition of the
Bayes optimal score function (minimum MSE regressor of the one-hot labels) and the optimal transports from the Wasserstein-barycenter problem (Section 3.2).

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois,
USA. Correspondence to: Ruicheng Xian <rxian2@illinois.edu>,
Han Zhao <hanzhao@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

3. Based on the findings, we propose a post-processing
1

