FaDIn: Fast Discretized Inference for Hawkes Processes with General
Parametric Kernels
Guillaume Staerman * 1 Cédric Allain * 1 Alexandre Gramfort 1 Thomas Moreau 1
to predict the rate of events as a function of time and the
previous events’ history. TPPs are historically used to
model intervals between events, such as in renewal theory, which studies the sequence of intervals between successive replacements of a component susceptible to failure. TPPs find many applications in neuroscience, in particular, to model single-cell recordings and neural spike
trains (Truccolo et al., 2005; Okatan et al., 2005; Kim
et al., 2011; Rad & Paninski, 2011), occasionally associated with spatial statistics (Pillow et al., 2008) or network models (Galves & Löcherbach, 2015). Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHP; Hawkes 1971) are likely the
most popular, as they can model interactions between each
univariate process. They also have the peculiarity that a
process can be self-exciting, meaning that a past event will
increase the probability of having another event in the future on the same process. The conditional intensity function is the key quantity for TPPs. With MHP, it is composed
of a baseline parameter and kernels. It describes the probability of occurrence of an event depending on time. The
kernel function represents how processes influence each
other or themselves. The most commonly used inference
method to obtain the baseline and the kernel parameters of
MHP is the maximum likelihood (MLE; see e.g., Daley &
Vere-Jones, 2007 or Lewis & Mohler, 2011). One alternative and often overlooked estimation criterion is the least
squares ℓ2 error, inspired by the theory of empirical risk
minimization (ERM; Reynaud-Bouret & Rivoirard 2010;
Hansen et al. 2015; Bacry et al. 2020).

Abstract
Temporal point processes (TPP) are a natural tool
for modeling event-based data. Among all TPP
models, Hawkes processes have proven to be the
most widely used, mainly due to their adequate
modeling for various applications, particularly
when considering exponential or non-parametric
kernels. Although non-parametric kernels are an
option, such models require large datasets. While
exponential kernels are more data efficient and
relevant for specific applications where events
immediately trigger more events, they are illsuited for applications where latencies need to be
estimated, such as in neuroscience. This work
aims to offer an efficient solution to TPP inference using general parametric kernels with finite support. The developed solution consists of
a fast ℓ2 gradient-based solver leveraging a discretized version of the events. After theoretically
supporting the use of discretization, the statistical and computational efficiency of the novel approach is demonstrated through various numerical experiments. Finally, the method’s effectiveness is evaluated by modeling the occurrence
of stimuli-induced patterns from brain signals
recorded with magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Given the use of general parametric kernels, results show that the proposed approach leads to an
improved estimation of pattern latency than the
state-of-the-art.

A key feature of MHP modeling is the choice of kernels that can be either non-parametric or parametric. In
the non-parametric setting, kernel functions are approximated by histograms (Lewis & Mohler, 2011; Lemonnier
& Vayatis, 2014), by a linear combination of pre-defined
functions (Zhou et al., 2013a; Xu et al., 2016) or, alternatively, by functions lying in a RKHS (Yang et al., 2017).
In addition to the frequentist approach, many Bayesian
approaches, such as Gibbs sampling (Ishwaran & James,
2001) or (stochastic) variational inference (Hoffman et al.,
2013), have been adapted to MHP in particular to fit nonparametric kernels. Bayesian methods also rely on the
modeling of the kernel by histograms (e.g., Donnet et al.,
2020) or by a linear combination of pre-defined functions

1. Introduction
The statistical framework of Temporal Point Processes
(TPPs; see e.g., Daley & Vere-Jones 2003) is well adapted
for modeling event-based data. It offers a principled way
*

Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA,
Palaiseau, 91120, France. Correspondence to: Guillaume Staerman <guillaume.staerman@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

