M AGNETO: A Foundation Transformer
Hongyu Wang * 1 Shuming Ma * 2 Shaohan Huang 2 Li Dong 2 Wenhui Wang 2 Zhiliang Peng 1 Yu Wu 2
Payal Bajaj 2 Saksham Singhal 2 Alon Benhaim 2 Barun Patra 2 Zhun Liu 2 Vishrav Chaudhary 2
Xia Song 2 Furu Wei 2
Causal Language
Modeling
(GPT) Masked Language
Visual
Reasoning
Modeling
(BEiT-3)
(BERT)

Abstract
A big convergence of model architectures across
language, vision, speech, and multimodal is
emerging. However, under the same name “Transformers”, the above areas use different implementations for better performance, e.g., PostLayerNorm for BERT, and Pre-LayerNorm for
GPT and vision Transformers. We call for the development of Foundation Transformer for true
general-purpose modeling, which serves as a goto architecture for various tasks and modalities
with guaranteed training stability. In this work,
we introduce a Transformer variant, named M AG NETO, to fulfill the goal. Specifically, we propose
Sub-LayerNorm for good expressivity, and the
initialization strategy theoretically derived from
DeepNet (Wang et al., 2022a) for stable scaling up.
Extensive experiments demonstrate its superior
performance and better stability than the de facto
Transformer variants designed for various applications, including language modeling (i.e., BERT,
and GPT), machine translation, vision pretraining
(i.e., BEiT), speech recognition, and multimodal
pretraining (i.e., BEiT-3).

83.4
82.6

61.4
60.1

85.7 86.3

Visual Question
Answering 79.0 78.4
(BEiT-3)

30.5 31.0

6.6
6.2

Speech
Recognition
(T-T)

51.4
52.2

Semantic
Segmentation
(BEiT)

Machine
Translation
(Enc-dec)

84.5
84.9

ImageNet
Classification
(BEiT)

Normformer
Post-LN
Pre-LN
Previous SOTA
backbones
Magneto

Figure 1. M AGNETO performs better than the previous state-ofthe-art backbones across tasks and modalities with a unified architecture. Note that a lower score for speech recognition is better.

GPU hardware and large-scale data. It is appealing that we
can use the same network architecture for a broad range of
applications. So the pretrained models can be seamlessly
reused with the shared implementation and hardware optimization. Moreover, general-purpose modeling is important
to multimodal models, as different modalities can be jointly
encoded and fused by one model.

1. Introduction

However, despite using the same name “Transformers”,
there are significant differences in the implementation of the
architectures for different tasks. Figure 1 summarizes the
architectures for state-of-the-art models that are widely used
in various communities. For instance, some models (e.g.,
ViT, BEiT) adopt Pre-LayerNorm (Pre-LN) Transformers,
while others use Post-LayerNorm (Post-LN) variants (e.g.,
BERT) for better performance. Rather than directly using
the same architecture, we need to compare two Transformer
variants on the specific tasks or modalities to determine
the backbone, which is ineffective for model development.
More importantly, considering multimodal models, the optimal Transformer variants are usually different for input
modalities. For the example of BEiT-3 (Wang et al., 2022b)
vision-language pretraining, using Post-LN is sub-optimal
for vision encoding while Pre-LN is sub-optimal for the

Recent years have witnessed a big convergence of model architectures across language, vision, speech, and multimodal.
Specifically, starting from the natural language processing,
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the de
facto standard for various areas, including computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), speech (Zhang et al., 2020b),
and multimodal (Kim et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022b).
Transformers fully leverage the parallelism advantage of
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Furu Wei
<fuwei@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

