Maximal Initial Learning Rates in Deep ReLU Networks

Gaurav Iyer 1 2 Boris Hanin 3 David Rolnick 1 2

Abstract

chitecture, optimizer, and initialization scheme. As a result,
it can be difficult to theoretically analyze the relationship
between the learning rate and other elements of the training
framework, and computationally expensive to find the best
learning rate in practice.

Training a neural network requires choosing a
suitable learning rate, which involves a trade-off
between speed and effectiveness of convergence.
While there has been considerable theoretical and
empirical analysis of how large the learning rate
can be, most prior work focuses only on late-stage
training. In this work, we introduce the maximal
initial learning rate η ∗ – the largest learning rate
at which a randomly initialized neural network
can successfully begin training and achieve (at
least) a given threshold accuracy. Using a simple approach to estimate η ∗ , we observe that in
constant-width fully-connected ReLU networks,
η ∗ behaves differently from the maximum learning rate later in training. Specifically, we find that
η ∗ is well predicted as a power of (depth×width),
provided that (i) the width of the network is sufficiently large compared to the depth, and (ii) the
input layer is trained at a relatively small learning
rate. We further analyze the relationship between
η ∗ and the sharpness λ1 of the network at initialization, indicating they are closely though not
inversely related. We formally prove bounds for
λ1 in terms of (depth × width) that align with our
empirical results.

While there have been numerous works rigorously analyzing
effective learning rates both from theoretical and empirical
standpoints (Li et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2018), these works
tend to focus on behavior during late-stage training, considering which learning rates provide optimal performance
(Park et al., 2019), or lead to convergence guarantees (Wang
et al., 2022). However, it is not clear that optimal learning
rates early in training follow similar patterns to those near
convergence, and indeed a variety of heuristics for learning
rate scheduling suggest that an early change in learning rate
can actually boost performance (Goyal et al., 2017).
In this paper, we consider both empirically and theoretically
how large the learning rate can be in early training. Our
main contributions are as follows:
• In §3.1, we introduce the maximal initial learning rate
η ∗ – the largest learning rate at which a randomly initialized neural network can successfully begin training
– and show how it can be computed.
• For fully-connected deep ReLU networks, we empirically identify a power law relating the maximal initial
learning rate and the product of width and depth:

1. Introduction

E[ln η ∗ ] = −α ln(depth × width) + γ1 ,

The learning rate plays a crucial role in the training of deep
neural networks. Unfortunately, tuning the learning rate
is a tricky task – too large a learning rate can cause the
training loss to diverge, while too small a learning rate can
result in inefficient use of time and computational resources.
The optimal choice of learning rate has been observed to
depend non-trivially on many factors, including the data, ar-

which can be observed in Figure 11 . Notably, while
prior theoretical work (Karakida et al., 2019) suggests
that at the end of training α = 1, we find that at the start
of training α < 1, allowing for larger initial learning
rates.
• We show empirically that the sharpness λ1 (i.e. the
largest eigenvalue of the training loss Hessian) at initialization is a function of η ∗ , but does not necessarily
reflect the inverse relationship observed in late-stage
training. We illustrate this in Figure 4.

1

School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada 3 Dept. of
Operations Research & Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, USA. Correspondence to: Gaurav Iyer <gaurav.iyer@mila.quebec>.

1
Our empirical results suggest that α is indeed task-dependent.
While our results in Figure 1 largely show α ≈ 0.7 for sufficiently
wide networks, significant differences can be seen in Figure 11(a),
where we obtain smaller α on Gaussian data.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

