COMCAT: Towards Efficient Compression and Customization of
Attention-Based Vision Models
Jinqi Xiao 1 Miao Yin 1 Yu Gong 1 Xiao Zang 1 Jian Ren 2 Bo Yuan 1

Abstract

Xie et al., 2021; Carion et al., 2020). On the downside,
these emerging architectures, e.g., vision transformer (ViT)
and its variants (Touvron et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021a;
Li et al., 2022), suffer from even larger model sizes and
higher computational costs than convolutional neural networks (CNNs), hindering their efficient deployment in many
practical resource-constrained scenarios.

Attention-based vision models, such as Vision
Transformer (ViT) and its variants, have shown
promising performance in various computer vision tasks. However, these emerging architectures
suffer from large model sizes and high computational costs, calling for efficient model compression solutions. To date, pruning ViTs has been
well studied, while other compression strategies
that have been widely applied in CNN compression, e.g., model factorization, is little explored
in the context of ViT compression. This paper explores an efficient method for compressing vision
transformers to enrich the toolset for obtaining
compact attention-based vision models. Based
on the new insight on the multi-head attention
layer, we develop a highly efficient ViT compression solution, which outperforms the state-ofthe-art pruning methods. For compressing DeiTsmall and DeiT-base models on ImageNet, our
proposed approach can achieve 0.45% and 0.76%
higher top-1 accuracy even with fewer parameters. Our finding can also be applied to improve
the customization efficiency of text-to-image diffusion models, with much faster training (up to
2.6× speedup) and lower extra storage cost (up to
1927.5× reduction) than the existing works. The
code and models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/jinqixiao/ComCAT.

An attractive solution to this challenge is to perform model
compression, a strategy that can reduce network size without affecting task performance. Motivated by the huge prior
success of compressing CNNs (Hinton et al., 2015; Han
et al., 2015), several recent studies (Yin et al., 2023; Yu
et al., 2022b; Hou & Kung, 2022) have proposed to apply one (e.g., pruning) or combining several (e.g., pruning
and knowledge distillation) compression methods for vision
transformers, bringing considerable reduction in model size
and/or FLOPs.
Different from the existing works, this paper aims to address the above analyzed efficiency challenge from another
perspective – exploring the low-rankness of the attentionbased vision models. To date, a rich set of low-rank compression techniques for CNNs have been proposed in the
literature (Kim et al., 2015; Yin et al., 2021; Liebenwein
et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2022b;a; Xiao et al., 2023; Xiang
et al., 2023). However, consider 1) there exists a substantial
difference on network architecture and operation mechanism, e.g., multi-head attention in ViTs vs. channel-wise
convolution in CNNs; and 2) as indicated in (Yu & Wu,
2023) and verified by our analysis, many weight matrices
in the vision transformers do not exhibit low rankness, it is
not clear that whether low-rank compression would bring
the satisfied improvement on model efficiency. From the
perspective of practical deployment, a question naturally
arises: For compressing attention-based vision models, can
exploring model low-rankness provide comparable or even
better performance than other methods such as pruning?

1. Introduction
Recently the attention-based vision models have achieved
comparable or superior performance than the convolutioncentered architecture in various computer vision tasks,
demonstrating the promising benefit brought by using an
attention mechanism (Liu et al., 2021b; Caron et al., 2021;
1

To answer this question and fully unleash the potential of
low-rank compression for ViTs and attention-based models,
this paper first investigates the low-rankness in the multiahead attention layer, and proposes that the head-level lowrankness, instead of weight matrix-level, should be explored.
Based on this new insight, we then develop a highly efficient

2

Rutgers University Snap Inc. Correspondence to: Jinqi Xiao
<jinqi.xiao@rutgers.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

