Auxiliary Learning as an Asymmetric Bargaining Game

Aviv Shamsian * 1 Aviv Navon * 1 2 Neta Glazer 1 2 Kenji Kawaguchi 3
Gal Chechik 1 4 Ethan Fetaya 1

Abstract

jointly with a depth prediction task, whose annotations can
be obtained at scale (Standley et al., 2020).

Auxiliary learning is an effective method for enhancing the generalization capabilities of trained
models, particularly when dealing with small
datasets. However, this approach may present
several difficulties: (i) optimizing multiple objectives can be more challenging, and (ii) how to
balance the auxiliary tasks to best assist the main
task is unclear. In this work, we propose a novel
approach, named AuxiNash, for balancing tasks in
auxiliary learning by formalizing the problem as
a generalized bargaining game with asymmetric
task bargaining power. Furthermore, we describe
an efficient procedure for learning the bargaining
power of tasks based on their contribution to the
performance of the main task and derive theoretical guarantees for its convergence. Finally, we
evaluate AuxiNash on multiple multi-task benchmarks and find that it consistently outperforms
competing methods.

Auxiliary learning has a large potential to improve learning in the low data regime, but it gives rise to two main
challenges: Defining the joint optimization problem and
performing the optimization efficiently. (1) First, given a
main task at hand, it is not clear which auxiliary tasks would
benefit the main task and how tasks should be combined
into a joint optimization objective. For example, Standley
et al. (2020) showed that depth estimation is a useful auxiliary task for semantic segmentation but not the opposite.
In fact, adding semantic segmentation as an auxiliary task
harmed depth estimation performance. This suggests that
even close-related tasks may interfere with each other. (2)
Second, training with auxiliary tasks involves optimizing
multiple objectives simultaneously; While training with multiple tasks can potentially improve performance via better
generalization, it often underperforms compared to singletask models.
Previous auxiliary learning research focused mainly on the
first challenge: namely, weighting and combining auxiliary
tasks (Lin et al., 2019). The second challenge, optimizing
the main task in the presence of auxiliary tasks, has been
less explored. Luckily, this problem can be viewed as a case
of optimization in Multi-Task Learning (MTL). In MTL,
there is extensive research on controlling optimization such
that every task would benefit from the others. Specifically,
several studies proposed algorithms to aggregate gradients
from multiple tasks into a coherent update direction (Yu
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a; Navon et al., 2022). We
see large potential in bringing MTL optimization ideas into
auxiliary learning to address the optimization challenge.

1. Introduction
When training deep neural networks with limited labeled
data, generalization can be improved by adding auxiliary
tasks. In this approach, called Auxiliary learning (AL),
the auxiliary tasks are trained jointly with the main task,
and their labels can provide a signal that is useful for the
main task. AL is beneficial because auxiliary annotations
are often easier to obtain than annotations for the main task.
This is the case when the auxiliary tasks use self-supervision
(Oliver et al., 2018; Hwang et al., 2020; Achituve et al.,
2021), or their annotation process is faster. For example,
learning semantic segmentation of an image may require
careful and costly annotation, but can be improved if learned

Here we propose a novel approach named AuxiNash that
takes inspiration from recent advances in MTL optimization
as a cooperative bargaining game (Nash-MTL, Navon et al.,
2022). The idea is to view a gradient update as a shared
resource, view each task as a player in a game, and have
players compete over making the joint gradient similar to
their own task gradient. In Nash-MTL, tasks play a symmetric role, since no task is particularly favorable. This leads
to a bargaining solution that is proportionally fair across
tasks. In contrast, task symmetry no longer holds in aux-

*

Equal contribution 1 Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel 2 Aiola, Herzliya, Israel 3 National University of Singapore 4 Nvidia, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Aviv Shamsian <aviv.shamsian@live.biu.ac.il>, Aviv Navon
<aviv.navon@biu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

