The Ideal Continual Learner: An Agent That Never Forgets

Liangzu Peng 1 2 Paris V. Giampouras 1 René Vidal 2 3

Abstract

larger errors on past tasks), after learning the present one.
To address this problem, many practical methods have been
proposed. For example, memory-based methods store data
from past tasks and use it to solve the present task (LopezPaz & Ranzato, 2017), regularization-based methods add
some regularization terms to the loss in order to prevent
overfitting to the current task (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), and
expansion-based methods expand the network architecture
to accommodate learning a new task (Rusu et al., 2016).

The goal of continual learning is to find a model
that solves multiple learning tasks which are presented sequentially to the learner. A key challenge in this setting is that the learner may forget
how to solve a previous task when learning a new
task, a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting. To address this challenge, many practical
methods have been proposed, including memorybased, regularization-based, and expansion-based
methods. However, a rigorous theoretical understanding of these methods remains elusive. This
paper aims to bridge this gap between theory and
practice by proposing a new continual learning
framework called Ideal Continual Learner (ICL),
which is guaranteed to avoid catastrophic forgetting by construction. We show that ICL unifies
multiple well-established continual learning methods and gives new theoretical insights into the
strengths and weaknesses of these methods. We
also derive generalization bounds for ICL which
allow us to theoretically quantify how rehearsal
affects generalization. Finally, we connect ICL
to several classic subjects and research topics of
modern interest, which allows us to make historical remarks and inspire future directions.

Deep continual learning methods that embody either of these
three ideas, or combinations thereof, have greatly improved
the empirical performance in resisting catastrophic forgetting (Liu, 2022).1 While these methods have evolved so
rapidly, at least two questions remain under-explored:
(Q1) Is there any mathematical connection between continual learning and other conceptually related fields? The
answer seems elusive even for multitask learning (i.e., joint
training of all tasks): Chaudhry et al. (2020) and Mirzadeh
et al. (2021), among many others, advocated that performing
multitask learning gives the best performance for continual
learning, while Wu et al. (2022) claimed the opposite.
(Q2) How does the rehearsal mechanism provably affect
generalization? Lopez-Paz & Ranzato (2017) claimed
that rehearsal (i.e., joint training with part of previous
data stored in memory and the data of the present task)
would result in overfitting (and jeopardize generalization).
Chaudhry et al. (2019) rebutted against this claim by empirical evidence, while Verwimp et al. (2021) offered empirical
counter-evidence for what Chaudhry et al. (2019) argued.
Indeed, the answer to (Q2) has been unclear, which is why
Verwimp et al. (2021) posed this as a serious open problem.

1. Introduction
The goal of building intelligent machines that are adaptive
and self-improving over time has given rise to the continual
learning paradigm, where the learner needs to solve multiple tasks presented sequentially (Thrun & Mitchell, 1995).
In this setting, a key challenge known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989) is that, unlike humans,
the agent may forget how to solve past tasks (i.e., exhibit

Our Contributions. In this paper, we focus on theoretically
understanding continual learning and catastrophic forgetting
by trying to answer Questions (Q1) and (Q2). In particular:
• We propose a general framework for continual learning,
called the Ideal Continual Learner (ICL), and we show that,
under mild assumptions, ICL never forgets. This characterization of never forgetting makes it possible to address
Questions (Q1) and (Q2) via dissecting the optimization and
generalization properties of ICL.

1

Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 2 Innovation in Data Engineering and
Science (IDEAS), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
3
NORCE Norwegian Research Centre, Norway. Correspondence
to: Liangzu Peng <lpenn@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
We discuss the most relevant references in the main paper as
we proceed, and we review related works in detail in the appendix.

1

