Accelerated Infeasibility Detection of
Constrained Optimization and Fixed-Point Iterations

Jisun Park 1 Ernest K. Ryu 1 2

Abstract

cation or from applications such as embedded application,
mixed-integer optimization with branch-and-bound technique, or combinatorial optimization (Naik & Bemporad,
2017; De Loera et al., 2012). Classical solvers based on interior point methods or simplex methods, in their first phase,
determines whether the problem is feasible or infeasible
by finding a feasible point. The behavior of such classical
solvers under pathologies is well understood through extensive theoretical research and through the decades-long
deployment of open-source and commercial solvers. The
analysis of first-order algorithms such as Douglas-Rachford
splitting (DRS) and ADMM applied to pathological problem instances has started to gain attention. However, the
computational complexity of determining the infeasibility
of a given problem instance has yet to be formally studied.

As first-order optimization methods become the
method of choice for solving large-scale optimization problems, optimization solvers based on firstorder algorithms are being built. Such generalpurpose solvers must robustly detect infeasible
or misspecified problem instances, but the computational complexity of first-order methods for
doing so has yet to be formally studied. In this
work, we characterize the optimal accelerated rate
of infeasibility detection. We show that the standard fixed-point iteration achieves a O(1/k 2 ) and
O(1/k) rates, respectively, on the normalized iterates and the fixed-point residual converging to
the infimal displacement vector, while the accelerated fixed-point iteration achieves O(1/k 2 ) and
Õ(1/k 2 ) rates. We then provide a matching complexity lower bound to establish that Θ(1/k 2 ) is
indeed the optimal accelerated rate.

In this work, we characterize the optimal accelerated rate of
infeasibility detection by analyzing the convergence rates
of fixed-point iterations towards the infimal displacement
vector, which serves as a certificate of infeasibility. We show
that the standard fixed-point iteration achieves a O(1/k 2 )
and O(1/k) rates, respectively, on the normalized iterates
and the fixed-point residual, while the accelerated fixedpoint iteration achieves O(1/k 2 ) and Õ(1/k 2 ) rates. We
then provide a matching complexity lower bound to establish that Θ(1/k 2 ) is indeed the optimal accelerated rate.

1. Introduction
First-order optimization methods have become the method
of choice for solving the large-scale optimization problems
of the modern era. As first-order methods scale more favorably than classical interior-point methods (O’Donoghue
et al., 2016; Stellato et al., 2020; Garstka et al., 2021), new
optimization solvers based on first-order algorithms are being built with the goal of replacing classical solvers based
on interior-point methods or simplex methods in large-scale
applications.

1.1. Preliminaries and notations
We use the standard notations in Ryu & Yin (2022).
Sets and operators. Let H be a real Hilbert space. For a
set C ⊆ H, we denote by conv C a convex hull of C, C a
closure of C, and conv C a closure of a convex hull of C.
If C is a nonempty closed convex set, for any x ∈ H, there
exists a unique vector z ∈ C such that z ∈ argminy∈C ∥x−
y∥2 , which is denoted as ΠC (x) and called a projection of
x onto C. We also let δC refer to the indicator function of
set C. We denote by Sn the set of all n × n symmetric
n
matrices and by S+
the set of all n × n symmetric positive
n
semidefinite matrices. We say X ⪰ Y if X − Y ∈ S+
for
n
X, Y ∈ S .

However, these new first-order solvers are far less equipped
to robustly detect infeasible or misspecified problem instances. A general-purpose solver must robustly detect
infeasible problem instances arising from user misspecifi1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National
University 2 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence,
Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Ernest K. Ryu
<ernestryu@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Let 𝕋 : H ⇒ H be a set-valued operator. dom 𝕋 = {x |
𝕋x ̸= ∅} is called the domain of 𝕋, and R(𝕋) = {y | ∃x ∈
1

