On User-Level Private Convex Optimization

Badih Ghazi * 1 Pritish Kamath * 1 Ravi Kumar * 1 Pasin Manurangsi * 2 Raghu Meka * 1 3 Chiyuan Zhang * 1

Abstract

function. The goal is to return a value that achieves as small
a loss as possible, either averaged over the data (empirical
risk minimization) or the population distribution underlying
the data (stochastic convex optimization).

We introduce a new mechanism for stochastic
convex optimization (SCO) with user-level differential privacy guarantees. The convergence
rates of this mechanism are similar to those in the
prior work of Levy et al. (2021); Narayanan et al.
(2022), but with two important improvements.
Our mechanism does not require any smoothness
assumptions on the loss. Furthermore, our bounds
are also the first where the minimum number of
users needed for user-level privacy has no dependence on the dimension and only a logarithmic
dependence on the desired excess error. The main
idea underlying the new mechanism is to show
that the optimizers of strongly convex losses have
low local deletion sensitivity, along with an output perturbation method for functions with low
local deletion sensitivity, which could be of independent interest.

Given its importance, a large body of work has tackled the convex optimization problem under item-level DP
(e.g., Chaudhuri & Monteleoni (2008); Chaudhuri et al.
(2011); Kifer et al. (2012); Bassily et al. (2014; 2019); Wang
et al. (2017); Feldman et al. (2020); Asi et al. (2021); Gopi
et al. (2022)) with the optimal risk bounds established in
many standard settings, such as when the loss is Lipschitz
or strongly convex. User-level DP has also been studied recently in various learning tasks (Liu et al., 2020; Ghazi et al.,
2021); see also the survey by Kairouz et al. (2021, Section
4.3.2) for its relevance in federated learning, where the question of determining trade-offs between item-level and userlevel DP is highlighted. Levy et al. (2021); Narayanan et al.
(2022) have studied convex optimization with user-level DP;
these results have two main drawbacks: they require the
loss function to be smooth and they do not achieve good
risk bounds in some regime of parameters. A question in
Levy et al. (2021) was if the smoothness requirement can
be removed. In this paper, we resolve this question in the
affirmative by introducing novel mechanisms for convex
optimization under user-level DP. En route, we also improve
existing excess risk bounds for a large regime of parameters.

1. Introduction
Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b) is a formal
notion that protects the privacy of each user contributing to
a dataset when releasing statistics about the dataset. The
settings considered in literature have typically involved each
user contributing a single “item” to the dataset. Thus the
most commonly used notion of DP protects the privacy of
each item, and we refer to it as item-level DP. However,
when a dataset contains multiple items contributed by each
user, it is essential to simultaneously protect the privacy of
all items contributed by any individual user; this notion has
come to be known as user-level DP.

1.1. Background
We introduce some notation to state our results concretely.
For n, m ∈ N, suppose there are n users, and let the input
to the ith user be xi := (xi,1 , . . . , xi,m ). Two datasets
x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) and x′ = (x′1 , . . . , x′n ) are said to be
user-level neighbors, denoted x ∼ x′ , if there is an index
i0 ∈ [n] such that xi = x′i for all i ∈ [n] ∖ {i0 }.1

Convex optimization is one of the most basic and powerful
computational tools in statistics and machine learning. In
the most abstract setting, each item corresponds to a loss

We recall the definition of DP, extended from Dwork et al.
(2006a;b); see also Dwork & Roth (2014); Vadhan (2017):

1
Google Research, Mountain View, CA 2 Google Research, Thailand 3 UCLA, Los Angles, CA. Correspondence to:
Pasin Manurangsi <pasin@google.com>, Pritish Kamath <pritish@alum.mit.edu>.

Definition 1.1 ((User-Level) Differential Privacy (DP)).
Let ε > 0 and δ ∈ [0, 1]. A randomized algorithm
M : X n×m → O is (ε, δ)-differentially private ((ε, δ)-DP)
if, for all x ∼ x′ and all (measurable) outcomes E ⊆ O, it
holds that Pr[M(x) ∈ E] ≤ eε · Pr[M(x′ ) ∈ E] + δ.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

We use item-level to refer to the case where m = 1.

