Approximate Stein Classes for Truncated Density Estimation

Daniel J. Williams 1 Song Liu 1

Abstract

When data are truncated, many typical statistical assumptions break down. One fundamental problem with estimation in a truncated space is that the probability density
function (PDF), given by
ˆ
p̄θ (x)
pθ (x) =
, Z(θ) =
p̄θ (x)dx,
Z(θ)
V

Estimating truncated density models is difficult,
as these models have intractable normalising constants and hard to satisfy boundary conditions.
Score matching can be adapted to solve the truncated density estimation problem, but requires a
continuous weighting function which takes zero
at the boundary and is positive elsewhere. Evaluation of such a weighting function (and its gradient) often requires a closed-form expression of
the truncation boundary and finding a solution to
a complicated optimisation problem. In this paper,
we propose approximate Stein classes, which in
turn leads to a relaxed Stein identity for truncated
density estimation. We develop a novel discrepancy measure, truncated kernelised Stein discrepancy (TKSD), which does not require fixing a
weighting function in advance, and can be evaluated using only samples on the boundary. We
estimate a truncated density model by minimising
the Lagrangian dual of TKSD. Finally, experiments show the accuracy of our method to be an
improvement over previous works even without
the explicit functional form of the boundary.

cannot be fully evaluated. In this setup, V is the truncated
domain which can be highly complex and thus the integration to obtain the normalising constant, Z(θ), is intractable.
This normalising constant could be approximated via numerical integration, such as with Monte Carlo methods (Kalos
& Whitlock, 2009), but this comes with a significant computational expense. Recent attention has turned to estimation
methods which bypass the calculation of the normalising
constant entirely by working with the score function for
pθ (x),
ψ pθ = ψ pθ (x) := ∇x log pθ (x) = ∇x log p̄θ (x).
which uniquely represents a probability distribution.
Score-based estimation methods include score matching
(Hyvärinen, 2005; Hyvärinen, 2007), noise-contrastive
estimation (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; Gutmann &
Hyvärinen, 2012) and minimum Stein discrepancies (Stein,
1972; Barp et al., 2019). These methods are computationally fast and accurate, and usually rely on minimising a
discrepancy between the score functions for the model density pθ (x) and the unknown data density q(x), whose score
function is ψ q := ∇x log q(x).

1. Introduction
In truncated density estimation, we are unable to view a
full picture of our dataset. We are instead given access
to a smaller subsample of data artificially truncated by a
boundary. Examples of truncation boundaries include limited number of medical tests resulting in under-reported
disease counts, and a country’s borders preventing discoveries of habitat locations. In either case, a complex boundary
causes truncation which introduces difficulties in statistical
parameter estimation. Regular estimation techniques such
as maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) are ill-suited, as
we will explain.

Score-based methods have been applied across many domains, including hypothesis testing (Liu et al., 2016;
Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Xu, 2022; Wu et al., 2022), generative modelling (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021;
Pang et al., 2020), energy based modelling (Song & Kingma,
2021), and Bayesian posterior estimation (Sharrock et al.,
2022). Recently, two lines of work have been proposed
for the truncated domain; truncated density estimation via
score matching (Yu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Williams &
Liu, 2022), called TruncSM, and truncated goodness-of-fit
testing via the kernelised Stein discrepancy (KSD), denoted
bounded-domain KSD (bd-KSD) (Xu, 2022).

1
School of Mathematics, University of Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Daniel J. Williams <daniel.williams@bristol.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

These two lines of work both use a distance function as
a weighting function on the objective. Such a function is
1

