Neural Latent Aligner: Cross-trial Alignment for
Learning Representations of Complex, Naturalistic Neural Data

Cheol Jun Cho 1 Edward F. Chang 2 Gopala K. Anumanchipalli 1 2

Abstract

sights into the principles of neural computation and representation (Pandarinath et al., 2018b; Saxena & Cunningham,
2019; Vyas et al., 2020). Furthermore, these models often
provide well-constrained representations that are crucial for
developing robust brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) (Pandarinath et al., 2018a; Dyer et al., 2017; Karpowicz et al.,
2022; Dabagia et al., 2022). However, application of these
models to neural data from naturalistic experiments has been
limited, despite the rich implications that such data can offer
(Kay et al., 2008; Huth et al., 2016; Silbert et al., 2014;
Chartier et al., 2018).

Understanding the neural implementation of complex human behaviors is one of the major goals
in neuroscience. To this end, it is crucial to find
a true representation of the neural data, which
is challenging due to the high complexity of
behaviors and the low signal-to-ratio (SNR) of
the signals. Here, we propose a novel unsupervised learning framework, Neural Latent Aligner
(NLA), to find well-constrained, behaviorally relevant neural representations of complex behaviors. The key idea is to align representations
across repeated trials to learn cross-trial consistent information. Furthermore, we propose a
novel, fully differentiable time warping model
(TWM) to resolve the temporal misalignment
of trials. When applied to intracranial electrocorticography (ECoG) of natural speaking, our
model learns better representations for decoding
behaviors than the baseline models, especially in
lower dimensional space. The TWM is empirically validated by measuring behavioral coherence between aligned trials. The proposed framework learns more cross-trial consistent representations than the baselines, and when visualized, the
manifold reveals shared neural trajectories across
trials.

A major challenge is that the stimuli and tasks in naturalistic
experiments are highly complex, while existing methods
have been developed based on conventional experiments
with simple task structures. Previous methods assume the
low dimensionality of the task structure or simple dynamics (Pandarinath et al., 2018b; Ye & Pandarinath, 2021).
Neither assumption is applicable to real-world behaviors.
However, regardless of complexity, behaviorally relevant
representations should encode consistent information when
the corresponding behaviors are the same. We leverage this
hypothesis to learn representations that exclusively encode
information consistent across repeated trials. Another significant obstacle is the temporal misalignment among trials
caused by the varying durations of behaviors, which hinders
direct comparisons across trials. When properly aligned, a
novel pattern can be unveiled (Williams et al., 2020).
Here, we suggest a new unsupervised learning framework,
Neural Latent Aligner (NLA), to align latent representations
across trials, in both time domain and the representational
space. NLA outputs a temporal factor called content factor, designed to exclusively represent cross-trial consistent
information without noise. To achieve this, we propose a
new contrastive loss based on InfoNCE (Oord et al., 2018)
by incorporating the repeated trials as an additional sampling dimension. The objective is elaborated in Methods
(§3.1 & 3.2.3). To address the issue of temporal misalignment, we develop a new time warping model (TWM) with a
novel parametrization of temporal alignments. Additionally,
we propose two variants of our models, NLA-sDTW and
NLA-SUP, which employ distinct approaches for solving
the temporal misalignment.

1. Introduction
Recent advance in neural recording technologies has
prompted active development of diverse neuralmodels (e.g.,
Pandarinath et al. 2018b; Pei et al. 2021; Kostas et al. 2021),
and successful applications have provided significant in*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA, USA 2 Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Cheol Jun Cho <cheoljun@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

