Multi-Task Differential Privacy Under Distribution Skew

Walid Krichene 1 Prateek Jain 1 Shuang Song 1 Mukund Sundararajan 2
Abhradeep Thakurta 1 Li Zhang 1

Abstract

ent settings, including empirical risk minimization (Amin
et al., 2019; Levy et al., 2021), mean estimation (Cummings
et al., 2022), and matrix completion (Jain et al., 2018; Chien
et al., 2021). The setting we study is that of multi-task learning, in which users contribute data to multiple tasks. This
is for example the case in recommendation systems: given
a set of n users and m items (pieces of content, such as
movies or songs), the goal is to learn a representation for
each item based on the users’ preferences. Another example
is multi-class classification, where the goal is to learn m
classifiers (one per class). Notice that the training data of a
given user may be relevant to only a small subset of tasks.
This is certainly the case in recommendation, where users
typically interact with a small subset of the catalog of available content. This can also be the case in classification if
the number of classes is very large. The interaction pattern
between users and tasks can be described using a bipartite
graph Ω ⊆ [m] × [n], such that user j contributes data to
task i if and only if (i, j) ∈ Ω. We will also denote by
Ωi = {j : (i, j) ∈ Ω} the set of users contributing to task i.
The goal is then to minimize the empirical loss summed
over tasks,
m X
X
L(θ) =
`(θi ; xij , yij ),
(1)

We study the problem of multi-task learning under
user-level differential privacy, in which n users
contribute data to m tasks, each involving a subset
of users. One important aspect of the problem,
that can significantly impact quality, is the distribution skew among tasks. Tasks that have much
fewer data samples than others are more susceptible to the noise added for privacy. It is natural to
ask whether algorithms can adapt to this skew to
improve the overall utility.
We give a systematic analysis of the problem, by
studying how to optimally allocate a user’s privacy budget among tasks. We propose a generic
algorithm, based on an adaptive reweighting of
the empirical loss, and show that in the presence
of distribution skew, this gives a quantifiable improvement of excess empirical risk.
Experimental studies on recommendation problems that exhibit a long tail of small tasks, demonstrate that our methods significantly improve utility, achieving the state of the art on two standard
benchmarks.

i=1 j∈Ωi

where θi represents the model parameters for task i, and
xij , yij are respectively the features and labels contributed
by user j to task i. In general, we will assume that Ω, x, and
y are all private.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models trained on sensitive user data
present the risk of leaking private user information (Dwork
et al., 2007; Korolova, 2010; Calandrino et al., 2011; Shokri
et al., 2017). Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006)
mitigates this risk, and has become a gold standard widely
adopted in industry and government (Abowd, 2018; Wilson
et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2021; Amin et al., 2022).

In practice, the tasks can be imbalanced, i.e. the distribution of task sizes |Ωi | can be heavily skewed. This is the
case in recommendation systems, in which there is a long
tail of items with orders of magnitude fewer training examples than average (Yin et al., 2012; Liu & Zheng, 2020).
Classification tasks can also exhibit a similar skew among
classes (Kubat & Matwin, 1997). Under differential privacy
constraints, this skew makes tail tasks (those with less data)
more susceptible to quality losses. This disparate impact of
differential privacy is well documented, for example in classification with class imbalance (Bagdasaryan et al., 2019)
or in DP language models (McMahan et al., 2018).

In this work, we adopt the notion of user-level DP (Dwork &
Roth, 2014; Kearns et al., 2014), which seeks to protect all
data samples of a given user, a harder goal than protecting a
single sample. User-level DP has been studied under differ1
Google Research 2 Google. Correspondence to: Walid Krichene <walidk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A natural question is whether DP algorithms can be made
adaptive to such distribution skew. Some heuristics were
1

