Featured Graph Coarsening with Similarity Guarantees

Manoj Kumar 1 Anurag Sharma 2 Shashwat Saxena 1 Sandeep Kumar 1 3 4

Abstract

mains, from social networks to drug discovery and from
finance to material science studies. Large-scale graphs are
becoming increasingly common, which is exciting since
more data implies more knowledge and more training sets
for learning algorithms. However, the graph data size is the
real bottleneck; handling large graph data involves considerable computational hurdles to process, extract, and analyze.
Therefore, graph dimensionality reduction techniques are
needed.

Graph coarsening is a dimensionality reduction
technique that aims to learn a smaller-tractable
graph while preserving the properties of the original input graph. However, many real-world
graphs also have features or contexts associated
with each node. The existing graph coarsening
methods do not consider the node features and
rely solely on a graph matrix(e.g., adjacency and
Laplacian) to coarsen graphs. However, some recent deep learning-based graph coarsening methods are designed for specific tasks considering
both node features and graph matrix. In this
paper, we introduce a novel optimization-based
framework for graph coarsening that takes both
the graph matrix and the node features as the input and jointly learns the coarsened graph matrix
and the coarsened feature matrix while ensuring
desired properties. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that guarantees that
the learned coarsened graph is ϵ ∈ [0, 1) similar to the original graph. Extensive experiments
with both real and synthetic benchmark datasets
elucidate the proposed framework’s efficacy and
applicability for numerous graph-based applications, including graph clustering, node classification, stochastic block model identification, and
graph summarization.

Graph coarsening or graph summarization is a promising
direction for scaling up graph-based machine-learning approaches by simplifying large graphs. Coarsening aims to
summarize a very large graph into a smaller and tractable
graph while preserving the properties of the originally given
graph. The core idea of coarsening comes from the algebraic
multi-grid literature (Ruge & Stüben, 1987). Coarsening
methods have been applied in various applications like graph
partitioning (Hendrickson et al., 1995; Karypis & Kumar,
1998; Kushnir et al., 2006; Dhillon et al., 2007), graph summarization (Liu et al., 2018), machine learning (Lafon &
Lee, 2006; Gavish et al., 2010; Shuman et al., 2015), and
scientific computing(Chen et al., 2022; Hackbusch, 2013;
Ruge & Stüben, 1987; Briggs et al., 2000). The recent work
in (Loukas, 2019) developed a set of frameworks for graph
matrix coarsening, preserving spectral and cut guarantees,
but do not take node features into account. There are some
recent deep learning-based approaches that do take node
features into account (Cai et al., 2021; Ying et al., 2018; Ma
& Chen, 2020).
Furthermore, many real-world graphs also have features
associated with each graph, e.g., node feature or edge feature (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Zügner & Günnemann, 2019;
Wang et al., 2019). Existing graph coarsening methods are
not designed to consider features of nodes and rely solely
on structural information e.g., adjacency matrix to simplify
graphs that may not be suitable for downstream tasks that
require node features. Furthermore, these methods also lack
a formal guarantee on the properties of the original graph
and features being preserved in the coarsened graph and
coarsened features. However, there are some recent deep
learning-based graph coarsening technique that considers
feature matrix and Laplacian matrix both designed for a
particular task only, e.g., optimal transport coarsening(Ma
& Chen, 2021) for graph classification, GCOND (Jin et al.,

1. Introduction
Graph-based approaches with big data and machine learning are one of the strongest driving forces of the current
research frontiers, creating new possibilities in various do1
Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, New Delhi,
India 2 Department of Mathematics and Computing, IIT Delhi, New
Delhi, India 3 Bharti School Of Telecommunications Technology
Management, IIT Delhi, New Delhi, India 4 Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence, IIT Delhi, New Delhi, India. Correspondence to:
Manoj Kumar <eez208646@iitd.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

