Prometheus: Taming Sample and Communication Complexities in Constrained
Decentralized Stochastic Bilevel Learning

Zhuqing Liu 1 Xin Zhang 2 Prashant Khanduri 3 Songtao Lu 4 Jia Liu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, decentralized bilevel optimization has
gained signifiant attention thanks to its versatility in modeling a wide range of multi-agent learning problems, such
as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) and multiagent meta learning. However, one unexplored and fundamental problem in this area is how to solve decentralized stochastic bilevel optimization with domain constraints,
while achieving low sample and communication complexities. This problem often arises from, but is not limited
to, safety-constrained(Mansoor et al., 2023; 2021) MARL
for autonomous driving (Bennajeh et al., 2019), sparsityregularized multi-agent meta-learning (Poon & Peyré, 2021),
and rank-constrained matrix completion for recommender
systems (Pochmann & Von Zuben, 2022), etc. As shown
later in this paper, constrained decentralized bilevel optimization is far more challenging than its unconstrained counterpart due to the non-smoothness and complex coupling between domain constraints and the bilevel problem structure.
Also, as its name suggests, a defining feature of constrained
decentralized bilevel optimization is “decentralized,” which
implies that all agents must rely on communications to reach
a consensus on an optimal solution without any coordination from a server. Due to the potentially unreliable network
connections and the limited computation capability at each
agent, such consensus-based approaches call for low sample
and communication complexities. To our knowledge, none
of the existing works in the literature has considered solving
domain-constrained decentralized bilevel optimization with
low sample and communication complexities (e.g., (Gao
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022a; Chen et al.,
2022b;c; Huang et al., 2023) see Section 2 for detailed discussions). This motivates to fill in important gap in the
literature in light of the growing importance of constrained
decentralized bilevel optimization.

In recent years, decentralized bilevel optimization has gained significant attention thanks to
its versatility in modeling a wide range of multiagent learning problems, such as multi-agent reinforcement learning and multi-agent meta-learning.
However, one unexplored and fundamental problem in this area is how to solve decentralized
stochastic bilevel optimization problems with domain constraints, while achieving low sample and
communication complexities. This problem often arises from multi-agent learning problems
with safety constraints. As shown in this paper, constrained decentralized bilevel optimization is far more challenging than its unconstrained
counterpart due to the complex coupling structure, which necessitates new algorithm design
and analysis techniques. Toward this end, we
investigate a class of constrained decentralized
bilevel optimization problems, where multiple
agents collectively solve a nonconvex-stronglyconvex bilevel problem with constraints in the
upper-level variables. We propose an algorithm
called Prometheus (proximal tracked stochastic
recursive estimator) that achieves the first O(−1 )
results in both sample and communication complexities for constrained decentralized bilevel optimization, where  > 0 is a desired stationarity
error. Collectively, the results in this work contribute to a theoretical foundation for low sampleand communication-complexity constrained decentralized bilevel learning.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA 2 Department of Statistics,
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA 4 IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights,
NY, USA. Correspondence to: Jia Liu <liu@ece.osu.edu>.

Specifically, we focus on a class of constrained decentralized multi-task bilevel optimization problems, where we aim
to solve a decentralized nonconvex-strongly-convex bilevel
optimization problem with i) multiple lower-level problems
and ii) consensus and domain constrains on the upper level.
Such problems naturally arise in security-constrained bilevel
model for integrated natural gas and electricity system (Li

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

