Bandit Multi-linear DR-Submodular Maximization and Its Applications on
Adversarial Submodular Bandits
Zongqi Wan 1 2 Jialin Zhang 1 2 Wei Chen 3 Xiaoming Sun 1 2 Zhijie Zhang 4

Abstract

stochastically or adversarially, and the decision maker obtains a reward according to the reward function of this round.
In this paper, we consider the adversarial setting. In the
adversarial submodular bandit literature, the meta-action
technique proposed by Streeter & Golovin (2008) is commonly used to obtain a sublinear regret algorithm. This
technique employs online optimizers for each offline step of
an offline algorithm to mimic it in an online manner. This
technique reaches O(T 2/3 ) (1 − 1/e)-regret with the cardinality constraint (Streeter & Golovin, 2008). Subsequently,
Streeter et al. applied this technique to the assignment constraint (Streeter et al., 2009), which is a special partition
matroid where the feasible set can only select one item from
each partition. They obtained an O(T 4/5 ) (1 − 1/e)-regret
in this situation. A recent work (Niazadeh et al., 2021)
uses a Blackwell algorithm to turn offline greedy algorithms
into online regret minimization algorithms. As an application, they reproduced the O(T 2/3 ) (1 − 1/e)-regret for the
cardinality constraint.

We investigate the online bandit learning of the
monotone multi-linear DR-submodular functions,
designing the algorithm BanditMLSM that attains
O(T 2/3 log T ) of (1 − 1/e)-regret. Then we reduce submodular bandit with partition matroid
constraint and bandit sequential monotone maximization to the online bandit learning of the monotone multi-linear DR-submodular functions, attaining O(T 2/3 log T ) of (1 − 1/e)-regret in both
problems, which improve the existing results. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to give
a sublinear regret algorithm for the submodular
bandit with partition matroid constraint. A special
case of this problem is studied by Streeter et al.
(2009). They prove a O(T 4/5 ) (1 − 1/e)-regret
upper bound. For the bandit sequential submodular maximization, the existing work proves an
O(T 2/3 ) regret with a suboptimal 1/2 approximation ratio (Niazadeh et al., 2021).

In this paper, we present a different approach for the adversarial submodular bandit. We reduce the submodular bandit
into a bandit multi-linear DR-submodular maximization
problem. The DR-submodular function is a kind of nonconvex function with theoretical guarantees in optimization,
which has received much attention in recent years (Bian
et al., 2017a;b; Niazadeh et al., 2020). There are several
works considering the online full information or bandit feedback learning of the DR-submodular function (Chen et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Raut et al., 2020; Thang & Srivastav, 2021; Zhang et al., 2022a;b). DR-submodularity
is inspired by the submodular set function, and we find it
useful for designing submodular bandit algorithms due to its
continuity. Specifically, we propose the function class called
the multi-linear DR-submodular function. A multi-linear
DR-submodular function is a DR-submodular function, and
we additionally require it to be a multi-variable polynomial
with the degree of each variable not exceeding 1. We propose the algorithm BanditMLSM for the bandit maximization of this function class and reach the (1 − 1/e)-regret of
e 2/3 ), which is far better than the O(T 5/6 ) (1 − 1/e)O(T
regret bound achieved on the general bandit DR-submodular
maximization problem (Niazadeh et al., 2021). Multi-linear
DR-submodular function captures the property of the multi-

1. Introduction
Research on multi-armed bandit problems has developed
rapidly in the last two decades. After the classical finite-arm
bandit and linear bandit were well-studied in both stochastic
and adversarial settings, people were starting to consider
more general bandit problems. Submodular bandit is such
an object being considered due to its ability to characterize the diminishing property of reward function in realistic
applications.
In submodular bandit, an optimizer/decision-maker needs
to select a feasible subset each round, then a monotone
submodular reward function of this round is determined
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Microsoft
Research 4 Center for Applied Mathematics of Fujian Province,
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Fuzhou University. Correspondence to: Zhijie Zhang <zzhang@fzu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

