Robust Subtask Learning for Compositional Generalization

Kishor Jothimurugan 1 Steve Hsu 1 Osbert Bastani 1 Rajeev Alur 1

Abstract

et al., 2021). For example, if a driving robot learns how to
make left and right turns and to drive in a straight line, it can
then drive along any route composed of these primitives.

Compositional reinforcement learning is a
promising approach for training policies to perform complex long-horizon tasks. Typically, a
high-level task is decomposed into a sequence of
subtasks and a separate policy is trained to perform each subtask. In this paper, we focus on
the problem of training subtask policies in a way
that they can be used to perform any task; here, a
task is given by a sequence of subtasks. We aim
to maximize the worst-case performance over
all tasks as opposed to the average-case performance. We formulate the problem as a two agent
zero-sum game in which the adversary picks the
sequence of subtasks. We propose two RL algorithms to solve this game: one is an adaptation of existing multi-agent RL algorithms to our
setting and the other is an asynchronous version
which enables parallel training of subtask policies. We evaluate our approach on two multi-task
environments with continuous states and actions
and demonstrate that our algorithms outperform
state-of-the-art baselines.

A key challenge facing compositional reinforcement learning is the generalizability of the learned options. In particular, options trained under one distribution of tasks may no
longer work well if used in a new task, since the distribution of initial states from which the options are used may
shift. An alternate approach is to train the options separately to perform specific subtasks, but options trained this
way might cause the system to reach states from which future subtasks are hard to perform. One can overcome this
issue by handcrafting rewards to encourage avoiding such
states (Ivanov et al., 2021), in which case they generalize
well, but this approach relies heavily on human time and
expertise.
We propose a novel framework that addresses these challenges by formulating the option learning problem as an adversarial reinforcement learning problem. At a high level,
the adversary chooses the task that minimizes the reward
achieved by composing the available options. Thus, the
goal is to learn a set of robust options that perform well
across all potential tasks. Then, we provide two algorithms
for solving this problem. The first adapts existing ideas
for using reinforcement learning to solve Markov games
to our setting. Then, the second shows how to leverage
the compositional structure of our problem to learn options
in parallel at each step of a value iteration procedure; in
some cases, by enabling such parallelism, we can reduce
the computational cost of learning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has proven to be a promising
strategy for solving complex control tasks such as walking (Fujimoto et al., 2018), autonomous driving (Ivanov
et al., 2021), and dexterous manipulation (Akkaya et al.,
2019). However, a key challenge facing the deployment of
reinforcement learning in real-world tasks is its high sample complexity—solving any new task requires training a
new policy designed to solve that task. One promising solution is compositional reinforcement learning, where individual options (or skills) are first trained to solve simple tasks; then, these options can be composed together to
solve more complex tasks (Lee et al., 2018; 2021; Ivanov

We validate our approach on two benchmarks: (i) a rooms
environment where a point mass robot must navigate any
given sequence of rooms, and (ii) a simulated version of
the F1/10th car, where a small racing car must navigate any
given racetrack that is composed of several different predefined track segments. In both environments, our empirical
results demonstrate that robust options are critical for performing well on a wide variety of tasks.
In summary, our contributions are: (i) a game theoretic formulation of the compositional reinforcement learning problem, (ii) an algorithm for solving this problem in the finitestate setting with guaranteed convergence in the limit, (iii)
two learning algorithms for continuous-state systems, and

1
University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Kishor Jothimurugan <kishor@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

