Multi-Epoch Matrix Factorization
Mechanisms for Private Machine Learning

Christopher A. Choquette-Choo 1 H. Brendan McMahan 1 Keith Rush 1 Abhradeep Thakurta 1

Abstract

the manner in which data is processed that often do not
hold under the processing performed by centralized ML
pipelines, and are particularly challenging in cross-device
federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2021).

We introduce new differentially private (DP)
mechanisms for gradient-based machine learning (ML) with multiple passes (epochs) over a
dataset, substantially improving the achievable
privacy-utility-computation tradeoffs. We formalize the problem of DP mechanisms for adaptive streams with multiple participations and introduce a non-trivial extension of online matrix factorization DP mechanisms to our setting.
This includes establishing the necessary theory
for sensitivity calculations and efficient computation of optimal matrices. For some applications
like >10, 000 SGD steps, applying these optimal
techniques becomes computationally expensive.
We thus design an efficient Fourier-transformbased mechanism with only a minor utility loss.
Extensive empirical evaluation on both examplelevel DP for image classification and user-level
DP for language modeling demonstrate substantial improvements over all previous methods, including the widely-used DP-SGD. Though our
primary application is to ML, our main DP results are applicable to arbitrary linear queries and
hence may have much broader applicability.

Kairouz et al. (2021) recently proposed the DP-FTRL
framework that avoids reliance on amplification by
sampling, instead leveraging DP streaming of prefix
sums (Dwork et al., 2010; Chan et al., 2011; Honaker,
2015). DP-FTRL can match (or outperform) DP-SGD in
privacy-utility tradeoffs. This algorithm enabled McMahan
& Thakurta (2022) to train the first known provably DP ML
model on user data in a production setting.
Several works have since focused on this primitive as
an instantiation of the streaming matrix mechanism (see
Eq. (1)) (Henzinger et al., 2022; Fichtenberger et al., 2022;
Denisov et al., 2022); in particular, Denisov et al. (2022)
showed that leveraging the flexibility inherent in this formulation to design optimal matrices led to significant empirical improvements, though their work was restricted to
the single-epoch setting.
Our Contributions This single-epoch restriction is unnatural from the perspective of modern ML, where many
passes over the training data are common. We extend matrix factorization mechanisms for ML to the multi-epoch
setting by tackling several intertwined problems. This enables state-of-the-art mechanisms for DP-ML, with potentially broader applicability to, e.g., online PCA, marginal
estimation, and top-k selection, as discussed in Denisov
et al. (2022).

1. Introduction
Differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DPSGD) is the de facto standard algorithm for DP machine
learning (ML) (Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014;
Abadi et al., 2016a). However, obtaining state-of-theart privacy-utility tradeoffs critically requires use of privacy amplification techniques like shuffling (Erlingsson
et al., 2019; Feldman et al., 2022) or (Poisson) subsampling (Bassily et al., 2014; Zhu & Wang, 2019; Wang
et al., 2019). These in turn require strong assumptions on
1
Google
Research.
Correspondence
<{cchoquette,krush,mcmahan,athakurta}@google.com>.

1) We provide a framework for computing the sensitivity
of matrix mechanisms under general participation schemas
with vector contributions: these are essential to ML applications where we wish to privatize high-dimensional models. However, the efficient computation of optimal matrix factorizations only allows for sensitivity constraints
on scalar contributions. In the single participation case a
trivial argument equates sensitivity under scalar and vector
contributions and the computation of sensitivity is O(n)
by inspection. The situation becomes dramatically more
complex under multiple participations. To our surprise,
computing even scalar sensitivity can be NP-hard, and the

to:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

