Bit Allocation using Optimization

Tongda Xu * 1 Han Gao * 2 3 Chenjian Gao 2 4 Yuanyuan Wang 2 Dailan He 2 Jinyong Pi 2 Jixiang Luo 2
Ziyu Zhu 5 Mao Ye 3 Hongwei Qin 2 6 Yan Wang 1 Jingjing Liu 1 7 Ya-Qin Zhang 1 5 7

Abstract

proaches (Hu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a) have achieved
comparable performance with advanced traditional video
coding standards such as H.266 (Bross et al., 2021). The
majority of works in NVC focus on improving motion representation (Lu et al., 2019; 2020b; Agustsson et al., 2020)
and better temporal context (Djelouah et al., 2019; Lin et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2020a; Yılmaz & Tekalp, 2021; Li et al.,
2021). However, the bit allocation of NVC is relatively
under-explored (Li et al., 2022b).

In this paper, we consider the problem of bit
allocation in Neural Video Compression (NVC).
First, we reveal a fundamental relationship between bit allocation in NVC and Semi-Amortized
Variational Inference (SAVI). Specifically, we
show that SAVI with GoP (Group-of-Picture)level likelihood is equivalent to pixel-level bit
allocation with precise rate & quality dependency
model. Based on this equivalence, we establish
a new paradigm of bit allocation using SAVI.
Different from previous bit allocation methods,
our approach requires no empirical model and
is thus optimal. Moreover, as the original SAVI
using gradient ascent only applies to single-level
latent, we extend the SAVI to multi-level such as
NVC by recursively applying back-propagating
through gradient ascent. Finally, we propose a
tractable approximation for practical implementation. Our method can be applied to scenarios
where performance outweights encoding speed,
and serves as an empirical bound on the R-D performance of bit allocation. Experimental results
show that current state-of-the-art bit allocation
algorithms still have a room of ≈ 0.5 dB PSNR
to improve compared with ours. Code is available at https://github.com/tongdaxu/
Bit-Allocation-Using-Optimization.

The target of video codec is to minimize R-D (RateDistortion) cost R + λD, where R is bitrate, D is distortion
and λ is the Lagrangian multiplier controlling R-D trade-off.
Due to the frame reference structure of video coding, using
the same λ for all frames/regions is suboptimal. Bit allocation is the task of solving λ for different frames/regions.
For traditional codecs, the accurate bit allocation has been
considered intractable. And people solve λ approximately
via empirical rate & quality dependency model (Li et al.,
2014; 2016) (See details in Sec. 2.2)).
The pioneer of bit allocation for NVC (Rippel et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2022b) adopts the empirical rate dependency from Li
et al. (2014) and proposes a quality dependency model based
on the frame reference relationship. More recently, Li et al.
(2022a) propose a feed-forward bit allocation approach with
empirical dependency modeled implicitly by neural network.
However, the performance of those approaches heavily depends on the accuracy of empirical model. On the other
hand, we show that an earlier work, Online Encoder Update
(OEU) (Lu et al., 2020a), is in fact also a frame-level bit
allocation for NVC (See Appendix. E). Other works adopt
simplistic heuristics such as fixed λ schedule to achieve very
coarse bit allocation (Cetin et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Neural Video Compression (NVC) has been an active research area. Recently, state-of-the-art (SOTA) NVC ap-

In this paper, we first examine the relationship of bit allocation in NVC and Semi-Amortized Variational Inference
(SAVI) (Kim et al., 2018; Marino et al., 2018). We prove that
SAVI using GoP-level likelihood is equivalent to pixel-level
bit allocation using precise rate & quality dependency model.
Based on this relationship, we propose a new paradigm of
bit allocation using SAVI. Different from previous bit allocation methods, this approach achieves pixel-level control and
requires no empirical model. And thus, it is optimal assum-

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR),
Tsinghua University 2 SenseTime Research 3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 4 Beihang University
5
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University 6 Tsinghua University 7 School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Yan Wang
<wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

