Short-lived High-volume Bandits

Su Jia * 1 Nishant Oli * 2 Ian Anderson 2 Paul Duff 2 Andrew A. Li 3 R. Ravi 3

Abstract

such as standard A/B/n testing, are sufficient for finding the
most appealing content for the users; see, e.g., (Kohavi &
Longbotham, 2017).

We study how to efficiently perform A/B/n testing for a high-volume of short-lived treatments.
We formulate the problem as a multiple-play bandits model. In each round a set of k actions arrive. Each action is available for w rounds and
has an unknown reward rate. In each round, the
learner selects a multiset of n actions and immediately observes the realized rewards. We aim
to minimize the average loss under a random input model where the instance is randomly drawn
from a known prior distribution D. We show
that if k = O(nρ ) for some ρ > 0, our policy
1
1 −1
achieves Õ(n− min{ρ, 2 (1+ w ) } ) average loss on
a sufficiently large class of prior distributions. We
also complement this result by showing that ev1
ery policy suffers Ω(n− min{ρ, 2 } ) average loss on
the same class of distributions. We further validate the effectiveness of our policy through a
large-scale field experiment on Glance, a content
card-serving platform.

Naturally, then, the most challenging settings are where the
contents to be selected are short-lived and have high volume,
which occur in a variety of applications.
(A) Recommender Systems. From online advertising to social networks, platforms are sometimes faced with a massive
amount of short-lived contents to be recommended to users.
For example, more than 210 million Snaps were created on
Snapchat each day in 2020, most of which expired within
just 24 hours (Vuleta, 2021). The brevity of the lifetime can
either be caused by the features of the content (e.g. breaking
news) itself or by the transient nature of user attentions. The
platform needs to decide which contents to appear at the top
of the user news feeds to maximize user engagement.
(B) Website Optimization. In internet marketing, online
platforms perform multi-variate A/B/n testing (e.g., (McFarland, 2012; Yang et al., 2017)) to test different designs
of their user interface. For example, LinkedIn runs over
400 concurrent experiments per day to compare different
website designs, with the goal of encouraging users to establish or refine their personal profiles, or increasing the
subscriptions to LinkedIn Premium (Xu et al., 2015). The
combinatorial nature of the decision space results in a high
volume of items to test. Specifically, the number of possible
designs can be exponential in the number of features (e.g.,
logos, font, background color, etc.).

1. Introduction
Modern platforms leverage randomized experiments to
make informed decisions from a given set of alternatives.
As a particularly challenging scenario, these alternatives
can potentially have at the same time (i) high volume, with
thousands of new items being released each hour, and (ii)
short lifetime, due to the transient nature of the contents.
This challenge arises from, for example, recommending
short-lived content on a video-sharing platform.

However, these items can have a short life. For example,
considering the non-stationarity of the underlying environment (say, due to seasonality or societal events), any estimation is only reliable for a short amount of time. A simple
approach is to partition the time horizon into short segments,
in which the conversion rates of the designs are approximately constant, and then view the same design in different
segments as separate copies.

Orthogonal to lifetime, the problem is similarly well understood when there is a low volume of contents relative
to the number of users - dedicated exploration methods,

Adding to this challenge is personalization. A common and
naive approach is to cluster the users and solve the problem
for each cluster separately. However, when restricting to a
cluster, the number of users becomes much smaller while
the number of actions remains the same. In other words,
personalization would substantially limit the resources available for experimentation, rendering the problem harder.

*

First and second authors. All other authors are alphabetically
ordered. 1 Center of Data Science for Enterprise and Society (CDSES), Cornell University, Ithaca, USA 2 Glance, Bangalore, India
3
Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Su Jia <sj693@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

