SparseProp: Efficient Sparse Backpropagation
for Faster Training of Neural Networks at the Edge

Mahdi Nikdan * 1 Tommaso Pegolotti * 2 Eugenia Iofinova 1 Eldar Kurtic 1 Dan Alistarh 1 3

Abstract

2022), by which models sparsified on a large pretraining
corpus are then used for transfer learning on different tasks,
while preserving the sparsity mask.

We provide an efficient implementation of the
backpropagation algorithm, specialized to the
case where the weights of the neural network being trained are sparse. Our algorithm is general,
as it applies to arbitrary (unstructured) sparsity
and common layer types (e.g., convolutional or
linear). We provide a fast vectorized implementation on commodity CPUs, and show that it can
yield speedups in end-to-end runtime experiments,
both in transfer learning using already-sparsified
networks, and in training sparse networks from
scratch. Thus, our results provide the first support
for sparse training on commodity hardware.

Despite this progress on the optimization side, the vast majority of these approaches lack system support for fast training, in that they do not provide any practical speedups. This
is because the weight sparsity introduced is unstructured,
which is notoriously hard to leverage for computational
gains. Specifically, there is no general implementation of
backpropagation that can leverage unstructured weight sparsity for practical speedup on common hardware. At the
same time, approaches leveraging block sparsity (Mishra
et al., 2021; Gray et al., 2017) can only reach lower sparsity
without significant accuracy drops, and require specialized
training algorithms (Lagunas et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2022).
As such, unstructured weight sparsity is often dismissed as
a practical way of accelerating model training.

1. Introduction
The significant computational costs of deep learning have
led to massive interest in approaches for leveraging sparsity
in neural networks, which have been investigated in great
breadth and depth (Hoefler et al., 2021). On the inference
side, there is already emerging algorithmic and system support for sparsity on both GPUs (Mishra et al., 2021; Gale
et al., 2020a) and CPUs (Elsen et al., 2020; NeuralMagic,
2022), as well as a wide range of methods for obtaining
models which are both highly-sparse and highly-accurate.

Contribution. We contradict this conventional wisdom by
presenting a new vectorized implementation of backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1986), designed to be efficient
in the case where the weights of the neural network are
sparse, i.e. contain a significant fraction of zero values, and
show its potential for practical speedups in common edge
training scenarios, for both vision and language tasks. Our
algorithm, called SparseProp, is general in the sense that
1) it applies to arbitrary sparsity patterns, 2) general layer
types, and 3) can be efficiently vectorized using standard
CPU-supported approaches. The asymptotic complexity of
the algorithm is linear in the layer density, i.e. the number
of non-zero weights in the layer, providing proportional
runtime improvements to the weight sparsity, for both linear
and convolutional layers.

A new frontier in the area is accurate and efficient sparse
training. On the algorithmic side, there are several interesting proposals for sparse training algorithms (Dettmers &
Zettlemoyer, 2019; Kusupati et al., 2020; Evci et al., 2020;
Jayakumar et al., 2020; Schwarz et al., 2021), i.e. variants
of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) which aim to keep as
many weights as possible sparse during training. Another
interesting related approach is sparse transfer (Zafrir et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2021; Iofinova et al., 2022; Kurtic et al.,

To illustrate practical efficiency, we provide a fast vectorized
implementation of SparseProp aimed at general-purpose
Intel and AMD CPU architectures. Specifically, our implementation provides drop-in replacement implementations
for standard layer types, and only relies on widely-supported
AVX2 instructions. We show that SparseProp can lead to
practical runtime improvements both on single sparse layers,
validating our linear sparsity scaling claims, as well as on
end-to-end training of sparse models.

*
1
Equal contribution
IST Austria 2 ETH Zurich
Neural Magic, Inc..
Correspondence to:
Mahdi
Nikdan
<mahdi.nikdan@ist.ac.at>,
Tommaso
Pegolotti <tommaso.pegolotti@inf.ethz.ch>, Dan Alistarh
<dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We provide results for an integration with Pytorch (Paszke
1

