Sequential Monte Carlo Learning for Time Series Structure Discovery

Feras A. Saad 1 2 Brian J. Patton 2 Matthew D. Hoffmann 2 Rif A. Saurous 2 Vikash K. Mansinghka 3 2

Abstract
This paper presents a new approach to automatically discovering accurate models of complex
time series data. Working within a Bayesian nonparametric prior over a symbolic space of Gaussian process time series models, we present a
novel structure learning algorithm that integrates
sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) and involutive
MCMC for highly effective posterior inference.
Our method can be used both in “online” settings,
where new data is incorporated sequentially in
time, and in “offline” settings, by using nested
subsets of historical data to anneal the posterior.
Empirical measurements on real-world time series
show that our method can deliver 10x–100x runtime speedups over previous MCMC and greedysearch structure learning algorithms targeting the
same model family. We use our method to perform the first large-scale evaluation of Gaussian
process time series structure learning on a prominent benchmark of 1,428 econometric datasets.
The results show that our method discovers sensible models that deliver more accurate point forecasts and interval forecasts over multiple horizons
as compared to widely used statistical and neural
baselines that struggle on this challenging data.

(a) 1 observation

(b) 25 observations

(c) 50 observations

(d) 80 observations

Figure 1. Real-time discovery of time series structure. Red dots
show observed data so far, solid lines show mean forecasts from a
weighted ensemble of learned symbolic model structures, where
the thickness of a line is proportional to its corresponding model
weight; blue regions show 95% prediction intervals. (a) Broad
uncertainty. (b) Dominant linear trend. (c) Multimodal posterior, including linear trend with additive or with multiplicative
seasonality. (d) Linear trend with multiplicative seasonality.

series models may have trouble deciding what types of
patterns to include when working with a given dataset. Motivated by these challenges, this work addresses the problem
of automatically discovering models of time series data that
exhibit a wide range of patterns which are a-priori unknown.
Given observations {(ti , yi )}ni=1 of time points ti and time
series values yi , we focus on learning an unknown real
function f and i.i.d. noise process ϵ such that y(t) = f (t) +
ϵ(t), t ∈ R. These so-called “pure time series models”,
which are univariate in nature and do not include exogenous
variables, are used in many disciplines. In econometrics,
for example, the function f is intended to capture essential
empirical features of the observed data that are believed to
arise from an unknown macroeconomic structural model
whose exogenous variables are too complex or impossible
to accurately specify (Brooks, 2008, Chapter 5).

1. Introduction
Many applications depend on models that can explain and
predict time series data. A key challenge in time series
modeling is the substantial expertise needed to design statistical models that capture complex temporal patterns such
as changepoints, heteroskedastic noise, additive and multiplicative seasonal effects, and higher-order autocorrelations (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2021, Chapters 12–13).
Even experts who know how to construct sophisticated time

Figure 1 shows an example data stream and the evolution
of various hypotheses about the unknown function f that
our method explores as it encounters new observations. The
plots illustrate some central features of our approach, which
include: (i) adapting both the structure and parameters of
f according to patterns in the data observed so far; and
(ii) maintaining not one hypothesis about f but a weighted
collection of hypotheses that together capture uncertainty
over the unknown time series structure and parameters.

1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research 3 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Feras Saad
<fsaad@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

