GNN&GBDT-Guided Fast Optimizing Framework
for Large-scale Integer Programming

Huigen Ye 1 2 Hua Xu 1 2 Hongyan Wang 1 2 Chengming Wang 3 Yu Jiang 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Integer programs (IPs) are an essential type of problem that
can model a large number of combinatorial optimization
problems such as routing(Shaw, 1998), network designing(Du & Pardalos, 1998), and bin packing(man Jr et al.,
1996). However, solving real-world large-scale IPs is challenging because of their NP complexity (Paulus et al., 2020)
and high dimensionality (Martin, 2012). Therefore, how to
obtain a better feasible solution within the limited computing time has become a research hotspot in this field (Song
et al., 2020a; Ye et al., 2022).

The latest two-stage optimization framework
based on graph neural network (GNN) and large
neighborhood search (LNS) is the most popular framework in solving large-scale integer programs (IPs). However, the framework can not
effectively use the embedding spatial information in GNN and still highly relies on large-scale
solvers in LNS, resulting in the scale of IP being limited by the ability of the current solver
and performance bottlenecks. To handle these issues, this paper presents a GNN&GBDT-guided
fast optimizing framework for large-scale IPs that
only uses a small-scale optimizer to solve largescale IPs efficiently. Specifically, the proposed
framework can be divided into three stages: Multitask GNN Embedding to generate the embedding
space, GBDT Prediction to effectively use the embedding spatial information, and Neighborhood
Optimization to solve large-scale problems fast
using the small-scale optimizer. Extensive experiments show that the proposed framework can
solve IPs with millions of scales and surpass SCIP
and Gurobi in the specified wall-clock time using
only a small-scale optimizer with 30% of the problem size. It also shows that the proposed framework can save 99% of running time in achieving
the same solution quality as SCIP, which verifies
the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed
framework in solving large-scale IPs.

To solve IPs within a limited computing time, scholars have
proposed many efficient methods in the past few decades.
Currently, widely used techniques can be divided into two
categories (Zhang et al., 2023): the exact algorithm based
on branch and bound and the approximate algorithm based
on heuristics.
The representative work of the exact algorithm based on
branch and bound was first proposed by Land in 1960 (Land
& Doig, 1960) as a classic tree search method. By dividing
and conquering, it divides the search space by branching
and cleverly uses the problem’s relaxed boundary to delete
hopeless areas from the tree, which can effectively reduce
the search space and solve the problem of excessive combination space. However, solving an integer program (IP)
may require millions of branching decisions, and one wrong
decision may cause a doubled tree size. To improve the
accuracy of branching, Bénichou first proposed pseudo-cost
branching (Bénichou et al., 1971), which is efficient but
unreliable in the early stage of tree search. Applegate then
suggested strong branching (Applegate et al., 1995), which
is more reliable but time-consuming. In order to combine
the above methods’ advantages, Achterberg proposed hybrid branching (Achterberg & Berthold, 2009), flexible use
of pseudo-cost branching and strong branching in different branching stages, and has become the most commonly
used branching method for solvers. However, the above
artificially designed branching methods often manifest deficiencies in the face of increasingly complex optimization
problems with large data. Using machine learning technology to ”learn to branch” is an attractive improvement
direction, including variable selection (Nair et al., 2020),

1

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 2 Beijing National Research Center
for Information Science and Technology(BNRist), Beijing 100084,
China 3 Meituan Inc., Block F&G, Wangjing International R&D
Park, No.6 Wang Jing East Rd, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100102,
China. Correspondence to: Hua Xu <xuhua@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

