Composer: Creative and Controllable Image Synthesis with
Composable Conditions

Lianghua Huang 1 Di Chen 1 Yu Liu 1 Yujun Shen 2 Deli Zhao 1 Jingren Zhou 1

Abstract

produce photorealistic and diverse images (Ramesh et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2023). To further achieve
customized generation, many recent works extend the textto-image models by introducing conditions such as segmentation maps (Rombach et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022b;
Couairon et al., 2022), scene graphs (Yang et al., 2022),
sketches (Voynov et al., 2022), depthmaps (stability.ai,
2022), and inpainting masks (Xie et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022a), or by finetuning the pretrained models on a few
subject-specific data (Gal et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2022;
Ruiz et al., 2022). Nevertheless, these models still provide
only a limited degree of controllability for designers when
it comes to using them for practical applications. For
example, generative models often struggle to accurately
produce images with specifications for semantics, shape,
style, and color all at once, which is common in real-world
design projects.

Recent large-scale generative models learned on
big data are capable of synthesizing incredible
images yet suffer from limited controllability.
This work offers a new generation paradigm
that allows flexible control of the output image, such as spatial layout and palette, while
maintaining the synthesis quality and model
creativity. With compositionality as the core idea,
we first decompose an image into representative
factors, and then train a diffusion model with
all these factors as the conditions to recompose
the input. At the inference stage, the rich
intermediate representations work as composable
elements, leading to a huge design space (i.e.,
exponentially proportional to the number of
decomposed factors) for customizable content
creation. It is noteworthy that our approach,
which we call Composer, supports various levels
of conditions, such as text description as the
global information, depth map and sketch as
the local guidance, color histogram for low-level
details, etc. Besides improving controllability,
we confirm that Composer serves as a general
framework and facilitates a wide range of classical
generative tasks without retraining. Code and
models will be made available.

We argue that the key to controllable image generation
relies not only on conditioning, but even more significantly
on compositionality (Lake et al., 2017). The latter can
exponentially expand the control space by introducing an
enormous number of potential combinations (e.g., a hundred
images with eight representations each yield about 1008
combinations). Similar concepts are explored in the fields
of language and scene understanding (Keysers et al., 2019;
Johnson et al., 2016), where the compositionality is termed
compositional generalization, the skill of recognizing or
generating a potentially infinite number of novel combinations from a limited number of known components.

1. Introduction
“The infinite use of finite means.”

In this work, we build upon the above idea and present
Composer, a realization of compositional generative models.
By compositional generative models, we refer to generative
models that are capable of seamlessly recombining visual
components to produce new images (Figure 1). Specifically,
we implement Composer as a multi-conditional diffusion
model with a UNet backbone (Nichol et al., 2021). At every
training iteration of Composer, there are two phases: in the
decomposition phase, we break down images in a batch into
individual representations using computer vision algorithms
or pretrained models; whereas in the composition phase, we
optimize Composer so that it can reconstruct these images

– Noam Chomsky (Chomsky, 1965)
Generative image models conditioned on text can now
1

Alibaba Group 2 Ant Group. Correspondence to: Lianghua
Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu <xuangen.hlh, guangpan.cd,
ly103369@alibaba-inc.com>, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao
<shenyujun0302, zhaodeli@gmail.com>, Jingren Zhou
<jingren.zhou@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

