Robust Camera Pose Refinement for Multi-Resolution Hash Encoding
Hwan Heo 1 Taekyung Kim 2 Jiyoung Lee 2 Jaewon Lee 1 Soohyun Kim 1 Hyunwoo J. Kim 1 Jin-Hwa Kim 2 3

Abstract
Multi-resolution hash encoding has recently been
proposed to reduce the computational cost of neural renderings, such as NeRF. This method requires accurate camera poses for the neural renderings of given scenes. However, contrary to previous methods jointly optimizing camera poses
and 3D scenes, the naı̈ve gradient-based camera
pose refinement method using multi-resolution
hash encoding severely deteriorates performance.
We propose a joint optimization algorithm to calibrate the camera pose and learn a geometric representation using efficient multi-resolution hash
encoding. Showing that the oscillating gradient
flows of hash encoding interfere with the registration of camera poses, our method addresses
the issue by utilizing smooth interpolation weighting to stabilize the gradient oscillation for the
ray samplings across hash grids. Moreover, the
curriculum training procedure helps to learn the
level-wise hash encoding, further increasing the
pose refinement. Experiments on the novel-view
synthesis datasets validate that our learning frameworks achieve state-of-the-art performance and
rapid convergence of neural rendering.

Figure 1. Gradient smoothing (a) → (b) to attenuate the gradient
fluctuation (jiggled red arrow) of the hash encoding h. Notice
that we omitted the overlapped region in (b) being transparent.
For the camera pose refinement, the error back-propagation passes
through the d-linear interpolation weight w; however, its derivative
is determined by the sign of relative position of the input coordinate
x to the corners of the hash grid. The gradient fluctuation from
this makes it difficult to converge. Please refer to Sec. 3 for the
implementation details and the definitions of other symbols.

computational burden of training and evaluation heavier.

1. Introduction

Aware of this problem, related works have circumvented the
shortcomings by introducing grid-based approaches (Liu
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021a; Hedman et al., 2021; Sun et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2021; Fridovich-Keil et al., 2022; Karnewar
et al., 2022), which store view direction-independent representations in dense grids. While these methods explicitly
encode the whole scene simultaneously, they face a trade-off
between the computational cost of the model size and its
performance. Therefore, delicate training strategies such
as pruning or distillation are often required to preserve the
view-synthesis quality and reduce the model size. Recently,
Instant-NGP (Müller et al., 2022) addressed these problems
by proposing multi-resolution hash encoding for positional
encoding, which combines a multi-resolution decomposition with a lightweight hash grid. The multi-resolution
hash encoding achieved state-of-the-art performance and
the fastest convergence speed of NeRF.

A great surge in neural rendering has emerged in the last few
years. Specifically, the Neural Radiance Fields (Mildenhall
et al., 2020) (NeRF) has shown remarkable performances in
the novel view synthesis. NeRF leverages a fully connected
network to implicitly encode a 3D scene as a continuous signal and renders novel views through a differentiable volume
rendering. However, when the rendering of NeRF performs,
a large number of inferences are inevitable, making the
1

Department of Computer Science, Korea University, Republic
of Korea 2 NAVER AI Lab, Republic of Korea 3 AI Institute of
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Jin-Hwa Kim & Hyunwoo J. Kim <j1nhwa.kim@navercorp.com;
hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

