On the Convergence Rate of Gaussianization with Random Rotations

Felix Draxler 1 Lars Kühmichel 1 Armand Rousselot 1 Jens Müller 1 Christoph Schnörr 1 Ullrich Köthe 1

Abstract

ity, training speed, sample complexity) to achieve a specified performance are made. Also, existing results often limit
themselves to relatively weak measures of convergence.

Gaussianization (Chen & Gopinath, 2000) is a
simple generative model that can be trained without backpropagation. It has shown compelling
performance on low dimensional data. As the dimension increases, however, it has been observed
that the convergence speed slows down. We show
analytically that the number of required layers
scales linearly with the dimension for Gaussian input. We argue that this is because the model is unable to capture dependencies between dimensions.
Empirically, we find the same linear increase in
cost for arbitrary input p(x), but observe favorable scaling for some distributions. We explore
potential speed-ups and formulate challenges for
further research.

In this work, we consider a variant of normalizing flows
called Gaussianization (Chen & Gopinath, 2000) and its
variants rotation-based iterative Gaussianization (RBIG)
(Laparra et al., 2011), sliced iterative normalizing flows
(SINF) (Dai & Seljak, 2021) and Gaussianization Flow (GF)
(Meng et al., 2020). For the first time, we provide an explicit
convergence rate for Gaussianization.
In particular, we contribute:
• We analytically derive that the number of Gaussianization layers required to achieve the same improvement
in loss grows linearly with the dimensionality of the
problem for Gaussian input and random rotations (see
Figure 1 and Section 4.1).

1. Introduction

• We demonstrate limits of determining better-thanrandom rotations from finite training data (see Section 4.2).

Generative modeling is one of the most active areas of research in Machine Learning. A plethora of different architectures based on neural networks have been proposed, including: generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al.,
2020), variational auto-encoders (Kingma et al., 2019), normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), and most
recently denoising diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020).

• We argue that this is due to the model being unable
to capture dependencies between dimensions, which
dominates in high dimensions (see Section 4.3).
• We empirically determine the scaling behavior for real
world datasets, where we find a similar linear increase
in complexity with dimension, and favorable scaling
for some distributions (see Section 5.2).1

Diffusion models currently take the lead in efficient training
and high-quality sampling. However, evidence so far is
mostly empirical and subject to change. This calls for a
rigorous comparison of the different approaches.

Broadly speaking, we analyze the scaling behaviour of
Gaussianization with dimension analytically and empirically. This draws a general picture over the convergence
behavior of different invertible layers, see Section 6.

For all models, universal approximation theorems guarantee
that all reasonable distributions can be represented by the
different models (e.g. Teshima et al. (2020a;b); Koehler et al.
(2021)). This is a strong statement in the sense that with
enough resources, anything can be represented. However,
these theorems are not useful for model selection, mainly as
no statements about the required resources (model complex-

2. Related Work
There is a large collection of different methods which iteratively transform between distributions via rotations and
single-dimensional transforms. Originally, the idea of iteratively transporting input data to standard normal latent codes

1

Heidelberg University, Germany. Correspondence to: Felix
Draxler <felix.draxler@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Code available at: https://github.com/vislearn/
Gaussianization-Bound

1

