Local Optimization Achieves Global Optimality in Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning

Yulai Zhao 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 3 Jason D. Lee 1

Abstract

Policy optimization methods are widely used in MARL.
These algorithms often parameterize policies with a function
class and compute the gradients of the cumulative reward
using the policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al., 1999) or
its variants (e.g., NPG (Kakade, 2001) and PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017)) to update the policy parameters.

Policy optimization methods with function approximation are widely used in multi-agent reinforcement learning. However, it remains elusive how to design such algorithms with statistical guarantees. Leveraging a multi-agent performance difference lemma that characterizes the
landscape of multi-agent policy optimization, we
find that the localized action value function serves
as an ideal descent direction for each local policy.
Motivated by the observation, we present a multiagent PPO algorithm in which the local policy of
each agent is updated similarly to vanilla PPO. We
prove that with standard regularity conditions on
the Markov game and problem-dependent quantities, our algorithm converges to the globally optimal policy at a sublinear rate. We extend our
algorithm to the off-policy setting and introduce
pessimism to policy evaluation, which aligns with
experiments. To our knowledge, this is the first
provably convergent multi-agent PPO algorithm
in cooperative Markov games.

Despite the empirical successes, theoretical studies of policy optimization in MARL are very limited. Even for the
cooperative setting where the agents share a common goal:
maximizing the total reward function, numerous challenges
arise (Zhang et al., 2021). (1) non-stationarity: each action taken by one agent affects the total reward and the
transition of state. Consequently, each learning agent must
learn to adapt to the changing environment caused by other
agents. From the optimization perspective, the geometry of
the multi-agent policy optimization problem becomes unclear. Direct application of traditional single-agent analysis
becomes vague due to the lack of stationary Markovian property, which states that evolution in the future only depends
on the previous state and individual action. (2) scalability: taking other agents into consideration, each individual
agent would face the joint action space, whose dimension increases exponentially with the number of agents. Thus, having numerous agents in the environment problematizes the
theoretical analysis of MARL. (3) function approximation:
closely related to the scalability issue, the state space and
joint action space are often immense in MARL, promoting
function approximation to become a necessary component
in MARL at the ease of computation and statistical analysis.

1. Introduction
Recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
demonstrated many empirical successes, e.g., popular strategy games such as Go (Silver et al., 2016), StarCraft
II (Vinyals et al., 2019), and poker (Brown & Sandholm,
2018). In contrast to vanilla reinforcement learning (RL),
which is only concerned with a single agent seeking to maximize the total reward, MARL studies how multiple agents
interact with the shared environment and other agents.

In this paper, we aim to answer the following fundamental
question:
Can we design a provably convergent multi-agent policy
optimization algorithm in the cooperative setting with
function approximation?

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA 2 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, Yale University, CT, USA 3 Department of Industrial
Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Jason D. Lee <jasonlee@princeton.edu>.

We answer the above question affirmatively. We propose a
multi-agent PPO algorithm in which the local policy of each
agent is updated sequantially in a similar fashion as vanilla
PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017). In particular, we
leverage a multi-agent performance difference lemma (cf.
Lemma 4.1), assuming the joint policy is decomposed into
conditional dependent policies. Such a lemma characterizes

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

