Evolving Semantic Prototype Improves Generative Zero-Shot Learning

Shiming Chen 1 2 Wenjin Hou 3 Ziming Hong 4 Xiaohan Ding 5 Yibing Song 6
Xinge You 3 Tongliang Liu 2 4 Kun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning recognizes unseen classes by learning
their semantic knowledge, which is transferred from seen
classes. Inspired by GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and
VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2014), the generative zero-shot
learning methods (Arora et al., 2018) synthesize image sample features related to unseen classes based on the predefined class semantic prototypes (also referred to as semantic
embedding in (Yan et al., 2021) and semantic condition
in (Xian et al., 2019b)). The CNN features are typically utilized to synthesize unseen samples in generative ZSL. The
synthesized sample features of unseen classes via generative
ZSL benefit the classifier training process and improve the
ZSL performance.

In zero-shot learning (ZSL), generative methods
synthesize class-related sample features based on
predefined semantic prototypes. They advance the
ZSL performance by synthesizing unseen class
sample features for better training the classifier.
We observe that each class’s predefined semantic
prototype (also referred to as semantic embedding or condition) does not accurately match its
real semantic prototype. So the synthesized visual sample features do not faithfully represent
the real sample features, limiting the classifier
training and existing ZSL performance. In this
paper, we formulate this mismatch phenomenon
as the visual-semantic domain shift problem. We
propose a dynamic semantic prototype evolving
(DSP) method to align the empirically predefined
semantic prototypes and the real prototypes for
class-related feature synthesis. The alignment is
learned by refining sample features and semantic
prototypes in a unified framework and making
the synthesized visual sample features approach
real sample features. After alignment, synthesized sample features from unseen classes are
closer to the real sample features and benefit DSP
to improve existing generative ZSL methods by
8.5%, 8.0%, and 9.7% on the standard CUB, SUN
AWA2 datasets, the significant performance improvement indicates that evolving semantic prototype explores a virgin field in ZSL.

In generative ZSL, the unseen sample features for each class
are synthesized by conditioning the class semantic prototype.
As the class semantic prototype is predefined empirically, it
is not able to accurately represent the real semantic prototype that is not available in practice. Fig. 1(a) shows four
examples. The ‘bill color orange’ attribute in sample 2 does
not accurately reflect the bird’s bill color, which is mostly
dark. Moreover, the attribute ‘leg color black’ in sample 3
does not accurately reflect the bird’s leg, which is occluded
by its body. A similar phenomenon appears in sample 4,
where the attribute ‘bill color orange’ does not effectively
describe the bird’s bill that is mostly occluded as well. As
such, the attributes with their element values defined in the
semantic prototype do not properly represent image samples
due to color variations or partial occlusions. For an unseen
class, its semantic prototype and sample features differ from
the real prototype and real sample features, respectively,
as shown in Fig. 1(b). The feature discrepancy limits the
classifier training and the generative ZSL performance. We
formulate this phenomenon as a Visual-Semantic domain
shift problem. To mitigate domain shift, we start by updating the semantic prototype and finally approaching the
real one. Thus for an unseen class, sample features from
the conditional generator will resemble the real features to
benefit classifier training and improve the generative ZSL
performance.

1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA 2 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi,UAE
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
4
University of Sydney, Sydey, Australia 5 Tencent AI LAB, Shenzhen, China 6 AI3 Institute, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Xinge You <youxg@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose evolving the predefined semantic
prototypes and aligning them with real ones. The align1

