Refined Regret for Adversarial MDPs with Linear Function Approximation

Yan Dai 1 Haipeng Luo 2 Chen-Yu Wei 3 Julian Zimmert 4

Abstract

feedback received from the environment. In this paper, we
focus on adversarial MDPs where the loss functions can
vary with time and the state space can also be arbitrarily
large, capturing the fact that in real-world applications such
as robotics, the environment can be non-stationary and the
number of states can be prohibitively large.

We consider learning in an adversarial Markov
Decision Process (MDP) where the loss functions can change arbitrarily over K episodes and
the state space can be arbitrarily large. We assume that the Q-function of any policy is linear
in some known features, that is, a linear function
approximation exists. The best existing regret
upper bound for this setting (Luo et al., 2021b)
e 2/3 ) (omitting all other depenis of order O(K
dencies), given access to a simulator. This paper
provides
two algorithms that improve the regret to
√
e K) in the same setting. Our first algorithm
O(
makes use of a refined analysis of the Follow-theRegularized-Leader (FTRL) algorithm with the
log-barrier regularizer. This analysis allows the
loss estimators to be arbitrarily negative and might
be of independent interest. Our second algorithm
develops a magnitude-reduced loss estimator, further removing the polynomial dependency on the
number of actions in the first algorithm and leading to the optimal regret bound (up to logarithmic
terms and dependency on the horizon). Moreover,
we also extend the first algorithm to simulatore 8/9 ) refree linear MDPs, which achieves O(K
gret and greatly improves over the best existing
e 14/15 ). This algorithm relies on a
bound O(K
better alternative to the Matrix Geometric Resampling procedure by Neu & Olkhovskaya (2020),
which could again be of independent interest.

To handle large state spaces, one of the most common methods in the literature is to assume a linear-function approximation (Yang & Wang, 2020; Jin et al., 2020b; Wei et al.,
2021; Zanette et al., 2021; Neu & Olkhovskaya, 2021; Luo
et al., 2021b), where the expected loss suffered by any policy from any state-action pair, commonly known as the
Q-function, is linear in a set of known features.
While such assumptions are commonly used in the literature,
the minimax optimal regret attainable by the agent in adversarial environments is still poorly understood. 1 Specifically,
for adversarial linear-Q MDPs, the best existing bound is
of order K 2/3 where K is the number of episodes (Luo
et al., 2021b).2 In that paper, the authors assume a transition simulator (i.e., the agent is allowed to draw a trajectory
starting from any state-action pair, sampled from the actual transition and a given policy, without any cost) and
e 2/3 H 2 K 2/3 ) regret where H is the length of
achieve O(d
each episode and d is the dimension of the feature space.
On the other hand, the best lower bound for this setting
(induced from√the special case of adversarial linear bandits)
is of order Ω( K) (Dani et al., 2008). Therefore, a natural
question arises:
Is it possible to design an
√ algorithm in adversarial linear-Q
e K) regret bound?
MDPs that attains O(
In this work, we answer this question in the affirmative
by
√
developing two algorithms that both attain e
O( K) regret in
adversarial linear-Q MDPs when a simulator is granted, closing the gap with the lower bound. Both of our algorithms
follow the same framework of the policy optimization algo-

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) have been widely used
to model reinforcement learning problems, where an agent
needs to make decisions sequentially and to learn from the

1

1

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 University of Southern California 3 IDSS, MIT 4 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Yan Dai <yan-dai20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Haipeng Luo
<haipengl@usc.edu>, Chen-Yu Wei <chenyuw@mit.edu>, Julian Zimmert <zimmert@google.com>.

To be more specific, we only consider bandit feedback in this
paper, where the agent can only observe√
her experienced losses.
For the easier full-information setting, K-style near-optimal
regret has already been achieved (He et al., 2022) (cf. Table 1).
2
Meanwhile, if a “good”
√ exploratory policy π0 (formalized
in Footnote 4) is granted, K-style bounds are also achievable,
though with some additional dependencies on the quality of π0
(Luo et al., 2021b; Neu & Olkhovskaya, 2021); see Table 1.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

