Test-time Adaptation with Slot-Centric Models

Mihir Prabhudesai 1 Anirudh Goyal 2 Sujoy Paul 3 Sjoerd van Steenkiste 3 Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi 3
Gaurav Aggarwal 3 Thomas Kipf 3 Deepak Pathak 1 Katerina Fragkiadaki 1

Abstract
Current visual detectors, though impressive
within their training distribution, often fail to
parse out-of-distribution scenes into their constituent entities. Recent test-time adaptation methods use auxiliary self-supervised losses to adapt
the network parameters to each test example independently and have shown promising results
towards generalization outside the training distribution for the task of image classification. In
our work, we find evidence that these losses
are insufficient for the task of scene decomposition, without also considering architectural inductive biases. Recent slot-centric generative
models attempt to decompose scenes into entities in a self-supervised manner by reconstructing
pixels. Drawing upon these two lines of work,
we propose Slot-TTA, a semi-supervised slotcentric scene decomposition model that at test
time is adapted per scene through gradient descent on reconstruction or cross-view synthesis
objectives. We evaluate Slot-TTA across multiple input modalities, images or 3D point clouds,
and show substantial out-of-distribution performance improvements against state-of-the-art supervised feed-forward detectors, and alternative
test-time adaptation methods. Project Webpage:
http://slot-tta.github.io/

Input

TTA Step 0

TTA Step 50

TTA Step 150

Figure 1. Test-time adaptation in Slot-TTA: Segmentation improves when optimizing reconstruction or view synthesis objectives via gradient descent at test-time on a single test sample.

Wang et al., 2020) adapt the model parameters at test-time
to help generalization. In recent years, a variety of methods based on TTA have been proposed, focusing on fewshot adaptation (Ren et al., 2018) where the network is
given access to a few labeled examples, or unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) (Zhang, 2021) where the network
is given access to many unlabelled examples from the new
distribution. A popular approach in this setting is pseudolabelling (Wang et al., 2020; Bateson et al., 2022), where
the network uses its confident predictions in some examples
as additional pseudo-labelled training data to improve its accuracy. However, this approach requires multiple confident
examples for adaptation.

1. Introduction
While significant progress has been made in scene perception within the last decade, decomposing scenes into familiar
entities often generalizes poorly outside the training distribution (Geirhos et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2021). To
tackle changes in the data distribution, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) methods (Ghifary et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2020;

We instead, study a specific unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA ) setting where the network is adapted independently
to each unlabelled example in the test set. This setting is
analogous to a human taking more time to parse a difficult
example while not having access to any additional information (Kahneman, 2011). Existing approaches in this setting
typically devise a loss for a self-supervised pre-text task,
such as rotation prediction in TTT (Sun et al., 2020) or
instance discrimination in MT3 (Bartler et al., 2022), and
then optimize this loss per image at test-time (Sun et al.,
2020; Gandelsman et al., 2022; Bartler et al., 2022; Grill

1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mila, DeepMind 3 Google
Research. Correspondence to: Mihir Prabhudesai <mprabhud@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

