Coarse-to-Fine: a Hierarchical Diffusion Model for Molecule Generation in 3D
Bo Qiang * 1 Yuxuan Song * 2 Minkai Xu 3 Jingjing Gong 2 Bowen Gao 2
Hao Zhou 2 Weiying Ma 2 Yanyan Lan 2

Abstract

1. introduction
Deep generative models have specifically shown great
promise in modeling complex graph-like molecular structures, ranging from generating molecular atom-bond
graphs (Li et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018a) to
generating molecular conformations from graphs (Xu et al.,
2022; Jing et al., 2022). Despite the significant progress
achieved, a remaining but vital research direction in this
track is de novo design of drug molecules in 3D space. Integrating the 3D information into the molecule design process
enjoys several advantages over only involving topological
information in many important applications, e.g., structurebased drug design (Zhang et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2022;
Luo et al., 2021), molecular dynamic simulation (Hansson
et al., 2002), 3D similarity searching (Shin et al., 2015).

Generating desirable molecular structures in 3D
is a fundamental problem for drug discovery. Despite the considerable progress we have achieved,
existing methods usually generate molecules in
atom resolution and ignore intrinsic local structures such as rings, which leads to poor quality in
generated structures, especially when generating
large molecules. Fragment-based molecule generation is a promising strategy, however, it is nontrivial to be adapted for 3D non-autoregressive
generations because of the combinational optimization problems. In this paper, we utilize
a coarse-to-fine strategy to tackle this problem,
in which a Hierarchical Diffusion-based model
(i.e. HierDiff) is proposed to preserve the validity of local segments without relying on autoregressive modeling. Specifically, HierDiff
first generates coarse-grained molecule geometries via an equivariant diffusion process, where
each coarse-grained node reflects a fragment in a
molecule. Then the coarse-grained nodes are decoded into fine-grained fragments by a messagepassing process and a newly designed iterative
refined sampling module. Lastly, the fine-grained
fragments are then assembled to derive a complete atomic molecular structure. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HierDiff consistently
improves the quality of molecule generation over
existing methods1 .

Some early studies on 3D molecule generation usually adopt
an autoregressive approach (Gebauer et al., 2019; Luo et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2021), which introduces an artificial order on
the atoms and generates the atoms one by one in a language
generation way. However, molecules have a natural geometric structure in 3D. Besides, these models suffer from
the scale and error accumulation problem (Roney et al.,
2022; Luo & Ji, 2022). To tackle these problems, nonautoregressive models have been introduced in this area
and gain impressive results. For example, inspired by the
successful diffusion model in text and image generation,
Hoogeboom et al. (2022) proposed the first diffusion model
for molecule generation and significantly improves the validity of generated molecules.
Nevertheless, the atom-level generation manner in these
works, though enjoys higher flexibility to place each atom,
lacks the necessary constraints to obtain reliable molecule
structures, especially when generating large molecules. As
shown in Figure 1, without imposing Euclidean geometric constraints on the modeling process, the generated 3D
aromatic rings could seriously violate basic chemical rules.

*
Equal contribution .
Work was done while Bo Qiang
was a research intern at AIR 1 Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Peking University 2 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 3 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Yanyan Lan
<lanyanyan@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
qiangbo1222/HierDiff

Figure 1. Visualization results of 3D conformations generated by
atom-based methods.

1

