Delayed Bandits: When Do Intermediate Observations Help?

Emmanuel Esposito * 1 2 Saeed Masoudian * 3 Hao Qiu 1 Dirk van der Hoeven 4
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi 1 5 Yevgeny Seldin 3

Abstract

and acceptance/rejection decisions for scientific papers are
observed with delay after manuscript submissions. The
impact of delay on the performance of sequential decision
makers, measured by regret, has been extensively studied
under full information and bandit feedback, and in stochastic and adversarial environments. Yet, in many situations
in real life intermediate observations may be available to
the learner. For example, a health check-up might give a
preliminary indication on the effect of a treatment, an advertisement click might be a precursor for an upcoming
purchase, and preliminary reviews might provide some information regarding an upcoming acceptance or rejection
decision. In this work we study when, and how, intermediate observations can be used to reduce the impact of delay
in observing the final outcome of an action in a multi-armed
bandit setting.

We study a K-armed bandit with delayed feedback and intermediate observations. We consider
a model where intermediate observations have a
form of a finite state, which is observed immediately after taking an action, whereas the loss is
observed after an adversarially chosen delay. We
show that the regime of the mapping of states to
losses determines the complexity of the problem,
irrespective of whether the mapping of actions to
states is stochastic or adversarial. If the mapping
of states to losses
p is adversarial, then the regret
rate is of order (K + d)T (within log factors),
where T is the time horizon and d is a fixed delay.
This matches the regret rate of a K-armed bandit
with delayed feedback and without intermediate
observations, implying that intermediate observations are not helpful. However, if the mapping
of states to losses is stochastic,
we show that the
q

K + min{|S|, d} T
regret grows at a rate of
(within log factors), implying that if the number
|S| of states is smaller than the delay, then intermediate observations help. We also provide
refined high-probability regret upper bounds for
non-uniform delays, together with experimental
validation of our algorithms.

Online learning with delayed feedback and intermediate
observations was studied by Mann et al. (2019) in a
full-information setting, and then by Vernade et al. (2020)
in a nonstationary stochastic bandit setting. In the paper
of Vernade et al. (2020), at each time step the learner
chooses an action and immediately observes a signal (also
called state) belonging to a finite set. The actual loss (i.e.,
feedback) incurred by the learner in that time step is only
received with delay, which can be fixed or random. More
formally, the observed state is drawn from a distribution that
only depends on the chosen action, and the incurred loss is
drawn from a distribution that only depends on the observed
state (and not on the chosen action), forming a Markov chain.

1. Introduction

Action no delay

Delay is an ubiquitous phenomenon that many sequential decision makers have to deal with. For example, outcomes of
medical treatments are often observed with delay, purchase
events happen with delay after advertisement impressions,
*

At

State
St = st (At )

delay dt

Loss
ℓt (St )

The work of Vernade et al. (2020) studies a setting, where
st are nonstationary and ℓt are i.i.d. stochastic.

1

Equal contribution Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan,
Italy 2 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 3 University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 4 Korteweg-de Vries Institute
for Mathematics University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands 5 Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Emmanuel Esposito <emmanuel@emmanuelesposito.it>,
Saeed Masoudian <saeed.masoudian@di.ku.dk>.

In this work, we consider two possible regimes for the mappings st from actions to states (stochastic and adversarial)
and two possible regimes for the mappings ℓt from states
to losses (also stochastic and adversarial). Altogether, we
study four different regimes, defined by the combination of
the first and the second mapping type.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We characterize (within logarithmic factors) the minimax re-

1

