Forget Unlearning: Towards True Data-Deletion in Machine Learning

Rishav Chourasia 1 Neil Shah 1

Abstract

Retraining fresh ML models from scratch after deletions is
computationally expensive and does not scale. As an alternative to retraining, there is a growing interest in designing
cheap Machine Unlearning algorithms for erasing the influence of deleted data from already trained models. To quantify how well an unlearning algorithm deletes the requested
information in the worst-case, Ginart et al. (2019) propose
a differential privacy (DP) like (ε, δ)-indistinguishability
certification between the unlearning algorithm’s output and
that of fresh retraining without the deleted records. Several unlearning certifications that follow the same intuition
have since been proposed and used to certify numerous unlearning mechanisms (Izzo et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021;
Neel et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2019; Ullah et al., 2021).

Unlearning algorithms aim to remove deleted
data’s influence from trained models at a cost
lower than full retraining. However, prior guarantees of unlearning in literature are flawed and
don’t protect the privacy of deleted records. We
show that when people delete their data as a function of published models, records in a database
become interdependent. So, even retraining a
fresh model after deletion of a record doesn’t ensure its privacy. Secondly, unlearning algorithms
that cache partial computations to speed up the
processing can leak deleted information over a
series of releases, violating the privacy of deleted
records in the long run. To address these, we propose a sound deletion guarantee and show that
ensuring the privacy of existing records is necessary for the privacy of deleted records. Under
this notion, we propose an optimal, computationally efficient, and sound machine unlearning algorithm based on noisy gradient descent.

However, is indistinguishability from retraining a trustworthy guarantee of deletion privacy? We argue that it is not.
In the real world, a person’s decision to remove their information is often influenced by what a deployed model
reveals about them. Unfortunately, the same revealed information or attempts to censor it may also affect other
people’s decisions. This phenomenon is famously known
as the Streisand effect, named after the American singer
and actress Barbara Streisand’s attempts to censor a picture of her cliff-top Malibu residence, originally taken to
document the coastal erosion under the California Coastal
Records Project. Prior to Streisand’s lawsuit, the picture
was downloaded only six times, two of which were by
Streisand’s attorneys. However, after the case gained public attention, the site received over 420,000 visitors in the
following months (Adelman & Adelman, 2002). This kind
of adaptivity in real-world interactions creates interdependencies among the records in a database—some patterns
in stored records simply wouldn’t exist unless specific information about a target record that influenced others was
previously revealed. Even after removing the requested
records from the training database and retraining a model
from scratch, we demonstrate that an attacker can still identify the deleted records by solely examining the retrained
model, all due to the predictability of adaptive, yet unseen,
past interactions. As such, we argue that any deletion certification based on being indistinguishable from retraining,
as done in all prior unlearning definitions including Gupta
et al. (2021)’s adaptive unlearning certification, is fundamentally flawed.

1. Introduction
Corporations today collect their customers’ private information to train Machine Learning (ML) models that power
a variety of services like recommendations, searches, targeted ads, etc. To prevent any unintended use of personal
data, privacy policies, such as the General Data Protection Regulation and the California Consumer Privacy Act,
require that these corporations provide people the “Right
to be Forgotten” (RTBF)—if a person wants to revoke access to their data, an organization must comply by erasing
all information about them without undue delay (usually
a month). This includes ML models trained in standard
ways as privacy attacks like membership inference (Shokri
et al., 2017) and model inversion (Fredrikson et al., 2015)
demonstrate that training data can be exfiltrated from them.
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Rishav Chourasia
<rishav1@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

