Shape-Guided Dual-Memory Learning for 3D Anomaly Detection

Yu-Min Chu * 1 Chieh Liu * 1 Ting-I Hsieh 1 Hwann-Tzong Chen 1 2 Tyng-Luh Liu 3
Anomaly
Sample

Abstract
We present a shape-guided expert-learning framework to tackle the problem of unsupervised 3D
anomaly detection. Our method is established on
the effectiveness of two specialized expert models
and their synergy to localize anomalous regions
from color and shape modalities. The first expert
utilizes geometric information to probe 3D structural anomalies by modeling the implicit distance
fields around local shapes. The second expert considers the 2D RGB features associated with the
first expert to identify color appearance irregularities on the local shapes. We use the two experts to
build the dual memory banks from the anomalyfree training samples and perform shape-guided
inference to pinpoint the defects in the testing samples. Owing to the per-point 3D representation
and the effective fusion scheme of complementary modalities, our method efficiently achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the MVTec 3DAD dataset with better recall and lower false positive rates, as preferred in real applications.

Ground
Truth

RGB
Score Map

SDF
Score Map

Final
Score Map

Figure 1. Results of our method on the MVTec 3D-AD dataset.
Defects that are only perceptible in one but not the other modality
can be successfully localized by our method.

learning to combine the color and geometric information
for higher anomaly localization accuracy with lower computation and memory costs. Figure 1 illustrates the complementary advantage of our method for precisely localizing
the defects from different modalities.
The performance of anomaly detection is often evaluated
by the per-region overlap (PRO) (Bergmann et al., 2021)
and the corresponding false positive rate for consecutively
increasing anomaly thresholds. The most common setting is
to report the area under the PRO curve (AU-PRO) integrated
up to a false positive rate of 30% (i.e., integration limit at
0.3). However, in real applications, a false positive rate
of 30% might be too large and thus imprecise to pinpoint
the defect. To address this issue, we design our method to
pursue higher AU-PRO at very small integration limits. Our
method uses neural implicit functions (NIFs) to represent
local shapes by signed distance fields, as done by current
methods on 3D reconstruction (Jiang et al., 2020; Takikawa
et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021; 2022; Li et al., 2022). Partitioning a point-cloud sample into NIF-represented local
patches allows us to model 3D objects of complex shapes
under orientation changes. The local signed distance fields
also enable fine-grained per-point anomaly prediction. As
a result, our method achieves the state-of-the-art AU-PRO
on the MVTec 3D-AD benchmark, even at very small integration limits, which is considered rather challenging for
previous 2D and 3D anomaly detection methods.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization have many
applications in manufacturing and health care. Previous
methods mainly use color information to identify defects
and abnormal regions in the input images. While the color
information is generally sufficient for localizing anomalies
in most cases, it has also been shown that the 3D geometric
information, when adequately used, can be beneficial for
achieving better performance (Horwitz & Hoshen, 2022).
Our work aims to solve the problem of 3D anomaly detection and localization on the recently published MVTec
3D-AD dataset. We propose shape-guided dual-memory
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 2 Aeolus Robotics,
Taipei, Taiwan 3 Institute of Information Science, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Tyng-Luh Liu <liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We summarize the contributions of this work as follows:
1. The proposed shape-guided approach effectively in1

