Neural FIM for learning Fisher information metrics from point cloud data

Oluwadamilola Fasina * 1 Guillaume Huguet * 2 3 Alexander Tong 2 4 Yanlei Zhang 2 3 Guy Wolf 2 3
Maximilian Nickel 5 Ian Adelstein * 6 Smita Krishnaswamy * 7 8 1

Abstract

particularly from scientific domains, lies on a lower dimensional smoothly varying manifold (see Huguet et al. (2022);
He et al. (2014); Bhaskar et al. (2022); Lin & Zha (2008)).
Prior methods for learning data manifolds use data affinity
kernels that compute a pairwise distance matrix from a data
set, then pass the distances through a kernel function (such
as a Gaussian kernel function) to convert distances to affinities (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Bunte et al., 2012; Mika et al.,
1998). Eigenvectors of such an affinity matrix give the data
a manifold-intrinsic coordinate representation. This method,
while successful in some respects, has a key disadvantage
that it is implicitly biased by the particular sampling of the
data that is given, together with its irregularities. Further,
there is usually no straightforward way of extending such
manifold coordinate representations to unseen points.

Although data diffusion embeddings are ubiquitous in unsupervised learning and have proven
to be a viable technique for uncovering the underlying intrinsic geometry of data, diffusion embeddings are inherently limited due to their discrete nature. To this end, we propose neural FIM,
a method for computing the Fisher information
metric (FIM) from point cloud data - allowing for
a continuous manifold model for the data. Neural FIM creates an extensible metric space from
discrete point cloud data such that information
from the metric can inform us of manifold characteristics such as volume and geodesics. We
demonstrate Neural FIM’s utility in selecting parameters for the PHATE visualization method as
well as its ability to obtain information pertaining
to local volume illuminating branching points and
cluster centers embeddings of a toy dataset and
two single-cell datasets of IPSC reprogramming
and PBMCs (immune cells).

Here we propose a neural-network based method of directly
learning a Riemannian metric for data called the neural FIM.
Loosely speaking, a Riemannian metric is an infinitesimal
generator of manifold-intrinsic length and volume, based
on an inner product structure on the tangent space of every
point. Typically, a Riemannian metric cannot be learned
from discrete data as there is no continuous model of the
manifold. Although Bengio et al. (2003); Schoeneman et al.
(2017); Law & Jain (2006); Dadkhahi et al. (2017) developed methods for extending coordinate manifold representations to unseen points, none of these methods admit continuous manifold models and involve expensive computations.
Neural FIM is able to learn a continuous manifold model
by using a neural network to embed data points into a latent
space and creates a continuous implicit model of the data
from which we can compute the metric.

1. Introduction
An important goal of unsupervised learning is understanding the underlying shape or geometry of data (Bronstein
et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2019; De Domenico, 2017; Tsitsulin et al., 2019). A key paradigm here is the manifold
assumption which hypothesizes that high dimensional data,
Equal contribution , * Co-senior authors, 1 Applied Math Program, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 2 Mila - Quebec
AI Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada. 3 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC,
Canada. 4 Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 5 FAIR,
Meta AI 6 Department of Math, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA. 7 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA. 8 Department of Genetics, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA.. Correspondence to: Smita Krishnaswamy
<smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu>.
*

The specific Riemannian metric we aim to learn the data
manifold is the Fisher Information Metric (FIM). This type
of metric is defined on statistical manifolds, manifolds
where each datapoint is a probability distribution (Lauritzen,
1987; Lafferty et al., 2005; Noguchi, 1992). We obtain
such a pointwise probability distribution on point cloud data
by way of a data diffusion operator, as first defined in the
seminal work on diffusion maps (Coifman & Lafon, 2006).
After an affinity kernel is computed, it is row normalized
to a stochastic matrix. This normalized matrix is treated
as a Markovian operator which defines a random walk or a
diffusion on the data. We associate each data point to the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

