GAT: Guided Adversarial Training with Pareto-optimal Auxiliary Tasks

Salah Ghamizi 1 Jingfeng Zhang 2 Maxime Cordy 1 Mike Papadakis 1 Masashi Sugiyama 2 3 Yves Le Traon 1

Abstract

data (Rebuffi et al., 2021), or artificial data from generative
models (Gowal et al., 2021). These approaches produce significantly more robust models (e.g. ResNet50 with 51.56%
robust accuracy on CIFAR-10) and can be further enhanced
through the use of very large models (WideResNet-70-16
with 66% robust accuracy) (Croce et al., 2020).

While leveraging additional training data is well
established to improve adversarial robustness, it
incurs the unavoidable cost of data collection and
the heavy computation to train models. To mitigate the costs, we propose Guided Adversarial
Training (GAT), a novel adversarial training technique that exploits auxiliary tasks under a limited
set of training data. Our approach extends singletask models into multi-task models during the
min-max optimization of adversarial training, and
drives the loss optimization with a regularization
of the gradient curvature across multiple tasks.
Experimentally, GAT increases the robust AUC
of CheXpert medical imaging dataset from 50% to
83% and On CIFAR-10, GAT outperforms eight
state-of-the-art adversarial training and achieves
56.21% robust accuracy with Resnet-50. Overall,
we demonstrate that guided multi-task learning
is an actionable and promising avenue to push
further the boundaries of model robustness.

However, the robustness achieved by AT with data augmentation has already reached a plateau (Schmidt et al., 2018;
Gowal et al., 2021) whereas the computational costs of AT in
large models prohibit their use at scale. This is why research
has explored new techniques to increase robustness, taking
inspiration from, e.g., Neural Architecture Search (Ghamizi
et al., 2019; Dong & Yang, 2019) and self-supervised learning (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020). They are,
however, not yet competitive to data augmentation techniques in terms of clean and robust performances.
In this paper, we propose Guided Adversarial Training
(GAT), a new technique based on multi-task learning to
improve AT. Inspired from preliminary investigations of
robustness in multi-task models Mao et al. (2020) and
Ghamizi et al. (2021), we demonstrate that robustness can
be improved by adding auxiliary tasks to the model and
introducing a gradient curvature minimization and a multiobjective weighting strategy into the AT optimization process. Our novel regularization can achieve optimal paretofronts across the tasks for both clean and robust performances. To this end, GAT can exploit both self-supervised
tasks without human intervention (e.g. image rotation) and
domain-knowledge tasks using human-provided labels.

1. Introduction
Despite their impressive performance, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are sensitive to small, imperceptible perturbations in the input. The resulting adversarial inputs raise
multiple questions about the robustness of such systems,
especially in safety-critical domains such as autonomous
driving (Cao et al., 2019), financial services (Ghamizi et al.,
2020), and medical imaging (Ma et al., 2021).

Our experiments demonstrate that GAT outperforms eight
state-of-the-art AT techniques based on data augmentation
and training optimization, with an improvement on CIFAR10 of 3.14% to 26.4% compared to state of the art adversarial training with data-augmentation. GAT shines in scarce
data scenarios (e.g. medical diagnosis tasks), where data
augmentation is not applicable.

Adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al., 2017a) is the de
facto standard for building robust models. In its simplest
form, AT trains the model with the original training data and
adversarial examples crafted from them. Robustness can
be further increased with additional data in the AT process,
including unlabeled data (Carmon et al., 2019), augmented
1

Our large study across five datasets and six tasks demonstrates that task augmentation is an efficient alternative to
data augmentation, and can be key to achieving both clean
and robust performances.

2

The University of Luxembourg RIKEN Center for Advanced
Intelligence Project (AIP) 3 The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Jingfeng Zhang <jingfeng.zhang@riken.jp>.

Our algorithm and replication packages are available on
https://github.com/yamizi/taskaugment

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

