Lottery Tickets in Evolutionary Optimization:
On Sparse Backpropagation-Free Trainability

Robert Tjarko Lange 1 2 Henning Sprekeler 1 2

Abstract

several scaling challenges: The memory requirements for
evaluating populations of large networks quickly become
infeasible for common hardware settings. Furthermore, the
estimation of the search covariance is often statistically
inefficient. But is it really necessary to evolve full dense networks or can these challenges in principle be circumvented
by evolving sparse networks? The lottery ticket hypothesis
(Frankle & Carbin, 2019, LTH) recently empirically established the existence of sparse network initializations that
can be trained to similar performance levels as their dense
counterparts. In this study, we set out to answer whether the
existence of such winning initializations is fundamentally
tied to gradient-based training or whether sparse trainability can also be achieved in the context of ES. Furthermore,
the LTH has demonstrated yet another application of studying sparse trainability: The empirical analysis of learning
dynamics and loss surfaces (Frankle et al., 2020a;b). We,
therefore, shed light on the differences between gradient
descent-based and evolutionary optimization. Evci et al.
(2020) previously showed that sparse lottery tickets suffer from reduced gradient flow. GD-based lottery tickets
overcome this limitation by biasing the network to retrain
to its original dense solution. But does this ’regurgitating
ticket interpretation’ (Maene et al., 2021) also apply to the
setting of gradient-free optimization? We summarize our
contributions as follows:

Is the lottery ticket phenomenon an idiosyncrasy
of gradient-based training or does it generalize
to evolutionary optimization? In this paper we
establish the existence of highly sparse trainable
initializations for evolution strategies (ES) and
characterize qualitative differences compared to
gradient descent (GD)-based sparse training. We
introduce a novel signal-to-noise iterative pruning procedure, which incorporates loss curvature
information into the network pruning step. This
can enable the discovery of even sparser trainable network initializations when using black-box
evolution as compared to GD-based optimization.
Furthermore, we find that these initializations encode an inductive bias, which transfers across
different ES, related tasks and even to GD-based
training. Finally, we compare the local optima resulting from the different optimization paradigms
and sparsity levels. In contrast to GD, ES explore
diverse and flat local optima and do not preserve
linear mode connectivity across sparsity levels
and independent runs. The results highlight qualitative differences between evolution and gradientbased learning dynamics, which can be uncovered
by the study of iterative pruning procedures.

1. We apply iterative magnitude pruning (Han et al., 2015,
IMP; figure 1 left) to the ES setting and establish the existence of highly sparse evolvable initializations. They
consistently exist across different ES, architectures
(multi-layer perceptrons/MLP, & convolutional neural networks/CNN) and tasks (9 control & 3 vision
tasks). The LTH phenomenon does, therefore, not depend on gradient-based training or the implied masked
gradient flow (Section 3, Figure 1 right, top).

1. Introduction
Evolution strategies have recently shown to provide a competitive alternative to gradient-based training of neural networks (e.g. Such et al., 2017; Salimans et al., 2017). Instead
of assuming explicit access to gradient evaluations, ES refine the sufficient statistics of a search distribution using
information gathered from the black-box evaluation of sampled candidate solutions. In doing so, modern ES face
1

Technical University Berlin, Berlin, Germany 2 Science of
Intelligence Cluster of Excellence. Correspondence to: Robert
Tjarko Lange <robert.t.lange@tu-berlin.de>.

2. We introduce a novel iterative pruning procedure based
on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the ES search distribution, which accounts for the loss geometry information encoded by the search covariance. This pruning
scheme leads to initializations, which are trainable at
higher degrees of sparsity (Figure 1 right, top).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

