Continual Learners are Incremental Model Generalizers
Jaehong Yoon 1 2 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3 Yue Cao 4

Abstract

alistic in the real world; as the world persistently changes,
the model should cope with non-stationary data throughout
its lifespan. It carries the lifelong learnability of the representation model. As motivated by the Continual Learning
(CL) field (Thrun, 1995; Silver & Mercer, 2002; Kumar &
Daume III, 2012; Li & Hoiem, 2016), Unsupervised Continual Learning (UCL) (Rao et al., 2019; Madaan et al., 2022;
Fini et al., 2022) has recently been explored to address the
limitations of the conventional representation learning setup
and provides comprehensive analyses regarding the quality
of learned representations along with their forgetting.

Motivated by the efficiency and rapid convergence
of pre-trained models for solving downstream
tasks, this paper extensively studies the impact of
Continual Learning (CL) models as pre-trainers.
In both supervised and unsupervised CL, we find
that the transfer quality of the representation often
increases gradually without noticeable degradation in fine-tuning performance. This is because
CL models can learn improved task-general features when easily forgetting task-specific knowledge. Based on this observation, we suggest a new
unsupervised CL framework with masked modeling, which aims to capture fluent task-generic
representation during training. Furthermore, we
propose a new fine-tuning scheme, GLobal Attention Discretization (GLAD), that preserves rich
task-generic representation during solving downstream tasks. The model fine-tuned with GLAD
achieves competitive performance and can also
be used as a good pre-trained model itself. We
believe this paper breaks the barriers between
pre-training and fine-tuning steps and leads to
a sustainable learning framework in which the
continual learner incrementally improves model
generalization, yielding better transfer to unseen
tasks.

However, the recently proposed UCL frameworks have clear
limitations in their interpretation of model transfer to downstream tasks. Suppose ri,j be the performance of a predefined supervised metric for task j using a sequentially pretrained backbone model from the first to ith task. They train
on T sequential tasks {Tt }Tt=1 without labels, and measure
the effectiveness of their representation model leveraging
two supervised metrics: 1) the averaged performance gap
measured immediatelyP
after the task is learned and after
T −1
all tasks are learned t=1 rt = rT,t − rt,t (backward
transfer) (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato,
PT 2017) and 2) the averaged
performance of all tasks t=1 rt = rT,t . Though maximizing the transferability of the learned representations on
the target problem is essential for general-purpose models,
prior UCL works have confined their validations and analyses to linear evaluations as updating the linear classifier
with keeping fixed representation model backbones. This
can be suitable for measuring direct differences in model
drift (i.e., catastrophic forgetting) of continual learners. Yet,
it cannot disclose the change in knowledge transferability
during task sequential training, which is crucial in utilizing
the pre-trained model in practice.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Representation Learning (URL) (Radford
et al., 2015; Gidaris et al., 2018; Grill et al., 2020; Xie
et al., 2021) is a pertinent branch of machine learning in
which a model exploits data without human-generated signals to extract the generic representations. Although the
standard URL scenario assumes that we have a complete
unlabeled dataset before training, this setting is often unre-

Beyond the limited understanding of knowledge transfer
from prior works, we provide comprehensive transferability
analyses with varying evaluation setups via supervised and
unsupervised CL methods to explore their potential as a
pre-trainer. In Figure 1, we perform a simple experiment to
investigate the potential of incremental model generalization
via a continual learning setup. A model sequentially learns
the nine tasks from ImageNet1K-split (containing ten tasks
in total) using supervised CL methods: Base (a CL model
without any additional method), SI (Zenke et al., 2017), and
DER (Buzzega et al., 2020). Then, we measure the change

JY was an intern at Microsoft Research. 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 2 Microsoft Research 3 DeepAuto
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to:
Jaehong Yoon <jaehong.yoon@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

