Robust Counterfactual Explanations for Neural Networks
With Probabilistic Guarantees
Faisal Hamman 1 Erfaun Noorani 1 Saumitra Mishra 2 Daniele Magazzeni 2 Sanghamitra Dutta 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Counterfactual explanations (Wachter et al., 2017; Karimi
et al., 2020; Barocas et al., 2020) have garnered significant
interest in various high-stakes applications, such as lending,
hiring, etc. Counterfactual explanations aim to guide an
applicant on how they can change a model outcome by
providing suggestions for improvement. Given an original
data-point (e.g., an applicant who is denied a loan), the goal
is to try to find a point on the other (desired) side of the
decision boundary (a hypothetical applicant who is approved
for the loan) which also satisfies several other preferred
constraints, such as, (i) proximity to the original point; (ii)
changes in as few features as possible; and (iii) conforming
to the data manifold. Such a data-point that alters the model
decision is widely referred to as a “counterfactual.”

There is an emerging interest in generating robust counterfactual explanations that would remain valid if the model is updated or changed
even slightly. Towards finding robust counterfactuals, existing literature often assumes
that the original model m and the new model
M are bounded in the parameter space, i.e.,
∥Params(M )−Params(m)∥<∆. However, models can often change significantly in the parameter
space with little to no change in their predictions
or accuracy on the given dataset. In this work,
we introduce a mathematical abstraction termed
naturally-occurring model change, which allows
for arbitrary changes in the parameter space such
that the change in predictions on points that lie
on the data manifold is limited. Next, we propose a measure – that we call Stability – to quantify the robustness of counterfactuals to potential
model changes for differentiable models, e.g., neural networks. Our main contribution is to show
that counterfactuals with sufficiently high value
of Stability as defined by our measure will remain
valid after potential “naturally-occurring” model
changes with high probability (leveraging concentration bounds for Lipschitz function of independent Gaussians). Since our quantification depends
on the local Lipschitz constant around a data point
which is not always available, we also examine
practical relaxations of our proposed measure and
demonstrate experimentally how they can be incorporated to find robust counterfactuals for neural networks that are close, realistic, and remain
valid after potential model changes.

However, in several real-world scenarios, such as credit lending, the models making these high-stakes decisions have to
be updated due to various reasons (Upadhyay et al., 2021;
Black et al., 2021), e.g., to retrain on a few additional data
points, change the hyper-parameters or seed, or transition
to a different model class (Pawelczyk et al., 2020b). Such
model changes can often cause the counterfactuals to become invalid because typically they are quite close to the
original data point, and hence, also quite close to the decision boundary. For instance, suppose the counterfactual
explanation suggests an applicant to increase their income
by 10K to get approved for a loan and they actually act
upon that, but now, due to updates to the original model,
they are still denied by the updated model.
If counterfactuals become invalid due to model updates,
this can lead to confusion and distrust in the use of algorithms in high-stakes applications altogether. Users would
typically act on the suggested counterfactuals over a period
of time, e.g., increase their income for credit lending, but
only to find that it is no longer enough since the model has
slightly changed (perhaps due to retraining with a new seed
or hyperparameter). This cycle of invalidation and regenerating new counterfactuals can not only be frustrating and
time-consuming for users but also potentially hurts an institution’s reputation. This motivates our primary question:
How do we provide theoretical guarantees on the robustness
of counterfactuals to potential model changes?

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park. 2 JP Morgan Chase AI Research.
Correspondence to: Faisal Hamman <fhamman@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

