Unleashing Mask: Explore the Intrinsic Out-of-Distribution Detection Capability

Jianing Zhu 1 Hengzhuang Li 1 Jiangchao Yao 2 3 Tongliang Liu 4 5 Jianliang Xu 1 Bo Han 1

Abstract

those safety-critical applications like autonomous driving
and medical intelligence. Previous studies focus on designing a series of scoring functions (Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2017; Liang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022)
for OOD uncertainty estimation or fine-tuning with auxiliary
outlier data to better distinguish the OOD inputs (Hendrycks
et al., 2019b; Mohseni et al., 2020; Sehwag et al., 2021).

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is an indispensable aspect of secure AI when deploying machine learning models in real-world applications.
Previous paradigms either explore better scoring
functions or utilize the knowledge of outliers to
equip the models with the ability of OOD detection. However, few of them pay attention to the
intrinsic OOD detection capability of the given
model. In this work, we generally discover the existence of an intermediate stage of a model trained
on in-distribution (ID) data having higher OOD
detection performance than that of its final stage
across different settings, and further identify one
critical data-level attribution to be learning with
the atypical samples. Based on such insights, we
propose a novel method, Unleashing Mask, which
aims to restore the OOD discriminative capabilities of the well-trained model with ID data. Our
method utilizes a mask to figure out the memorized atypical samples, and then finetune the
model or prune it with the introduced mask to
forget them. Extensive experiments and analysis
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The
code is available at: https://github.com/
tmlr-group/Unleashing-Mask.

Despite the promising results achieved by previous methods (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hendrycks et al., 2019b;
Liu et al., 2020; Ming et al., 2022b), limited attention is
paid to considering whether the given well-trained model is
the most appropriate basis for OOD detection. In general,
models deployed for various applications have different
original targets (e.g., multi-class classification (Goodfellow et al., 2016)) instead of OOD detection (Nguyen et al.,
2015). However, most representative score functions, e.g.,
MSP (Hendrycks et al., 2019b), ODIN (Liang et al., 2018),
and Energy (Liu et al., 2020), uniformly leverage the given
models for OOD detection (Yang et al., 2021). The above
target-oriented discrepancy naturally motivates the following critical question: does the given well-trained model have
the optimal OOD discriminative capability? If not, how can
we find a more appropriate counterpart for OOD detection?
In this work, we start by revealing an interesting empirical
observation, i.e., there always exists a historical training
stage where the model has a higher OOD detection performance than the final well-trained one (as shown in Figure 1),
spanning among different OOD/ID datasets (Netzer et al.,
2011; Van Horn et al., 2018) under different learning rate
schedules (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) and model structures (Huang et al., 2017; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016).
It shows the inconsistency between gaining better OOD discriminative capability (Nguyen et al., 2015) and pursuing
better performance on ID data during training. Through the
in-depth analysis from various perspectives (as illustrated
in Figure 2), we figure out one possible attribution at the
data level is memorizing the atypical samples (compared
with others at the semantic level) that are hard to generalize
for the model. Seeking zero training error on those samples
leads the model more confident in the unseen OOD inputs.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has drawn increasing
attention when deploying machine learning models into the
open-world scenarios (Nguyen et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2018a;
Yang et al., 2021). Since the test samples can naturally arise
from a label-different distribution, identifying OOD inputs
from in-distribution (ID) data is important, especially for
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University 2 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai AI
Laboratory 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 5 Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Bo Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>, Jiangchao Yao
<Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn>.

The above analysis inspires us to propose a new method,
namely, Unleashing Mask (UM), to excavate the overlaid
detection capability of a well-trained given model by al-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

