High-dimensional Location Estimation via Norm Concentration for Subgamma
Vectors
Shivam Gupta 1 Jasper C.H. Lee 2 Eric Price 1

Abstract

up to translation. Such additional information allows us to
estimate λ to higher accuracy.

In location estimation, we are given n samples
from a known distribution f shifted by an unknown translation λ, and want to estimate λ as
precisely as possible. Asymptotically, the maximum likelihood estimate achieves the Cramér1
Rao bound of error N (0, nI
), where I is the
Fisher information of f . However, the n required
for convergence depends on f , and may be arbitrarily large. We build on the theory using
smoothed estimators to bound the error for finite
n in terms of Ir , the Fisher information of the
r-smoothed distribution. As n → ∞, r → 0 at
an explicit rate and this converges to the CramérRao bound. We (1) improve the prior work for
1-dimensional f to converge for constant failure
probability in addition to high probability, and (2)
extend the theory to high-dimensional distributions. In the process, we prove a new bound on
the norm of a high-dimensional random variable
whose 1-dimensional projections are subgamma,
which may be of independent interest.

The classic “textbook” theory for location estimation, and
indeed for parametric estimation in general, recommends using the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE). The MLE enjoys asymptotic normality: if we fix a distribution f and take
the number of samples n to infinity, the distribution of the
MLE converges to the multivariate Gaussian N (λ, n1 I −1 ),
where I is the Fisher information matrix, defined by
I= E

x∼f

h
i
⊤
(∇ log f (x)) (∇ log f (x))

As a basic property, if we denote the covariance matrix
of f by Σ, then we always have I −1 ⪯ Σ, implying that
the asymptotic performance of the MLE is always at least
as good as the sample mean, whose performance is controlled by the covariance Σ. Furthermore, the Crámer-Rao
bound states that no unbiased location estimator can have
covariance smaller than n1 I −1 , and so the MLE has the best
asymptotic performance of any unbiased estimator.
Even though the textbook theory is satisfying in that the
Fisher information essentially captures the informationtheoretic limits of location estimation, its predictions may
be misleading in practice. Specifically, this is due to the
asymptotic nature of the MLE performance guarantee: we
need to take the number of samples n to infinity in order to
achieve subgaussian estimation error. The asymptotic result
may have arbitrarily bad dependence on n in terms of the
model f . While bounds exist in terms of regularity properties of f (Miao, 2010; Spokoiny, 2011; Pinelis, 2017), these
bounds are infinite for simple examples like the Laplace
distribution. The research goal, therefore, is to establish a
finite-sample theory of location estimation, which bounds
the estimation error explicitly as a function of n, applies to
every f , and ideally attains even optimal constants in the
estimation error.

1. Introduction
Location estimation—a variant of mean estimation—is a
fundamental problem in parametric statistics. Suppose there
is a translation-invariant model f λ (x) = f (x − λ) for some
known distribution f over Rd . The statistician receives
n i.i.d. samples from f λ for some arbitrarily chosen true
parameter λ ∈ Rd , and the goal is to estimate λ with high
accuracy, succeeding with high probability over the samples.
In contrast to general mean estimation, which aims to estimate the mean under minimal assumptions on the distribution, here we know the exact shape of the distribution
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Department of Computer
Sciences and Institute for Foundations of Data Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Shivam Gupta
<shivamgupta@utexas.edu>.

Recent work by Gupta et al. (2022) addressed this question in the special case of 1 dimension. They showed that,
while the MLE can have bad finite-sample performance, it
is possible to improve the behavior by a simple adaptation:
add Gaussian noise of some appropriately chosen radius r,
where r decreases with the number of samples, to both the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

