On the Role of Attention in Prompt-tuning

Samet Oymak * 1 Ankit Singh Rawat * 2 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi * 3 Christos Thrampoulidis * 4

Abstract

modeling, vision, and decision making. Recently, one of
the key techniques that has helped pave the way for the
deployment of transformers to ever increasing application
areas is their ability to adapt to multiple unseen tasks by
conditioning their predictions through their inputs – a technique known as prompt-tuning (Lester et al., 2021; Li &
Liang, 2021). Concretely, prompt-tuning provides a more
efficient (cheaper/faster) alternative to fine-tuning the entire weights of the transformer by instead training (fewer)
so-called prompt parameters that are appended on the input
and can be thought of as an input interface. In fact, several
recent works have demonstrated experimentally that prompttuning is not only more efficient, but often even becomes
competitive to fine-tuning in terms of accuracy (Lester et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2023). However, there is currently limited
formal justification of such observations. This motivates the
first question of this paper:
How does prompt-tuning compare to fine-tuning in terms of
expressive power? Are there scenarios prompt-tuning
outperforms fine-tuning in that regard?
The core constituent of a transformer, and thus of prompttuning, is the attention mechanism. Through the attention
layer, prompts get to interact with other input features, create/modify attention weights, and facilitate the model to
attend on latent task-specific information. The standard attention layer relies on softmax nonlinearities. Operationally,
the softmax function allows a model to selectively focus on
certain parts of the input tokens when generating attention
outputs. However, there is little rigorous understanding of
attention-based prompt-tuning. Concretely,
What is the role of the softmax-attention in prompt-tuning
in terms of optimization and generalization? How does it
locate and extract relevant contextual information?

Prompt-tuning is an emerging strategy to adapt
large language models (LLM) to downstream
tasks by learning a (soft-)prompt parameter from
data. Despite its success in LLMs, there is limited theoretical understanding of the power of
prompt-tuning and the role of the attention mechanism in prompting. In this work, we explore
prompt-tuning for one-layer attention architectures and study contextual mixture-models where
each input token belongs to a context-relevant
or -irrelevant set. We isolate the role of prompttuning through a self-contained prompt-attention
model. Our contributions are as follows: (1) We
show that softmax-prompt-attention is provably
more expressive than softmax-self-attention and
linear-prompt-attention under our contextual data
model. (2) We analyze the initial trajectory of gradient descent and show that it learns the prompt
and prediction head with near-optimal sample
complexity and demonstrate how the prompt can
provably attend to sparse context-relevant tokens.
(3) Assuming a known prompt but an unknown
prediction head, we characterize the exact finite
sample performance of prompt-attention which reveals the fundamental performance limits and the
precise benefit of the context information. We
also provide experiments that verify our theoretical insights on real datasets and demonstrate
how prompt-tuning enables the model to attend to
context-relevant information.

1. Introduction

Contributions. Our contributions are as follows:

Transformer models have achieved remarkable success in a
wide array of machine learning domains spanning language

• We show that a particular form of attention which we
refer to as prompt-attention naturally arises from the selfattention model with prompt-tuning. We identify provable
scenarios where it is more expressive than self-attention
and linear-prompt-attention. 1 This separation result reveals insightful data models where prompt-tuning can be
superior to fine-tuning with self-attention.

*

In alphabetical order 1 University of Michigan & UC Riverside,
USA 2 Google Research NYC, USA 3 University of Southern California, USA 4 University of British Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Christos Thrampoulidis <cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Our emphasis is on the role of attention (whether prompt- or
self-). However, we analyze the general problem where attention
weights are optimized jointly with the linear classifier head.

