Comparison of meta-learners for estimating multi-valued treatment
heterogeneous effects

Naoufal Acharki 1 2 Ramiro Lugo 2 Antoine Bertoncello 2 Josselin Garnier 1

Abstract

relationships in the data (Pearl, 2019).

Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATE)
estimation is one of the main challenges in causal
inference with observational data. In addition to
Machine Learning based-models, nonparametric
estimators called meta-learners have been developed to estimate the CATE with the main advantage of not restraining the estimation to a specific
supervised learning method. This task becomes,
however, more complicated when the treatment is
not binary as some limitations of the naive extensions emerge. This paper looks into meta-learners
for estimating the heterogeneous effects of multivalued treatments. We consider different metalearners, and we carry out a theoretical analysis
of their error upper bounds as functions of important parameters such as the number of treatment
levels, showing that the naive extensions do not
always provide satisfactory results. We introduce
and discuss meta-learners that perform well as
the number of treatments increases. We empirically confirm the strengths and weaknesses of
those methods with synthetic and semi-synthetic
datasets.

Based on the Potential Outcomes theory (Neyman, 1923;
Rubin, 1974), epidemiologists and statisticians have developed a set of tools that reduce the inference of causal effects
to statistical inference under certain assumptions about, for
example, the data-generating process. They have been successfully applied in many fields such as medicine (Alaa &
van der Schaar, 2017), economics (Knaus et al., 2020b), public policy (Imai & Strauss, 2011) and marketing (Diemert
et al., 2018) to infer causal effects. However, most of these
studies are limited to a binary treatment setting whereas
many causal questions in real-world cases are not binary. It
would be helpful to give an in-depth analysis of the impact
of the treatment across its possible levels instead of just
considering a binary scenario where the treatment is either
assigned or not. In addition, the heterogeneity of effects
may provide valuable information regarding this treatment’s
effectiveness and help users personalize their intervention
policies and strategies.
The problem of Causal Inference beyond binary treatment
settings is gaining attention from the Causal Inference community. There are two major challenges: Firstly, the lack of
the ground truth due to the fundamental problem of causal
inference (Holland, 1986) makes Heterogeneous Treatment
Effects estimation more challenging (Alaa & van der Schaar,
2018) as standard metrics can not be used to assess performances. Secondly, binarizing the multi-valued treatment setting leads to a violation of the Stable Unit Treatment Value
Assumption (SUTVA) as it violates the principle of ”no
hidden variations of treatment”. It may yield a bias known
as position bias in recommendation systems (Chen et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2022). It happens when some units tend
to have/select high treatment values and, therefore, there
is a hidden variation of the treatment that is not taken into
consideration when one attempt to binarize the treatment.
From a statistical point of view, this bias was established
by Heiler & Knaus (2022) who show that the binarization
of multi-valued treatments does not disassociate the heterogeneity of the treatment from the heterogeneity of the
effects of each value.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of Machine Learning (ML)
and its efficiency in predicting outcomes, the question of
counterfactual prediction ”what would happen if ?” arises.
Engineers and specialists want to know how the outcome
would be affected after an intervention on a parameter. It
will help them personalize the parameter at efficient levels
and optimize the outcome. Recently, much effort has been
devoted to supervised ML to find the optimal intervention
strategy. Yet, the results are not always convincing. These
models cannot distinguish between correlations and causal
1

CMAP, Ecole polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
Palaiseau, France 2 TotalEnergies One Tech, Palaiseau, France. Correspondence to: Naoufal Acharki <naoufal.acharki@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The extension of the binary setting does not seem trivial as
several versions are possible and turn out to have different
1

