Transformer-based Stagewise Decomposition
for Large-Scale Multistage Stochastic Optimization

Chanyeong Kim * 1 Jongwoong Park * 2 Hyunglip Bae 1 Woo Chang Kim 1

Abstract

determining an optimal control policy within a continuoustime framework. On the other hand, RL and MSP are
suitable for discrete-time problems. RL utilizes simulated
or real-world experience to learn optimal decision-making
through a trial-and-error process, while MSP seeks to find
optimal decisions through mathematical formulation in either continuous or discrete spaces. Therefore, the selection
of a methodology depends on specific problem characteristics, such as the nature of uncertainties and the type of
decision variables.

Solving large-scale multistage stochastic programming (MSP) problems poses a significant challenge as commonly used stagewise decomposition
algorithms, including stochastic dual dynamic
programming (SDDP), face growing time complexity as the subproblem size and problem count
increase. Traditional approaches approximate
the value functions as piecewise linear convex
functions by incrementally accumulating subgradient cutting planes from the primal and dual
solutions of stagewise subproblems. Recognizing these limitations, we introduce TranSDDP, a
novel Transformer-based stagewise decomposition algorithm. This innovative approach leverages the structural advantages of the Transformer
model, implementing a sequential method for integrating subgradient cutting planes to approximate
the value function. Through our numerical experiments, we affirm TranSDDP’s effectiveness
in addressing MSP problems. It efficiently generates a piecewise linear approximation for the
value function, significantly reducing computation time while preserving solution quality, thus
marking a promising progression in the treatment
of large-scale multistage stochastic programming
problems.

In this paper, we focus on the use of MSP to solve sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty. MSP
applies to a wide range of problems, including production
optimization, hydropower production planning, and asset
liability management (Shiina & Birge, 2003; Carino et al.,
1994; Fleten & Kristoffersen, 2008). To handle uncertainties, MSP utilizes scenario trees that approximate the underlying stochastic process by a finite set of scenarios with
discretized time points. This enables the transformation
of the original stochastic problem into a single large deterministic equivalent problem. However, the computational
complexity of solving these deterministic equivalent problems can become intractable as the number of scenarios
increases exponentially with the number of stages and/or
the number of nodes per stage. This challenge, known as
the curse of dimensionality, presents a critical limitation of
MSP when confronted with large-scale problems.
To tackle the computational complexities arising from largescale MSP problems, several decomposition-based algorithms have been proposed. These algorithms can be broadly
categorized into two types: scenario decomposition and
stagewise decomposition. Both approaches aim to decompose the original problem into smaller subproblems that are
computationally tractable, while still ensuring adherence to
the nonanticipativity constraints, which prevent decisionmaking from relying on future information.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty
can be addressed using various methodologies, including
stochastic optimal control (SOC), reinforcement learning
(RL), and multistage stochastic programming (MSP). SOC
is a mathematical optimization approach that focuses on
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial and Systems
Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 NCSOFT Corporation, Seongnam, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Woo
Chang Kim <wkim@kaist.ac.kr>.

Scenario decomposition algorithms decompose large-scale
MSP problems into smaller subproblems based on scenarios,
allowing for the relaxation of nonanticipativity constraints
within each subproblem. Well-known scenario decomposition algorithms include the dual decomposition algorithm
(Carøe & Schultz, 1999) and progressive hedging (Rockafel-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

