How Much does Initialization Affect Generalization?
Sameera Ramasinghe 1 Lachlan MacDonald 2 Moshiur Farazi 3 Hemanth Saratchandran 2 Simon Lucey 2

Abstract

they not only converge towards a global minimum, but also
are biased towards solutions that exhibit good generalization even without explicit regularization. This mysterious
behavior is flagged as the “implicit regularization” of neural
networks and remains an open research problem.

Characterizing the remarkable generalization
properties of over-parameterized neural networks
remains an open problem. A growing body of
recent literature shows that the bias of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) and architecture choice
implicitly leads to better generalization. In this paper, we show on the contrary that, independently
of architecture, SGD can itself be the cause of
poor generalization if one does not ensure good
initialization. Specifically, we prove that any differentiably parameterized model, trained under
gradient flow, obeys a weak spectral bias law
which states that sufficiently high frequencies
train arbitrarily slowly. This implies that very
high frequencies present at initialization will remain after training, and hamper generalization.
Further, we empirically test the developed theoretical insights using practical, deep networks.
Finally, we contrast our framework with that supplied by the flat-minima conjecture and show that
Fourier analysis grants a more reliable framework
for understanding the generalization of neural networks.

To understand implicit regularization, numerous studies
have considered simplified settings with restrictive assumptions such as linear networks (Jacot et al., 2018b; Soudry
et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2020; Gunasekar
et al., 2018b; Wu et al., 2019), shallow networks (Gunasekar
et al., 2018a; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019; Ali et al., 2020), wide
networks (Jacot et al., 2018a; Mei et al., 2019; Chizat &
Bach, 2020; Oymak & Soltanolkotabi, 2019; Zhang et al.,
2020a), vanishing initialization (Chizat et al., 2019; Gunasekar et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2019), or infinitesimal
learning rates (Ma et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2018; Moroshko et al., 2020). Despite different
assumptions, most of these works primarily focus on the
effect of optimization procedure over the other factors and,
at a high level, conclude that gradient-based optimizations
guides neural networks toward max-margin solutions for
separable data or minimize a notion of weight-norm in regression. While the aforementioned studies yield powerful
insights, there remains a gap between theory and practice
due to the restrictive assumptions presently necessary to
prove quantitative results.

1. Introduction

Our work is an attempt to help bridge this gap. To this
end, we show substantial evidence that although the optimization procedure provides an important bias, initialization
also plays a decisive role in determining the generalization
of a neural network, and that this factor is at play across
all architectures. In particular, we demonstrate that even
with gradient-based optimization and a deep architecture
– networks can converge to solutions with extremely poor
generalization properties. We further demonstrate that this
result depends on the Fourier spectrum at initialization. It
should be noted that our result is not a recapitulation
of the well-known observation that bad initialization
hampers the convergence of neural networks. Rather,
we show that initializing networks such that they have
higher energies for higher frequencies leads to solutions
that achieve perfect training accuracy, yet succumb to inferior test accuracy. We further reveal that this is a generic
property that holds in both classification and regression

Neural networks are often used in the over-parameterized
regime, meaning their loss landscapes admit many global
minima that achieve zero training error. However, finding
such solutions is a non-convex, high-dimensional problem,
which is typically intractable to solve analytically. Furthermore, each of these minima may have unique properties
that can lead to varying generalization performance, making
some solutions more preferred than others. Surprisingly,
however, it is widely established that when neural networks
are trained with gradient-based optimization techniques,
1
Amazon, Australia 2 Australian Institute of Machine Learning,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide SA, Australia 3 Machine Learning
and Artificial Intelligence FSP, Data61-CSIRO. Correspondence to:
Sameera Ramasinghe <sameera.ramasinghe@adelaide.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

