Generalizing Neural Wave Functions

Nicholas Gao 1 Stephan Günnemann 1
well-scaling approximation solutions in O(N 4 ) with the
number of electrons N (Hermann et al., 2022). Despite
their theoretical scaling, this time complexity comes with a
large prefactor leading to exploding computational requirements if one screens many different molecules. To address
this limitation, Gao & Günnemann (2022) proposed the Potential Energy Surface Network (PESNet), a neural network
wave function that generalizes across different structures.
While reducing computational costs, PESNet is limited to
different spatial arrangements of the same set of atoms.

Abstract
Recent neural network-based wave functions have
achieved state-of-the-art accuracies in modeling
ab-initio ground-state potential energy surface.
However, these networks can only solve different spatial arrangements of the same set of
atoms. To overcome this limitation, we present
Graph-learned Orbital Embeddings (Globe), a
neural network-based reparametrization method
that can adapt neural wave functions to different molecules. Globe learns representations of
local electronic structures that generalize across
molecules via spatial message passing by connecting molecular orbitals to covalent bonds. Further, we propose a size-consistent wave function
Ansatz, the Molecular Orbital Network (Moon),
tailored to jointly solve Schrödinger equations
of different molecules. In our experiments, we
find Moon converging in 4.5 times fewer steps to
similar accuracy as previous methods or to lower
energies given the same time. Further, our analysis shows that Moon’s energy estimate scales
additively with increased system sizes, unlike previous work where we observe divergence. In both
computational chemistry and machine learning,
we are the first to demonstrate that a single wave
function can solve the Schrödinger equation of
molecules with different atoms jointly.

A key challenge in the generalization to arbitrary molecules
is the variable number of molecular orbitals. To resolve this, we introduce Graph-learned Orbital Embeddings
(Globe), a generalization of PESNet that can solve arbitrary
Schrödinger equations jointly. Like previous work, Globe
uses a two-level approach where one network represents the
electronic wave function and the other reparametrizes the
wave function depending on the molecule. We resolve the
issue of the dynamical numbers of molecular orbitals by
embedding orbitals in 3D space. This enables us to learn
local electronic structures via spatial message passing in
graph neural networks (GNNs). For the wave function, we
present the Molecular Orbital Network (Moon), the first sizeconsistent neural wave function. We accomplish size consistency in two key steps, firstly, by using spatial message
passing Moon focuses on local interactions, and, secondly,
by using the nuclei as anchor points for message passing.
While the first step is strictly required for size consistency,
the latter enables efficient reparametrization via Globe.

1. Introduction

In our experiments, we find Moon accelerating convergence
in joint training by up to 4.5 times and performing similarly
to the attention-based PsiFormer on larger systems (von
Glehn et al., 2023). Further, we observe that transfers of
neural wave functions to larger structures do not require
additional self-consistent field (SCF) calculations. In summary, our main contributions are:1

In silico design of molecules requires accessing their quantum mechanical properties. This requires solving the associated Schrödinger equation. However, exact solutions are
often intractable and approximations can become computationally expensive for larger and more complex systems.
In recent years, neural network-based wave functions have
emerged as a promising alternative, providing accurate and

• Globe, a reparametrization method for adapting neural
wave functions to arbitrary molecules based on localized molecular orbital embeddings.
• Moon, a size-consistent neural wave function enabling
generalization to larger structures, faster convergence,
and accurate energies.

1

Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science
Institute, Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Nicholas gao <n.gao@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Source code: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/globe/

