Scaling Up Dataset Distillation to ImageNet-1K with Constant Memory

Justin Cui 1 Ruochen Wang 1 Si Si 2 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1

Abstract

2018). Different from core-set selection (Wolf, 2011; Rebuffi et al., 2017; Castro et al., 2018), synthetic samples
are learned freely in the continuous space instead of being
selected from the original dataset, so they often achieve
better performance in the regime with higher compression
rates. Due to the importance of compressing a large dataset
into smaller ones, many algorithms have been proposed
in the past few years, including Gradient Matching (Zhao
& Bilen, 2021b), Distribution Matching (Zhao & Bilen,
2021a), KIP (Nguyen et al., 2021) and Matching Training
Trajectories (MTT) (Cazenavette et al., 2022). Recently, a
line of methods based on matching trajectory has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on smaller datasets (Cui
et al., 2022; Cazenavette et al., 2022): When using only 50
synthetic images per class which yields a 100x compression
rate, MTT only incurs 13.4% accuracy drop compared to
training on the whole CIFAR-10 dataset.

Dataset Distillation is a newly emerging area that
aims to distill large datasets into much smaller
and highly informative synthetic ones to accelerate training and reduce storage. Among various
dataset distillation methods, trajectory-matchingbased methods (MTT) have achieved SOTA performance in many tasks, e.g., on CIFAR-10/100.
However, due to exorbitant memory consumption
when unrolling optimization through SGD steps,
MTT fails to scale to large-scale datasets such as
ImageNet-1K. Can we scale this SOTA method
to ImageNet-1K and does its effectiveness on CIFAR transfer to ImageNet-1K? To answer these
questions, we first propose a procedure to exactly
compute the unrolled gradient with constant memory complexity, which allows us to scale MTT to
ImageNet-1K seamlessly with ∼ 6x reduction in
memory footprint. We further discover that it is
challenging for MTT to handle datasets with a
large number of classes, and propose a novel soft
label assignment that drastically improves its convergence. The resulting algorithm sets new SOTA
on ImageNet-1K: we can scale up to 50 IPCs (Image Per Class) on ImageNet-1K on a single GPU
(all previous methods can only scale to 2 IPCs on
ImageNet-1K), leading to the best accuracy (only
5.9% accuracy drop against full dataset training)
while utilizing only 4.2% of the number of data
points - an 18.2% absolute gain over prior SOTA.

Despite achieving state-of-the-art performance, MTT cannot scale to large datasets due to its huge GPU memory
requirement (Zhou et al., 2022; Cazenavette et al., 2022;
Cui et al., 2022). This is fundamentally due to the objective function of MTT, which unrolls T SGD updates with
synthetic images and matches the resulting weights with a
reference point (obtained by training on the original dataset).
Since this objective function unrolls T optimization steps,
back-propagating requires expanding and storing T gradient
computational graphs in GPU memory and is prohibitive in
large-scale problems. For instance, unrolling T = 30 steps
on CIFAR-10 requires 47GB GPU memory (Cazenavette
et al., 2022) with IPC 50, and thus it runs out of memory
when scaling to ImageNet-1K. This has become the main
issue when scaling MTT to large problems.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a memory-efficient version of
MTT, which only requires storing a single gradient computational graph even when unrolling T steps. This reduces the
GPU memory complexity of MTT with respect to number
of unrolled steps from linear to constant, while achieving
an identical solution and with only marginal computational
overhead. This is done by a novel procedure to cache and
rearrange the gradient computation of the trajectory matching loss. Equipped with the proposed method, we are able
to scale MTT to ImageNet-1K with 1, 2, 10, 50 IPCs. In
the literature, there exists only one most recent paper that
scales to ImageNet-1K with IPC up to 2, but it encounters

In this paper, we study the problem of dataset distillation,
where the goal is to distill a large dataset into a small set
of synthetic samples, such that models trained with the
synthetic samples can achieve competitive performance
compared with training on the whole dataset (Wang et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Justin Cui
<justincui@ucla.edu>, Cho-Jui Hsieh <chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

