SNeRL: Semantic-aware Neural Radiance Fields for Reinforcement Learning

Dongseok Shim * 1 Seungjae Lee * 2 3 H. Jin Kim 1 2 3

Abstract

Multi-view Image

As previous representations for reinforcement
learning cannot effectively incorporate a humanintuitive understanding of the 3D environment,
they usually suffer from sub-optimal performances. In this paper, we present Semantic-aware
Neural Radiance Fields for Reinforcement Learning (SNeRL), which jointly optimizes semanticaware neural radiance fields (NeRF) with a convolutional encoder to learn 3D-aware neural implicit
representation from multi-view images. We introduce 3D semantic and distilled feature fields
in parallel to the RGB radiance fields in NeRF
to learn semantic and object-centric representation for reinforcement learning. SNeRL outperforms not only previous pixel-based representations but also recent 3D-aware representations
both in model-free and model-based reinforcement learning.

Encoder

𝒵

NeRF
RGB field

RL
agent
Action

Reward
Feature field

Semantic field

Figure 1. Semantic-aware NeRF for reinforcement learning.
We present SNeRL, a reinforcement learning framework that
learns 3D-aware representation with a convolutional encoder and
semantic-aware NeRF decoder. The latent vectors from the encoder are propagated to the policy network to generate an action
for RL agents.

Other approaches utilize joint learning of auxiliary unsupervised tasks (Laskin et al., 2020b; Schwarzer et al., 2020),
and data-augmented reinforcement learning (Laskin et al.,
2020a; Yarats et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Developing agents that can achieve complex control tasks
directly from image inputs has been a long-standing problem in reinforcement learning (RL). Previous works over
the past few years have made notable progress in the data
efficiency of learning visual control problems. The most
challenging part of solving visual control tasks is obtaining the low-dimensional latent representations from highdimensional observations. To this end, they pre-train the
encoder in various ways such as unsupervised representation learning via image reconstruction using offline datasets
(Finn et al., 2016; Kulkarni et al., 2019; Islam et al., 2022),
contrastive learning (Zhan et al., 2022), reconstructing task
information (Yang & Nachum, 2021; Yamada et al., 2022),
and training multi-view consistency (Dwibedi et al., 2018).

While a number of works have been proposed to improve
the data efficiency in visual control problems, the majority
of the encoders trained from those methods have limited
capability in obtaining 3D structural information and lack
equivariance to 3D transformations. Such limitations come
from ignoring 3D structural information and learning visual
representation from a single-view observation.
Recently, there have been attempts to consider 3D information of the environment in robot control and manipulation
(Li et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2022) by learning implicit
spatial representation via neural radiance fields (NeRF)
(Mildenhall et al., 2020). They map pixel-level multi-view
observations of a scene to a latent vector through an autoencoder structure, where the NeRF decoder provides 3D structured neural scene representation via RGB self-supervision
for each view.

*

Equal contribution; Order was determined by coin flip
Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University
2
Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University 3 ASRI, AIIS,
Seoul National University. Correspondence to: H. Jin Kim
<hjinkim@snu.ac.kr>.

1

Even though the aforementioned pioneers achieved better
performance compared to the previous RL algorithms with
a single-view observation, they still did not take full advantage of 3D-aware representation learning. It is because those

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

