Neuro-Symbolic Continual Learning:
Knowledge, Reasoning Shortcuts and Concept Rehearsal

Emanuele Marconato * 1 2 Gianpaolo Bontempo * 1 3 Elisa Ficarra 3 Simone Calderara 3 Andrea Passerini 2
Stefano Teso 4 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
We initiate the study of Neuro-Symbolic Continual Learning (NeSy-CL), in which the goal is to solve a sequence
of neuro-symbolic tasks. As is common in neuro-symbolic
(NeSy) prediction (Manhaeve et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018;
Giunchiglia & Lukasiewicz, 2020; Hoernle et al., 2022;
Ahmed et al., 2022a), the machine is provided prior knowledge relating one or more target labels to symbolic, highlevel concepts extracted from sub-symbolic data, and has to
compute a prediction by reasoning over said concepts. The
central challenge of Nesy-CL is that the data distribution
and the knowledge may vary across tasks. E.g., in medical
diagnosis knowledge may encode known relationships between possible symptoms and conditions, while different
tasks are characterized by different distributions of X-ray
scans, symptoms and conditions. The goal, as in continual
learning (CL) (Parisi et al., 2019), is to obtain a model that
attains high accuracy on new tasks without forgetting what
it has already learned under a limited storage budget.

We introduce Neuro-Symbolic Continual Learning, where a model has to solve a sequence of
neuro-symbolic tasks, that is, it has to map subsymbolic inputs to high-level concepts and compute predictions by reasoning consistently with
prior knowledge. Our key observation is that
neuro-symbolic tasks, although different, often
share concepts whose semantics remains stable
over time. Traditional approaches fall short: existing continual strategies ignore knowledge altogether, while stock neuro-symbolic architectures
suffer from catastrophic forgetting. We show that
leveraging prior knowledge by combining neurosymbolic architectures with continual strategies
does help avoid catastrophic forgetting, but also
that doing so can yield models affected by reasoning shortcuts. These undermine the semantics of the acquired concepts, even when detailed
prior knowledge is provided upfront and inference is exact, and in turn continual performance.
To overcome these issues, we introduce COOL, a
COncept-level cOntinual Learning strategy tailored for neuro-symbolic continual problems that
acquires high-quality concepts and remembers
them over time. Our experiments on three novel
benchmarks highlights how COOL attains sustained high performance on neuro-symbolic continual learning tasks in which other strategies
fail.1

Existing approaches are insufficient for NeSy-CL: neurosymbolic models are designed for offline learning and as
such suffer from catastrophic forgetting (Parisi et al., 2019),
while continual learning strategies are designed for neural
networks that neglect prior knowledge, preventing applications to tasks where compliance with regulations is key, e.g.,
safety critical tasks (Ahmed et al., 2022a; Hoernle et al.,
2022). It is tempting to tackle NeSy-CL by pairing a SotA
neuro-symbolic architecture, such as DeepProbLog (Manhaeve et al., 2018), with a proven rehearsal or distillation
strategy, for instance dark experience replay (Buzzega et al.,
2020). This yields immediate benefits, in the sense that prior
knowledge makes the model more robust to catastrophic forgetting, as we will show. However, we show also that it is
flawed, because it cannot prevent the model from acquiring
reasoning shortcuts (defined in Section 3), through which it
attains high task accuracy by acquiring unintended concepts
with task-specific semantics, as illustrated in Figure 1. In
turn, reasoning shortcuts entail poor cross-task transfer.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Pisa, Italy 2 DISI, University of Trento, Italy 3 University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Italy 4 CIMeC, University of Trento, Italy. Correspondence to:
Emanuele Marconato <emanuele.marconato@unitn.it>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
The data and code are available at https://github.com/emamarconato/NeSy-CL

Our key observation is that, even though neuro-symbolic
tasks may differ in terms of knowledge and distribution, the
semantics of the concepts they rely on must remain stable
1

