Personalized Federated Learning under Mixture of Distributions

Yue Wu * 1 Shuaicheng Zhang * 2 Wenchao Yu 3 Yanchi Liu 3 Quanquan Gu 1 Dawei Zhou 2 Haifeng Chen 3
Wei ChengB 3

Abstract

learning across distributed data sources without compromising the confidential nature of the original training data,
while also being fully compliant with government regulations (Lim et al., 2020; Aledhari et al., 2020; Mothukuri
et al., 2021). This method has drawn a lot of attention in
recent years since it enables model training on diverse, decentralized data while protecting privacy and security. In
many applications, the model needs to be adjusted for each
device or user, notably the cross-device scenarios. These
situations are the focus of Personalized Federated Learning
(PFL), which tries to provide client-specific model parameters for a certain model architecture. In this scenario, each
client aims to obtain a local model with a respectable test
result on its own local data distribution (Wang et al., 2019).

The recent trend towards Personalized Federated
Learning (PFL) has garnered significant attention as it allows for the training of models that
are tailored to each client while maintaining data
privacy. However, current PFL techniques primarily focus on modeling the conditional distribution heterogeneity (i.e. concept shift), which
can result in suboptimal performance when the
distribution of input data across clients diverges
(i.e. covariate shift). Additionally, these techniques often lack the ability to adapt to unseen
data, further limiting their effectiveness in realworld scenarios. To address these limitations, we
propose a novel approach, FedGMM, which utilizes Gaussian mixture models (GMM) to effectively fit the input data distributions across diverse
clients. The model parameters are estimated by
maximum likelihood estimation utilizing a federated Expectation-Maximization algorithm, which
is solved in closed form and does not assume
gradient similarity. Furthermore, FedGMM possesses an additional advantage of adapting to new
clients with minimal overhead, and it also enables
uncertainty quantification. Empirical evaluations
on synthetic and benchmark datasets demonstrate
the superior performance of our method in both
PFL classification and novel sample detection.

In order to cater to the unique needs of individual clients
and address the statistical diversity that exists among them,
existing PFL studies frequently resort to an elegant amalgamation of federated learning and other sophisticated approaches, such as meta-learning (Sim et al., 2019), client
clustering (Ghosh et al., 2020), multi-task learning (Marfoq
et al., 2021), knowledge distillation (Zhu et al., 2021), and
the lottery ticket hypothesis(Wang et al., 2022), to achieve
the desired level of personalization. For example, clients
can be assigned to many clusters, and clients in the same
cluster are assumed to use the same model via clustered FL
techniques (Ghosh et al., 2020). To train a global model as
a meta-model and then fine-tune the parameters for each
client, several researchers have embraced meta-learning
based methodologies (Sim et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2019).
Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2022) suggested utilizing a routing hypernetwork to expertly curate and assemble modular
blocks from a globally shared modular pool, in order to
craft bespoke local networks through the application of the
lottery ticket theory. A recent study (Marfoq et al., 2021)
that leveraged the multi-task learning concept posited that
each client’s data distribution was a composite of M underlying distributions, and proposed the use of a linear mixture
model to make tailored decisions based on the shared components among them. It optimizes the varying conditional
distribution Pc (y|x) under the assumption that the marginal
distributions Pc (x) = Pc′ (x) are the same for all clients
(Assumption 2 in (Marfoq et al., 2021)).

1. Introduction
The sheer volume of data at our disposal today is often sequestered in isolated silos, making it challenging to access
and utilize. Federated Learning (FL) presents a groundbreaking solution to this conundrum, enabling collaborative
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. 3 NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, USA. Correspondence to: Wei Cheng
<weicheng@nec-labs.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

While these approaches are adept at addressing the issue of
1

