Parallel Online Clustering of Bandits via Hedonic Game

Xiaotong Cheng 1 Cheng Pan 1 Setareh Maghsudi 1

Abstract

To develop decision-making strategies for large-scale applications, it is conventional to assume a linear structure
between actions and rewards thanks to their simplicity and
effectiveness (Li et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022). In the stochastic linear bandit (Auer, 2002; Dani et al., 2008; AbbasiYadkori et al., 2011), each arm (action) has a feature vector
known as “context”. The expected payoff associated with
each arm is an unknown linear function of the feature vector.
The agent must infer the unknown linear function based on
the context and payoff information and select accordingly.
The contextual linear bandit is a reference model for adaptive recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010; Caron et al.,
2012).

Contextual bandit algorithms appear in several applications, such as online advertisement and recommendation systems like personalized education
or personalized medicine. Individually-tailored
recommendations boost the performance of the
underlying application; nevertheless, providing
individual suggestions becomes costly and even
implausible as the number of users grows. As
such, to efficiently serve the demands of several
users in modern applications, it is imperative to
identify the underlying users’ clusters, i.e., the
groups of users for which a single recommendation might be (near-)optimal. We propose CLUBHG, a novel algorithm that integrates a gametheoretic approach into clustering inference. Our
algorithm achieves Nash equilibrium at each inference step and discovers the underlying clusters.
We also provide regret analysis within a standard
linear stochastic noise setting. Finally, experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets show
the superior performance of our proposed algorithm compared to the state-of-the-art algorithms.

Standard contextual bandit algorithms usually focus on a
single user and make recommendations only based on the
individual’s historical data (Li et al., 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011). However, such an approach suffers from several shortcomings in serving many users with multiple recommendable items in modern applications (Mahadik et al.,
2020). On the one hand, the large number of users and items
increases the computational burden significantly. On the
other hand, the sparse and insufficient observations concerning the single agent yield a weak estimation of its characteristics and degrade the decision-making performance (Yang
et al., 2020). To address such shortcomings, it is imperative
to identify a few subgroups/communities within which the
users share similar characteristics and utilize their collective
effect for high-quality, speedy, and dynamic recommendations. In other words, discovering the clustering structure of
users can reduce the computational burden and improve the
quality of recommendations.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems, which formalize the
exploration-exploitation trade-off (Slivkins et al., 2019),
have been under intensive investigations in the past decade
(Li et al., 2019). In its seminal setting, an agent acts at
each round and receives an instantaneous reward. The agent
aims to develop an action selection policy to maximize its
cumulative rewards over all rounds. The MAB framework
finds application in facing decision-making problems in
various areas such as clinical trials, dynamic pricing, computational advertising, web-page content optimization, and
recommendation systems (Gentile et al., 2017; Bouneffouf
et al., 2020).

References (Gentile et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016) initially
investigated the clustering of bandits, where the algorithms
adaptively learn the clustering structure over users based
on the estimated user similarities. The proposed algorithms
use graph vertices to represent users and consider the users
connected by edges to belong to the same cluster; Nevertheless, these algorithms have several limitations. First,
since they use connected components to represent clusters,
two clusters can become completely disjoint if all edges
between them are removed. Besides, splitting clusters is
irreversible, i.e., once users are (erroneously) separated into
different clusters, they cannot be aggregated again (Gentile et al., 2017). Furthermore, most of the bandit-based

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Xiaotong Cheng
<xiaotong.cheng@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

