Multi-Environment Pretraining Enables Transfer to Action Limited Datasets

David Venuto * 1 2 Mengjiao Yang * 3 4 Pieter Abbeel 4 Doina Precup 1 2 3 Igor Mordatch 3 Ofir Nachum 3

Abstract

computer vision applications (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2018; Zhai et al., 2021). Recently, a number of works have shown that a similar approach can be applied to tasks more often tackled by reinforcement learning (RL), such as robotics and game-playing.
For example, Reed et al. (2022) suggest combining large
datasets of expert behavior from a variety of RL domains
in order to train a single generalist agent, while Lee et al.
(2022) demonstrate a similar result but using non-expert
(offline RL) data from a suite of Atari game-playing environments and using a decision transformer (DT) sequence
modeling objective

Using massive datasets to train large-scale models
has emerged as a dominant approach for broad
generalization in natural language and vision applications. In reinforcement learning, however,
a key challenge is that available data of sequential decision making is often not annotated with
actions - for example, videos of game-play are
much more available than sequences of frames
paired with their logged game controls. We propose to circumvent this challenge by combining
large but sparsely-annotated datasets from a target environment of interest with fully-annotated
datasets from various other source environments.
Our method, Action Limited PreTraining (ALPT),
leverages the generalization capabilities of inverse
dynamics modelling (IDM) to label missing action data in the target environment. We show that
utilizing even one additional environment dataset
of labelled data during IDM pretraining gives rise
to substantial improvements in generating action
labels for unannotated sequences. We evaluate our
method on Atari game-playing environments and
show that with target environment data equivalent
to only 12 minutes of gameplay, we can significantly improve game performance and generalization capability compared to other approaches.
Furthermore, we show that ALPT remains beneficial even when target and source environments
share no common actions, highlighting the importance of pretraining on broad datasets even
though they might seem irrelevant to the target
task at hand.

Applying large-scale training necessarily relies on the ability
to gather sufficiently large and diverse datasets. For RL
domains, this can be a challenge, as the most easily available
data – for example, videos of a human playing a video game
or a human completing a predefined task – often does not
contain labelled actions, i.e., game controls or robot joint
controls. We call such datasets action limited, because little
or none of the dataset is annotated with action information.
Transferring the success of approaches like DT to such tasks
is therefore bottlenecked by the ability to acquire action
labels, which can be expensive and time-consuming (Zolna
et al., 2020).
Some recent works have explored approaches to mitigate
the issue of action limited datasets. For example, Video
PreTraining (VPT) (Baker et al., 2022) proposes gathering
a small amount (2k hours of video) of labeled data manually which is used to train an inverse dynamics model
(IDM) (Nguyen-Tuong et al., 2008); the IDM is then used
to provide action labels on a much larger video-only dataset
(70k hours). This method is shown to achieve human level
performance in Minecraft. It has also been demonstrated
that some agents can learn directly from videos without any
action labels (Seo et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

While VPT shows promising results, it still requires over
2k hours of manually-labelled data; thus, a similar amount
of expensive labelling is potentially necessary to extend
VPT to other environments. In this paper, we propose an
orthogonal but related approach to VPT: leveraging a large
set of labeled data from various source domains to learn an
agent policy on a limited action dataset of a target evaluation
environment. To tackle this setting, we propose Action Lim-

The training of large-scale models on large and diverse data
has become a standard approach in natural language and
*

Equal contribution. 1 Mila 2 McGill University 3 Google DeepMind 4 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to:
David Venuto <david.venuto@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

