Automated Search for Conjectures on Mathematical Constants using Analysis of
Integer Sequences

Ofir Razon 1 Yoav Harris 1 Shahar Gottlieb 1 Dan Carmon 2 Ofir David 1 Ido Kaminer 1

Abstract

ing mathematical constants often inspired mathematical research that revealed intrinsic properties of said constants
and occasionally had a great impact in seemingly unrelated
fields (Andrews, 1979). In Ramanujan’s ‘Lost Notebook’,
formulas about q-series and on mock modular forms were
found to have applications in physics such as calculating
black hole entropy (Harvey, 2019). Furthermore, in number
theory, a polynomial continued fraction (CF) formula of
ζ(3) was utilized by Apery to prove it’s irrationality (Apéry,
1979). However, despite their great impact, the discovery of
new formulas has been a scarce occasion, relying mostly on
the intuition of great mathematicians such as Ramanujan.

The discovery of formulas involving mathematical constants such as π and e had a great impact on various fields of science and mathematics.
However, such discoveries have remained scarce,
relying on the intuition of mathematicians such as
Ramanujan and Gauss. Recent efforts to automate
such discoveries, such as the Ramanujan Machine
project, relied solely on exhaustive search and remain limited by the space of options that can be
covered. Here we propose a fundamentally different method to search for conjectures on mathematical constants: through analysis of integer
sequences. We introduce the Enumerated Signedcontinued-fraction Massey Approve (ESMA) algorithm, which builds on the Berlekamp-Massey
algorithm to identify patterns in integer sequences
that represent mathematical constants. ESMA
has found various known formulas and new conjectures for e, e2 , tan(1), and ratios of values of
Bessel functions, many of which provide faster
numerical convergence than their corresponding
simple continued fractions forms. We also characterize the space of constants that ESMA can catch
and quantify its algorithmic advantage in certain
scenarios. Altogether, this work continues the
development toward algorithm-augmented mathematical intuition, to help accelerate mathematical
research.

In the Ramanujan Machine Project (Raayoni et al., 2021),
an automated approach for conjecture discovery involving
fundamental constants was presented. This automation was
approached as a search problem: different functions of given
fundamental constants (e.g.,(1 + e)/(1 − e)) are calculated
to some limited precision and stored in hash tables, which
are later numerically compared with decimal values of a
generated family of polynomial CFs (a CF in which the
partial numerator and denominator sequences are integercoefficient polynomials (Laughlin & Wyshinski, 2005)).
Each match is further validated by a high decimal precision calculation. This algorithm obtained significant results,
discovering many previously unknown formulas and conjectures for e, π, π 2 , and ζ(3), along with discovering the most
efficient representation of the Catalan constant G (Raayoni
et al., 2021). However, the algorithm was limited in its
capacities since it still relied on an exhaustive search, expensive in computational resources and limited in the space of
options that it can cover.

1. Introduction

Here we propose a fundamentally different approach. We
convert each target constant into a set of integer sequences
which we search for patterns utilizing the BerlekampMassey algorithm (Berlekamp, 1966; Massey, 1969). Such
a pattern, if exists, may provide a formula for the target
constant. We thus name the overall algorithm Enumerated
Signed-CF Massey Approve (ESMA).

Fundamental mathematical constants like e, π and φ are
ubiquitous in almost all fields of science and mathematics (Finch, 2003). The discovery of new formulas involv1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
Israel institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 StarkWare Industries, Netanya, Israel. Correspondence to: Ofir Razon <razonofir@gmail.com>, Ido Kaminer <kaminer@technion.ac.il>.

Our approach is inspired by ideas of compression, entropy,
and information theory (Shannon, 1948). Decimal representations of irrational constants such as e may seem (incorrectly) to contain an infinite amount of data with no

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

