Robust and private stochastic linear bandits

Vasileios Charisopoulos 1 Hossein Esfandiari 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract

In theory, deciding the next action sequentially is easiest.
However, there are several obstacles to overcome when it
comes to practice. The first obstacle is that the rewards in
bandit algorithms are often the result of interactions with
physical entities (Bouneffouf et al., 2020) (e.g., recommendation systems, clinical trials, advertising, etc.), raising concerns about the privacy of participating entities. For example, responses of an individual to medical treatments can
inadvertently reveal privacy-sensitive health information.
Therefore, it is essential to design learning algorithms that
preserve the privacy of reward sequences.

In this paper, we study the stochastic linear bandit problem under the additional requirements of
differential privacy, robustness and batched observations. In particular, we assume an adversary
randomly chooses a constant fraction of the observed rewards in each batch, replacing them with
arbitrary numbers. We present differentially private and robust variants of the arm elimination
algorithm using logarithmic batch queries under
two privacy models and provide regret bounds in
both settings. In the first model, every reward in
each round is reported by a potentially different
client, which reduces to standard local differential privacy (LDP). In the second model, every
action is “owned” by a different client, who may
aggregate the rewards over multiple queries and
privatize the aggregate response instead. To the
best of our knowledge, our algorithms are the
first simultaneously providing differential privacy
and adversarial robustness in the stochastic linear
bandits problem.

Furthermore, observations collected from multiple users
or external resources are prone to failures or corruptions.
These corruptions are modeled by adversaries, which can
tamper with a fraction of the observed rewards. Adversarial
corruptions can be strategic, (e.g., simultaneously hijacking
the devices of multiple users), or random (such as misclicks
in the context of an ad campaign). Regardless of their nature, they highlight the need for developing robust learning
algorithms that succeed in the presence of such corruptions.
Developing robust private policies has drawn considerable
attention in the past couple of years ((Esfandiari et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2021; Kothari et al., 2022; Ghazi et al., 2021;
Dimitrakakis et al., 2014; Li et al., 2022b)). However, despite the importance of the bandits model, we are not aware
of any provably robust and private policy for this model.

1. Introduction
Bandits model is a popular formulation for online learning,
wherein a learner interacts with her environment by choosing a sequence of actions, each of which presents a reward
to the learner, from an available (potentially infinite) set of
actions. The goal of the learner is to minimize her regret,
defined as the difference between the rewards obtained by
the chosen sequence of actions and the best possible action
in hindsight. To achieve this, the learner must balance between exploration (choosing actions that reveal information
about the action set) and exploitation (repeating actions that
offered the highest rewards in previous rounds).

Lastly, in practice, it is often desirable or even necessary
for the learner to perform actions in parallel. For example,
ad campaigns present an assortment of advertisements to
multiple users at the same time and are only periodically
recalibrated (Bertsimas & Mersereau, 2007). Consequently,
batch policies must optimally balance between parallelization, which can offer significant time savings, and information exchange, which must happen frequently enough to
allow for exploration of the action space (Esfandiari et al.,
2021).
In this paper, we develop a learning policy that addresses
both privacy and robustness challenges, while enjoying the
benefits of parallelization. Specifically, our policy protects
the privacy of reward sequences by respecting the standard
differential privacy measure, while withstanding an adversary that changes a constant fraction of the observed rewards
in each batch. In the remainder of this section, we formally

1

Operations Research & Information Engineering, Cornell University. Part of this work was completed while the author was
with Google. 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Vasileios
Charisopoulos <vc333@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

