Less is More: Task-aware Layer-wise Distillation for Language Model
Compression

Chen Liang 1 Simiao Zuo 2 Qingru Zhang 1 Pengcheng He 2 Weizhu Chen 2 Tuo Zhao 1

Abstract

Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; He et al., 2020;
2023). Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015)
is a powerful tool to compress large models (i.e., teacher
models) into small ones (i.e., student models) with a minimal loss of performance. This approach trains the student
to match the output predictions of the teacher.

Layer-wise distillation is a powerful tool to compress large models (i.e. teacher models) into small
ones (i.e., student models). The student distills
knowledge from the teacher by mimicking the
hidden representations of the teacher at every intermediate layer. However, layer-wise distillation
is difficult. Since the student has a smaller model
capacity than the teacher, it is often under-fitted.
Furthermore, the hidden representations of the
teacher contain redundant information that the student does not necessarily need for the target task’s
learning. To address these challenges, we propose
a novel Task-aware layEr-wise Distillation (TED).
TED designs task-aware filters to align the hidden
representations of the student and the teacher at
each layer. The filters select the knowledge that
is useful for the target task from the hidden representations. As such, TED reduces the knowledge
gap between the two models and helps the student to fit better on the target task. We evaluate
TED in two scenarios: continual pre-training and
fine-tuning. TED demonstrates significant and
consistent improvements over existing distillation
methods in both scenarios. Code is available
at https://github.com/cliang1453/
task-aware-distillation.

However, such a last-layer-only distillation approach does
not exploit the intermediate layers of the teacher, which
contain rich semantic and syntactic knowledge. To leverage
such knowledge, researchers have proposed a layer-wise
distillation approach, which trains the student to match the
hidden representation of the teacher at each layer (Sun et al.,
2019; Jiao et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020b; Hou et al., 2020;
Zuo et al., 2022). Such an approach often improves the
generalization performance of the student model.
Nevertheless, layer-wise distillation faces two major challenges. First, the student may struggle to mimic the hidden
representations of the teacher due to their large capacity gap.
This often leads to large discrepancies between their hidden
representations. Consequently, model training/optimization
often favors reducing such large discrepancies over the training loss of the student (i.e., the target task’s loss such as
cross-entropy), resulting in an under-fitted student model.
Second, mimicking the hidden representations may not be
beneficial for the target task’s learning. This is because the
hidden representations of the teacher often contain redundant information (Dalvi et al., 2020; Durrani et al., 2020).
Given the limited capacity of the student, such redundant
information may compete with the useful information for
distillation, hindering the useful knowledge from being distilled. Our empirical observations show that for some tasks,
layer-wise distillation only marginally outperforms standard
KD (Table 2).

1. Introduction
Large pre-trained language models have achieved state-ofthe-art performances in many natural language processing
tasks (Wang et al., 2019; Rajpurkar et al., 2016a). However,
their deployment in resource-limited scenarios is hindered
by their huge number of parameters (Raffel et al., 2019;

To address these challenges, we propose a novel layerwise distillation method, TED (Task-aware layEr-wise
Distillation), which distills task-specific knowledge from
the teacher to the student. We design a pair of task-aware
filters for each layer of the teacher and student1 . Each filter

1
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, U.S.A.
2
Microsoft, Redmond, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Chen Liang
<cliang73@gatech.edu>.

1

For simplicity, we assume that the student and teacher are of
the same depth (number of layers) but different widths. The case
of different depths will be elaborated in Section 2.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

