Rethinking Weak Supervision in Helping Contrastive Learning

Jingyi Cui 1 * Weiran Huang 2 3 * Yifei Wang 4 * Yisen Wang 1 5

Abstract

et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021; Wang et al.,
2021a). It learns good representations of high-dimensional
observations from a large amount of unlabeled data, by
pulling together an anchor and its augmented views in the
embedding space. On the other hand, supervised contrastive
learning (Khosla et al., 2020) uses same-class examples
and their corresponding augmentations as positive labels,
and achieves significantly better performance than both the
unsupervised contrastive learning and the state-of-the-art
classification losses, e.g. cross entropy loss. While accurate
supervised signals are not always available, there is a lot of
weak supervision accompanying the data. This makes us
wonder: can weak supervision help contrastive learning?

Contrastive learning has shown outstanding performances in both supervised and unsupervised
learning, and has recently been introduced to
solve weakly supervised learning problems such
as semi-supervised learning and noisy label learning. Despite the empirical evidence showing that
semi-supervised labels improve the representations of contrastive learning, it remains unknown
if noisy supervised information can be directly
used in training instead of after manual denoising.
Therefore, to explore the mechanical differences
between semi-supervised and noisy-labeled information in helping contrastive learning, we establish a unified theoretical framework of contrastive
learning under weak supervision. Specifically, we
investigate the most intuitive paradigm of jointly
training supervised and unsupervised contrastive
losses. By translating the weakly supervised information into a similarity graph under the framework of spectral clustering based on the posterior
probability of weak labels, we establish the downstream classification error bound. We prove that
semi-supervised labels improve the downstream
error bound whereas noisy labels have limited
effects under such a paradigm. Our theoretical
findings here provide new insights for the community to rethink the role of weak supervision in
helping contrastive learning.

There are two major types of weak supervision. The first is
semi-supervised information, where the supervised labels
are only available on a small fraction of samples. The second
is noisy-labeled information, where the labels are available
but unreliable, i.e. the labels can possibly be wrong. Empirical evidence has shown that semi-supervised information
can directly be used in positive sample selection to help improve the representations of contrastive learning by jointly
training the supervised and unsupervised contrastive losses
(Assran et al., 2020; Acharya et al., 2022). By contrast,
for noisy-labeled information, most methodological studies
use contrastive learning as a tool to select confident samples based on the learned representations (Yao et al., 2021;
Ortego et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022a),
whereas none of the existing literature demonstrates if noisy
label information can help improve the representations of
contrastive learning. Therefore, we are wondering if the
conclusion on noisy-labeled information is the same as the
semi-supervised information. If not, what are the differences
between semi-supervised and noisy-labeled information in
helping contrastive learning?

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning has shown state-of-the-art empirical
performances in unsupervised representation learning (Chen

In this paper, we show an awkward fact that noisy labels
have a limited effect on representations of contrastive learning under the joint training paradigm, and the winner of supervised and unsupervised contrastive learning itself serves
as an embarrassingly strong baseline. As a preview of results, in Figure 1, we plot the result of unsupervised contrastive learning trained without labels (SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020)), supervised contrastive learning trained with
noisy labels (SupCon (Khosla et al., 2020)), the winner of
SupCon and SimCLR (Max), and joint training of SimCLR

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 School of
Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 5 Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yisen Wang
<yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

