Demystifying Disagreement-on-the-Line in High Dimensions

Donghwan Lee * 1 Behrad Moniri * 2 Xinmeng Huang 1 Edgar Dobriban 3 Hamed Hassani 2

Abstract

they can be extremely sensitive to changes in the input data
distribution (e.g., Biggio et al. (2013); Szegedy et al. (2014);
Hendrycks et al. (2020), etc.). This is a significant concern in safety-critical applications where errors are costly
(e.g., Oakden-Rayner et al. (2020), etc.). In such scenarios,
it is important to estimate how well the predictive model
performs on out-of-distribution (OOD) data.

Evaluating the performance of machine learning
models under distribution shifts is challenging, especially when we only have unlabeled data from
the shifted (target) domain, along with labeled
data from the original (source) domain. Recent
work suggests that the notion of disagreement,
the degree to which two models trained with different randomness differ on the same input, is a
key to tackling this problem. Experimentally, disagreement and prediction error have been shown
to be strongly connected, which has been used to
estimate model performance. Experiments have
led to the discovery of the disagreement-on-theline phenomenon, whereby the classification error
under the target domain is often a linear function of the classification error under the source
domain; and whenever this property holds, disagreement under the source and target domain
follow the same linear relation. In this work, we
develop a theoretical foundation for analyzing disagreement in high-dimensional random features
regression; and study under what conditions the
disagreement-on-the-line phenomenon occurs in
our setting. Experiments on CIFAR-10-C, Tiny
ImageNet-C, and Camelyon17 are consistent with
our theory and support the universality of the theoretical findings.

Collecting labeled data from new distributions can be costly,
but unlabeled data is often readily available. As such, recent
research efforts have focused on developing methods that
can estimate a predictive model’s OOD performance using
only unlabeled data (e.g., Garg et al. (2021); Deng & Zheng
(2021); Chen et al. (2021); Guillory et al. (2021), etc.).
In particular, works dating back at least to Recht et al.
(2019) suggest that the out-of-distribution (OOD) and indistribution (ID) errors of predictive models of different
complexities are highly correlated. This was rigorously
proved in Tripuraneni et al. (2021) for random features
model under covariate shift. However, determining the correlation requires labeled OOD data. To sidestep this requirement, Baek et al. (2022) proposed an alternative approach
that looks at the disagreement on an unlabeled set of data
points between pairs of neural networks with the same architecture trained with different sources of randomness. They
observed a linear trend between ID and OOD disagreement,
as for ID and OOD error. Surprisingly, the linear trend had
the same empirical slope and intercept as the linear trend
between ID and OOD accuracy. This phenomenon, termed
disagreement-on-the-line, allows estimating the linear relationship between OOD and ID error using only unlabeled
data, and finally allows estimating the OOD error.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning methods such as deep neural networks are effective at prediction tasks when the input test
data is similar to the data used during training. However,

At the moment, the theoretical basis for disagreement-onthe-line remains unclear. It is unknown how generally it
occurs, and what factors (such as the type of models or
data used) may influence it. To better understand—or even
demystify—these empirical findings, in this paper, we develop a theoretical foundation for studying disagreement.
We focus on the following key questions:

*

Equal contribution 1 Graduate Group in Applied Mathematics
and Computational Science, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, PA, USA 3 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: Donghwan Lee <dh7401@sas.upenn.edu>, Behrad Moniri
<bemoniri@seas.upenn.edu>.

Is disagreement-on-the-line a universal phenomenon? Under what conditions is it guaranteed to happen, and what
happens if those conditions fail?

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To work towards answering these questions, we study dis-

1

