Differentially Private Distributed Bayesian Linear Regression with MCMC

Barış Alparslan 1 Sinan Yıldırım 1 Ş. İlker Birbil 2

Abstract

cal risk minimisation (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Bassily et al.,
2014; Abadi et al., 2016; Kuru et al., 2022) can be applied to
regression once it is cast as a data-driven optimisation problem. Many general-purpose Bayesian differentially private
estimation methods can also be used in regression problems.
Williams & Mcsherry (2010) is one of the first works that
considered a hierarchical model for the privatised data and
Bayesian estimation for the model parameters. Zhang et al.
(2016) analyse several differential privacy mechanisms for
posterior sampling and suggest using these mechanisms also
for linear regression. Dimitrakakis et al. (2017) developed a
posterior sampling query algorithm to combine differential
privacy and Bayesian inference. Contrary to those onesample approaches, general-purpose differentially private
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, which
aim to identify the whole posterior distribution via iterative
sampling, can also be applied to regression (Wang et al.,
2015; Foulds et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2015; Yıldırım &
Ermiş, 2019; Heikkilä et al., 2019; Gong, 2022; Alparslan
& Yıldırım, 2022; Ju et al., 2022).

We propose a novel Bayesian inference framework for distributed differentially private linear regression. We consider a distributed setting where
multiple parties hold parts of the data and share
certain summary statistics of their portions in
privacy-preserving noise. We develop a novel
generative statistical model for privately shared
statistics, which exploits a useful distributional
relation between the summary statistics of linear
regression. We propose Bayesian estimation of
the regression coefficients, mainly using Markov
chain Monte Carlo algorithms, while we also provide a fast version that performs approximate
Bayesian estimation in one iteration. The proposed methods have computational advantages
over their competitors. We provide numerical
results on both real and simulated data, which
demonstrate that the proposed algorithms provide
well-rounded estimation and prediction.

Several works in the literature are somewhat more directly
related to differentially private regression. Zhang et al.
(2012) have suggested a functional mechanism method,
which is based on perturbing polynomial objective functions
with privacy-preserving noise. As an alternative, Dwork
et al. (2014b); Wang (2018) considered perturbation of
summary statistics. Alabi et al. (2022) provide a technical discussion on different point estimation methods for
differentially private simple linear regression, (that is when
we have a single feature). Ferrando et al. (2022) present a
method to compute confidence intervals for the coefficients
of linear regression. Cai et al. (2021) study the rates of convergence for parameter estimation with differential privacy
via output perturbation, where a non-private estimator is
perturbed. All those works consider point estimation of the
linear regression parameters.

1. Introduction
Linear regression is a mathematical method that lies at the
core of statistical research. Many researchers have been
working on linear regression since the 19th century, and
hence, many well-known solution methods exist. On a separate note, privacy-preserving statistical learning has gained
popularity and importance in recent years, with differential
privacy prevailing as the most commonly used definition
for privacy (Dwork, 2006; Dwork et al., 2014a; Dankar &
El Emam, 2013). As a result, there is a recent but growing
interest in differentially private linear regression.
Many works in the data privacy literature do not mainly
focus on regression but are motivated by or can be applied
to regression. As an example, differentially private empiri-

In this paper, we focus on differentially private distributed
Bayesian inference for the parameters of linear regression.
We use a novel hierarchical model that relies on a distributional relationship (Proposition 3.1) between the summary statistics of linear regression, which, to the best of
our knowledge, has not been exploited so far. We propose
Bayesian inference algorithms that take perturbations of
summary statistics as observations. The general inferential

1

Faculty of Engineering and Sciences, Sabancı University,
Turkey 2 Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Barış Alparslan
<baris.alparslan@sabanciuniv.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

