Sample and Predict Your Latent: Modality-free Sequential Disentanglement via
Contrastive Estimation
Ilan Naiman * 1 Nimrod Berman * 1 Omri Azencot 1

Abstract

Data disentanglement is related to representation learning,
where semantic latent representations are sought, to be used
in various downstream tasks. A common goal in sequential
disentanglement is the factorization of data to time-invariant
(i.e., static) and time-variant (i.e., dynamic) features (Hsu
et al., 2017). Most sequential disentanglement approaches
for arbitrary data modalities such as video, audio, and time
series are unsupervised, modeling the task via variational
autoencoders (VAE) (Hsu et al., 2017; Yingzhen & Mandt,
2018; Han et al., 2021). Effectively, the static and dynamic
factors are obtained via separate posterior distributions.

Unsupervised disentanglement is a long-standing
challenge in representation learning. Recently,
self-supervised techniques achieved impressive
results in the sequential setting, where data is timedependent. However, the latter methods employ
modality-based data augmentations and random
sampling or solve auxiliary tasks. In this work,
we propose to avoid that by generating, sampling,
and comparing empirical distributions from the
underlying variational model. Unlike existing
work, we introduce a self-supervised sequential
disentanglement framework based on contrastive
estimation with no external signals, while using
common batch sizes and samples from the latent
space itself. In practice, we propose a unified,
efficient, and easy-to-code sampling strategy for
semantically similar and dissimilar views of the
data. We evaluate our approach on video, audio,
and time series benchmarks. Our method presents
state-of-the-art results in comparison to existing
techniques. The code is available at GitHub.

Self-supervised learning appeared only recently in sequence
disentanglement works via supervisory signals, pretext tasks,
and contrastive estimation. However, existing SSL introduces several shortcomings as it depends on the underlying
modality. In this work, modality refers to the properties
of the data or task. For instance, (Zhu et al., 2020) design
auxiliary tasks per data type, e.g., predict silence in audio
segments or detect a face in an image. Similarly, (Bai et al.,
2021) require positive and negative samples with respect
to the input, i.e., same-class and different-class examples,
respectively. In practice, positive views are obtained via
data-dependent data augmentation transformations such as
rotations and cropping, whereas negative views are selected
randomly from the batch. To increase the variability in the
batch, common solutions address these issues by increasing
the batch or creating a memory bank, resulting in high memory costs. In this work, we refer to the above approaches
as modality-based supervision methods, and we argue that
they can be avoided if the underlying model is generative.

1. Introduction
One of the main challenges for modern learning frameworks
in tackling new tasks is the lack of high-quality real-world
labeled data. Unfortunately, labeling massive amounts of
data is a time-consuming process that typically requires
expert knowledge. Unsupervised learning is a modeling
paradigm for learning without labels, and thus it gained
increased attention in recent years (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015). Recent approaches utilize the inputs as supervisory
signals (Chen et al., 2020a) and use pretext tasks (Misra &
Maaten, 2020), yielding highly-competitive self-supervised
learning (SSL) frameworks (Caron et al., 2020). The goal
of this paper is to study the effect of a novel SSL approach
on sequential disentanglement problems.

To alleviate the above disadvantages, we design a novel
sampling technique, yielding a new contrastive learning
framework for disentanglement tasks of arbitrary sequential
data that is based on the following insights. First, variational
autoencoders naturally support the comparison of empirical distributions and their sampling. Second, we observe
that a sample may be contrasted with its subsequent VAE
prediction, leading to an increase in batch variability while
keeping its size fixed. Based on these observations, we will
show that we generate good positive and negative views.
We evaluate our method on several challenging disentanglement problems and downstream tasks, and we achieve
beyond state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in comparison
to several strong baseline methods.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, BenGurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Correspondence to: Ilan Naiman <naimani@post.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

