Provable Data Subset Selection For Efficient Neural Networks Training

Murad Tukan * 1 Samson Zhou 2 Alaa Maalouf 1 3 Daniela Rus 3 Vladimir Braverman 2 Dan Feldman 4

Abstract

the
PNhidden layer. The linear output layer then computes
i=1 αi ρ(∥x − ci ∥2 ), where αi is the weight of neuron i
in the linear output neuron. Therefore, RBFNNs are feedforward neural networks because the edges between the
nodes do not form a cycle, and enjoy advantages such
as simplicity of analysis, faster training time, and interpretability, compared to alternatives such as convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and even multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs) (Padmavati, 2011).

Radial basis function neural networks (RBFNN)
are well-known for their capability to approximate
any continuous function on a closed bounded set
with arbitrary precision given enough hidden neurons. In this paper, we introduce the first algorithm to construct coresets for RBFNNs, i.e., small
weighted subsets that approximate the loss of the
input data on any radial basis function network
and thus approximate any function defined by an
RBFNN on the larger input data. In particular, we
construct coresets for radial basis and Laplacian
loss functions. We then use our coresets to obtain a provable data subset selection algorithm for
training deep neural networks. Since our coresets
approximate every function, they also approximate the gradient of each weight in a neural network, which is a particular function on the input.
We then perform empirical evaluations on function approximation and dataset subset selection
on popular network architectures and data sets,
demonstrating the efficacy and accuracy of our
coreset construction.

Function approximation via RBFNNs. RBFNNs are universal approximators in the sense that an RBFNN with a sufficient number of hidden neurons (large N ) can approximate
any continuous function on a closed, bounded subset of Rd
with arbitrary precision (Park & Sandberg, 1991), i.e., given
a sufficiently large input set P of n points in Rd and given its
corresponding label function y : P → R, an RBFNN, can be
trained to approximate the function y. Therefore, RBFNNs
are commonly used across a wide range of applications,
such as function approximation (Park & Sandberg, 1991;
1993; Lu et al., 1997), time series prediction (Whitehead
& Choate, 1996; Leung et al., 2001; Harpham & Dawson,
2006), classification (Leonard & Kramer, 1991; Wuxing
et al., 2004; Babu & Suresh, 2012), and system control (Yu
et al., 2011; Liu, 2013), due to their faster learning speed.
For a given RBFNN size, i.e., the number of neurons in
the hidden layer, and an input set, the aim of this paper is
to compute a small weighted subset that approximates the
loss of the input data on any radial basis function neural
network of this size and thus approximates any function
defined (approximated) by such an RBFNN on the big input
data. This small weighted subset is called a coreset.

1. Introduction
Radial basis function neural networks (RBFNNs) are artificial neural networks that generally have three layers:
an input layer, a hidden layer with a radial basis function (RBF) as an activation function, and a linear output
layer. In this paper, the input layer receives a d-dimensional
vector x ∈ Rd of real numbers. The hidden layer then
consists of various nodes
 representing
 RBFs, to compute
2
ρ(∥x − ci ∥2 ) := exp − ∥x − ci ∥2 , where ci ∈ Rd is
the center vector for neuron i across, say, N neurons in

Coresets. Consider a prototypical machine/deep learning
problem in which we are given an input set P ⊆ Rd of n
points, its corresponding weights function w : P → R, a set
of queries X (a set of candidate solutions for the involved
optimization problem), and a loss function f : P × X →
[0, ∞). The tuple (P, w, X, f ) is called the query space, and
it defines the optimization problem at hand
P — where usually,
the goal is to find x∗ ∈ arg minx∈X p∈P w(p)f (p, x).
Given a query space (P, w, X, f ), a coreset is a small
weighted subset of the input P that can provably approximate the cost of every query x ∈ X on P (Feldman, 2020);
see Definition 2.1. In particular, a coreset for a RBFNN can

* This research was first carried out during the Ph.D. studies
at the department of computer science of the University of Haifa
1
DataHeroes, Israel. 2 Department of Computer science, Rice university. 3 CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, USA. 4 Department of computer
science, University of Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Murad
Tukan <murad@dataheroes.ai>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

