Achieving High Accuracy with PINNs via Energy Natural Gradient Descent

Johannes Müller 1 Marius Zeinhofer 2

Abstract

strong form, this is known under the name physics informed
neural networks or deep Galerkin method, see for example (Dissanayake & Phan-Thien, 1994; Lagaris et al., 1998;
Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018; Raissi et al., 2019); (b) if
existent, leveraging the variational formulation to obtain a
loss function, this is known as the deep Ritz method (E &
Yu, 2018), see also (Beck et al., 2020; Weinan et al., 2021)
for in depth reviews of these methods.

We propose energy natural gradient descent, a
natural gradient method with respect to a Hessianinduced Riemannian metric as an optimization
algorithm for physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) and the deep Ritz method. As a main
motivation we show that the update direction in
function space resulting from the energy natural gradient corresponds to the Newton direction
modulo an orthogonal projection onto the model’s
tangent space. We demonstrate experimentally
that energy natural gradient descent yields highly
accurate solutions with errors several orders of
magnitude smaller than what is obtained when
training PINNs with standard optimizers like gradient descent, Adam or BFGS, even when those
are allowed significantly more computation time.
We show that the approach can be combined with
deterministic and stochastic discretizations of the
integral terms and with deep networks allowing
for an application in higher dimensional settings.

One central reason for the rapid development of these methods is their mesh free nature which allows easy incorporation of data and their promise to be effective in highdimensional and parametric problems, that render meshbased approaches infeasible. Nevertheless, in practice when
these approaches are tackled directly with well established
optimizers like GD, SGD, Adam or BFGS, they often fail to
produce accurate solutions even for problems of small size.
This phenomenon is increasingly well documented in the
literature where it is attributed to an insufficient optimization leading to a variety of optimization procedures being
suggested, where accuracy better than in the order of 10−3
relative L2 error can rarely be achieved (Hao et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021; 2022b; Krishnapriyan et al., 2021; Davi
& Braga-Neto, 2022; Zeng et al., 2022). The only exceptions are ansatzes, which are conceptionally different from
direct gradient based optimization, more precisely greedy
algorithms and a reformulation as a min-max game (Hao
et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Neural network based PDE solvers have recently experienced an enormous growth in popularity and attention
within the scientific community following the works of (E
et al., 2017; Han et al., 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos,
2018; E & Yu, 2018; Raissi et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021).
In this article we focus on methods, which parametrize the
solution of the PDE by a neural network and use a formulation of the PDE in terms of a minimization problem to
construct a loss function used to train the network. The
works following this ansatz can be divided into the two approaches: (a) residual minimization of the PDEs residual in

Contributions We provide a simple, yet effective optimization method that achieves high accuracy for a range
of PDEs when combined with the PINN ansatz. Although
we evaluate the approach on PDE related tasks, it can be
applied to a wide variety of training problems. Our main
contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce the notion of energy natural gradients.
This natural gradient is defined via the Hessian of the
training objective in function space, see Definition 1

1

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences Inselstraße 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany 2 Department of Numerical
Analysis and Scientific Computing, Simula Research Laboratory,
Kristian Augusts Gate 23, 0164, Oslo, Norway. Correspondence
to: Marius Zeinhofer <mariusz@simula.no>, Johannes Müller
<jmueller@mis.mpg.de>.

We show that an energy natural gradient update in
parameter space corresponds to a Newton update in
function space. In particular, for quadratic energies the
function space update approximately moves into the
direction of the error u∗ − uθ , see Theorem 2.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We demonstrate the capabilities of the energy natu1

