Reinforcement Learning with General Utilities:
Simpler Variance Reduction and Large State-Action Space

Anas Barakat 1 Ilyas Fatkhullin 1 Niao He 1

Abstract

Bhatnagar & Lakshmanan (2012); Miryoosefi et al. (2019);
Efroni et al. (2020)), experiment design (Mutny et al., 2023)
and diverse skill discovery (Eysenbach et al., 2019) among
others. We refer the interested reader to Table 1 in Zahavy
et al. (2021); Mutti et al. (2022b), Zhang et al. (2020) and
references therein for further examples and a more comprehensive description of such problems.

We consider the reinforcement learning (RL) problem with general utilities which consists in maximizing a function of the state-action occupancy
measure. Beyond the standard cumulative reward RL setting, this problem includes as particular cases constrained RL, pure exploration
and learning from demonstrations among others.
For this problem, we propose a simpler singleloop parameter-free normalized policy gradient
algorithm. Implementing a recursive momentum variance reduction mechanism, our algorithm
achieves Õ(ϵ−3 ) and Õ(ϵ−2 ) sample complexities for ϵ-first-order stationarity and ϵ-global optimality respectively, under adequate assumptions.
We further address the setting of large finite state
action spaces via linear function approximation
of the occupancy measure and show a Õ(ϵ−4 )
sample complexity for a simple policy gradient
method with a linear regression subroutine.

Recently, Zhang et al. (2020; 2021b) proposed a unified formulation encapsulating all the aforementioned problems as
a maximization of a functional (which may not be concave)
over the set of state-action occupancy measures. Interestingly, this formulation generalizes standard RL which corresponds to maximizing a linear functional of the state-action
occupancy measure (Puterman, 2014). Subsuming the standard RL problem, the case where the objective functional is
convex (concave for maximization) in the occupancy measure is known as Convex RL (Zhang et al., 2020; Zahavy
et al., 2021; Geist et al., 2022; Mutti et al., 2022b).
Unlike the standard RL problem which enjoys a nice additive structure, the more general nonlinear functional alters
the additive structure of the problem, invalidates the classical Bellman equations as a consequence and hence hinders
the standard use of the dynamical programming machinery (see for e.g., Bertsekas (2019); Sutton & Barto (2018)).
While value-based methods are not meaningful anymore in
this general (nonlinear) utilities setting, Zhang et al. (2020;
2021b) proposed a direct policy search method to solve the
RL problem with general utilities. This class of methods
directly updates a parametrized policy along the gradient
direction of the objective function. More precisely, Zhang
et al. (2021b) propose a double-loop Policy Gradient (PG)
method called TSIVR-PG implementing a variance reduction mechanism requiring two large batches and checkpoints.
Similarly to existing variance-reduced PG methods in the
standard RL setting, the algorithm makes use of importance
sampling (IS) weights to account for the distribution shift
inherent to the RL setting. Interestingly, while most existing
variance-reduced PG methods make an unrealistic and unverifiable assumption which guarantees that the IS weights
variance is bounded at each iteration of the algorithm, Zhang
et al. (2021b) alleviate this issue by using a gradient truncation mechanism. Such a strategy consisting in performing a

1. Introduction
While the classical Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem
consists in learning a policy maximizing the expected cumulative sum of rewards through interaction with an environment, several other problems of practical interest are
concerned with objectives involving more general utilities.
Examples of such problems include pure exploration in RL
via maximizing the entropy of the state visitation distribution (see for e.g., Hazan et al. (2019); Mutti et al. (2022a)),
imitation learning via minimizing an f -divergence between
state-action occupancy measures of an agent and an expert (Ghasemipour et al., 2020), risk-sensitive (Zhang et al.,
2021a) or risk-averse RL maximizing, for instance, the Conditional Value-at-Risk (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015), constrained RL (see for e.g., Altman (1999); Borkar (2005);
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: A.B. <anas.barakat@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

