Online Local Differential Private Quantile Inference via Self-normalization

Yi Liu 1 Qirui Hu 2 Lei Ding 1 Linglong Kong 1

Abstract

bution of outputs of a query made on a dataset under the
alteration of one data point. This has led to a vast amount
of literature under the umbrella of DP, resulting in various
generalizations, tools, and applications. However, while
enjoying the mathematically solid guarantee of DP and its
variants, concerns about a weak link in the process, the
trusted curator, are beginning to arise.

Based on binary inquiries, we developed an algorithm to estimate population quantiles under Local
Differential Privacy (LDP). By self-normalizing,
our algorithm provides asymptotically normal estimation with valid inference, resulting in tight
confidence intervals without the need for nuisance
parameters to be estimated. Our proposed method
can be conducted fully online, leading to high
computational efficiency and minimal storage requirements with O(1) space. We also proved
an optimality result by an elegant application of
one central limit theorem of Gaussian Differential Privacy (GDP) when targeting the frequently
encountered median estimation problem. With
mathematical proof and extensive numerical testing, we demonstrate the validity of our algorithm
both theoretically and experimentally.

The use of trusted curators undermines the spirit of the solid
cryptographic level of privacy protection that DP provides.
This risk is not limited to information security breaches
and rogue researchers but also includes legal proceedings
where researchers may be compelled to hand over the raw
data, breaking the initial promise made to DP at the time of
data collection. Two concepts, Local Differential Privacy
(LDP) and pan-DPs, are proposed as solutions. The pan-DP
directly counters this issue by solidifying the algorithm to
withstand multiple announced intrusions (subpoenas) or one
unannounced intrusion (hackers). The concept of LDP was
first introduced formally by (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011),
but its early form can be traced back to (Evfimievski et al.,
2003) and (Warner, 1965), in the name of ”amplification”
and ”randomized response survey,” respectively.

1. Introduction
Personal data is currently widely used for various purposes,
such as facial recognition, personalized advertising, medical
trials, and recommendation systems to name a few. While
there are potential benefits, it is important also to consider
the risks associated with handling sensitive personal information. For instance, research on diabetes can provide
valuable insights that may benefit society as a whole in the
long term. However, it is crucial to keep in mind that participants may suffer direct consequences if their data is not
properly protected through controlled disclosure, such as a
rise in health insurance premiums.

In LDP settings, the sensitive information never leaves the
control of the users unprotected. The users encode and alter
their data locally before sending them to an untrusted central
data server for further analysis and computation. Recently,
in (Amin et al., 2020) unveiled a connection between panDP and LDP by considering variants of pan-DP framework
that can defend against multiple unannounced intrusions.
Surprisingly, this requirement can only be fulfilled if the data
is scrambled before it leaves the owner’s control, which goes
back to the definition of LDP. For better privacy protection,
many big tech companies have already implemented LDP
into their products, such as Google (Erlingsson et al., 2014)
and Microsoft (Ding et al., 2017).

The concept of Differential Privacy (DP; Dwork et al., 2006)
has been successful in providing a rigorous condition for
controlled disclosure by bounding the change in the distri-

This discovery rekindled the research interest in LDP. Researchers have begun to consider fundamental statistical
problems, such as estimating parameters, modeling, and hypothesis testing under this constraint. The quantiles, including the median, are basic summary statistics that have been
widely studied within the framework of differential privacy.
Early research in this area includes the estimation of quantiles under the central DP setting, as presented in (Dwork

1

Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Center for Statistical
Science, Department of Industrial Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Linglong Kong
<lkong@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

