Semi-Autoregressive Energy Flows:
Exploring Likelihood-Free Training of Normalizing Flows

Phillip Si 1 2 Zeyi Chen 3 Subham Sekhar Sahoo 1 Yair Schiff 4 Volodymyr Kuleshov 1 4

Abstract

constrains the range of architectures that can be used to
parameterize flow models.

Training normalizing flow generative models
can be challenging due to the need to calculate
computationally expensive determinants of
Jacobians. This paper studies the likelihood-free
training of flows and proposes the energy
objective, an alternative sample-based loss based
on proper scoring rules. The energy objective
is determinant-free and supports flexible model
architectures that are not easily compatible
with maximum likelihood training, including
semi-autoregressive energy flows, a novel
model family that interpolates between fully
autoregressive and non-autoregressive models.
Energy flows feature competitive sample quality,
posterior inference, and generation speed relative
to likelihood-based flows; this performance is
decorrelated from the quality of log-likelihood
estimates, which are generally very poor. Our
findings question the use of maximum likelihood
as an objective or a metric, and contribute to a
scientific study of its role in generative modeling.

This paper questions the use of maximum likelihood
for training normalizing flows and shows the existence
of alternative objectives that do not require computing
determinants or performing adversarial training (Grover
et al., 2018). These objectives yield highly performant
models; however, their performance is entirely decorrelated
from competitive log-likelihood scores, which are very
poor. Our findings contribute to the scientific understanding
of generative model objectives and further question the
common practice of training and evaluating models via the
likelihood, hinting at the viability of alternative methods.
Specifically, we introduce the energy objective, a
sample-based multidimensional extension of proper scoring
rules that does not require computing model densities
(Gneiting & Raftery, 2007a). The energy objective extends
the recent autoregressive quantile flow framework of Si et al.
(2022) to flexible non-autoregressive flow architectures. We
complement this objective with efficient estimators based
on random projections and a theoretical analysis that draws
connections to divergence minimization, and that highlights
benefits over maximum likelihood.

1. Introduction

The energy objective enables training model architectures
that are more flexible than ones trained using maximum
likelihood (e.g., densely connected networks). These
models feature exact posterior inference (which is useful
in applications such as semi-supervised learning and latent
space manipulation), as well as exact likelihood estimation
(which helps us study log-likelihood as an objective and
a metric). In particular, we propose semi-autoregressive
flows, an architecture that interpolates between fully
autoregressive and non-autoregressive models. From a
practical perspective, energy flows achieve improved sample
quality, posterior inference, and generation speed across
a number of tasks and compared to equivalent model
architectures trained using maximum likelihood. Table 1
compares our approach to existing methods.

Normalizing flows form one of the major families of
probabilistic and generative models (Rezende & Mohamed,
2015; Kingma et al., 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2019). They
feature tractable inference and maximum likelihood learning
and have applications in areas, such as image generation
(Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), anomaly detection (Nalisnick
et al., 2019), and density estimation (Papamakarios et al.,
2017). However, training flows requires calculating
computationally expensive determinants of Jacobians; this
1
Computer and Information Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 4 Department of Computer Science, Cornell Tech, NYC,
NY, USA. Correspondence to: Phillip Si <ps789@cs.cornell.edu>,
Volodymyr Kuleshov <kuleshov@cornell.edu>.

Contributions. In summary, this work (1) presents new
results that question the use of maximum likelihood for
training flows and proposes an alternative approach based

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

