On Penalty-based Bilevel Gradient Descent Method

Han Shen 1 Tianyi Chen 1

Abstract

where C, U(x) and S(x) are non-empty and closed sets
given any x ∈ C. We call f and g respectively as the upperlevel and lower-level objective.

Bilevel optimization enjoys a wide range of applications in hyper-parameter optimization, metalearning and reinforcement learning. However,
bilevel problems are difficult to solve and recent
progress on scalable bilevel algorithms mainly focuses on bilevel optimization problems where the
lower-level objective is either strongly convex or
unconstrained. In this work, we tackle the bilevel
problem through the lens of the penalty method.
We show that under certain conditions, the penalty
reformulation recovers the solutions of the original bilevel problem. Further, we propose the
penalty-based bilevel gradient descent algorithm
and establish its finite-time convergence for the
constrained bilevel problem under some lowerlevel error bound conditions weaker than strong
convexity. The experimental results showcase the
efficiency of the proposed algorithm. The code is
available on GitHub (link).

The bilevel optimization problem BP can be extremely
difficult to solve due to the tangling between the upper-level
and lower-level problems. Even for the simpler case where
g(x, ·) is strongly-convex, U(x) = Rdy and C = Rdx , it
was not until recently that the veil of an efficient method was
partially lifted. Under the strong convexity of g(x, ·), the
lower-level solution set S(x) is a singleton. In this case, BP
reduces to minimizing f (x, S(x)), the gradient of which
can be calculated with the implicit gradient (IG) method
(Pedregosa, 2016; Ghadimi & Wang, 2018). It has been later
shown by (Chen et al., 2021) that the IG method converges
almost as fast as the gradient-descent method. However,
existing IG methods cannot handle either the lower-level
constraint U(x) or the non-strong convexity of g(x, ·) due
to the difficulty of computing the implicit gradient and thus
can not be applied to more complicated bilevel problems.
To overcome the above challenges, recent work aims to develop gradient-based methods without lower-level strong
convexity. A prominent branch of algorithms are based on
the iterative differentiation method; see e.g., (Franceschi
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2021b). In this case, the lower-level
solution set S(x) is replaced by the output of an iterative
optimization algorithm that solves the lower-level problem
(e.g., gradient descent (GD)) which allows for explicit differentiation. However, these methods are typically restricted to
the unconstrained case since the lower-level algorithm with
the projection operator is difficult to differentiate. Furthermore, the algorithm has high memory and computational
costs when the lower-level iteration number is large.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization plays an increasingly important role
in machine learning as it has a wide range of applications
including hyper-parameter optimization (Maclaurin et al.,
2015; Franceschi et al., 2018), meta-learning (Finn et al.,
2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), reinforcement learning
(Cheng et al., 2022) and adversarial learning (Jiang et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022).
Define f : Rdx × Rdy 7→ R and g : Rdx × Rdy 7→ R. In
this paper, we consider the following bilevel problem:

On the other hand, it is tempting to penalize certain optimality metric of the lower-level problem (e.g., ∥∇y g(x, y)∥2 )
to the upper-level objective, leading to the single-level optimization problem. The high-level idea is that minimizing
the optimality metric guarantees the lower-level optimality
condition y ∈ S(x) and as long as the optimality metric admits simple gradient evaluation, then the penalized objective
can be optimized via gradient-based algorithms. However,
as we will show in the next example, GD with a straightforward penalization mechanism may not lead to the desired
solution of the original bilevel problems.

BP : min f (x, y) s.t. x ∈ C,
x,y

y ∈ S(x) := arg min g(x, y)
y∈U (x)
1

Department of ECSE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy,
NY, USA. Correspondence to: Han Shen <shenh5@rpi.edu>,
Tianyi Chen <chent18@rpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

