Kernel Sufficient Dimension Reduction and Variable Selection
for Compositional Data via Amalgamation

Junyoung Park 1 Jeongyoun Ahn 2 Cheolwoo Park 1

Abstract

of the components are meaningful. They are frequently
normalized to sum to unity. Thus, compositional data with
d + 1 variables lie on the d-dimensional simplex ∆d ⊂
Rd+1 :


X
d
∆ = (x0 , . . . , xd )
xi = 1, xi ≥ 0, ∀i .

Compositional data with a large number of components and an abundance of zeros are frequently
observed in many fields recently. Analyzing such
sparse high-dimensional compositional data naturally calls for dimension reduction or, more preferably, variable selection. Most existing approaches
lack interpretability or cannot handle zeros properly, as they rely on a log-ratio transformation. We
approach this problem with sufficient dimension
reduction (SDR), one of the most studied dimension reduction frameworks in statistics. Characterized by the conditional independence of the
data to the response on the found subspace, the
SDR framework has been effective for both linear and nonlinear dimension reduction problems.
This work proposes a compositional SDR that
can handle zeros naturally while incorporating
the nonlinear nature and spurious negative correlations among components rigorously. A critical
consideration of sub-composition versus amalgamation for compositional variable selection is
discussed. The proposed compositional SDR is
shown to be statistically consistent in constructing a sub-simplex consisting of true signal variables. Simulation and real microbiome data are
used to demonstrate the performance of the proposed SDR compared to existing state-of-art approaches.

This type of data appears commonly in many applications;
for example, chemical compositions of honey in food science, mineral compositions of rocks in geology, and composition of product categories of customers’ internet shopping
carts. This research is primarily inspired by microbiome
data, which measure the relative abundance of microbes that
live in or on a human or animal’s body.
Microbiomes have recently received much attention in medical research due to their association with various diseases
and health-related attributes in humans (Huttenhower et al.,
2012; Goodman & Gardner, 2018). Modern sequencing
technologies, such as 16S rRNA gene sequencing, are used
to quantify the raw numbers of microbiomes. However,
as the total number of counts varies greatly amongst the
samples, the raw count data obtained in this manner must
be viewed as compositional (Li, 2015). In addition, microbiome data often exhibit high dimensionality and contain
excess zeros, i.e., there are much higher numbers of microbial taxa than available samples, and a large percentage,
about 50% to 90%, of counts are zero (Lutz et al., 2022).
Identifying relevant variables is a common and important
task in the study of microbiome data because most taxa are
unlikely to be associated with the response of interest (Lee
et al., 2022). Accurately chosen microbial variables can be
used in subsequent analyses such as prediction with reduced
computational cost and increased interpretability.

1. Introduction
Compositional data are multivariate data that consist of
nonnegative values in which only the relative proportions

Despite the necessity of variable selection for highdimensional sparse compositional data, there are few approaches that rigorously perform it. As pointed out in Susin
et al. (2020), the main difficulty lies in how to account for
the compositional nature of the data, i.e., the spurious negative correlation due to the sum-to-one constraint (Pearson,
1897). Dominantly popular approaches to compositional
variable selection are based on the log-ratio transformation
designed to address this spurious correlation problem, which
is sometimes referred to as CoDA (Compositional Data anal-

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 2 Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to: Cheolwoo Park <parkcw2021@kaist.ac.kr>, Jeongyoun Ahn
<jyahn@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

