Best Arm Identification in Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits

Filippo Vannella 1 2 Alexandre Proutiere 1 Jaeseong Jeong 2

Abstract

To reduce the sample complexity, the learner may leverage
any underlying structure tying up the expected rewards of
the various arms together. Most efforts in this direction
have focused on linear structures (Degenne et al., 2020; Fiez
et al., 2019; Jedra & Proutiere, 2020; Karnin, 2016; Soare
et al., 2014; Tao et al., 2018), see (Wang et al., 2021) and
references therein. Exploiting the underlying structure is
critical when the number of arms becomes extremely large,
as in combinatorial bandit problems (Chen et al., 2014; Jourdan et al., 2021). To solve these problems, the learner faces
a statistical efficiency issue (she has to control the sample
complexity), but also needs to account for inherent computational limits (she will typically have to solve combinatorial
optimization problems over the set of possible arms).

We investigate the problem of best arm identification in Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits (MAMABs) where the rewards are defined through a
factor graph. The objective is to find an optimal
global action with a prescribed level of confidence
and minimal sample complexity. We derive a tight
instance-specific lower bound of the sample complexity and characterize the corresponding optimal sampling strategy. Unfortunately, this bound
is obtained by solving a combinatorial optimization problem with a number of variables and constraints exponentially growing with the number of
agents. We leverage Mean Field (MF) techniques
to obtain, in a computationally efficient manner,
an approximation of the lower bound. The approximation scales at most as ρK d (where ρ, K,
and d denote the number of factors in the graph,
the number of possible actions per agent, and the
maximal degree of the factor graph). We devise
MF-TaS (Mean-Field-Track-and-Stop), an algorithm whose sample complexity provably matches
our approximated lower bound. We illustrate
the performance of MF-TaS numerically using
both synthetic and real-world experiments (e.g.,
to solve the antenna tilt optimization problem in
radio communication networks).

We investigate the best arm identification problem in the
stochastic Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits (MAMABs)
– referred to as M-BAI for short. M-BAI is a particular
instance of the best arm identification problem in combinatorial bandits, where (i) a global arm or action is defined by
the actions individually selected by the various agents, and
(ii) the reward function is defined through a factor graph.
This reward structure arises naturally in networks where
agents interact with their neighbors in the graph, and need
to coordinate toward a common goal. The paper was actually motivated by the problem of learning to coordinate
base-stations in radio communication networks (see §7.2).
Contributions. For the M-BAI problem, we present a statistically and computationally efficient algorithm. The algorithm has provable performance guarantees (in the form
of sample complexity upper bounds), and can be applied in
large-scale MAMABs. More precisely, our contributions
are as follows.

1. Introduction
Best arm identification with fixed confidence in stochastic bandits (Lai & Robbins, 1985) refers to the problem of
finding the arm with the highest expected reward with a
prescribed level of certainty, while minimizing the number
of samples or arm draws, i.e., the sample complexity. When
the arm rewards are unrelated, the sample complexity needs
to typically scale linearly with the number of arms, and the
task quickly becomes intractable as this number grows large.

1) Sample complexity lower bound. We derive an instancespecific lower bound on the sample complexity satisfied by
any algorithm. The bound is defined through an optimization problem, whose solution provides an optimal sampling
strategy. Unfortunately, because of the factored reward
structure, this optimization problem contains an exponential
number of variables and constraints, and is hence difficult
to exploit in practice.

1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Ericsson, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Filippo Vannella <vannella@kth.se>.
2

2) Mean-Field-based approximation of the lower bound optimization problem. We propose a tight approximation of
the lower bound optimization problem obtained by com-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

