Probabilistic Concept Bottleneck Models

Eunji Kim 1 Dahuin Jung 1 Sangha Park 1 Siwon Kim 1 Sungroh Yoon 1 2

012334ÿ67889ÿ
034
ÿÿ788ÿ7ÿ8
ÿÿ7ÿ7ÿ
ÿÿ8ÿ7ÿ8
ÿÿÿ!879ÿ"

Abstract
Interpretable models are designed to make decisions in a human-interpretable manner. Representatively, Concept Bottleneck Models (CBM) follow a two-step process of concept prediction and
class prediction based on the predicted concepts.
CBM provides explanations with high-level concepts derived from concept predictions; thus, reliable concept predictions are important for trustworthiness. In this study, we address the ambiguity issue that can harm reliability. While the
existence of a concept can often be ambiguous
in the data, CBM predicts concepts deterministically without considering this ambiguity. To provide a reliable interpretation against this ambiguity, we propose Probabilistic Concept Bottleneck Models (ProbCBM). By leveraging probabilistic concept embeddings, ProbCBM models
uncertainty in concept prediction and provides
explanations based on the concept and its corresponding uncertainty. This uncertainty enhances
the reliability of the explanations. Furthermore, as
class uncertainty is derived from concept uncertainty in ProbCBM, we can explain class uncertainty by means of concept uncertainty. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
ejkim47/prob-cbm.

#$%&3ÿ%$3'21ÿ(3

)*ÿ9ÿ

)*ÿ9ÿ8

)*ÿ9ÿ7

Figure 1. Examples of ambiguous cases in the existence of the concept. Images have diverse visual contexts, where partial concepts
may become invisible and unclear.

et al., 2019). However, post-hoc methods cannot entirely
explain the model’s prediction (Zhou et al., 2018) and provide approximate explanations in a human-understandable
form, which may lead to incorrect explanations (Rudin,
2019). In contrast, interpretable models are designed to
make decisions through human-interpretable processes, ensuring interpretability and not requiring an external explanation method to account for their decisions. Accordingly,
research on building interpretable models has been actively
conducted (Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Koh
et al., 2020; Jung et al., 2020; Bohle et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

A concept-based model makes a decision and provides an
explanation based on high-level concepts (Koh et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020). Here, the concepts have semantic meanings that align with human understanding and can be expressed via imagery or language (Kim et al., 2018a). Concept Bottleneck Models (CBM) (Koh et al., 2020), which are
widely used concept-based models, adopt concept prediction
in the middle of the decision-making process of the blackbox model. In CBM, the final decision is made based on the
predicted concepts; thus, the concept prediction serves as an
explanation. Accordingly, concept prediction is important
for ensuring interpretability in CBM. The concept prediction in CBM is trained as deterministic binary classification
by using a dataset that includes concept labels indicating
the existence (1) or non-existence (0) of a concept.

As deep learning systems have been increasingly used in
various applications and fields, ensuring transparency of
the systems’ decision-making has become a significant
challenge (Esteva et al., 2019; Miller, 2019). Numerous
post-hoc explanation methods have been introduced to explain the decision-making of already-trained deep neural
networks (Simonyan et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2018a; Goyal
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea 2 Interdisciplinary Program in
Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

