FLEX: an Adaptive Exploration Algorithm for Nonlinear Systems

Matthieu Blanke 1 Marc Lelarge 1

Abstract

lect informative data and learn the system globally in a
sample-efficient manner (Yang et al., 2021), independent of
any control task. Once this task agnostic exploration phase
is completed, the learned model can be exploited to solve
multiple downstream tasks.

Model-based reinforcement learning is a powerful
tool, but collecting data to fit an accurate model
of the system can be costly. Exploring an unknown environment in a sample-efficient manner
is hence of great importance. However, the complexity of dynamics and the computational limitations of real systems make this task challenging.
In this work, we introduce FLEX, an exploration
algorithm for nonlinear dynamics based on optimal experimental design. Our policy maximizes
the information of the next step and results in an
adaptive exploration algorithm, compatible with
generic parametric learning models and requiring minimal resources. We test our method on a
number of nonlinear environments covering different settings, including time-varying dynamics.
Keeping in mind that exploration is intended to
serve an exploitation objective, we also test our
algorithm on downstream model-based classical
control tasks and compare it to other state-of-theart model-based and model-free approaches. The
performance achieved by FLEX is competitive
and its computational cost is low.

Dynamics may be complex and generally take the form of
a nonlinear function of the state. An example would be
air friction, which is essential to consider for an accurate
control law, and yet difficult to model from physical principles (Faessler et al., 2018; De Simone et al., 2015). While
exploration in linear systems is well understood (Goodwin
& Payne, 1977), efficiently learning nonlinear dynamics
is far more challenging. For realistic applications, this is
compounded by the hard limitations of memory and computational resources of embedded systems (Tassa et al., 2012).
Furthermore, the dynamics or the agent’s model of it may
vary over time, and the exploration policy must adapt as the
data stream is collected. Therefore, it is critical that the algorithm works adaptively, with limited memory storage and
that it runs fast enough to be implementable in a real system,
while being flexible enough to learn complex dynamics with
potentially sophisticated models.
Different approaches have been proposed recently for exploring nonlinear environments, and have proceeded by
maximizing an information gain (or uncertainty) on the
parameters for specific classes of learning models. An
exact computation can be derived for models with linear parametrizations (Schultheis et al., 2020), which are
however of limited expressivity. Uncertainty can also be
computed with Gaussian processes (Buisson-Fenet et al.,
2020) or approximated using ensembles of neural networks (Shyam et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020) but these
approaches suffer from a quadratic memory complexity and
an important computational cost respectively, making them
unlikely to be implementable in real systems. In all the
above approaches, the inputs are planned episodically by
solving a non-convex optimization problem where the nonlinear dynamics are simulated over a potentially large time
horizon. Planning then relies on nonlinear solvers, which
may be too slow to run in real time (Kleff et al., 2021).
Furthermore, planning over large time horizons renders the
algorithm unable to adapt to new observations as they are
collected. As a result, the agent may spend a long time
trusting a wrong model and exploring uninformative states.

1. Introduction
Control theory and model-based reinforcement learning
have had a range of achievements in various fields including
aeronautics, robotics and energy systems (Kirk, 1970; Sutton & Barto, 2018). For the agent to find an effective control
policy, the mathematical model of the environment must
faithfully capture the dynamics of the system and thus must
be fit with data. However, collecting observations can be expensive: consider for example an aircraft system, for which
running experiments costs a lot of energy and time (Gupta
et al., 1976). In this regard, active exploration (or system
identification) aims at exciting the system in order to col1
INRIA, DI ENS, PSL Research University. Correspondence
to: Matthieu Blanke <matthieu.blanke@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

