Uncovering Adversarial Risks of Test-Time Adaptation

Tong Wu 1 Feiran Jia 2 Xiangyu Qi 1 Jiachen T. Wang 1
Vikash Sehwag 1 Saeed Mahloujifar 1 Prateek Mittal 1

Abstract
Recently, test-time adaptation (TTA) has been
proposed as a promising solution for addressing
distribution shifts. It allows a base model
to adapt to an unforeseen distribution during
inference by leveraging the information from
the batch of (unlabeled) test data. However,
we uncover a novel security vulnerability of
TTA based on the insight that predictions on
benign samples can be impacted by malicious
samples in the same batch. To exploit this
vulnerability, we propose Distribution Invading
Attack (DIA), which injects a small fraction of
malicious data into the test batch. DIA causes
models using TTA to misclassify benign and
unperturbed test data, providing an entirely new
capability for adversaries that is infeasible in
canonical machine learning pipelines. Through
comprehensive evaluations, we demonstrate the
high effectiveness of our attack on multiple
benchmarks across six TTA methods. In response,
we investigate two countermeasures to robustify
the existing insecure TTA implementations,
following the principle of “security by design”.
Together, we hope our findings can make the
community aware of the utility-security tradeoffs
in deploying TTA and provide valuable insights
for developing robust TTA approaches.

Figure 1. Overview of conventional machine learning and testtime adaptation. Test-time adaptation adapts to the test batch,
but is vulnerable to malicious data at test time (in contrast to
conventional machine learning).

different test data distributions. Specifically, when test data
are processed batch-wise (bat, 2021), TTA first leverages
them to update the base model and then makes the final
predictions using the updated model. Methodologically,
TTA differs from the conventional ML (inductive learning)
and falls within the transductive learning paradigm
(Vapnik, 1998). TTA usually outperforms conventional ML
under distribution shifts since 1) it gains the distribution
knowledge from the test batch and 2) it can adjust the model
adaptively. Empirically, TTA has been shown to be effective
in a range of tasks, including image classification (Wang
et al., 2021b), object detection (Sinha et al., 2023), and
visual document understanding (Ebrahimi et al., 2022).

1
Princeton University 2 Penn State University. Correspondence
to: Tong Wu <tongwu@princeton.edu>.

However, in this work, we highlight a potential security
vulnerability in the test-time adaptation process — an
adversary can introduce malicious behaviors into the
model by crafting samples in the test batch. Our
key insight is that TTA generates the final predictive
model based on the entire test batch rather than making
independent predictions for each data as in a conventional
ML pipeline. Therefore, the prediction for one entry in
a batch will be influenced by other entries in the same
batch. As a result, an adversary may submit malicious
data at test time to interfere with the generation of the final
predictive model, consequently disrupting predictions on
other unperturbed data submitted by benign users. This
emphasizes the necessity of considering the utility-security
tradeoffs associated with deploying TTA.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our Contributions. To exploit this vulnerability, we
present a novel attack called Distribution Invading Attack
(DIA), which exploits TTA by introducing malicious data

1. Introduction
Test-time adaptation (TTA) (Wang et al., 2021b; Schneider
et al., 2020; Goyal et al., 2022) is a cutting-edge machine
learning (ML) approach that addresses the problem of
distribution shifts in test data (Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019). Unlike conventional ML methods that rely on a fixed
base model, TTA generates batch-specific models to handle

1

