Efficient Learning of Mesh-Based Physical Simulation with
Bi-Stride Multi-Scale Graph Neural Network

Yadi Cao 1 † Menglei Chai 2 † Minchen Li 3 Chenfanfu Jiang 3

Abstract

(Bridson, 2015; Cao & Li, 2018), aerodynamics (Cao et al.,
2022), and heat transfer (Cao et al., 2019). However, traditional numerical solvers are often computationally expensive, particularly for time-sensitive applications such as
iterative design optimization, where fast online inference
is desired. In recent years, the machine learning community has shown great interest in improving efficiency or
replacing traditional solvers with learned models. These
works include both end-to-end frameworks (Grzeszczuk
et al., 1998; Obiols-Sales et al., 2020) and those utilizing
physics-informed losses (Raissi et al., 2019; Karniadakis
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2020). Many existing works apply convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Fukushima &
Miyake, 1982) to physical systems residing on two- or threedimensional structured grids (Guo et al., 2016; Tompson
et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2019; Fotiadis et al., 2020). However, the strict dependency on regular domain shapes makes
it non-trivial to be applied on unstructured meshes. While
it is possible to deform simple irregular domains into rectangular shapes to apply CNNs (Gao et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022a), the challenge remains for domains with complex
topologies, which are common in practice.

Learning the physical simulation on large-scale
meshes with flat Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
and stacking Message Passings (MPs) is challenging due to the scaling complexity w.r.t. the number of nodes and over-smoothing. There has been
growing interest in the community to introduce
multi-scale structures to GNNs for physical simulation. However, current state-of-the-art methods
are limited by their reliance on the labor-intensive
drawing of coarser meshes or building coarser
levels based on spatial proximity, which can introduce wrong edges across geometry boundaries.
Inspired by the bipartite graph determination, we
propose a novel pooling strategy, bi-stride to
tackle the aforementioned limitations. Bi-stride
pools nodes on every other frontier of the breadthfirst search (BFS), without the need for the manual drawing of coarser meshes and avoiding the
wrong edges by spatial proximity. Additionally,
it enables a one-MP scheme per level and nonparametrized pooling and unpooling by interpolations, resembling U-Nets, which significantly
reduces computational costs. Experiments show
that the proposed framework, BSMS-GNN, significantly outperforms existing methods in terms
of both accuracy and computational efficiency in
representative physical simulations.

As a result, the use of graph neural networks (GNNs)
in physics-based simulations on unstructured meshes has
gained significant attention in recent years (Battaglia et al.,
2018; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018; Belbute-Peres et al.,
2020; Pfaff et al., 2020; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020;
Harsch & Riedelbauch, 2021; Gao et al., 2022). The naive
GNN approach stacks multiple MPs to model information
propagation throughout space. However, as the graph size
increases, this approach faces two major challenges: (1)
Complexity: as both the number of nodes to be processed
and the MP iterations increase linearly, a quadratic complexity becomes inevitable for both the running time and
memory usage of the computational graph (Fortunato et al.,
2022). (2) Oversmoothing: the graph convolution can be
seen as a low-pass filter that suppresses the higher-frequency
signals (Chen et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020c). Then the stacked
MPs iteratively project the information onto the eigenspace
of the graph while all higher-frequency signals are smoothed
out, making the training more difficult.

1. Introduction
Simulating physical systems through numerically solving
partial differential equations (PDEs) is a key area in science and engineering, with applications ranging from solid
mechanics (Jiang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2020a), to fluid1
Department of Computer Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA
AR Perception, Google, Los Angeles, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Chenfanfu Jiang <cffjiangmath.ucla.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To address these limitations, researchers have begun intro-

1

