Multi-Agent Learning from Learners

Mine Melodi Caliskan * 1 Francesco Chini * 1 Setareh Maghsudi 1

Abstract
A large body of the “Inverse Reinforcement
Learning” (IRL) literature focuses on recovering
the reward function from a set of demonstrations
of an expert agent who acts optimally or noisily
optimally. Nevertheless, some recent works move
away from the optimality assumption to study the
“Learning from a Learner (LfL)” problem, where
the challenge is inferring the reward function of a
learning agent from a sequence of demonstrations
produced by progressively improving policies. In
this work, we take one of the initial steps in addressing the multi-agent version of this problem
and propose a new algorithm, MA-LfL (Multiagent Learning from a Learner). Unlike the stateof-the-art literature, which recovers the reward
functions from trajectories produced by agents in
some equilibrium, we study the problem of inferring the reward functions of interacting agents in
a general sum stochastic game without assuming
any equilibrium state. The MA-LfL algorithm is
rigorously built on a theoretical result that ensures
its validity in the case of agents learning according to a multi-agent soft policy iteration scheme.
We empirically test MA-LfL and we observe high
positive correlation between the recovered reward
functions and the ground truth.

Figure 1. Two autonomous cars from different companies might
optimize different reward functions which are not directly accessible. For example, one company might prioritize speed and another
one safety or energy efficiency. They share the same environment
(road) and learning the reward function of each other can help
them to predict the other agent behaviour.

tion of the task performed by the agent and this knowledge is
better suited to be transferred to new environments. This is
even more important when the demonstrator is not an expert,
especially when it is under an ongoing policy learning process. Learning the reward functions, which do not change
during the learning process, is also crucial in a multi-agent
setting. Consider for instance the case of lane change in a
highway for autonomous cars (Fig. 1). Here the environment contains multiple private agents, which can observe
each others’ states and actions but cannot access any other
information such as the policies and rewards of others. Inferring the reward functions of other agents can be useful to
model and predict their behaviour.

1. Introduction
The “Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)” problem corresponds to inferring the reward function of a reinforcement
learning (RL) agent from a set of trajectories. Learning the
reward function, as compared to directly learning the policy
of the demonstrator, allows to have a more succinct descrip-

Initial work on IRL typically assumes the reward function
to be linear w.r.t. a set of features (Abbeel & Ng, 2004).
However recent approaches to IRL have been relaxing this
assumption (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Fu et al., 2017). Early
IRL literature also assumes the observed agent to be an
expert, i.e., to behave optimally or noisy optimally (Ng
et al., 2000; Ziebart et al., 2008). Recent work has relaxed
the optimality assumption (Brown et al., 2019), (Tangkaratt
et al., 2020) and in (Jacq et al., 2019), the authors have
introduced the “Learning from a Learner (LfL)” problem,
where the challenge is to infer the reward function of a
learning agent from trajectories produced by a sequence of
progressively improving policies. For another approach to

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Tuebingen, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Mine
Melodi Caliskan <mine.caliskan@uni-tuebingen.de>, Francesco
Chini <francesco.chini1990@gmail.com>, Setareh Maghsudi
<setareh.maghsudi@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

