Constrained Phi-Equilibria

Martino Bernasconi 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1 Francesco Trovò 1 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

problems. Most of the works on equilibrium computation
problems focus on classical solution concepts—such as the
well-known Nash equilibrium (NE) (Nash, 1951) and correlated equilibrium (CE) (Aumann, 1974)—, thus neglecting
the presence of constraints entirely. However, in most of
the real-world applications, the players are usually subject
to constraints that rule out the feasibility of some of their
strategies, such as, e.g., safety requirements and budget
caps. Thus, addressing equilibrium notions involving constraints is a crucial step needed for the operationalization of
game-theoretic concepts into real-world settings.

The computational study of equilibria involving
constraints on players’ strategies has been largely
neglected. However, in real-world applications,
players are usually subject to constraints ruling
out the feasibility of some of their strategies, such
as, e.g., safety requirements and budget caps.
Computational studies on constrained versions
of the Nash equilibrium have lead to some results under very stringent assumptions, while finding constrained versions of the correlated equilibrium (CE) is still unexplored. In this paper, we
introduce and computationally characterize constrained Phi-equilibria—a more general notion
than constrained CEs—in normal-form games.
We show that computing such equilibria is in general computationally intractable, and also that the
set of the equilibria may not be convex, providing
a sharp divide with unconstrained CEs. Nevertheless, we provide a polynomial-time algorithm
for computing a constrained (approximate) Phiequilibrium maximizing a given linear function,
when either the number of constraints or that of
players’ actions is fixed. Moreover, in the special case in which a player’s constraints do not
depend on other players’ strategies, we show that
an exact, function-maximizing equilibrium can be
computed in polynomial time, while one (approximate) equilibrium can be found with an efficient
decentralized no-regret learning algorithm.

The study of equilibrium notions involving constraints was
initiated by Arrow & Debreu (1954), who define the concept
of generalized NE (GNE). The GNE can be interpreted as an
NE of a game where players’ strategies are subject to some
constraints, which must be satisfied at the equilibrium and
also determine which are the feasible players’ deviations.
However, given that computing a GNE is clearly PPADhard (Daskalakis et al., 2009), all the works dealing with
the computation of GNEs (see, e.g., (Facchinei & Kanzow,
2010)) provide efficient algorithms only in specific settings
that require very stringent assumptions.
Most of the computationally challenges in finding GNEs are
inherited from the NE. In settings in which constrained are
not involved, the computational issues of NEs are usually
circumvented by considering weaker equilibrium notions.
Among them, those that have received most of the attention
in the literature are the CE and its variations, which have
been shown to be efficiently computable in several settings
of interest (Papadimitriou & Roughgarden, 2008; Celli et al.,
2020). Surprisingly, with the only exception of (Chen et al.,
2022) (see Section 1.2 for a detailed discussion on it), no
work has considered the problem of computing CEs in constrained settings. Thus, investigating whether the CE retains
its nice computational properties when adding constraints
on players’ strategies is an open interesting question.

1. Introduction
Over the last years, equilibrium computation problems
have received a terrific attention from AI and ML research (Brown & Sandholm, 2019; Bakhtin et al., 2022),
as game-theoretical equilibrium notions provide a principled framework to deal with multi-player decision-making

1.1. Original Contributions

1

Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Martino
Bernasconi <martino.bernasconideluca@polimi.it>.

In this paper, we introduce and computationally characterize
constrained Phi-equilibria, starting, as it is customary, from
the setting of normal-form games. Our equilibria include
the constrained versions of the classical CE and all of its
variations as special cases, by generalizing the notion of Phi-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

