A Generalization of ViT/MLP-Mixer to Graphs

Xiaoxin He 1 Bryan Hooi 1 2 Thomas Laurent 3 Adam Perold 4 Yann LeCun 5 6 Xavier Bresson 1

Abstract

and their two major limitations; low expressivity representation and poor long-range dependency. We also present the
current techniques that address these issues, i.e. WeisfeilerLeman GNNs, graph positional encoding and Graph Transformers, as well as their shortcomings.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown
great potential in the field of graph representation learning. Standard GNNs define a local
message-passing mechanism which propagates information over the whole graph domain by stacking multiple layers. This paradigm suffers from
two major limitations, over-squashing and poor
long-range dependencies, that can be solved using global attention but significantly increases the
computational cost to quadratic complexity. In
this work, we propose an alternative approach to
overcome these structural limitations by leveraging the ViT/MLP-Mixer architectures introduced
in computer vision. We introduce a new class of
GNNs, called Graph ViT/MLP-Mixer, that holds
three key properties. First, they capture longrange dependency and mitigate the issue of oversquashing as demonstrated on Long Range Graph
Benchmark and TreeNeighbourMatch datasets.
Second, they offer better speed and memory efficiency with a complexity linear to the number
of nodes and edges, surpassing the related Graph
Transformer and expressive GNN models. Third,
they show high expressivity in terms of graph isomorphism as they can distinguish at least 3-WL
non-isomorphic graphs. We test our architecture
on 4 simulated datasets and 7 real-world benchmarks, and show highly competitive results on
all of them. The source code is available for
reproducibility at: https://github.com/
XiaoxinHe/Graph-ViT-MLPMixer.

Message-Passing GNNs (MP-GNNs). GNNs have become
the standard learning architectures for graphs based on their
flexibility to work with complex data domains s.a. recommendation (Monti et al., 2017; Berg et al., 2017), chemistry (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer et al., 2017), physics
(Cranmer et al., 2019; Bapst et al., 2020), transportation
(Derrow-Pinion et al., 2021), vision (Han et al., 2022a), natural language processing (NLP) (Wu et al., 2021a), knowledge graphs (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018), drug design (Stokes
et al., 2020; Gaudelet et al., 2020) and medical domain (Li
et al., 2020b; 2021). Most GNNs are designed to have two
core components. First, a structural message-passing mechanism s.a. Defferrard et al. (2016); Kipf & Welling (2017);
Hamilton et al. (2017); Monti et al. (2017); Bresson & Laurent (2017); Gilmer et al. (2017); Veličković et al. (2018)
that computes node representations by aggregating the local
1-hop neighborhood information. Second, a stack of L layers that aggregates L-hop neighborhood nodes to increase
the expressivity of the network and transmit information
between nodes that are L hops apart.
Weisfeiler-Leman GNNs (WL-GNNs). One of the major limitations of MP-GNNs is their inability to distinguish
(simple) non-isomorphic graphs. This limited expressivity can be formally analyzed with the Weisfeiler-Leman
graph isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968), as first
proposed in Xu et al. (2019); Morris et al. (2019). Later
on, Maron et al. (2018) introduced a general class of korder WL-GNNs that can be proved to universally represent
any class of k-WL graphs (Maron et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2019). But to achieve such expressivity, this class of GNNs
requires using k-tuples of nodes with memory and speed
complexities of O(N k ), with N being the number of nodes
and k ≥ 3. Although the complexity can be reduced to
O(N 2 ) and O(N 3 ) respectively (Maron et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2019; Azizian & Lelarge, 2020), it is still computationally costly compared to the linear complexity O(E) of
MP-GNNs with E being the number of edges, which often
reduces to O(N ) for real-world graphs that exhibit sparse
structures. In order to reduce memory and speed complexi-

1. Message-Passing GNNs and the Limitations
In this first section, we present the background of the project
by introducing the standard Message-Passing (MP) GNNs
1
School of Computing, University of Singapore 2 Institute of
Data Science, National University of Singapore 3 Loyola Marymount University 4 Element, Inc. 5 New York University 6 Meta AI.
Correspondence to: Xiaoxin He <he.xiaoxin@u.nus.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

