Efficient Self-supervised Learning with Contextualized Target Representations
for Vision, Speech and Language

Alexei Baevski 1 Arun Babu 2 Wei-Ning Hsu 2 Michael Auli 2

Abstract

in mind which makes it unclear whether the same learning mechanisms generalize across modalities. To this end,
recent work has introduced unified model architectures (Jaegle et al., 2021b;a) and training objectives which function
identically in different modalities (Baevski et al., 2022).

Current self-supervised learning algorithms are often modality-specific and require large amounts of
computational resources. To address these issues,
we increase the training efficiency of data2vec,
a learning objective that generalizes across several modalities. We do not encode masked tokens,
use a fast convolutional decoder and amortize the
effort to build teacher representations. data2vec
2.0 benefits from the rich contextualized target
representations introduced in data2vec which enable a fast self-supervised learner. Experiments
on ImageNet-1K image classification show that
data2vec 2.0 matches the accuracy of Masked
Autoencoders in 16.4x lower pre-training time,
on Librispeech speech recognition it performs as
well as wav2vec 2.0 in 10.6x less time, and on
GLUE natural language understanding it matches
a retrained RoBERTa model in half the time. Trading some speed for accuracy results in ImageNet1K top-1 accuracy of 86.8% with a ViT-L model
trained for 150 epochs. Models and code are available at www.github.com/pytorch/fairseq/
tree/master/examples/data2vec.

Self-supervised models have benefited from increased scale
in model capacity and training datasets (Brown et al., 2020)
as well as large amounts of computational training effort (Hoffmann et al., 2022) which resulted in interesting
emerging properties (Wei et al., 2022). And while the resulting models are excellent few-shot learners (Brown et al.,
2020), the preceding self-supervised learning stage is far
from efficient: for some modalities, models with hundreds
of billions of parameters are trained which often pushes the
boundaries of what is computationally feasible.
In this paper, we present data2vec 2.0 which improves the
compute efficiency of self-supervised learning with contextualized target prediction (Baevski et al., 2022) by using an
efficient data encoding (He et al., 2021), a fast convolutional
decoder and by reusing target representations for multiple
masked versions of each sample (Assran et al., 2022; Girdhar et al., 2022). The algorithm uses the same learning
objective for each modality but trains separate models for
each one using the Transformer architecture with different
feature encoders depending on the input modality. We follow Baevski et al. (2022) by creating latent contextualized
representations with a teacher model based on unmasked
training examples which are regressed by a student model
whose input is a masked version of the sample (Figure 1)

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has been an active research topic
which resulted in much progress across several areas such
as computer vision (Grill et al., 2020; Bao et al., 2021; He
et al., 2021), natural language processing (NLP; Radford
et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2019; Brown
et al. 2020), and speech processing (van den Oord et al.,
2018; Schneider et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020b; Hsu
et al., 2021; Baevski et al., 2021; Babu et al., 2022). However, algorithms are often designed with a single modality

Target contextualization enables capturing information
about the entire sample, e.g., for text, these targets can
represent the different meanings of a word depending on
the context. This is more difficult for conventional noncontextualized targets which use a single set of features to
represent the different meanings of a word. At first glance,
the creation of contextualized targets with a separate teacher
appear to be an additional step that slows model training
but our efficiency improvements suggest that contextualized
targets result in a richer learning task and faster learning.

1

Character AI, work done while at Meta AI 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Alexei Baevski <alexei.b@gmail.com >, Michael
Auli <michaelauli@meta.com>.

Experiments demonstrate efficiency improvements of between 2-16x at similar accuracy on image classification,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

