Finite-Sample Analysis of Learning High-Dimensional Single ReLU Neuron

Jingfeng Wu * 1 Difan Zou * 2 Zixiang Chen * 3 Vladimir Braverman 4 Quanquan Gu 3 Sham M. Kakade 5

Abstract

ing data, which is often referred to as overparameterization.
Yet, overparameterized models (when properly optimized)
can still achieve strong generalization performance in practice. Understanding the statistical learning mechanism in
the overparameterized regime has drawn great attention in
the learning theory community.

This paper considers the problem of learning a single ReLU neuron with squared loss (a.k.a., ReLU
regression) in the overparameterized regime,
where the input dimension can exceed the number of samples. We analyze a Perceptron-type
algorithm called GLM-tron (Kakade et al., 2011)
and provide its dimension-free risk upper bounds
for high-dimensional ReLU regression in both
well-specified and misspecified settings. Our risk
bounds recover several existing results as special
cases. Moreover, in the well-specified setting,
we provide an instance-wise matching risk lower
bound for GLM-tron. Our upper and lower risk
bounds provide a sharp characterization of the
high-dimensional ReLU regression problems that
can be learned via GLM-tron. On the other hand,
we provide some negative results for stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) for ReLU regression with
symmetric Bernoulli data: if the model is wellspecified, the excess risk of SGD is provably no
better than that of GLM-tron ignoring constant
factors, for each problem instance; and in the
noiseless case, GLM-tron can achieve a small risk
while SGD unavoidably suffers from a constant
risk in expectation. These results together suggest
that GLM-tron might be preferable to SGD for
high-dimensional ReLU regression.

Recently, overparameterized linear regression problems
have been extensively investigated. Dimensional-free, finitesample, and instance-wise excess risk bounds have been
established for various algorithms, including the minimal
ℓ2 -norm interpolator (Bartlett et al., 2020), ridge regression
(Tsigler & Bartlett, 2020; Cheng & Montanari, 2022), lownorm interpolator (Zhou et al., 2020; 2021; Koehler et al.,
2021) and the online stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
methods (Zou et al., 2021b; Wu et al., 2022a). These results
together deliver a relatively comprehensive picture of when
and how high-dimensional linear regression problems can
be learned with finite samples.
However, when the model is not linear, the overparameterized regime is much less well understood, even for the
arguably simplest ReLU regression problems (see (1)). This
work aims to fill this gap by providing sharp risk bounds for
learning high-dimensional ReLU regression problems with
finite samples.
High-Dimensional ReLU Regression. The problem of
ReLU Regression aims to minimize the following risk:
2
R(w) := E ReLU(x⊤ w) − y ,

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning such as deep learning, the number of model parameters often exceeds the amount of train-

w ∈ H,

(1)

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Johns Hopkins University 2 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Hong Kong 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of California, Los Angeles 4 Department of
Computer Science, Rice University 5 Department of Computer
Science and Department of Statistics, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Vladimir Braverman <vb21@rice.edu>,
Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>, Sham M. Kakade
<sham@seas.harvard.edu>.

where H is a Hilbert space that can be either d-dimensional
for a finite d or countably infinite dimensional; ReLU(·) :=
max{·, 0} is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU); (x, y) ∈
H ⊗ R denotes a pair of an input feature vector and the
corresponding scalar response; the expectation is taken over
some unknown distribution of (x, y); and w ∈ H denotes
the model parameter. It is worth noting that in general R(·)
is non-convex due to the non-linearity of ReLU. Therefore,
ReLU regression is significantly harder than linear regression.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Given N i.i.d. samples, (xt , yt )N
t=1 , two iterative algorithms
will be considered for optimizing (1). The first algorithm is
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which is initialized from

*

1

