AdaptDiffuser: Diffusion Models as Adaptive Self-evolving Planners

Zhixuan Liang 1 Yao Mu 1 Mingyu Ding 1 2 Fei Ni 3 Masayoshi Tomizuka 2 Ping Luo 1 4

Abstract

Diffusion Model
Initialize

Diffusion models have demonstrated their powerful generative capability in many tasks, with great
potential to serve as a paradigm for offline reinforcement learning. However, the quality of the
diffusion model is limited by the insufficient diversity of training data, which hinders the performance of planning and the generalizability to new
tasks. This paper introduces AdaptDiffuser, an
evolutionary planning method with diffusion that
can self-evolve to improve the diffusion model
hence a better planner, not only for seen tasks but
can also adapt to unseen tasks. AdaptDiffuser enables the generation of rich synthetic expert data
for goal-conditioned tasks using guidance from
reward gradients. It then selects high-quality data
via a discriminator to finetune the diffusion model,
which improves the generalization ability to unseen tasks. Empirical experiments on two benchmark environments and two carefully designed
unseen tasks in KUKA industrial robot arm and
Maze2D environments demonstrate the effectiveness of AdaptDiffuser. For example, AdaptDiffuser not only outperforms the previous art Diffuser (Janner et al., 2022) by 20.8% on Maze2D
and 7.5% on MuJoCo locomotion, but also adapts
better to new tasks, e.g., KUKA pick-and-place,
by 27.9% without requiring additional expert data.
More visualization results and demo videos could
be found on our project page.

II. Model (re-)training
Goal Point

Diverse Goal Point

I. Offline Trajectories
(Single Goal)

Reward
Guidance

IV. Diverse synthetic data

III. Guided Trajectory
Generation

Selection by
Discriminator

Returns

(a) Illustration of AdaptDiffuser.
138
116
94
72
50

Maze2D

84
82
80
78
76
IQL

Mujoco

Diffuser

36
28
20
12
4

KUKA Robot

AdaptDiffuser (Ours)

(b) Performance comparisons on three benchmarks.
Figure 1. Overall framework and performance comparison of
AdaptDiffuser. It enables diffusion models to generate rich synthetic expert data using guidance from reward gradients of either
seen or unseen goal-conditioned tasks. Then, it iteratively selects high-quality data via a discriminator to finetune the diffusion
model for self-evolving, leading to improved performance on seen
tasks and better generalizability to unseen tasks.

collected offline data without interacting with the live environment. Traditional offline RL approaches require fitting
value functions or computing policy gradients, which are
challenging due to limited offline data (Agarwal et al., 2020;
Kumar et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019; Kidambi et al., 2020).
Recent advances in generative sequence modeling (Chen
et al., 2021a; Janner et al., 2021; 2022) provide effective
alternatives to conventional RL problems by modeling the
joint distribution of sequences of states, actions, rewards
and values. For example, Decision Transformer (Chen et al.,
2021a) casts offline RL as a form of conditional sequence
modeling, which allows more efficient and stable learning
without the need to train policies via traditional RL algorithms like temporal difference learning (Sutton, 1988). By
treating RL as a sequence modeling problem, it bypasses
the need of bootstrapping for long-term credit assignment,

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al., 2020;
Prudencio et al., 2022) aims to learn policies from previously
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR 2 University of California, Berkeley, USA
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Ping Luo <pluo.lhi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

