Neural Algorithmic Reasoning with Causal Regularisation

Beatrice Bevilacqua 1 Kyriacos Nikiforou * 2 Borja Ibarz * 2 Ioana Bica 2 Michela Paganini 2 Charles Blundell 2
Jovana Mitrovic † 2 Petar Veličković † 2

Abstract

et al., 2022b; Bansal et al., 2022; Beurer-Kellner et al., 2022).
The rationale is that, if a model learns how to reason, or
learns to execute an algorithm, it should be able to apply
that reasoning, or algorithm, to a completely novel problem,
even in a different domain. Specifically, if a model has
learnt an algorithm, it should be gracefully applicable on
out-of-distribution (OOD) examples, which are substantially
different from the examples in the training set, and return
correct outputs for them. This is because an algorithm—and
reasoning in general—is a sequential, step-by-step process,
where a simple decision is made in each step based on
outputs of the previous computation.

Recent work on neural algorithmic reasoning has
investigated the reasoning capabilities of neural networks, effectively demonstrating they can
learn to execute classical algorithms on unseen
data coming from the train distribution. However, the performance of existing neural reasoners significantly degrades on out-of-distribution
(OOD) test data, where inputs have larger sizes.
In this work, we make an important observation:
there are many different inputs for which an algorithm will perform certain intermediate computations identically. This insight allows us to
develop data augmentation procedures that, given
an algorithm’s intermediate trajectory, produce
inputs for which the target algorithm would have
exactly the same next trajectory step. We ensure
invariance in the next-step prediction across such
inputs, by employing a self-supervised objective
derived by our observation, formalised in a causal
graph. We prove that the resulting method, which
we call Hint-ReLIC, improves the OOD generalisation capabilities of the reasoner. We evaluate
our method on the CLRS algorithmic reasoning
benchmark, where we show up to 3× improvements on the OOD test data.

Prior work (Diao & Loynd, 2022; Dudzik & Veličković,
2022; Ibarz et al., 2022; Mahdavi et al., 2022) has explored
this setup, using the CLRS-30 benchmark (Veličković et al.,
2022a), and showed that while many algorithmic tasks can
be learned by Graph Neural Network (GNN) processors in
a way that generalises to larger problem instances, there are
still several algorithms where this could not be achieved.
Importantly, CLRS-30 also provides ground-truth hints for
every algorithm. Hints correspond to the state of different
variables employed to solve the algorithm (e.g. positions,
pointers, colouring of nodes) along its trace. Such hints
can optionally be used during training, but are not available
during evaluation. In previous work, they have mainly been
used as auxiliary targets together with the algorithm output.
The prevailing hypothesis is that gradients coming from predicting these additional relevant signals will help constrain
the representations in the neural algorithmic executor and
prevent overfitting. Predicted hints can also be optionally
fed back into the model to provide additional context and
aid their prediction at the next step.

1. Introduction
Recent works advocate for building neural networks that
can reason (Xu et al., 2020; 2021; Veličković & Blundell,
2021; Veličković et al., 2022a). Therein, it is posited that
combining the robustness of algorithms with the flexibility
of neural networks can help us accelerate progress towards
models that can tackle a wide range of tasks with real world
impact (Davies et al., 2021; Deac et al., 2021; Veličković

In practice, while utilising hints in this way does lead to models that follow the algorithmic trajectory better, they have
had a less substantial impact on the accuracy of the predicted
final output. This is likely due to the advent of powerful
strategies such as recall (Bansal et al., 2022), wherein the
input is fed back to the model at every intermediate step,
constantly “reminding” the model of the problem that needs
to be solved. The positive effect of recall on the final output
accuracy has been observed on many occasions (Mahdavi
et al., 2022), and outweighs the contribution from directly

*
Equal contribution † Equal Advising 1 Purdue University
DeepMind.
Work done while Beatrice Bevilacqua was
at DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Beatrice Bevilacqua
<bbevilac@purdue.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

