Causal Isotonic Calibration
for Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Lars van der Laan * 1 Ernesto Ulloa-Pérez * 2 Marco Carone 3 Alex Luedtke 1

Abstract

fields, such as marketing (Devriendt et al., 2018), the social sciences (Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009), and the health
sciences (Kent et al., 2018). For example, in the health
sciences, heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) are of
high importance to understanding and quantifying how certain exposures or interventions affect the health of various
subpopulations (Dahabreh et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2020). Potential applications include prioritizing treatment to certain
sub-populations when treatment resources are scarce, or individualizing treatment assignments when the treatment can
have no effect (or even be harmful) in certain subpopulations
(Dahabreh et al., 2016). As an example, treatment assignment based on risk scores has been used to provide clinical
guidance in cardiovascular disease prevention (Lloyd-Jones
et al., 2019) and to improve decision-making in oncology
(Collins & Varmus, 2015; Cucchiara et al., 2018).

We propose causal isotonic calibration, a novel
nonparametric method for calibrating predictors
of heterogeneous treatment effects. Furthermore,
we introduce cross-calibration, a data-efficient
variant of calibration that eliminates the need
for hold-out calibration sets. Cross-calibration
leverages cross-fitted predictors and generates
a single calibrated predictor using all available
data. Under weak conditions that do not assume
monotonicity, we establish that both causal isotonic calibration and cross-calibration achieve fast
doubly-robust calibration rates, as long as either
the propensity score or outcome regression is estimated accurately in a suitable sense. The proposed causal isotonic calibrator can be wrapped
around any black-box learning algorithm, providing robust and distribution-free calibration guarantees while preserving predictive performance.

A wide range of statistical methods are available for assessing HTEs, with recent examples including Wager & Athey
(2018), Carnegie et al. (2019), Lee et al. (2020), Yadlowsky
et al. (2021), and Nie & Wager (2021), among others. In
particular, many methods, including Imbens & Wooldridge
(2009) and Dominici et al. (2020), scrutinize HTEs via conditional average treatment effects (CATEs). The CATE is
the difference in the conditional mean of the counterfactual
outcome corresponding to treatment versus control given
covariates, which can be defined at a group or individual
level. When interest lies in predicting treatment effect, the
CATE can be viewed as the oracle predictor of the individual
treatment effect (ITE) that can feasibly be learned from data.
Optimal treatment rules have been derived based on the sign
of the CATE estimator (Murphy, 2003; Robins, 2004), with
more recent works incorporating the use of flexible CATE
estimators (Luedtke & van der Laan, 2016). Thus, due to its
wide applicability and scientific relevance, CATE estimation
has been of great interest in statistics and data science.

1. Introduction
Estimation of causal effects via both randomized experiments and observational studies is critical to understanding
the effects of interventions and informing policy. Moreover,
it is often the case that understanding treatment effect heterogeneity can provide more insights than overall population
effects (Obermeyer & Emanuel, 2016; Athey, 2017). For
instance, a study of treatment effect heterogeneity can help
elucidate the mechanism of an intervention, design policies
targeted to subpopulations that can most benefit (Imbens &
Wooldridge, 2009), and predict the effect of interventions
in populations other than the ones in which they were developed. These necessities have arisen in a wide range of

Regardless of its quality as a proxy for the true CATE, it is
generally accepted that predictions from a given treatment
effect predictor can still be useful for decision-making. However, theoretical guarantees for rational decision-making
using a given treatment effect predictor typically hinge
on the predictor being a good approximation of the true
CATE. Accurate CATE estimation can be challenging be-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Washington, USA 2 Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology,
and Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of
Biostatistics, University of Washington, USA. Correspondence to:
Lars van der Laan <lvdlaan@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

