LSDS++: Dual Sampling for Accelerated k-means++

Chenglin Fan
CSE Department, Pennsylvania State University
201 Old Main, University Park, PA 16802, USA
fanchenglin@gmail.com

Ping Li, Xiaoyun Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{pinli, xiaoyli}@linkedin.com
where d(p, c) = ∥p − c∥2 is the squared l2 distance. The
number of centers, k, could be tens, hundreds or even millions depending on the industrial application.

Abstract
k-means clustering is an important problem in
machine learning and statistics. The k-means++
initialization algorithm has driven new acceleration strategies and theoretical analysis for solving
the k-means clustering problem. The state-ofthe-art variant, called LocalSearch++, adds
extra local search steps upon k-means++ to
achieve constant approximation error in expectation. In this paper, we propose a new variant
named LSDS++, which improves the sampling
efficiency of LocalSearch++ via a strategy
called dual sampling. By defining a new capture
graph based on the concept of coreset, we show
that the proposed LSDS++ is able to achieve the
same expected constant error with reduced complexity. Experiments are conducted to justify the
benefit of LSDS++ in practice.

1.1. Algorithms for k-means
In the past 50 years, continuous progress has been made to
solve the clustering problem in (1). One popular and widely
used approach is the Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982). With
a set of randomly initialized centers, the Lloyd’s algorithm
repeatedly assigns each data point to its nearest center and
updates the centers by taking the average of all points in the
cluster back and forth until convergence. From an information theory viewpoint, this method implements the distortion
optimal quantization for multi-dimensional data. However,
one drawback of Lloyd’s algorithm is that the theoretical
guarantee on the final solution is hard to be established.
Moreover, the number of iterations required to converge can
be superpolynomial (Arthur and Vassilvitskii, 2006). As
an alternative approach, Kanungo et al. (2004) proposed a
local search algorithm. As presented in Algorithm 1, the algorithm iteratively finds the swap between a center point in
the current center set and a point outside the center set that
minimizes the clustering cost. It is shown that local search
achieves an approximation factor of (9 + ϵ) in polynomial
time (i.e., output C such that cost(P, C) ≤ (9 + ϵ)optk ,
where optk is the optimal k-means cost). However, the
strategy of finding the optimal swap between one center
and another data point in every iteration usually leads to
prohibitively high running time empirically. Other approximation algorithms that use local search include (Bandyapadhyay and Varadarajan, 2016; Cohen-Addad, 2018; Friggstad
et al., 2019). In general, these algorithms also have running
time that depends doubly exponentially on the dimension.

1. Introduction
The k-means clustering is an important problem in statistics and machine learning, with numerous applications in
finance, web, networks analysis, etc. (Abbasi and Younis,
2007). Given a set P of data points in the Euclidean space
Rd such as user profiles and gene sequences, the goal of
the k-means algorithm is to group the n data points into
k disjoint clusters, such that points near each other should
belong to the same cluster. Typically, given a set of centers,
every data point p is assigned to the cluster whose center
is the closest among all centers to p. Denote the center set
as C (with |C| = k). Formally, the objective of k-means
clustering is to find C that minimizes the following cost:
cost(P, C) =

X
p∈P

min d(p, c),
c∈C

p, c ∈ Rd ,

1.2. Center initialization for k-means

(1)

It is known that the Lloyd’s algorithm can be very sensitive
to the choice of the initial centers (Milligan, 1980). Therefore, there have been many works on determining good
initial centers for k-means, among which the k-means++
seeding algorithm (Arthur and Vassilvitskii, 2007) (also

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

