Linear Time GPs for Inferring Latent Trajectories from Neural Spike Trains

Matthew Dowling 1 Yuan Zhao 2 Il Memming Park 3

Abstract

the dynamics underlying neural computation (Macke et al.,
2011; Pfau et al., 2013; Archer et al., 2014; Frigola et al.,
2014; Pandarinath et al., 2018). These methods usually
fall under the header of latent variable models (LVMs) and
posit that the observed neural activity can be sufficiently
explained by linear or nonlinear mappings of latent dynamics (Pei et al., 2021). Among those, a large class of LVMs
employ Gaussian processes (GPs) to specify a priori beliefs
on the temporal structure of latent trajectories (Yu et al.,
2009; Zhao & Park, 2017; Koyama et al., 2010; Jensen
et al., 2021).

Latent Gaussian process (GP) models are widely
used in neuroscience to uncover hidden state
evolutions from sequential observations, mainly
in neural activity recordings. While latent GP
models provide a principled and powerful solution in theory, the intractable posterior in nonconjugate settings necessitates approximate inference schemes, which may lack scalability. In
this work, we propose cvHM, a general inference
framework for latent GP models leveraging HidaMatérn kernels and conjugate computation variational inference (CVI). With cvHM, we are able to
perform variational inference of latent neural trajectories with linear time complexity for arbitrary
likelihoods. The reparameterization of stationary
kernels using Hida-Matérn GPs helps us connect
the latent variable models that encode prior assumptions through dynamical systems to those
that encode trajectory assumptions through GPs.
In contrast to previous work, we use bidirectional
information filtering, leading to a more concise
implementation. Furthermore, we employ the
Whittle approximate likelihood to achieve highly
efficient hyperparameter learning.

1

The success and ubiquitous use of GPs is due in part to
favorable properties such as universality, flexibility, and intuitive control over smoothness via time/length scale and
differentiablility. However, GP inference generally lacks
scalability and non-Gaussian observations make the exact
posterior intractable. Though approximate methods like
sparse GPs (Titsias, 2009) can help, this comes at the price
of accuracy and expressiveness. Variational inference is
widely used to enable computationally efficient approximations, however, a naive implementation still requires solving a large and dense linear system with time complexity
of O(T 3 ) and space complexity O(T 2 ) for a sequence of
length T .
In this work, we combine two recent developments in GP
inference, the Hida-Matérn (HM) kernels and conjugate
computation variational inference (CVI). The linear state
space representation of GP through HM kernels (Dowling
et al., 2021) allows for efficient latent trajectory inference
via Kalman filtering/smoothing. Utilizing natural gradients
of the exponential family, CVI further reduces VI to a numerically elegant iterative optimization (Khan & Lin, 2017).
As a result, the conjugate variational Hida-Matérn GP
(cvHM) framework accelerates latent GP inference to linear time while maintaining flexibility of kernel choice and
computationally efficient hyperparameter optimization. Furthermore, we introduce the Whittle (marginal) likelihood as
an attractive approximation for GP hyperparameter learning.

Introduction

Arguably the spatiotemporal structure of neural population
activity implements neural computation. Although it is
not directly observable, recovery of the (effective) latent
neural state evolution from recordings of neural activity is
possible (Paninski et al., 2010; Kao et al., 2015), and is
critical for advancing our understanding of neural computation. Strong experimental evidence supporting the existence
of low dimensional neural manifolds has fueled research
into developing statistical models that can be used to infer
1
Stony Brook University, New York, USA 2 National Institute of Mental Health, USA 3 Champalimaud Research, Champalimaud Foundation, Portugal. Correspondence to: Matthew Dowling
<matthew.dowling@stonybrook.edu>.

Our contributions are the following: (i) We propose cvHM,
combining Hida-Matérn GPs and CVI , as a tool for extracting latent trajectories from multivariate (neural) time
series in linear time complexity. (ii) We show that the information filter in tandem with CVI results in a more concise

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

