Neural Stochastic Differential Games for Time-series Analysis

Sungwoo Park * 1 Byoungwoo Park * 2 Moontae Lee 1 3 Changhee Lee 2

Abstract

tion redundancy by adopting a concept known as temporal
decay (Che et al., 2018; Mei & Eisner, 2017). Such an
inductive bias relies on the belief that the influence of past
observations exponentially decreases over time. However,
due to this strong assumption, any method built upon the
fixed inductive bias may fail to capture different temporal
dynamics in various real-world scenarios properly.

Modeling spatiotemporal dynamics with neural
differential equations has become a major line of
research that opens new ways to handle various
real-world scenarios (e.g., missing observations,
irregular times, etc.). Despite such progress, most
existing methods still face challenges in providing
a general framework for analyzing time series. To
tackle this, we adopt stochastic differential games
to suggest a new philosophy of utilizing interacting collective intelligence in time series analysis.
For the implementation, we develop the novel gradient descent-based algorithm called deep neural
fictitious play to approximate the Nash equilibrium. We theoretically analyze the convergence
result of the proposed algorithm and discuss the
advantage of cooperative games in handling noninformative observation. Throughout the experiments on various datasets, we demonstrate the
superiority of our framework over all the tested
benchmarks in modeling time-series prediction by
capitalizing on the advantages of applying cooperative games. An ablation study shows that neural
agents of the proposed framework learn intrinsic
temporal relevance to make accurate time-series
predictions.

A promising direction to tackle this challenge is to learn
the temporal correlation structure from data. One candidate for learning the implicit relation is recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) which subsequently encode past observations into a latent space with a gating mechanism. Due to
the implicitness of latent encoding, the model provides ambiguous explanations of how observations are related to the
prediction. Furthermore, conventional RNNs are incapable
of capturing the irregularly sampled time-series, which is
problematic for many real-world applications.
Recently, remarkable advances have been made to model
underlying continuous temporal dynamics utilizing neural
differential equations (Chen et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020;
Kidger et al., 2020) (NDEs). For instance, a stream of
research (Rubanova et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2021; Schirmer
et al., 2022) has focused on overcoming the initial condition
problem of conventional differential equation models by
encoding temporal dynamics into the latent space. A set of
past observations are incorporated into latent representations
and fully utilized for time-series prediction. However, owing
to the inexplicable relation between temporal states in the
latent representations, these methods are still incapable of
showing the explicit rationale that can reveal the impact of
past observations on the future.

1. Introduction
The key challenge of time-series prediction is understanding
how past observations contribute to the future and building
a probabilistic model that intrinsically captures the temporal
correlation. A model is required to differentiate the relative
importance of past observations on the future time-series
such that the redundant information is well-suppressed during inference. To address this challenge, a series of previous works followed the philosophy of defining informa-

In this paper, we present a novel framework built upon
game theory to model temporal dynamics of time-series
data. More specifically, we extend the conventional differential equation (DE) to the multi-agent counterpart for
decomposing the observational time-series. Each agent individually encodes the impact of a partial observation into
an underlying stochastic trajectory and interacts with each
other to extract meaningful information to predict the future.
We formulate the collaboration among agents utilizing cooperative differential games (Leitmann, 1974; Staatz, 1983;
Sexton, 1986) to integrate the individual information and
adaptively balance the importance of each agent. As a result

*
Equal contribution 1 LG AI Research 2 Artificial Intelligence
Graduate School, Chung-Ang University 3 Department of Information and Decision Sciences, University of Illinois Chicago. Correspondence to: Sungwoo Park <sungwoopark.lg@lgresearch.ai>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

