In Search for a Generalizable Method for Source Free Domain Adaptation

Malik Boudiaf 1 2 Tom Denton 3 Bart van Merriënboer 3 Vincent Dumoulin∗ 3 Eleni Triantafillou∗ 3

Abstract

training data (“source-free”). Preferably this adaptation can
be performed unsupervised. This is the problem of sourcefree domain adaptation (SFDA) that we target in this work.

Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is compelling because it allows adapting an off-the-shelf
model to a new domain using only unlabelled
data. In this work, we apply existing SFDA techniques to a challenging set of naturally-occurring
distribution shifts in bioacoustics, which are very
different from the ones commonly studied in computer vision. We find existing methods perform
differently relative to each other than observed
in vision benchmarks, and sometimes perform
worse than no adaptation at all. We propose a
new simple method which outperforms the existing methods on our new shifts while exhibiting
strong performance on a range of vision datasets.
Our findings suggest that existing SFDA methods
are not as generalizable as previously thought and
that considering diverse modalities can be a useful
avenue for designing more robust models.

Several models have been proposed recently to tackle SFDA.
However, we argue that evaluation in this area is a significant challenge in and of itself: We desire SFDA methods
that are general, in that they can be used for different applications to adapt an application-appropriate pre-trained
model to cope with a wide range of distribution shifts. Unfortunately, the standard SFDA evaluation protocols focus
on a narrow set of shifts in vision tasks, leaving us with a
limited view of the relative merits among different methods,
as well as their generalizability. In this work, we address this
limitation by studying a new set of distribution shifts. We
expand on the existing evaluation methods, in order to gain
as much new information as possible about SFDA methods.
We also argue that we should target distribution shifts that
are naturally-occurring as this maximizes the chances of the
resulting research advances being directly translated into
progress in real-world problems.
To that end, we propose to study a new set of distribution
shifts in the audio domain. We use a bird species classifier
trained on a large dataset of bird song recordings as our pretrained model. This dataset consists of focalized recordings,
where the song of the identified bird is at the foreground of
the recording. Our goal is to adapt this model to a set of
passive recordings (soundscapes). The shift from focalized
to soundscape recordings is substantial, as the recordings
in the latter often feature much lower signal-to-noise ratio, several birds vocalizing at once, as well as significant
distractors and environmental noise like rain or wind. In addition, the soundscapes we consider originate from different
geographical locations, inducing extreme label shifts.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made significant progress on a wide range
of application areas. An important contributing factor has
been the availability of increasingly larger datasets and models (Kaplan et al., 2020; Song et al., 2022). However, a
downside of this trend is that training state-of-the-art models has also become increasingly expensive. This is not
only wasteful from an environmental perspective, but also
makes the training of such models inaccessible to some
practitioners due to the prohibitive resources required, or
potential difficulties with data access. On the other hand, directly reusing already-trained models is often not desirable,
as their performance can degrade significantly in the presence of distribution shifts during deployment (Geirhos et al.,
2020). Therefore, a fruitful avenue is designing adaptation
methods for pre-trained models to succeed on a new target
domain, without requiring access to the original (source)

Our rationale for choosing to study these shifts is threefold. Firstly, they are challenging, as evidenced by the
poor performance on soundscape datasets compared to focalized recordings observed by Goëau et al. (2018); Kahl
et al. (2021). Secondly, they are naturally occurring and any
progress in addressing them can support ecological monitoring and biodiversity conservation efforts and research.
Finally, our resulting evaluation framework is “just different
enough” from the established one: It differs in terms of i)
the modality (vision vs. audio), ii) the problem setup (single-

*

Equal contribution 1 ÉTS Montréal 2 Work done while interning
at Google 3 Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to:
Malik Boudiaf <malik.boudiaf.1@etsmtl.net>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

