A General Representation Learning Framework with Generalization
Performance Guarantees
Junbiao Cui 1 Jianqing Liang 1 Qin Yue 1 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract

make learning tasks easier to solve. In most cases, the
function f is nonlinear, thus we need to apply a nonlinear
mapping φ to input space X . The process of learning φ
from data is called representation learning.

The generalization performance of machine learning methods depends heavily on the quality of
data representation. However, existing researches
rarely consider representation learning from the
perspective of generalization error. In this paper,
we prove that generalization error of representation learning function can be estimated effectively
by solving two convex optimization problems.
Based on it, we propose a general representation
learning framework. And then, we apply the proposed framework to two most commonly used
nonlinear mapping methods, i.e., kernel based
method and deep neural network (DNN), and
thus design a kernel selection method and a DNN
boosting framework, correspondingly. Finally, extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of the
proposed methods.

In machine learning, two most commonly used nonlinear
mapping methods are kernel based method and DNN.
Kernel based method utilizes kernel mapping φkernel to
map original data into a latent space X ′ , and then completes
learning in latent space. In general, it is not necessary to
give explicit expression of kernel mapping φkernel , making the kernel based method highly flexible and universal.
Benefiting from it, a large number of kernel based methods
have been proposed, such as kernelized principal component
analysis (Schölkopf et al., 1998), kernelized support vector
machine (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995), and kernelized k-means
(Zhang & Rudnicky, 2002), etc. Among them, the selection
of kernel directly determines the generalization performance
of kernel based method. So far, many kernels have been
proposed, such as Gaussian kernel, polynomial kernel, and
Laplacian kernel, etc. However, selecting a proper kernel for
a learning task is very challenging, because it is difficult to
estimate the generalization performance of the corresponding latent data representation given a kernel.

1. Introduction
Machine learning, especially supervised learning, has
achieved significant success in many fields, such as computer vision (Russakovsky et al., 2015; He et al., 2016;
Carion et al., 2020; He et al., 2022), speech recognition
(Sainath et al., 2013; Gulati et al., 2020; Chiu et al., 2022),
and natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020; Qiu
et al., 2020; Cuadros et al., 2022), etc. The nature of machine learning is to learn the law from empirical data, which
is usually a function from input space X to output space Y,
i.e., f : X → Y.

DNN (LeCun et al., 2015) maps original data into a latent
space X ′ through a multi-layer neural network φDNN , and
then adds a liner mapping at the end of φDNN . In DNN, the
network architecture and loss are major impact factors of
the generalization performance.
For a learning task, designing a good network architecture usually needs domain knowledge. For example, CNN
(LeCun et al., 1989; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016), ViT (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021), and MAE (He et al., 2022) are designed for computer
vision tasks, while RNN (Rumelhart et al., 1986), LSTM
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), Seq2Seq (Sutskever
et al., 2014), BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) are designed for natural language processing
tasks. How to design good network architectures for specific
tasks is beyond the scope of this paper.

It is well known that the data representation has a huge
effect on the performance of machine learning methods
(Goodfellow et al., 2016). Better data representations can
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School
of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China. Correspondence to: Jiye Liang
<ljy@sxu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

So far, a lot of losses have been proposed to train DNN,
which can be roughly divided into two categories, super1

