Input Perturbation Reduces Exposure Bias in Diffusion Models

Mang Ning 1 2 Enver Sangineto 2 Angelo Porrello 2 Simone Calderara 2 Rita Cucchiara 2

Abstract

eration process is based on a sequence of denoising steps, in
which a synthetic sample is created starting from pure noise
and autoregressively reducing the noise component. In more
detail, during training, a real sample x 0 is progressively destroyed in T steps adding Gaussian noise (forward process).
The sequence x 0 , ..., x t , ..., x T so obtained, is used to train
a deep denoising autoencoder (µ(·)) to invert the forward
process: x̂ t−1 = µ(x t , t). At inference time, the generation process is autoregressive because it depends on the
previously generated samples: x̂ t−1 = µ(x̂ t , t) (Sec. 3).

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models have
shown an impressive generation quality although
their long sampling chain leads to high computational costs. In this paper, we observe that a
long sampling chain also leads to an error accumulation phenomenon, which is similar to the
exposure bias problem in autoregressive text generation. Specifically, we note that there is a discrepancy between training and testing, since the
former is conditioned on the ground truth samples,
while the latter is conditioned on the previously
generated results. To alleviate this problem, we
propose a very simple but effective training regularization, consisting in perturbing the ground
truth samples to simulate the inference time prediction errors. We empirically show that, without
affecting the recall and precision, the proposed
input perturbation leads to a significant improvement in the sample quality while reducing both
the training and the inference times. For instance,
on CelebA 64×64, we achieve a new state-of-theart FID score of 1.27, while saving 37.5% of the
training time. The code is available at https:
//github.com/forever208/DDPM-IP.

Despite the large success of DDPMs in different generative
fields (Sec. 2), one of the main drawbacks of these models
is their very long computational time, which depends on the
large number of steps T required at both the training and
the inference stage. As recently emphasised in (Xiao et al.,
2022), the fundamental reason why T needs to be large is
that each denoising step is assumed to be Gaussian, and
this assumption holds only for small step sizes. Conversely,
with larger step sizes, the prediction network (µ(·)) needs
to solve a harder problem and it becomes progressively less
accurate (Xiao et al., 2022). However, in this paper, we
observe that there is a second phenomenon, related to the
sampling chain, but partially in contrast with the first, which
is the accumulation of these errors over the T inference
sampling steps. This is basically due to the discrepancy
between the training and the inference stage, in which the
latter generates a sequence of samples based on the results
of the previous steps, hence possibly accumulating errors.
In fact, at training time, µ(·) is trained with a ground truth
pair (x t , x t−1 ) and, given x t , it learns to reconstruct x t−1
(µ(x t , t)). However, at inference time, µ(·) has no access
to the “real” x t , and its prediction depends on the previously generated x̂ t (µ(x̂ t , t)). This input mismatch between
µ(x t , t), used during training, and µ(x̂ t , t), used during testing, is similar to the exposure bias problem (Ranzato et al.,
2016; Schmidt, 2019) shared by other autoregressive generative methods. For example, Rennie et al. (2017) argue that
training a network to maximize the likelihood of the next
ground-truth word given the previous ground-truth word
(called “Teacher-Forcing” (Bengio et al., 2015)) results in
error accumulation at inference time, since the model has
never been exposed to its own predictions.

1. Introduction
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) are a new generative
paradigm which is attracting a growing interest due to its
very high-quality sample generation capabilities (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Nichol et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022).
Differently from most existing generative methods which
synthesize a new sample in a single step, DDPMs resemble
the Langevin dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011) and the gen1

Department of Information and Computing Science, Utrecht
University, the Netherlands. 2 Department of Engineering (DIEF),
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy. Correspondence to: Mang Ning <m.ning@uu.nl>, Enver Sangineto <enver.sangineto@unimore.it>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we first empirically analyze this accumulation
error phenomenon. For instance, we show that a standard
1

