Prefer to Classify: Improving Text Classifiers via Auxiliary Preference Learning

Jaehyung Kim 1 2 Jinwoo Shin 1 Dongyeop Kang 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
The recent development of natural language processing
(NLP) systems significantly boosts state-of-the-art performances on various NLP tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022). This success of NLP systems has been driven
by, among other things, the construction of largely humanannotated benchmarks, such as GLUE (Wang et al., 2019),
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), or BIG-bench (Srivastava
et al., 2022). These benchmarks are usually constructed by
(a) collecting (or writing) the relevant input texts and (b)
assigning output labels by human annotators. Here, (a) is
arguably more costly and cumbersome in many practical
scenarios; for example, input texts with distribution mismatch or spurious patterns could make the model suffer
from learning the generalized representation (Gururangan
et al., 2018; Karamcheti et al., 2021), and hence the much
higher cost is often paid to the collection process to keep the
quality of the constructed benchmark (Kaushik et al., 2020).
Therefore, it is often preferable to pay the additional human
cost to annotate the existing benchmarks in a complementary way (instead of collecting new input texts), e.g., one
can improve the label quality (Nie et al., 2020b; Fornaciari
et al., 2021) by assigning multiple annotators to each input
or obtain the finer task information with the new label space
(Williams et al., 2022). In this paper, we investigate a new
alternative way to better exploit the existing benchmarks
(input texts and task labels), with auxiliary annotation to
further improve the model performance.

The development of largely human-annotated
benchmarks has driven the success of deep neural networks in various NLP tasks. To enhance
the effectiveness of existing benchmarks, collecting new additional input-output pairs is often too
costly and challenging, particularly considering
their marginal impact on improving the current
model accuracy. Instead, additional or complementary annotations on the existing input texts in
the benchmarks can be preferable as an efficient
way to pay the additional human cost. In this
paper, we investigate task-specific preferences between pairs of input texts as a new alternative way
for such auxiliary data annotation. From ‘pairwise’ comparisons with respect to the task, the
auxiliary preference learning enables the model
to learn an additional informative training signal
that cannot be captured with ‘instance-wise’ task
labels. To this end, we propose a novel multitask learning framework, called prefer-to-classify
(P2C), which can enjoy the cooperative effect of
learning both the given classification task and the
auxiliary preferences. Here, we provide three
different ways to collect preference signals in
practice: (a) implicitly extracting from annotation records (for free, but often unavailable), (b)
collecting explicitly from crowd workers (high
paid), or (c) pre-trained large language models
such as GPT-3 (low paid). Given existing classification NLP benchmarks, we demonstrate that the
proposed auxiliary preference learning via P2C
on them is effective in improving text classifiers.
Our codes are publicly available.1

Contribution. We introduce task-specific preferences between pairs of input texts as a new and auxiliary data annotation, to improve the text classification system upon the
existing task annotations (Figure 1(a)). By relatively ordering a pair of two texts and better calibrating them with
respect to the task through ‘pair-wise’ comparison, we expect that the auxiliary preference learning provides an additional informative training signal that cannot be captured
with ‘instance-wise’ evaluation (see Figure 1(b)).

1
KAIST 2 Work was mainly done while visiting Minnesota NLP.
University of Minnesota. Correspondence to: Jaehyung Kim
<jaehyungkim@kaist.ac.kr>.

This preference signal could be obtained not only from
human annotators (called subjective preference), but also
from the existing annotation records (called extractive preference), if available, and even the recent strong pre-trained
language models (called generative preference). To be specific, generative preference is obtained by querying the pref-

3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/minnesotanlp/p2c

1

