Towards Unbiased Training in Federated Open-world Semi-supervised Learning

Jie Zhang 1 Xiaosong Ma 1 Song Guo 1 Wenchao Xu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
To tackle the privacy issues in distributed machine learning,
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2021b) has emerged as a promising paradigm by collaboratively training a shared model among multiple clients
without exposing their private raw data. As a common
practice in FL, the global model is usually obtained by periodically averaging the updated model parameters from
distributed clients in a centralized server. While existing FL
methods assume that clients’ data is fully labeled so that supervised learning can be conducted for local model update
on each client, in some real-world applications, the data
labeling process can be prohibitive due to the tremendous
overhead and the requirement of corresponding expertise
(Ouali et al., 2020) such as for medical diagnoses (Ng et al.,
2021) and object detection (Liu et al., 2021).

Federated Semi-supervised Learning (FedSSL)
has emerged as a new paradigm for allowing distributed clients to collaboratively train a machine
learning model over scarce labeled data and abundant unlabeled data. However, existing works for
FedSSL rely on a closed-world assumption that all
local training data and global testing data are from
seen classes observed in the labeled dataset. It is
crucial to go one step further: adapting FL models
to an open-world setting, where unseen classes exist in the unlabeled data. In this paper, we propose
a novel Federated open-world Semi-Supervised
Learning (FedoSSL) framework, which can solve
the key challenges in distributed and open-world
settings, i.e., the biased training process for heterogeneously distributed unseen classes. Specifically,
since the advent of a certain unseen class depends
on a client basis, the locally unseen classes (exist in multiple clients) are likely to receive differentiated superior aggregation effects than the
globally unseen classes (exist only in one client).
We adopt an uncertainty-aware suppressed loss
to alleviate the biased training between locally
unseen and globally unseen classes. Besides, we
enable a calibration module supplementary to the
global aggregation to avoid potential conflicting
knowledge transfer caused by inconsistent data
distribution among different clients. The proposed
FedoSSL can be easily adapted to state-of-the-art
FL methods, which is also validated via extensive experiments on benchmarks and real-world
datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and CINIC-10).

The scarce labeled data and the abundant unlabeled data give
the rise to the emergence of federated semi-supervised learning (FedSSL) (Jeong et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022), which
can simultaneously exploit both the labeled and unlabeled
data to optimize a global model in distributed environments.
Existing FedSSL schemes have demonstrated to train models based on a small amount of labeled data on both client
or server side (Jin et al., 2020; Long et al., 2020). However,
these works rely on the closed-world assumption that all
local training data and global testing data are from the same
set of classes that are included in the labeled dataset (Zhou,
2022; Boult et al., 2019), which is often invalid for practical
scenarios. In contrast, the open-world settings allow novel
class discovery, and thus are common for data in-the-wild,
e.g., in medical image classification tasks, some diseases are
naturally scarce and never labeled before, while the model
may be required to both classify images into predefined
types (seen classes) and discover new unknown diseases
(unseen classes). Hence, a new fundamental question arises:
how to collaboratively train models on distributed data to
enable classification on both seen and unseen classes under
the open-world setting?

1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Song Guo
<song.guo@polyu.edu.hk>.

To this end, we first construct a new FedSSL benchmark that
extends the conventional closed-world training framework
to the open-world setting. Surprisingly, it is demonstrated
that there is a significant performance degradation due to
the existence of unseen classes in unlabeled data during the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

