Theoretical Guarantees of Learning Ensembling Strategies
with Applications to Time Series Forecasting

Hilaf Hasson 1 Danielle C. Maddix 1 Yuyang Wang 1 Gaurav Gupta 1 Youngsuk Park 1

Abstract

the raw data) are examples of “stacked generalizations”,
or “stacking” (Wolpert, 1992); see (Ting & Witten, 1997b).
Stacking is an umbrella term referring to the process of training one model on top of the predictions of the base learners.
In the simple mean and median cases, the stacking model
is constant rather than learned. Despite being heavily used
in practice, the theoretical properties of stacked generalizations are underexplored, and stacking has notoriously been
referred to as “black art” (Wolpert, 1992; Ting & Witten,
1997a).

Ensembling is among the most popular tools in
machine learning (ML) due to its effectiveness in
minimizing variance and thus improving generalization. Most ensembling methods for black-box
base learners fall under the umbrella of “stacked
generalization,” namely training an ML algorithm
that takes the inferences from the base learners
as input. While stacking has been widely applied
in practice, its theoretical properties are poorly
understood. In this paper, we prove a novel result,
showing that choosing the best stacked generalization from a (finite or finite-dimensional) family of
stacked generalizations based on cross-validated
performance does not perform “much worse” than
the oracle best. Our result strengthens and significantly extends the results in Van der Laan et al.
(2007). Inspired by the theoretical analysis, we
further propose a particular family of stacked generalizations in the context of probabilistic forecasting, each one with a different sensitivity for how
much the ensemble weights are allowed to vary
across items, timestamps in the forecast horizon,
and quantiles. Experimental results demonstrate
the performance gain of the proposed method.

One early attempt to quantifiably understand stacked generalization is due to Van der Laan et al. (2007). Built on top
of Van der Vaart et al. (2006), the authors prove a theoretical guarantee (Theorem 2 of Van der Laan et al. (2007))
that choosing the best stacked generalization out of a finite (rather than finite-dimensional) family of constant (as
opposed to learned) stacked generalizations based on crossvalidation performance does not do much worse than the
oracle best. They then apply their result to the case of a single learned stacked generalization by discretizing the space
of the functions that the stacked generalization may become
after the training, resulting in a guarantee that degrades with
the cardinality of the chosen discretization.
In this paper, we make a major step towards a better theoretical understanding of the stacking mechanism. More
precisely, we show new results that extend Van der Laan
et al. (2007) in two ways: 1. We remove the assumption
that the stacked generalizations are constant, and permit
them to be learned, without changing the conclusion of the
result. This allows us to get much better guarantees even
for the case of a single stacked generalization, as it removes
the need for a discretization. (See the discussion following
Theorem 4.1.) 2. We extend the result from the case of finite
families to the case of finite-dimensional families.

1. Introduction
Ensemble methods have been a staple in machine learning with ensemble-based methods such as Random Forests
(Breiman, 2001) and XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016)
being among the most popular choices for tabular data by
practitioners (KS2, 2020; 2021). Both classical (mean, median, weights based on cross-validated performance) and
relatively modern ensembling strategies, e.g., Erickson et al.
(2020) (which in two popular Kaggle competitions has beat
99% of the participating data scientists after training on

We further push the boundary beyond the tabular case to
study the concrete use case of time series forecasting. Ensembling of time series models is a notoriously challenging
task, coined as the “Forecast Combination Puzzle” by (Stock
& Watson, 2004), with many follow-up works in the literature; see Section 2. We concern ourselves with datasets that
involve multiple time series, forecasting a fixed number of
timestamps into the future, and predicting multiple quantiles

1
AWS AI Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Hilaf Hasson <hashilaf@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

