Synthetic Prompting: Generating Chain-of-Thought Demonstrations for Large
Language Models

Zhihong Shao 1 Yeyun Gong 2 Yelong Shen 3 Minlie Huang 1 Nan Duan 2 Weizhu Chen 3

Abstract

costly and tedious, while relying on a limited set of demonstrations may hamper the LLMs’ generalization and adaptation to different test inputs.

Large language models can perform various reasoning tasks by using chain-of-thought prompting,
which guides them to find answers through stepby-step demonstrations. However, the quality of
the prompts depends on the demonstrations given
to the models, and creating many of them by hand
is costly. We introduce SYNTHETIC PROMPTING,
a method that leverages a few handcrafted examples to prompt the model to generate more examples by itself, and selects effective demonstrations
to elicit better reasoning. Our method alternates
between a backward and forward process to generate new examples. The backward process generates a question that match a sampled reasoning
chain, so that the question is solvable and clear.
The forward process produces a more detailed
reasoning chain for the question, improving the
quality of the example. We evaluate our method
on numerical, symbolic, and algorithmic reasoning tasks, and show that it outperforms existing
prompting techniques.

In this paper, we propose a novel method, SYNTHETIC
PROMPTING, that leverages the LLMs’ own knowledge and
generative power to augment a limited set of demonstrations with self-synthesized examples, and then uses the augmented set to elicit better reasoning in the LLMs. Specifically, given a few seed examples, each consisting of a
question and a chain of reasoning steps, we prompt an
LLM to generate more examples by alternating between
two processes: (1) the backward process, where the LLM
synthesizes a question based on a self-generated reasoning
chain, which ensures that the question is answerable and
well-defined; and (2) the forward process, where the LLM
produces a reasoning chain for the synthesized question,
which refines the reasoning chain to be more precise and
consistent with the question. We repeat this process until
we obtain enough synthetic examples. To select the most
effective demonstrations from the augmented set, we propose a new selection scheme based on in-cluster complexity,
which aims to maximize the diversity and informativeness
of the demonstrations by clustering them and choosing the
most complex one (the one with the longest reasoning chain)
from each cluster. Finally, we prompt the LLM with the
selected demonstrations to generate a reasoning chain for a
test question and then use it to obtain the answer.

1. Introduction
Few-shot demonstrations, i.e., examples of inputs and outputs for a task, can enable Large Language Models (LLMs)
to perform various tasks without fine-tuning (Brown et al.,
2020; Chung et al., 2022). LLMs can further improve their
performance by using chain-of-thought prompting, which
provides intermediate reasoning steps for the task (Wei et al.,
2022b; Kojima et al., 2022). However, the LLMs’ few-shot
performance depends heavily on the quality of the demonstrations, especially for reasoning tasks that need complex
and diverse reasoning patterns. Manually creating a large
and diverse set of examples for demonstration selection is

We evaluate our method on various reasoning tasks, including numerical reasoning, algorithmic reasoning, and
symbolic reasoning. Following previous few-shot settings
(Wang et al., 2022b; Suzgun et al., 2022), we demonstrate
that our method can significantly improve the LLMs’ performance, achieving up to 15.6% absolute gains over the
state-of-the-art methods.
Our main contributions are:

1

Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
Microsoft Azure AI. Correspondence to: Minlie Huang
<aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
3

• We introduce SYNTHETIC PROMPTING, a novel
method that augments a limited set of demonstrations
with self-synthesized examples by prompting an LLM,
and leverages the augmented set to elicit better reasoning in the LLM.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

