On the Forward Invariance of Neural ODEs
Wei Xiao 1 Tsun-Hsuan Wang 1 Ramin Hasani 1 Mathias Lechner 1
Yutong Ban 1 Chuang Gan 2 Daniela Rus 1
A

Abstract

B Neural ODE with no Invariance

Neural ODE

𝐼(𝑡)

We propose a new method to ensure neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) satisfy output
specifications by using invariance set propagation. Our approach uses a class of control barrier
functions to transform output specifications into
constraints on the parameters and inputs of the
learning system. This setup allows us to achieve
output specification guarantees simply by changing the constrained parameters/inputs both during training and inference. Moreover, we demonstrate that our invariance set propagation through
data-controlled neural ODEs not only maintains
generalization performance but also creates an additional degree of robustness by enabling causal
manipulation of the system’s parameters/inputs.
We test our method on a series of representation
learning tasks, including modeling physical dynamics and convexity portraits, as well as safe
collision avoidance for autonomous vehicles.

Input

Output

Input
Invariance

Output
spec

Invariance propagation

What if there is an obstacle in
In the flow of a neural ODE?

C

Neural ODE + Invariance

We use Neural ODEs with Invariance

Figure 1. Invariance Propagation for neural ODEs. Output specifications can be guaranteed with invariance, including specification
satisfaction between samplings, e.g., spiral curve regression with
critical region avoidance.

terfactual inputs (Vorbach et al., 2021). For example, a
well-trained neural ODE instance that learned to chase a
spiral dynamic (Fig. 1B), would not be able to avoid an
object on its flow, even if it has seen this type of output
specification/constraint during training. This shortcoming
demands a fundamental fix to ensure the safe operation of
these models specifically in safety-critical applications such
as robust and trustworthy policy learning, safe robot control,
and system verification (Lechner et al., 2020; Kim et al.,
2021; Hasani et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018) are continuous deep learning models that enable a range of useful properties such as
exploiting dynamical systems as an effective learning class
(Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Gu et al., 2021), efficient time
series modeling (Rubanova et al., 2019; Lechner & Hasani,
2022), and tractable generative modeling (Grathwohl et al.,
2018; Liebenwein et al., 2021).

In this paper, we set out to ensure neural ODEs satisfy
output specifications. To this end, we introduce the concept
of propagating invariance sets. An invariance set is a form
of specification consisting of physical laws, mathematical
expressions, safety constraints, and other prior knowledge of
the structure of the learning task. We can ensure that neural
ODEs are invariant to noise and affine transformations such
as rotating, translating, or scaling an input, as well as to
other uncertainties in training and inference.

Neural ODEs are typically trained via empirical risk minimization (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Pontryagin, 2018) endowed with proper regularization schemes (Massaroli et al.,
2020) without much control over the behavior of the obtained network and over the ability to account for coun1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2 MITIBM Watson AI Lab. Videos and code are available on the
website: https://weixy21.github.io/invariance/.
Correspondence to: Wei Xiao <weixy@mit.edu>.

To propagate invariance sets through neural ODEs we can
use Lyapunov-based methods with forward invariance properties such as a class of control barrier functions (CBFs)
(Ames et al., 2017), to formally guarantee that the output

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

