Leveraging Offline Data in Online Reinforcement Learning

Andrew Wagenmaker 1 Aldo Pacchiano 2

Abstract

paradigm. Recent years have seen an impressive set of
results deploying RL algorithms in a variety of domains
such as healthcare (Yu et al., 2021), robotics (Kober et al.,
2013), and games (Silver et al., 2016). Typically, in such
RL settings, the goal of the learner is to find a policy that
maximizes the expected reward that can be obtained in a
given environment. Motivated by the practical successes of
RL, developing efficient approaches to policy optimization
has been a question of much interest in the machine learning community in recent years. Broadly speaking, policy
optimization algorithms can be divided into two camps: online RL, where the learner has no prior knowledge of the
environment and must simply interact with it to learn a good
policy, and offline RL, where the agent has access to a set
of offline data from interactions with the environment, but
is otherwise unable to interact with it.
Online methods (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Azar et al.,
2017; Auer et al., 2008) rely on the continuous deployment
of policies to collect data. These policies are computed at
every step by the algorithm and make use of the information
that has been collected so far. Unfortunately, online methods
can be very data inefficient. In the absence of a sufficiently
exploratory baseline policy, they may require an extremely
large number of samples to gather sufficient data to learn
a near-optimal policy. Offline RL methods (Levine et al.,
2020) mitigate some of these shortcomings. For example, if
the offline data was originally collected by running a handcrafted expert policy in the environment, or by running a
known safe exploration strategy in a production system, it
could be sufficient to learn a near-optimal policy without
requiring any additional interactions with the environment.
Unfortunately, offline methods are very sensitive to the coverage of the logged data. Namely, the quality of the candidate policy generated by an offline algorithm will strongly
depend on how well the available data covers the true optimal policy’s support (Zhan et al., 2022). Moreover, since
no further interactions with the environment are allowed,
offline RL algorithms may not have any way of knowing
whether or not their candidate policy is near-optimal—they
cannot verify the optimality of the policy.
In this work, we aim to bridge the gap between online and
offline reinforcement learning and consider an intermediate
setting, which we call FineTuneRL, where the algorithm
has access to an offline dataset but can also augment this for

Two central paradigms have emerged in the reinforcement learning (RL) community: online RL
and offline RL. In the online RL setting, the agent
has no prior knowledge of the environment, and
must interact with it in order to find an ϵ-optimal
policy. In the offline RL setting, the learner instead has access to a fixed dataset to learn from,
but is unable to otherwise interact with the environment, and must obtain the best policy it can
from this offline data. Practical scenarios often
motivate an intermediate setting: if we have some
set of offline data and may also interact with the
environment, how can we best use the offline data
to minimize the number of online interactions
necessary to learn an ϵ-optimal policy? In this
work, we consider this setting, which we call the
FineTuneRL setting, for MDPs with linear structure. We characterize the necessary number of
online samples needed in this setting given access
to some offline dataset, and develop an algorithm,
FTP EDEL, which is provably optimal, up to H
factors. We show through an explicit example that
combining offline data with online interactions
can lead to a provable improvement over either
purely offline or purely online RL. Finally, our
results illustrate the distinction between verifiable
learning, the typical setting considered in online
RL, and unverifiable learning, the setting often
considered in offline RL, and show that there is a
formal separation between these regimes.

1. Introduction
Many important learning problems in adaptive environments can be mapped into the reinforcement learning (RL)
1
2
University of Washington, Seattle.
Work done
while at Microsoft Research, New York.
Current Affiliation: Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard and Boston
University.
Correspondence to:
Andrew Wagenmaker
<ajwagen@cs.washington.edu>,
Aldo Pacchiano
<aldopacchiano@aldopacchiano.ai>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

