Certifying Ensembles: A General Certification Theory with S-Lipschitzness

Aleksandar Petrov 1 * Francisco Eiras 2 Amartya Sanyal 3 Philip H.S. Torr 2 Adel Bibi 2 *

Abstract

tain a better-performing one (Hansen & Salamon, 1990;
Sagi & Rokach, 2018). While it was originally proposed
to improve the accuracy of weak classifiers (Rokach, 2016;
Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023), it is also beneficial for improving
uncertainty estimation and calibration (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020), as well as mitigating the
effects of concept drift (Sagi & Rokach, 2018). These benefits of ensembling have inspired research into studying its
effect on robustness. For example, recent empirical works
have shown that encouraging diversity in the non-maximal
predictions (Pang et al., 2019), or in the gradient directions
(Kariyappa & Qureshi, 2019) of individual classifiers results
in ensembles with improved robustness.

Improving and guaranteeing the robustness of
deep learning models has been a topic of intense
research. Ensembling, which combines several
classifiers to provide a better model, has been
shown to be beneficial for generalisation, uncertainty estimation, calibration, and mitigating the
effects of concept drift. However, the impact of
ensembling on certified robustness is less well
understood. In this work, we generalise Lipschitz
continuity by introducing S-Lipschitz classifiers,
which we use to analyse the theoretical robustness
of ensembles. Our results are precise conditions
when ensembles of robust classifiers are more
robust than any constituent classifier, as well as
conditions when they are less robust.

However, the degree of improved performance depends on
the ensembled classifiers. When the constituent classifiers
are all highly accurate, there is little room for improvement
after ensembling; the gains are most pronounced with weak
classifiers. Possibly, a similar limitation holds for robustness: perhaps ensembles of robust classifiers enjoy lower
robustness improvements than ensembles of non-robust classifiers. Pang et al. (2019), Horváth et al. (2021), Yang et al.
(2022) and Puigcerver et al. (2022) propose theoretical justifications for why ensembles boost robustness but stop short
of quantifying the improvement, especially when the individual classifiers are already robust. This raises the following
questions on the robustness limitations of ensembles:

1. Introduction
Deep learning classifiers are almost as celebrated for their
near-perfect accuracy, as they are notorious for their lack
of robustness (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2015). Within the past decade, as empirically robust classifiers have begun to emerge (Madry
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018), so did attempts to certify
their robustness. The goal of robustness certification is to
obtain a set of additive perturbations around an input under
which the prediction remains unchanged. Most approaches
fall under one of three families of methods: exact certification (Katz et al., 2017; Ehlers, 2017; Huang et al., 2017),
over-approximation (Wong & Kolter, 2018; Salman et al.,
2019b), or probabilistic certification (Weng et al., 2019), notably randomized smoothing methods (Lecuyer et al., 2019;
Cohen et al., 2019).

i. For a collection of robust classifiers, can their ensemble be more robust than its constituents? If so, what
is the maximum achievable improvement, and under
which conditions?
ii. Conversely: Is it possible for an ensemble of robust
classifiers to be less robust than its constituents? If
so, what is the worst possible drop in robustness, and
under which conditions?
We tackle these questions by introducing S-Lipschitzness
in Section 3, a generalization of Lipschitz continuity that
enables tight analysis of the theoretical robustness of ensembles. S-Lipschitzness gives rise to certificates which need
not be symmetric and are guaranteed to certify regions at
least as large as the classical Lipschitz ones.

Ensembling consists in combining several classifiers to ob*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 ETH AI Center, ETH
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: A. Petrov
<aleks@robots.ox.ac.uk>, A. Bibi <adel.bibi@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Building on the S-Lipschitzness framework, in Section 4,
we offer the following answers to the above questions:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

