Sharp Variance-Dependent Bounds in Reinforcement Learning: Best of Both
Worlds in Stochastic and Deterministic Environments
Runlong Zhou 1 Zihan Zhang Simon S. Du 1

Abstract

et al., 2020b; Li et al., 2021).
The MDPs in practice often enjoy benign structures,
so problem-dependent regret bounds are of great interest (Zanette & Brunskill, 2019). RL algorithms often perform far better on these MDPs than what their worst-case
guarantees would suggest. Motivated by this observation,
we want to systematically study algorithms with regrets
depending on quantities that characterizes the hardness of
MDPs. Ideally, such algorithms should automatically exploit the MDP instance without the prior knowledge of
problem-dependent quantities. As a motivating example,
for time-homogeneous MDPs with total reward bounded
by 1, the minimax regret bound for deterministic MDPs
is OpSAq where S and A are number of states and actions, respectively and the worst-case minimax
˘optimal re`?
r SAK where K
gret bound for stochastic MDPs is O
is the number of episodes. Many problems can be formulated as deterministc MDPs, such as shortest path (maze,
real world navigation), combinatorial optimization, Atari
games (Mnih et al., 2013) and many games (mountain
car, lunar lander, robotics, etc.) in OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). Deterministic systems can also approximate stochastic systems well (see Section 2 and 6 in Bertsekas (2012)). We want an algorithm designed for generic
stochastic MDPs with worst-case minimax optimal regret
bound while enjoying the OpSAq bound when the MDP is
deterministic.

We study variance-dependent regret bounds for
Markov decision processes (MDPs). Algorithms with variance-dependent regret guarantees can automatically exploit environments with
low variance (e.g., enjoying constant regret on
deterministic MDPs). The existing algorithms
are either variance-independent or suboptimal.
We first propose two new environment norms to
characterize the fine-grained variance properties
of the environment. For model-based methods,
we design a variant of the MVP algorithm (Zhang
et al., 2021a). We apply new analysis techniques to demonstrate that this algorithm enjoys
variance-dependent bounds with respect to the
norms we propose. In particular, this bound is simultaneously minimax optimal for both stochastic and deterministic MDPs, the first result of its
kind. We further initiate the study on modelfree algorithms with variance-dependent regret
bounds by designing a reference-function-based
algorithm with a novel capped-doubling reference update schedule. Lastly, we also provide
lower bounds to complement our upper bounds.

1. Introduction

Zanette & Brunskill (2019) is a pioneer work which provides a model-based algorithm whose regret scales with
variance-depedent quantities. They defined a quantity, Q‹ ,
named the maximum per-step conditional variance to characterize the randomness
? of the MDP instance, and showed
a regret bound of r
Op HQ‹ ¨ SAK ` H 5{2 S 2 Aq, where
H is the planning horizon. This bound is still not satisfac‹
tory because: ① There exist
? MDPs with Q “ Ωp1q, so
r HSAKq which does not match
the regret reduces to Op
?
r SAKq. ② For determinthe minimax optimal bound Op
istic MDPs (Q‹ “ 0), the regret reduces to r
OpH 5{2 S 2 Aq,
which does not match the optimal OpSAq bound.

We consider episodic reinforcement learning (RL) on tabular Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Existing algorithms can be categorized into two classes: model-based
methods whose space complexity scales quadratically with
the number of states (Auer et al., 2008; Agrawal & Jia,
2017; Azar et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2017; 2019; Zanette
& Brunskill, 2019; Zhang et al., 2021a) and model-free
methods whose space complexity scales linearly with the
number of states (Jin et al., 2018; Bai et al., 2019; Zhang
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to:
Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

