AdaBoost is not an Optimal Weak to Strong Learner

Mikael Møller Høgsgaard * 1 Kasper Green Larsen * 1 Martin Ritzert * 2

Abstract

tiple inaccurate classifiers/hypotheses that focus on different parts of the training data and combines them using a
weighted majority vote. In more detail, it runs for some
T iterations, each time invoking W to produce a hypothesis ht . It then computes weights
P w and outputs the final
voting classifier f (x) = sign( t wt ht (x)). For the calls
of W, AdaBoost maintains a distribution Dt over the training samples that puts a large weight on training samples
misclassified by most of h1 , . . . , ht−1 and a smaller weight
on samples classified correctly. Using this distribution, in
iteration t AdaBoost invokes the weak learner to produce a
hypothesis ht performing better than chance under Dt . This
way, ht focuses on training examples that are hard for the
voting classifier so far.

AdaBoost is a classic boosting algorithm for combining multiple inaccurate classifiers produced
by a weak learner, to produce a strong learner
with arbitrarily high accuracy when given enough
training data. Determining the optimal number
of samples necessary to obtain a given accuracy
of the strong learner, is a basic learning theoretic
question. Larsen and Ritzert (NeurIPS’22) recently presented the first provably optimal weakto-strong learner. However, their algorithm is
somewhat complicated and it remains an intriguing question whether the prototypical boosting
algorithm AdaBoost also makes optimal use of
training samples. In this work, we answer this
question in the negative. Concretely, we show that
the sample complexity of AdaBoost, and other
classic variations thereof, are sub-optimal by at
least one logarithmic factor in the desired accuracy of the strong learner.

In this paper, we study the sample complexity of AdaBoost,
answering the question whether AdaBoost is able to make
optimal use of its training data. To formally answer this
question, we need to introduce a few parameters. A γ-weak
learner is a learning algorithm that, given some constant
number of training samples from an unknown data distribution D, produces a hypothesis h that correctly predicts
the label of a new sample from D with probability at least
1/2 + γ. We let H denote the set of possible hypotheses that
the weak learner may output. A strong learner, on the other
hand, is a learning algorithm that for any 0 < ε, δ < 1, with
probability at least 1 − δ over a set of m(ε, δ) training samples from an unknown distribution D, outputs a hypothesis
that correctly predicts the label of a new sample from D with
probability at least 1 − ε. The function m(ε, δ) is referred to
as the sample complexity. A strong learner can thus obtain
arbitrarily high accuracy 1 − ε when given enough training
samples m(ε, δ). See Section 1.1 for a formal definition of
weak and strong learning.

1. Introduction
The algorithm AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire, 1997) is the
textbook example of a boosting algorithm. Boosting algorithms in general make use of a weak learner, i.e. a learning
algorithm that produces classifiers with accuracy slightly
better than chance, and produces from it a so-called strong
learner, achieving arbitrarily high accuracy when given
enough training samples. The question whether one can
always produce a strong learner from a weak learner was
initially asked by Kearns and Valiant (Kearns, 1988; Kearns
& Valiant, 1994) and initiated the field of boosting.

Recently, Larsen & Ritzert (2022) showed that the optimal
sample complexity of weak-to-strong learning is given by


d
ln(1/δ)
m(ε, δ) = Θ
+
,
(1)
γ2ε
ε

Given a weak learner W, AdaBoost uses W to train mul*

Equal contribution 1 Group of Algorithms, Data Structures and Foundations of Machine Learning, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark 2 Neural Data Science, Georg-August-Universität
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Mikael
Møller Høgsgaard <hogsgaard@cs.au.dk>, Kasper Green Larsen
<larsen@cs.au.dk>, Martin Ritzert <ritzert@informatik.unigoettingen.de>.

where d is the VC-dimension of the hypothesis set H of the
weak learner. The paper provides both a learning algorithm
achieving this sample complexity as well as an asymptotically matching lower bound. Their algorithm is based on a
majority vote among hypotheses produced by a version of
AdaBoost. It is thus a majority of majorities. Is this neces-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

