Parallel Q-Learning: Scaling Off-policy Reinforcement Learning under
Massively Parallel Simulation

Zechu Li * 1 Tao Chen * 1 Zhang-Wei Hong 1 Anurag Ajay 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

et al., 2013; Miki et al., 2022) and drug discovery (Popova
et al., 2018). A primary challenge in using RL is the need
for large amounts of real-world data. There are two main
strategies to tackle this problem. One is to improve the sample efficiency of RL algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap
et al., 2015) to make better use of available data. The other
is to reduce the need for real-world data collection by training policies in simulation and deploying them in the real
world (Hwangbo et al., 2019; OpenAI et al., 2020; Margolis
et al., 2022; Miki et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a). In simto-real pipelines, the training wall-clock time matters more
than the sample efficiency — faster training can speed up
the experiment cycle and unlock the potential for addressing
a broader range of complex problems.

Reinforcement learning is time-consuming for
complex tasks due to the need for large amounts
of training data. Recent advances in GPU-based
simulation, such as Isaac Gym, have sped up
data collection thousands of times on a commodity GPU. Most prior works have used onpolicy methods like PPO due to their simplicity and easy-to-scale nature. Off-policy methods are more sample-efficient, but challenging
to scale, resulting in a longer wall-clock training time. This paper presents a novel Parallel
Q-Learning (PQL) scheme that outperforms PPO
in terms of wall-clock time and maintains superior sample efficiency. The driving force lies
in the parallelization of data collection, policy
function learning, and value function learning.
Different from prior works on distributed offpolicy learning, such as Apex, our scheme is designed specifically for massively parallel GPUbased simulation and optimized to work on a single workstation. In experiments, we demonstrate
the capability of scaling up Q-learning methods
to tens of thousands of parallel environments
and investigate important factors that can affect
learning speed, including the number of parallel environments, exploration strategies, batch
size, GPU models, etc. The code is available
at https://github.com/Improbable-AI/pql.

The community has widely recognized the need for faster
training, leading to the development of several distributed
frameworks (Horgan et al., 2018; Espeholt et al., 2018).
However, these frameworks usually operate at a server scale
that requires hundreds or thousands of computers in a cluster,
making them impractical for most researchers and practitioners. Specifically, most of these computers are used to
run multiple simulator instances in parallel to speed up data
collection. Recent advance in GPU-based simulation, such
as Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021), has mitigated
the need for a large number of machines as it enables the
parallel simulation of tens of thousands of environments
on one GPU. A natural question that arises in this massively parallel setting is: what RL algorithm is suitable to
achieve better wall-clock time? Many prior works (Allshire
et al., 2021; Rudin et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022b) use
on-policy algorithms like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for
training policies in Isaac Gym due to their simplicity and
easy-to-scale nature. However, they suffer from low sample
efficiency, in which data collection can still take most of the
total wall-clock time.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive results on many real-world problems, such as robotics (Kober

Intuitively, by virtue of requiring less data than on-policy
algorithms, off-policy algorithms (Q-learning methods, in
particular) should reduce the wall-clock time of training.
However, better sample efficiency will not lead to shorter
training time if the algorithm cannot make good use of parallel environments. Some prior works (Nair et al., 2015;
Horgan et al., 2018) have developed distributed frameworks

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Zechu Li
<zechu@mit.edu>, Tao Chen <taochen@mit.edu>, Pulkit
Agrawal <pulkitag@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

