Personalized Federated Learning with Inferred Collaboration Graphs

Rui Ye * 1 Zhenyang Ni * 1 Fangzhao Wu 2 Siheng Chen 1 3 Yanfeng Wang 3 1

Abstract
Personalized federated learning (FL) aims to collaboratively train a personalized model for each
client. Previous methods do not adaptively determine who to collaborate at a fine-grained level,
making them difficult to handle diverse data heterogeneity levels and those cases where malicious
clients exist. To address this issue, our core idea is
to learn a collaboration graph, which models the
benefits from each pairwise collaboration and allocates appropriate collaboration strengths. Based
on this, we propose a novel personalized FL algorithm, pFedGraph, which consists of two key modules: (1) inferring the collaboration graph based
on pairwise model similarity and dataset size at
server to promote fine-grained collaboration and
(2) optimizing local model with the assistance of
aggregated model at client to promote personalization. The advantage of pFedGraph is flexibly
adaptive to diverse data heterogeneity levels and
model poisoning attacks, as the proposed collaboration graph always pushes each client to collaborate more with similar and beneficial clients. Extensive experiments show that pFedGraph consistently outperforms the other 14 baseline methods
across various heterogeneity levels and multiple
cases where malicious clients exist. Code will
be available at https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/pFedGraph.

Figure 1. Inferred collaboration graph guides the server to coordinate which pairs of clients should collaborate at what intensity
level, enabling the proposed pFedGraph to be adaptive to diverse
data heterogeneity levels.

In the conventional paradigm, multiple clients collaboratively train a shared global model without transmitting local
datasets (McMahan et al., 2017). However, due to data heterogeneity across clients, the global model trained with all
data from all clients might not cater to the utility of each
individual client. To promote better customization to each
client, personalized FL has been proposed and allows each
client to train a personalized model that is adapted to its
local data (Smith et al., 2017; Li et al., 2021b).
A fundamental challenge in personalized FL is an appropriate tradeoff between the individual utilities and the benefits
through collaboration. When all clients have similar data
distributions, they should get much improvements through
collaborating with each other; while when each client’s
data distribution is different, collaboration would bring less
benefits to each client. Therefore, the optimal individual
and collaboration tradeoff depends on data heterogeneity
level. However, in practice, data heterogeneity level is unknown since data is not communicated in FL, which makes
this tradeoff hard to handle. To handle this issue, previous
works have put forth solutions from several perspectives.
For example, Ditto (Li et al., 2021b) and pFedMe (T Dinh
et al., 2020) regularizes the ℓ2 distance between the local
and global models. L2GD (Hanzely & Richtárik, 2020) and
APFL (Deng et al., 2020) consider linear interpolation between local and global models. FedPer (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019), FedRep (Collins et al., 2021), and FedRoD (Chen
& Chao, 2021) share the same aggregated shallow model

1. Introduction
As an emerging collaborative machine learning framework with privacy-preserving properties, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) has attracted much attention from both industries (Yang et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2020a) and academia (Yang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).
*
Equal contribution 1 Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Siheng Chen <sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

