Improving the Model Consistency of Decentralized Federated Learning

Yifan Shi 1 Li Shen 2 Kang Wei 3 Yan Sun 4 Bo Yuan 1 Xueqian Wang 1 Dacheng Tao 4

Abstract

Central server

…

…

To mitigate the privacy leakages and communication burdens of Federated Learning (FL), decentralized FL (DFL) discards the central server
and each client only communicates with its neighbors in a decentralized communication network.
However, existing DFL suffers from high inconsistency among local clients, which results
in severe distribution shift and inferior performance compared with centralized FL (CFL), especially on heterogeneous data or sparse communication topologies. To alleviate this issue, we
propose two DFL algorithms named DFedSAM
and DFedSAM-MGS to improve the performance
of DFL. Specifically, DFedSAM leverages gradient perturbation to generate local flat models via
Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM), which
searches for models with uniformly low loss values. DFedSAM-MGS further boosts DFedSAM
by adopting Multiple Gossip Steps (MGS) for
better model consistency, which accelerates the
aggregation of local flat models and better balances communication complexity and generalization. Theoretically, we present improved conver
1
1
gence rates O √KT
+ T1 + K 1/2 T 3/2
and
(1−λ)2
Q

…

…

(a) CFL framework

(b) DFL framework

Figure 1. Illustrations of CFL (a) and DFL (b). For DFL, the
various communication topologies are shown in Appendix A.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (Mcmahan …et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2020b) allows distributed clients to collaboratively train a
shared model under the orchestration of the cloud without
transmitting local data. However, …
almost all FL paradigms
employ a(a) Ring
central server to communicate
with clients, which
(b) Exponential
faces several critical challenges, such as computational resources limitation, high communication bandwidth cost,
and privacy leakage (Kairouz et al., 2021). Compared to the
centralized FL (CFL, Figure 1(a)), …
decentralized FL (DFL,
Figure 1(b)), where the clients only communicate with their
neighbors without a central server, offers communication
advantage and further preserves the data privacy (Kairouz
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Sun et… al., 2022).
Due to the participants with different
hardware and network
(d) Fully-connected
(c) Grid
capabilities in the real federated system, DFL is a promising
field of research that has been frequently considered as a
challenge in several review articles in recent years (Beltrán
et al., 2022; Kairouz et al., 2021). In practice, the most
promising DFL application scenarios include healthcare
(Nguyen et al., 2022), industry 4.0 such as the blockchain
system (Kang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), mobile services in
the internet-of-things (IoT) (Wang et al., 2022b), the robust
networks for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) (Wang
et al., 2020) and internet-of-vehicles (Yu et al., 2020).

1
O √KT
+ T1 + K 1/2 Tλ3/2+1
in non-convex
(1−λQ )2
setting for DFedSAM and DFedSAM-MGS, respectively, where 1 − λ is the spectral gap of
gossip matrix and Q is the number of MGS. Empirically, our methods can achieve competitive
performance compared with CFL methods and
outperform existing DFL methods.



1

Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China 2 JD Explore Academy,
Beijing, China 3 Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, China 4 The University of Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>, Xueqian Wang
<wang.xq@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

However, DFL suffers from severe inconsistency among local models due to heterogeneous data distribution and model
aggregation locality caused by intrinsic network connectivity. This inconsistency may result in severe over-fitting
in local models and performance degradation (Sun et al.,
2022). To explore the mechanism behind this phenomenon,
we present the structure of the loss landscapes (Li et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

(b) L

