Neural Network Accelerated Implicit Filtering: Integrating Neural Network
Surrogates With Provably Convergent Derivative Free Optimization Methods

Brian Irwin 1 Eldad Haber 1 Raviv Gal 2 Avi Ziv 2

Abstract

include many problems arising from business, chemistry,
computer science, economics, engineering design, finance,
mathematics, medicine, operations research, physics, and
transportation (see Rios & Sahinidis (2013), Shan & Wang
(2010), Kelley (2011), Audet & Hare (2017), Conn et al.
(2009), and references within for specific examples). In such
problems, the function f (x) : X 7→ R is often viewed as
a black box with unknown inner workings. Given an input
x ∈ X , the black box produces an output f (x), but does
not produce derivatives of f (x). The output f (x) typically
contains some added noise, and so we express f (x) using
the decomposition (1) where fs (x) is a smooth function

In this paper, we introduce neural network accelerated implicit filtering (NNAIF), a novel family
of methods for solving noisy derivative free (i.e.
black box, zeroth order) optimization problems.
NNAIF intelligently combines the established
literature on implicit filtering (IF) optimization
methods with a neural network (NN) surrogate
model of the objective function, resulting in accelerated derivative free methods for unconstrained
optimization problems. The NN surrogate model
consists of a fixed number of parameters, which
can be as few as ≈ 1.3 × 104 , that are updated as
NNAIF progresses. We show that NNAIF directly
inherits the convergence properties of IF optimization methods, and thus NNAIF is guaranteed to
converge towards a critical point of the objective
function under appropriate assumptions. Numerical experiments with 31 noisy problems from the
CUTEst optimization benchmark set demonstrate
the benefits and costs associated with NNAIF.
These benefits include NNAIF’s ability to minimize structured functions of several thousand
variables much more rapidly than well-known alternatives, such as Covariance Matrix Adaptation
Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) and finite difference based variants of gradient descent (GD) and
BFGS, as well as its namesake IF.

f (x) = fs (x) + φ(x)

(1)

and φ(x) is noise. Our goal is to solve the optimization
problem (2) using only samples from the noisy black box
f (x) given in (1) instead of samples from the (inaccessible)

min fs (x)

(2)

x∈X

smooth function fs (x).
The nature of the noise φ(x) in (1) may be deterministic or
stochastic. The high frequency periodic function (3) is a

φ(x) = sin ω kxk2 , ω  0
(3)
simple example of deterministic noise. The high frequency
sinusoidal oscillations produce a rough output surface for
f (x) with many local minima that can trap derivative based
optimizers. A more complicated example of deterministic
noise is the truncation error in a numerical simulation, such
as an adaptive ordinary differential equation (ODE) solver.

1. Introduction

When the noise φ(x) is stochastic, the value of the noise
φ(x) likely changes each time one samples the output of the
black box f (x), even if the inputs x are unchanged. Drawing independent and identically distributed (IID) samples
from a uniform distribution (4) is a simple example

Derivative free optimization (DFO), also referred to as black
box optimization (BBO) and zeroth order (ZO) optimization,
is an important subfield within numerical optimization with
many important practical applications. These applications
1
Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Hybrid Cloud
Quality Technologies, IBM Research, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Brian Irwin <birwin@eoas.ubc.ca>.

φ(x) ∼ U(−, ) ,

>0

(4)

of stochastic noise. A more complicated example of stochastic noise is when the probability density function (PDF) of
the stochastic noise φ(x) is a parametric function with parameters that depend on x, such as when  is replaced with
(x) in (4).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

