Expertise Trees Resolve Knowledge Limitations in Collective Decision-Making

Axel Abels 1 2 Tom Lenaerts 1 2 3 Vito Trianni 4 Ann Nowé 2

Abstract

advice of the group of medical experts. Ideally, we would
hope that medical experts agree on the best treatment based
on objective characteristics of each treatment, such as its
success rate, side effects, and cost. However, expert opinions are likely to be influenced by both objective factors and
subjective views. For example, based on previous experience with comparable patients, a clinician may have views
about the efficacy of a treatment for a patient that differs
from another clinician’s views. Such divergences can result
from factors which are clearly outside of an expert’s control, but they can also be the result of cognitive biases. For
example, medical experts might overstate the efficacy of a
treatment as a result of confirmation bias (Trope et al., 1997)
or the primacy effect (Bond et al., 2007). Experts thus provide individual advice based on their previous experience
with similar problems. When we have access to a diverse
set of experts who might disagree, we wish to determine
on which advice to act. Particularly, we consider the case
wherein multiple iterations (on different problem instances,
e.g., different patients with different medical records) of
the decision-making process occur, allowing us to adapt to
expertise. The challenge of identifying an appropriate way
to act on expert advice is heightened by the partial feedback:
we only observe the outcome of the decisions we make, e.g.,
the chosen treatment.

Experts advising decision-makers are likely to display expertise which varies as a function of the
problem instance. In practice, this may lead to
sub-optimal or discriminatory decisions against
minority cases. In this work, we model such
changes in depth and breadth of knowledge as
a partitioning of the problem space into regions
of differing expertise. We provide here new algorithms that explicitly consider and adapt to the
relationship between problem instances and experts’ knowledge. We first propose and highlight
the drawbacks of a naive approach based on nearest neighbor queries. To address these drawbacks
we then introduce a novel algorithm — expertise
trees — that constructs decision trees enabling the
learner to select appropriate models. We provide
theoretical insights and empirically validate the
improved performance of our novel approach on
a range of problems for which existing methods
proved to be inadequate.

1. Introduction
The following example from medical diagnostics illustrates
the problem settings we examine in this work: an online
platform repeatedly presents a group of medical experts with
patients demonstrating sets of symptoms. Based on these
symptoms, the patient’s medical record, and the experts’
knowledge and experience, the most appropriate treatment
must be selected. This treatment is then applied to the
patient, and its effectiveness is evaluated based on some
measure of recovery, side effects, and cost, for example. A
rational objective in this setting is to maximize the effectiveness of the treatments administered as a function of the

The use of expert advice has been extensively studied to
solve complex decision problems in the face of uncertainty,
known as bandits (Auer et al., 2002a; Foster & Rakhlin,
2020). Prior approaches to leveraging expert advice in this
setting are however not conditioned on the characteristics
of each problem instance. In contrast, we consider here
localized expertise, specifically the case wherein at each
iteration the quality of experts may change as a function of
the problem instance, i.e., an observed set of features. Such
varying levels of expertise are normal for human experts
who specialize in particular areas of a larger problem domain. Similarly, artificial experts may exhibit performance
fluctuations as a consequence of insufficient training, or of
incomplete or biased data sets. Specifically, (un)conscious
biases may result in judgmental errors caused by an erroneous weighting of sensitive traits such as gender or ethnicity (Pohl, 2017). Such biases can occur both in humans
and in artificial experts as a result of biased design or data
bias (Gianfrancesco et al., 2018). Methods capable of de-

1
Machine Learning Group, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium 2 AI Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
3
Center for Human-Compatible AI, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
4
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy. Correspondence to: Axel Abels
<axel.abels@ulb.be>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

