Trajectory-Aware Eligibility Traces for
Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning

Brett Daley 1 2 Martha White 1 2 3 Christopher Amato 4 Marlos C. Machado 1 2 3

Abstract

inforcement learning is the temporal credit assignment problem (Sutton, 1984): upon receiving a reward, which past actions should be held responsible and, hence, be reinforced?
Basic temporal-difference (TD) methods assign credit to the
immediately taken action (e.g., Watkins, 1989; Rummery &
Niranjan, 1994), bootstrapping from previous experience to
learn long-term dependencies. This process requires a large
number of repetitions to generate effective behaviors from
rewards, motivating research into multistep return estimation
in which credit is distributed among multiple past actions
according to some eligibility rule (e.g., Sutton, 1988).

Off-policy learning from multistep returns is crucial for sample-efficient reinforcement learning,
but counteracting off-policy bias without exacerbating variance is challenging. Classically, offpolicy bias is corrected in a per-decision manner:
past temporal-difference errors are re-weighted by
the instantaneous Importance Sampling (IS) ratio
after each action via eligibility traces. Many offpolicy algorithms rely on this mechanism, along
with differing protocols for cutting the IS ratios
to combat the variance of the IS estimator. Unfortunately, once a trace has been fully cut, the
effect cannot be reversed. This has led to the
development of credit-assignment strategies that
account for multiple past experiences at a time.
These trajectory-aware methods have not been extensively analyzed, and their theoretical justification remains uncertain. In this paper, we propose
a multistep operator that can express both perdecision and trajectory-aware methods. We prove
convergence conditions for our operator in the
tabular setting, establishing the first guarantees
for several existing methods as well as many new
ones. Finally, we introduce Recency-Bounded
Importance Sampling (RBIS), which leverages
trajectory awareness to perform robustly across
λ-values in several off-policy control tasks.

One challenge of multistep estimators is that they generally
have higher variance than 1-step estimators (Kearns &
Singh, 2000). This is exacerbated in the off-policy setting,
where environment interaction is conducted according to a
behavior policy that differs from the target policy for which
returns are being estimated. The discrepancy between the
two policies manifests mathematically as bias in the return
estimation, which can be detrimental to learning if left
unaddressed (Precup et al., 2000). Despite these challenges,
off-policy learning is important for exploration and sample
efficiency. The canonical bias-correction technique is Importance Sampling (IS; Kahn & Harris, 1951), wherein the
bias due to the differing policies is eliminated by the product
of their probability ratios (Precup et al., 2000). Although
IS theoretically resolves the off-policy bias, it can suffer
from extreme variance that makes it largely impractical.
Directly managing the variance of the IS estimator has been
a fruitful avenue for developing efficient off-policy algorithms. Past work has focused on modifying the individual
IS ratios to reduce the variance of the full update: e.g., Tree
Backup (Precup et al., 2000), Qπ (λ) (Harutyunyan et al.,
2016), Retrace (Munos et al., 2016), ABQ (Mahmood et al.,
2017), and C-trace (Rowland et al., 2020). All of these
methods can be implemented online with per-decision rules
(Precup et al., 2000) that determine how much to reduce,
or cut, the IS ratio according to the current state-action
pair. The re-weighted TD error is then broadcast to previous experiences using eligibility traces (Barto et al., 1983;
Sutton, 1984). The decisions made by these algorithms are
Markov in the sense that each iterative off-policy correction
depends on only the current state-action pair. One issue

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning concerns an agent interacting with
its environment through trial and error to maximize its expected cumulative reward. One of the great challenges of re1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair 4 Khoury College of Computer Sciences,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Brett Daley <brett.daley@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

