Do You Remember? Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting for Fake Audio
Detection
Xiaohui Zhang 1 2 Jiangyan Yi 1 Jianhua Tao 3 Chenglong Wang 1 4 Chuyuan Zhang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the development of speech synthesis and voice conversion technology (Wang et al., 2018; 2021), the models
can generate human-like speech, which makes it difficult
for most people to distinguish the generated audio from the
real one. Although this technology has brought great convenience to human life, it has also brought great safety hazards
to the country and society. Therefore, fake audio detection
has attracted increasing attention in recent years. A series of
challenges have been organized to detect fake audio, such as
the ASVspoof challenge (Wu et al., 2015; Kinnunen et al.,
2017; Todisco et al., 2019; Yamagishi et al., 2021) and the
Audio Deep Synthesis Detection (ADD) challenge (Yi et al.,
2022). In these competitions, deep neural networks have
achieved great success. Currently, large-scale pre-trained
models have gradually been applied to fake audio detection
and achieved state-of-the-art results on several public fake
audio detection datasets (Tak et al., 2022; Martı́n-Doñas &
Álvarez, 2022; Lv et al., 2022; Wang & Yamagishi, 2021).
Although fake audio detection achieves promising performance, it may be significantly degraded when dealing with
audio of another dataset. The diversity of audio proposes a
significant challenge to fake audio detection across datasets
(Zhang et al., 2021b;a).

Current fake audio detection algorithms have
achieved promising performances on most
datasets. However, their performance may be
significantly degraded when dealing with audio of
a different dataset. The orthogonal weight modification to overcome catastrophic forgetting does
not consider the similarity of genuine audio across
different datasets. To overcome this limitation, we
propose a continual learning algorithm for fake
audio detection to overcome catastrophic forgetting, called Regularized Adaptive Weight Modification (RAWM). When fine-tuning a detection
network, our approach adaptively computes the
direction of weight modification according to the
ratio of genuine utterances and fake utterances.
The adaptive modification direction ensures the
network can effectively detect fake audio on the
new dataset while preserving its knowledge of old
model, thus mitigating catastrophic forgetting. In
addition, genuine audio collected from quite different acoustic conditions may skew their feature
distribution, so we introduce a regularization constraint to force the network to remember the old
distribution in this regard. Our method can easily
be generalized to related fields, like speech emotion recognition. We also evaluate our approach
across multiple datasets and obtain a significant
performance improvement on cross-dataset experiments.

Some approaches have been proposed to improve detection performance across datasets. An ensemble learning
method is proposed to improve the detection ability of the
model for unseen audio (Monteiro et al., 2020) and a dualadversarial domain adaptive network (DDAN) is designed
to learn more generalized features for different datasets
(Wang et al., 2020). Both methods require some audio from
the old dataset, but in some practical situations, it is almost impossible to obtain them. For instance, a pre-trained
model proposed by a company has been released to the public. It is unfeasible for the public to fine-tune it using the
data belonging to the original company. In addition, a data
augmentation method is proposed to extract more robust
features for detection across datasets (Zhang et al., 2021b),
which is only suitable for the datasets with similar feature
distribution. In continual learning, a method called Detecting Fake Without Forgetting (DFWF) is proposed for fake
audio detection (Ma et al., 2021). Although the above meth-

1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence
Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 2 School of Computer and Information Technology,
University of Beijing Jiaotong, Beijing, China 3 Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 University of
Science and Technology of China, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Jiangyan Yi <jiangyan.yi@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

