Curriculum Co-disentangled Representation Learning
across Multiple Environments for Social Recommendation

Xin Wang 1 Zirui Pan 1 Yuwei Zhou 1 Hong Chen 1 Chendi Ge 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
There exist complex patterns behind the decisionmaking processes of different individuals across
different environments. For instance, in a social
recommender system, various user behaviors are
driven by highly entangled latent factors from
two environments, i.e., consuming environment
where users consume items and social environment where users connect with each other. Uncovering the disentanglement of these latent factors for users can benefit in enhanced explainability and controllability for recommendation.
However, in literature there has been no work on
social recommendation capable of disentangling
user representations across consuming and social
environments. To solve this problem, we study codisentangled representation learning across different environments via proposing the curriculum codisentangled representation learning (CurCoDis)
model to disentangle the hidden factors for users
across both consuming and social environments.
To co-disentangle joint representations for useritem consumption and user-user social graph simultaneously, we partition the social graph into
equal-size sub-graphs with minimum number of
edges being cut, and design a curriculum weighing strategy for subgraph training through measuring the complexity of subgraphs via Descartes’
rule of signs. We further develop the prototyperouting optimization mechanism, which achieves
co-disentanglement of user representations across
consuming and social environments. Extensive
experiments for social recommendation demonstrate that our proposed CurCoDis model can significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods on
several real-world datasets.

Human behaviors may demonstrate complex and diverse
patterns in different environments. Taking social recommender systems as an example (Fan et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2019), there exist a consuming environment where users consume items and a social environment
where user form social connections with each other. The
decision-making processes of each individual across these
environments follow complex patterns, driven by highly
entangled hidden factors that govern the formations of consuming interactions with items, social connections among
users, and their mutual influences. Disentangling and uncovering these entangled latent factors for users when learning representations for social recommendation can bring
more explainability and controllability in the representations, thereby boosting the model performance.
However, learning disentangled representation across consuming and social environment simultaneously for social recommendation remains largely unexplored in literature. On the one hand, existing social recommendation
approaches learn representations in various manners without disentangling the latent factors across different environments. As a result, these works learn representations in an
entangled way, failing to discover the latent explanatory factors hidden in the observed data. On the other hand, existing
works on disentangled representation learning for recommendation do not consider the influence from social environment, ignoring the complex relations between consuming
interactions and social connections of different individuals.
This being the case, the existing literature fails to uncover
the mixed explanatory latent factors across consuming environment and social environment.
In this work, we study the problem of co-disentangled representation learning across multiple environments, particularly
for social recommendation with consuming environment
and social environment. Nevertheless, learning disentangled
representations for users across consuming and social environments is fundamentally different from existing settings
within a single consuming environment, and thus poses two
challenges. First, in addition to the user-item consumption which captures user consuming interactions with items,
social recommendation normally employs a massive user-

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to:
Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

