Continual Vision-Language Representation Learning
with Off-Diagonal Information

Zixuan Ni 1 * Longhui Wei 2 Siliang Tang 1 † Yueting Zhuang 1 Qi Tian 2 †

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, multi-modal pre-trained models such as CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021) have attracted much attention. By utilizing these pre-trained models, many works have achieved
new progress in downstream tasks such as image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, speech
recognition (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021b; Li et al.,
2022; Baevski et al., 2020), etc. Although the CLIP model
has strong generalization in open-world data, as mentioned
in its original paper (Radford et al., 2021), the ability to
match image-text samples that are not in its training data
distribution is still weak. The natural idea to alleviate this
problem is to scale up the training data that covers different
data domains. However, it is impractical to train infinite
data distribution with limited hardware resources at once.

Large-scale multi-modal contrastive learning
frameworks like CLIP typically require a large
amount of image-text samples for training. However, these samples are always collected continuously in real scenarios. This paper discusses
the feasibility of continual CLIP training using
streaming data. Unlike continual learning based
on self-supervised learning methods for pure images, which is empirically robust against catastrophic forgetting, CLIP’s performance degeneration in the continual setting is significant and
non-neglectable. By analyzing the changes in
the model’s representation space during continual
CLIP training from a spatial geometry perspective,
we explore and summarize these spatial variations
as Spatial Disorder (SD), which can be divided
into Intra-modal Rotation and Inter-modal Deviation. Moreover, we empirically and theoretically demonstrate how SD leads to a performance decline for CLIP on cross-modal retrieval
tasks. To alleviate SD, we propose a new continual vision-language representation learning framework Mod-X: Maintain off-diagonal informationmatriX. By selectively aligning the off-diagonal
information distribution of contrastive matrices,
the Mod-X improves the capability of the multimodal model by maintaining the multi-modal representation space alignment on the old data domain during continuously fitting the new training
data domain. Experiments on commonly used
datasets with different scales and scopes have
demonstrated the effectiveness of our method.

To address the above problems, this paper mainly explores
the feasibility of continuously training the CLIP model
through streaming data, a training paradigm that follows
Continual Learning (CL) (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). Traditional supervised continual learning has been proven to
suffer from catastrophic forgetting (Rebuffi et al., 2017;
Kirkpatrick et al., 2017): The model’s performance on old
tasks drops significantly as training phases rising. Recently,
some works (Ni et al., 2021b; Hu et al., 2021) have validated that self-supervised models based on pure images
like SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) and BarlowTwins (Zbontar
et al., 2021) do not suffer from severe catastrophic forgetting during continual training. Some works (Madaan et al.,
2021; Thai et al., 2021) conjecture that the reason is that
the contrastive loss is not directly affected by the supervised
signal, and the self-supervised framework does not have a
Softmax function to amplify the influence of labels.
However, the performance of CLIP with a continual training
setting is clearly different from the self-supervised continual
training, which only uses images, though they both utilize
contrastive loss. There is a significant degradation of multimodal retrieval results with continual CLIP training compared with joint training (the experiment results are shown
in Section 3 and 5). By analyzing the changes in the model’s
representation space during continual CLIP training from
a spatial geometry perspective, we explore and summarize
these spatial variations as Spatial Disorder (SD), which

*
Work done when interning at Huawei Cloud.;† Corresponding
author. 1 Zhejiang University 2 Huawei Cloud. Correspondence to: Siliang Tang <siliang@zju.edu.cn>, Qi Tian
<tian.qi1@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

