Understanding Gradient Regularization in Deep Learning:
Efficient Finite-Difference Computation and Implicit Bias

Ryo Karakida 1 Tomoumi Takase 1 Tomohiro Hayase 2 Kazuki Osawa 3

Abstract

cally reported that gradient regularization (GR), i.e., adding
penalty of the gradient norm to the original loss, makes
the training dynamics reach flat minima and leads to better
generalization performance (Barrett & Dherin, 2021; Smith
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022). Using only the information
of the first-order gradient seems a simple and computationally friendly idea. Because the first-order gradient is used to
optimize the original loss, using its norm is seemingly easier
to use than other sharpness penalties based on second-order
information such as the Hessian and Fisher information
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Jastrzebski et al., 2021).

Gradient regularization (GR) is a method that penalizes the gradient norm of the training loss during training. While some studies have reported
that GR can improve generalization performance,
little attention has been paid to it from the algorithmic perspective, that is, the algorithms of GR that
efficiently improve the performance. In this study,
we first reveal that a specific finite-difference computation, composed of both gradient ascent and
descent steps, reduces the computational cost of
GR. Next, we show that the finite-difference computation also works better in the sense of generalization performance. We theoretically analyze
a solvable model, a diagonal linear network, and
clarify that GR has a desirable implicit bias to
so-called rich regime and finite-difference computation strengthens this bias. Furthermore, finitedifference GR is closely related to some other
algorithms based on iterative ascent and descent
steps for exploring flat minima. In particular, we
reveal that the flooding method can perform finitedifference GR in an implicit way. Thus, this work
broadens our understanding of GR for both practice and theory.

Despite its simplicity, our understanding of GR has been limited so far in the following points. First, we need to consider
the fact that GR must compute the gradient of the gradient
with respect to the parameter. This type of computation
has been investigated in a slightly different context: inputJacobian regularization, that is, penalizing the gradient with
respect to the input dimension to increase robustness against
input noise (Drucker & Le Cun, 1992; Hoffman et al., 2019).
Some studies proposed the use of double backpropagation
(DB) as an efficient algorithm for computing the gradient
of the gradient for input-Jacobian regularization, whereas
others proposed the use of finite-difference computation
(Peebles et al., 2020; Finlay & Oberman, 2021). It remains
unclear which algorithm is more efficient in the case of
GR. Second, theoretical understanding of GR has been limited. Although empirical studies have confirmed that the
GR causes the gradient dynamics to eventually converge
to better minima with higher performance, the previous
work provides no concrete theoretical evaluation for this
result. Third, it also remains unclear whether the GR has
any potential connection to other regularization methods.
Because the finite difference is composed of both gradient
ascent and descent steps by definition, we are reminded of
some learning algorithms for exploring flat minima such as
sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021)
and the flooding method (Ishida et al., 2020), which are
also composed of ascent and descent steps. Clarifying these
points would help to deepen our understanding of efficient
regularization methods for deep learning.

1. Introduction
Explicit or implicit regularization is a key component for
achieving better performance in deep learning. For instance,
adding some regularization on the local sharpness of the
loss surface is one common approach to enable the trained
model to achieve better performance (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Foret et al., 2021; Jastrzebski et al., 2021).
In the related literature, some recent studies have empiri1
Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST, Japan 2 Cluster
Metaverse Lab, Japan 3 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Ryo Karakida
<karakida.ryo@aist.go.jp>.

In this work, we reveal that a finite-difference computation
is crucial for achieving better performance with GR. This

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

