On Over-Squashing in Message Passing Neural Networks:
The Impact of Width, Depth, and Topology

Francesco Di Giovanni 1 Lorenzo Giusti 2 Federico Barbero 3 Giulia Luise 4 Pietro Liò 1 Michael Bronstein 3

Abstract

damental flaws, from expressivity (Xu et al., 2019; Morris
et al., 2019), to over-smoothing (Nt & Maehara, 2019; Cai &
Wang, 2020; Bodnar et al., 2022; Rusch et al., 2022; Di Giovanni et al., 2022b; Zhao et al., 2022) and over-squashing.
The first two limitations have been thoroughly investigated,
however less is known about over-squashing.

Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) are
instances of Graph Neural Networks that leverage the graph to send messages over the edges.
This inductive bias leads to a phenomenon known
as over-squashing, where a node feature is insensitive to information contained at distant nodes.
Despite recent methods introduced to mitigate
this issue, an understanding of the causes for oversquashing and of possible solutions are lacking.
In this theoretical work, we prove that: (i) Neural
network width can mitigate over-squashing, but
at the cost of making the whole network more
sensitive; (ii) Conversely, depth cannot help mitigate over-squashing: increasing the number of
layers leads to over-squashing being dominated
by vanishing gradients; (iii) The graph topology
plays the greatest role, since over-squashing occurs between nodes at high commute time. Our
analysis provides a unified framework to study
different recent methods introduced to cope with
over-squashing and serves as a justification for a
class of methods that fall under graph rewiring.

Alon & Yahav (2021) described over-squashing as an issue
emerging when MPNNs propagate messages across distant
nodes, with the exponential expansion of the receptive field
of a node leading to many messages being ‘squashed’ into
fixed-size vectors. Topping et al. (2022) formally justified
this phenomenon via a sensitivity analysis on the Jacobian
of node features and, partly, linked it to the existence of
edges with high-negative curvature. However, some important questions are left open from the analysis in Topping
et al. (2022): (i) What is the impact of width in mitigating
over-squashing? (ii) Can over-squashing be avoided by sufficiently deep models? (iii) How does over-squashing relate
to the graph-spectrum and the underlying topology beyond
curvature bounds that only apply to 2-hop propagation? The
last point is particularly relevant due to recent works trying to combat over-squashing via methods that depend on
the graph spectrum (Arnaiz-Rodrı́guez et al., 2022; Deac
et al., 2022; Karhadkar et al., 2022). However, it is yet to be
clarified if and why these works alleviate over-squashing.

1. Introduction

In this work, we aim to address all the questions that are left
open in Topping et al. (2022) to provide a better theoretical
understanding on the causes of over-squashing as well as on
what can and cannot fix it.

Learning on graphs with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
(Sperduti, 1993; Goller & Kuchler, 1996; Gori et al., 2005;
Scarselli et al., 2008; Bruna et al., 2014; Defferrard et al.,
2016) has become an increasingly flourishing area of machine learning. Typically, GNNs operate in the messagepassing paradigm by exchanging information between
nearby nodes (Gilmer et al., 2017), giving rise to the class
of Message-Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs). While
message-passing has demonstrated to be a useful inductive
bias, it has also been shown that the paradigm has some fun-

Contributions and outline. An MPNN is generally constituted by two main parts: a choice of architecture, and
an underlying graph over which it operates. In this work,
we investigate how these factors participate in the oversquashing phenomenon. We focus on the width and depth
of the MPNN, as well as on the graph-topology.

1

University of Cambridge 2 Sapienza University 3 University of
Oxford 4 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Francesco Di
Giovanni <fd405@cam.ac.uk>.

• In Section 3, we prove that the width can mitigate oversquashing (Theorem 3.2), albeit at the potential cost of
generalization. We also verify this with experiments.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• In Section 4, we show that depth may not be able to
alleviate over-squashing. We identify two regimes. In
1

