Provable Multi-instance Deep AUC Maximization with Stochastic Pooling

Dixian Zhu 1 Bokun Wang 2 Zhi Chen 3 Yaxing Wang 4 Milan Sonka 3 Xiaodong Wu 3 Tianbao Yang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep AUC maximization (DAM) has recently achieved
great success for many AI applications due to its capability
of handling imbalanced data (Yang & Ying, 2022). For
example, it earned first place at Stanford CheXpert competition (Irvin et al., 2019), and state-of-the-art performance
on other datasets (Yuan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b).
However, a novel application of DAM for multi-instance
learning (MIL) has not been studied in the literature.

This paper considers a novel application of deep
AUC maximization (DAM) for multi-instance
learning (MIL), in which a single class label is
assigned to a bag of instances (e.g., multiple 2D
slices of a CT scan for a patient). We address a
neglected yet non-negligible computational challenge of MIL in the context of DAM, i.e., bag
size is too large to be loaded into GPU memory
for backpropagation, which is required by the
standard pooling methods of MIL. To tackle this
challenge, we propose variance-reduced stochastic pooling methods in the spirit of stochastic optimization by formulating the loss function over
the pooled prediction as a multi-level compositional function. By synthesizing techniques from
stochastic compositional optimization and nonconvex min-max optimization, we propose a unified and provable muli-instance DAM (MIDAM)
algorithm with stochastic smoothed-max pooling
or stochastic attention-based pooling, which only
samples a few instances for each bag to compute
a stochastic gradient estimator and to update the
model parameter. We establish a similar convergence rate of the proposed MIDAM algorithm as
the state-of-the-art DAM algorithms. Our extensive experiments on conventional MIL datasets
and medical datasets demonstrate the superiority
of our MIDAM algorithm. The method is opensourced at https://libauc.org/.

MIL refers to a setting where multiple instances are observed for an object of interest and only one label is given
to describe that object. Many real-life applications can
be formulated as MIL. For example, the medical imaging
data for diagnosing a patient usually consists of a series
of 2D high-resolution images (e.g., CT scan), and only a
single label (containing a tumor or not) is assigned to the
patient (Quellec et al., 2017). MIL has a long history in
machine learning and various methods have been proposed
for traditional learning with tabular data (Babenko, 2008;
Carbonneau et al., 2016) and deep learning (DL) with unstructured data (Oquab et al., 2015; Charles et al., 2017; Ilse
et al., 2018). The fundamental theorem of symmetric functions (Zaheer et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2016), inspires a general
three-step approach for classifying a bag of instances: (i) a
transformation of individual instances, (ii) a pooling of transformed instances using a symmetric (permutation-invariant)
function, (iii) a transformation of pooled representation. A
key in the implementation of the three steps is the symmetric function that takes the transformations of all instances
as input and produces an output, which is also known as
the pooling operation. In the literature, various pooling
strategies have been explored, e.g., max pooling, average
pooling, and smoothed-max (i.e., log-exp-sum) pooling of
predictions (Ramon et al., 2000), attention-based pooling of
feature representations (Ilse et al., 2018).

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, IA,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Iowa, IA, USA
4
Beijing Institute of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Dixian Zhu, Tianbao Yang <dixian-zhu@uiowa.edu, tianbaoyang@tamu.edu>.

However, to the best of our knowledge, none of the existing
works have tackled the computational challenge of MIL in
the context of DL when a bag is large due to the existence of
multiple instances in the bag. The limitation of computing
resources (e.g., the memory size of GPU) might prevent
loading all instances of a bag at once, creating a severe
computational bottleneck for training. For example, an MRI
scan of the brain may produce up to hundreds of 2D slices

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

