Low-Switching Policy Gradient with Exploration
via Online Sensitivity Sampling

Yunfan Li 1 Yiran Wang 1 Yu Cheng 2 Lin Yang 1

Abstract

are some of the most classic (Williams, 1992; Konda &
Tsitsiklis, 1999) approaches for RL. Although their theoretical convergence properties have been established in (Geist
et al., 2019; Abbasi-Yadkori et al.; Agarwal et al., 2020b;
Bhandari & Russo, 2019) with assumptions that the state
space is already well-explored, it is usually not the case
in practice. To resolve this issue, policy-based approaches
with active exploration in the environment have been proposed in simple tabular (Shani et al., 2020), linear function
approximation (Cai et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2020a) and
general function approximation (Feng et al., 2021) models.

Policy optimization methods are powerful algorithms in Reinforcement Learning (RL) for
their flexibility to deal with policy parameterization and ability to handle model misspecification. However, these methods usually suffer
from slow convergence rates and poor sample
complexity. Hence it is important to design provably sample efficient algorithms for policy optimization. Yet, recent advances for this problems
have only been successful in tabular and linear
setting, whose benign structures cannot be generalized to non-linearly parameterized policies. In
this paper, we address this problem by leveraging
recent advances in value-based algorithms, including bounded eluder-dimension and online sensitivity sampling, to design a low-switching sampleefficient policy optimization algorithm, LPO, with
general non-linear function approximation. We
show that, our algorithm obtains an ε-optimal pole poly(d)
icy with only O(
ε3 ) samples, where ε is the
suboptimality gap and d is a complexity measure
of the function class approximating the policy.
This drastically improves previously best-known
sample bound for policy optimization algorithms,
e poly(d)
O(
ε8 ). Moreover, we empirically test our theory with deep neural nets to show the benefits of
the theoretical inspiration.

Among these exploration-based approaches, Agarwal et al.
(2020a) and Feng et al. (2021) are specially designed to
handle model-misspecification more robustly than existing value-based approaches (Jin et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2020b) by performing policy gradient methods to solve a
sequence of optimistic MDPs. However, the robustness of
both (Agarwal et al., 2020a) and (Feng et al., 2021) pays
a huge price: to obtain an ε-suboptimal policy, Agarwal
11
e
et al. (2020a) requires ∼ O(1/ε
), and Feng et al. (2021)
8
e
requires ∼ O(1/ε ) number of samples to obtain an εoptimal policy. Recently, Zanette et al. (2021) has designed
a low switching (i.e. reducing the number of policy changes)
policy-based algorithm with linear function approximation,
which largely reduces the sample complexity of Agarwal
et al. (2020a). However, it is still unknown how to improve
sample complexity of policy-based algorithms with good
robustness in the non-linear setting.
As for the value-based methods, low-switching techniques
(Bai et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2021) are utilized to reduce the policy changes of the algorithm. Among
them, Kong et al. (2021) proposed a novel notion of online
sensitivity score, which measures the importance of a data
point relative to a given dataset over some general function
class. By using this sensitivity score, Kong et al. (2021)
established an online sub-sampling technique which greatly
reduced the average computing time of previous work (Wang
et al., 2020b). Nevertheless, it is unknown whether such
low-switching techniques can be applied to save samples in
policy-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in
many practical areas by adopting policy gradient methods
with deep neural networks (Schulman et al., 2015a; 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2018). These policy optimization methods
1
Department of Electical and Computer Engineering, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Microsoft
Research, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Yunfan Li
<yunfanli@g.ucla.edu>, Lin Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we present a low-switching policy-based algorithm LPO (Low-Switching Policy Gradient and Explo1

