Prototype-Sample Relation Distillation: Towards Replay-Free
Continual Learning

Nader Asadi 1 2 MohammadReza Davari 1 2 Sudhir Mudur 1 Rahaf Aljundi 3 Eugene Belilovsky 1 2

Abstract

Task 1

In Continual learning (CL) balancing effective
adaptation while combating catastrophic forgetting is a central challenge. Many of the recent
best-performing methods utilize various forms of
prior task data, e.g. a replay buffer, to tackle the
catastrophic forgetting problem. Having access
to previous task data can be restrictive in many
real-world scenarios, for example when task data
is sensitive or proprietary. To overcome the necessity of using previous tasks’ data, in this work, we
start with strong representation learning methods
that have been shown to be less prone to forgetting.
We propose a holistic approach to jointly learn the
representation and class prototypes while maintaining the relevance of old class prototypes and
their embedded similarities. Specifically, samples are mapped to an embedding space where
the representations are learned using a supervised
contrastive loss. Class prototypes are evolved continually in the same latent space, enabling learning and prediction at any point. To continually
adapt the prototypes without keeping any prior
task data, we propose a novel distillation loss that
constrains class prototypes to maintain relative
similarities as compared to new task data. This
method yields state-of-the-art performance in the
task-incremental setting, outperforming methods
relying on large amounts of data, and provides
strong performance in the class-incremental setting without using any stored data points.

End Task 2

Start Task 2

2

2

3

3

1
4
1

4

Prototype
Sample
Preserved
1 3 2 4

1 3 2 4

Softmax (Similarities to

)

Softmax (Similarities to

)

Figure 1. Illustration of our Prototype-Sample Relation Distillation
(PRD). For each prior task prototype, we preserve the relative ordering of samples in the mini-batch. This allows the representation
to adapt to new tasks while maintaining relevant positions of past
prototypes. Illustrated for the prototype in orange 4 samples in
the minibatch are ranked 1 through 4 based on similarity. PRD
attempts to preserve this ranking while learning the new task.

of the learner is to continuously incorporate new information
from the data stream while retaining previously acquired
knowledge. Performance decay of the system on the older
samples due to the loss of previously acquired knowledge is
referred to as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989), which represents a great challenge in CL. Thus CL
algorithms are typically designed to control for catastrophic
forgetting while observing additional restrictions such as
memory and computation constraints.
Some of the early work in modern continual learning such as
LwF (Li & Hoiem, 2017) and EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016)
propose solutions that do not require storage of past data.
However, in complex settings with long task sequences,
these techniques tend to under-perform by a wide margin
compared to the idealized joint training (Chaudhry et al.,
2019). Many recent high-performing approaches in this area
maintain existing samples in some form of buffer, allowing
them to be reused for distillation(Rebuffi et al., 2017), replay (Chaudhry et al., 2019; Caccia et al., 2020), or as part
of gradient alignment constraints (Lopez-Paz et al., 2017;
Chaudhry et al.). These approaches have been shown to be
more efficient and have become a predominant approach for
many state-of-the-art continual learning systems (Verwimp
et al., 2022). On the other hand in many cases when training
on a new task it may be prohibited to store prior data. For

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) aims to continuously acquire
knowledge from an ever-changing stream of data. The goal
1
Concordia University 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute
Toyota Motor Europe. Correspondence to: Nader Asad
<nader.asadi@concordia.ca>,
Eugene Belilovsky <eugene.belilovsky@concordia.ca>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

