Differential Privacy, Linguistic Fairness, and Training Data Influence:
Impossibility and Possibility Theorems for Multilingual Language Models

Phillip Rust 1 Anders Søgaard 1

Abstract

best facilitate such transfer, achieving optimal multilingual compression (Ravishankar & Søgaard, 2021) through
parameter sharing (rather than compartmentalization), remains an open research problem.

Language models such as mBERT, XLM-R, and
BLOOM aim to achieve multilingual generalization or compression to facilitate transfer to a
large number of (potentially unseen) languages.
However, these models should ideally also be private, linguistically fair, and transparent, by relating their predictions to training data. Can these
requirements be simultaneously satisfied? We
show that multilingual compression and linguistic fairness are compatible with differential privacy, but that differential privacy is at odds with
training data influence sparsity, an objective for
transparency. We further present a series of experiments on two common NLP tasks and evaluate multilingual compression and training data
influence sparsity under different privacy guarantees, exploring these trade-offs in more detail.
Our results suggest that we need to develop ways
to jointly optimize for these objectives in order to
find practical trade-offs.

With the widespread adaptation of multilingual language
models also comes responsibility and requirements that
models are trustworthy (Pruksachatkun et al., 2021). What
does trustworthiness amount to for multilingual language
models? A crucial requirement is that multilingual NLP
models perform equally well across languages, not favoring any languages over others. (Choudhury & Deshpande,
2021) refer to this property as linguistic fairness. Linguistic fairness is defined as zero variance across languagespecific losses, typically estimated on held-out data.1
Another crucial requirement is transparency, i.e., the ability to say why models make particular predictions. Methods to achieve transparency come in two flavors; Some
methods—commonly referred to as feature attribution
methods—present rationales behind predictions in terms
of input token attributions, but such rationales are limited
in that they cannot explain predictions motivated by the
absence of input tokens or the presence of particular token combinations. Feature attribution methods have also
been shown to be unreliable (Kindermans et al., 2019; Arun
et al., 2020). Other methods highlight training data influence, i.e., provide influential data points as rationales for
decisions. Often referred to as instance-based interpretability methods, they are argued to be more useful across different NLP tasks (Han et al., 2020; Han & Tsvetkov, 2021;
Zhou et al., 2021b). We refer to the objective of achieving sparse training data influence, i.e. strong instanceinterpretability, as training data influence sparsity. Finally, for many NLP applications, we further need our
models to be private, for which differential privacy (DP;
Dwork, 2006) provides a theoretically rigorous framework.

1. Introduction
One of the open challenges in AI is bridging the widening
digital language divide by providing technologies that work
well for all languages. Multilingual language models such
as mBERT (Devlin et al., 2019), XLM-R (Conneau et al.,
2020a), and BLOOM (Scao et al., 2022), facilitate transfer between closely related languages, enabling roll-out of
technologies for low-resource languages, and are used for a
wide range of real-world applications in many languages—
e.g., from named entity recognition (Khalifa et al., 2021) to
legal document classification (Wang & Banko, 2021). Generalization across languages is challenged by typological
divides, language families, or scripts (Singh et al., 2019;
Dufter & Schütze, 2020) and finding architectures that

1
This definition of linguistic fairness is an instantiation of
equal risk fairness or overall performance parity, i.e., equal model
performance across groups (Berk et al., 2018; Verma & Rubin,
2018; Williamson & Menon, 2019), which balances precisionbased and recall-based metrics and is considered more relevant
than calibration-based metrics for standard NLP applications.
Since the three are mutually exclusive (Miconi, 2017), we ignore
calibration and balance precision and recall.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen.
Correspondence to: Phillip Rust <p.rust@di.ku.dk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

