Adversarial Learning of Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Yang Sui 1 Yukun Huang 1 Hongtu Zhu 2 Fan Zhou 1

Abstract

key features of potentially realistic applications such as partial observability, different action spaces, non-stationarity,
and stochasticity make the practical applicability of offline
RL algorithms difficult to assess (Gulcehre et al., 2020).
Moreover, offline RL methods may often suffer from some
reproducibility problems (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Peng et al.,
2019). These issues create a gap between the offline data
used to train the policy and the online environment where
the policy will be applied, limiting the efficiency of RL in
solving real-world problems. Efforts have been made to
adapt the offline policy to the online environment through
model, value learning, or importance sampling, see (Precup,
2000; Thomas et al., 2015; Jiang & Li, 2016; Kumar et al.,
2021; Gulcehre et al., 2020), but the gap remains, and its
detection in practice is not yet solved.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant
advancements in artificial intelligence. However,
its real-world applications are limited due to differences between simulated environments and the
actual world. Consequently, it is crucial to systematically analyze how each component of the
RL system can affect the final model performance.
In this study, we propose an adversarial learning
framework for distributional reinforcement learning, which adopts the concept of influence measure from the statistics community. This framework enables us to detect performance loss caused
by either the internal policy structure or the external state observation. The proposed influence
measure is based on information geometry and
has desirable properties of invariance. We demonstrate that the influence measure is useful for three
diagnostic tasks: identifying fragile states in trajectories, determining the instability of the policy
architecture, and pinpointing anomalously sensitive policy parameters.

In industry, policies are trained offline or in simulators and
then applied to the real world (He & Shin, 2019; Liang et al.,
2021; Qin et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2021). Although offline
simulators and online environments may appear to be almost
the same, these offline-trained policies can perform poorly
in the real world and the resulting decision trajectories can
be quite different. For example, the order-dispatching policy of ride-sharing companies is usually trained using an
offline simulator which is then applied to the real world
afterwards (Xu et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2019; Zhou et al.,
2021a;b). As the online environment keeps changing over
time, there always exists a gap between the simulated and
the real platforms which makes the trained policy perform
poorly in practice. In particular, the same policy can make
an undesirable decision when encountering a similar but
slightly different state which has never been seen during
the offline training. In addition, subtle changes in a specific
parameter of the policy network can also lead to abnormal
results. To further illustrate this issue, we carry out some
empirical studies using the Atari 2600 platform. As Figure
1(a) shows, a small perturbation imposed on some certain
state can significantly change the trajectory afterwards in
the Breakout environment. Similarly, there is a huge gap between the re-generated trajectory and the original trajectory
after applying a perturbation to some parameters in the policy network, see Figure 1(b). This suggests that for the entire RL system, small variations of many local components
can lead to the performance difference between the online
and offline situations. Unfortunately, there is currently no

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success
in various artificial intelligence areas, such as video games
(Lample & Chaplot, 2017; Li, 2017), large-scale strategy
games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), robot manipulation (Kober
et al., 2013; Nguyen & La, 2019), and behavioral learning
in social scenarios (Baker et al., 2019). Despite the advantages of RL in the virtual world, applying RL to real-world
problems is challenging. First, offline RL methods usually lack a clear and understandable process for generating
various design choices, from model architecture to algorithmic hyperparameters (Kumar et al., 2021). In addition,
1

School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China 2 Departments of
Biostatistics, Statistics, Computer Science, and Genetics, The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA.
Correspondence to: Fan Zhou <zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

