Unsupervised Out-of-Distribution Detection with Diffusion Inpainting

Zhenzhen Liu * 1 Jin Peng Zhou * 1 Yufan Wang 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract
Unsupervised out-of-distribution detection (OOD)
seeks to identify out-of-domain data by learning
only from unlabeled in-domain data. We present
a novel approach for this task – Lift, Map, Detect (LMD) – that leverages recent advancement
in diffusion models. Diffusion models are one
type of generative models. At their core, they
learn an iterative denoising process that gradually maps a noisy image closer to their training
manifolds. LMD leverages this intuition for OOD
detection. Specifically, LMD lifts an image off
its original manifold by corrupting it, and maps it
towards the in-domain manifold with a diffusion
model. For an out-of-domain image, the mapped
image would have a large distance away from
its original manifold, and LMD would identify
it as OOD accordingly. We show through extensive experiments that LMD achieves competitive
performance across a broad variety of datasets.
Code can be found at https://github.
com/zhenzhel/lift_map_detect.

DM

DM

Map

Lift from
Manifold

Lift from
Manifold

DM

M

ap

The diffusion model learns the in-domain manifold.

ge
Lar nce
ta
s
i
D
Small
Distance

Manifold of Fire
Hydrants
(Out-of-domain)

Manifold of Faces (In-domain)

Figure 1. The pictorial intuition behind LMD for OOD detection.
A diffusion model learns a mapping to the in-domain manifold.
LMD lifts an image off its manifold by masking, and uses the
diffusion model to move it towards the in-domain manifold. An
in-domain image would have a much smaller distance between the
original and mapped locations than its out-of-domain counterparts.

1. Introduction

which would be meaningless and possibly misleading.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection seeks to classify
whether a data point belongs to a particular domain. It is
especially important, because machine learning models typically assume that test-time samples are drawn from the same
distribution as the training data. If the test data do not follow the training distribution, they can inadvertently produce
non-sensical results. The increased use of machine learning models in high-stake areas, such as medicine (Hamet &
Tremblay, 2017) and criminal justice (Rigano, 2019), amplifies the importance of OOD detection. For example, if a
doctor mistakenly inputs a chest X-ray into a brain tumor
detector, the model would likely still return a prediction –

Previous researches have studied OOD detection under different settings: supervised and unsupervised. Within the
supervised setup, the supervision can originate from different sources. In the most informed setting, one assumes
access to representative out-of-domain samples. These allow one to train an OOD detector as a classifier distinguishing in-domain from out-of-domain data, and achieve high
performance (Hendrycks et al., 2018; Ruff et al., 2019) –
as long as the out-of-domain data do not deviate from the
assumed out-of-domain distribution. In many practical applications, however, such knowledge is unattainable. In fact,
out-of-domain data can be highly diverse and unpredictable.
A significantly more relaxed assumption is to only require
access to an in-domain classifier or class labels. Under
this setting, methods such as Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016);
Liang et al. (2017); Lee et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2021);
Wang et al. (2022) have achieved competitive performance.
Although less informed, this setting relies on two implicit
assumptions: the in-domain data have well-defined classes,

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. Correspondence
to: Zhenzhen Liu <zl535@cornell.edu>, Jin Peng Zhou
<jz563@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

