Does Continual Learning Equally Forget All Parameters?

Haiyan Zhao 1 Tianyi Zhou 2 Guodong Long 1 Jing Jiang 1 Chengqi Zhang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Empowered by advancing deep learning techniques and neural networks, machine learning has achieved unprecedented
promising performance on challenging tasks in different
fields, mostly under the i.i.d. offline setting. However, its
reliability and performance degenerate drastically in continual learning (CL) where the data distribution or task in
training changes over time, as the model quickly adapts to
a new task and overwrites the previously learned weights.
This leads to a severe bias toward more recent tasks and
“catastrophic forgetting” of previously learned knowledge,
which is detrimental to a variety of practical applications.

Distribution shift (e.g., task or domain shift) in
continual learning (CL) usually results in catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge. Although it can be alleviated by repeatedly
replaying buffered data, the every-step replay is
time-consuming. In this paper, we study which
modules in neural networks are more prone to forgetting by investigating their training dynamics
during CL. Our proposed metrics show that only
a few modules are more task-specific and sensitive to task change, while others can be shared
across tasks as common knowledge. Hence, we
attribute forgetting mainly to the former and find
that finetuning them only on a small buffer at the
end of any CL method can bring non-trivial improvement. Due to the small number of finetuned
parameters, such “Forgetting Prioritized Finetuning (FPF)” is efficient in computation. We further propose a more efficient and simpler method
that entirely removes the every-step replay and
replaces them by only k-times of FPF periodically triggered during CL. Surprisingly, this “kFPF” performs comparably to FPF and outperforms the SOTA CL methods but significantly
reduces their computational overhead and cost.
In experiments on several benchmarks of classand domain-incremental CL, FPF consistently improves existing CL methods by a large margin,
and k-FPF further excels in efficiency without degrading the accuracy. We also empirically studied
the impact of buffer size, epochs per task, and
finetuning modules on the cost and accuracy of
our methods.

A widely studied strategy to mitigate forgetting is experience replay (ER) (Ratcliff, 1990; Robins, 1995) and its
variants (Riemer et al., 2018; Buzzega et al., 2020; Boschini
et al., 2022), which store a few data from previous tasks in
the limited memory and train the model using both the current and buffered data. However, they only bring marginal
improvements when the memory is too small to store sufficient data for recovering previously learned knowledge,
which is common due to the complicated distributions of
previous tasks. In contrast, multi-task learning (Caruana,
1997) usually adopts a model architecture composed of a
task-agnostic backbone network and multiple task-specific
adapters on top of it. While the backbone needs to be
pre-trained on large-scale data, the adapters are usually
lightweight and can be achieved using a few data. In CL,
however, we cannot explicitly pre-define and separate the
task-agnostic parts and task-specific parts. Although previous methods (Schwarz et al., 2018; Zenke et al., 2017)
have studied to restrict the change of parameters critical to
previous tasks, such an extra constraint might degrade the
training performance and discourage task-agnostic modules
from capturing shared knowledge.
In this paper, we study a fundamental but open problem in
CL, i.e., are most parameters task-specific and sensitively
changing with the distribution shift? Or is the catastrophic
forgetting mainly caused by the change in a few task-specific
parameters? It naturally relates to the plasticity-stability
trade-off in biological neural systems (Mermillod et al.,
2013): more task-specific parameters improve the plasticity
but may cause severe forgetting, while the stability can
be improved by increasing parameters shared across tasks.

1

University of Technology Sydney 2 University of Maryland.
Correspondence to: Haiyan Zhao <Haiyan.Zhao2@student.uts.edu.au>, Tianyi Zhou <tianyi@umd.edu>,
Guodong Long, Jing Jiang, Chengqi Zhang <{guodong.long,
jing.jiang, chengqi.zhang}@uts.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

