Decentralized Stochastic Bilevel Optimization with Improved per-Iteration
Complexity

Xuxing Chen 1 Minhui Huang 2 Shiqian Ma 3 Krishnakumar Balasubramanian 4

Abstract
min

Φ(x) = f (x, y ∗ (x))

s.t.

y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y),

x∈Rp

Bilevel optimization recently has received tremendous attention due to its great success in solving
important machine learning problems like meta
learning, reinforcement learning, and hyperparameter optimization. Extending single-agent training
on bilevel problems to the decentralized setting
is a natural generalization, and there has been
a flurry of work studying decentralized bilevel
optimization algorithms. However, it remains unknown how to design the distributed algorithm
with sample complexity and convergence rate
comparable to SGD for stochastic optimization,
and at the same time without directly computing
the exact Hessian or Jacobian matrices. In this
paper we propose such an algorithm. More specifically, we propose a novel decentralized stochastic bilevel optimization (DSBO) algorithm that
only requires first order stochastic oracle, Hessianvector product and Jacobian-vector product oracle.
The sample complexity of our algorithm matches
the currently best known results for DSBO, while
our algorithm does not require estimating the full
Hessian and Jacobian matrices, thereby possessing to improved per-iteration complexity.

(1)

y∈Rq

where we minimize the upper level function f with respect
to x subject to the constraint that y ∗ (x) is the minimizer of
the lower level function. Its applications can range from
classical optimization problems like compositional optimization (Chen et al., 2021) to modern machine learning problems such as reinforcement learning (Hong et al., 2020),
meta learning (Snell et al., 2017; Bertinetto et al., 2018;
Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Ji et al., 2020), hyperparameter
optimization (Pedregosa, 2016; Franceschi et al., 2018), etc.
State-of-the-art bilevel optimization algorithms with nonasymptotic analyses include BSA (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018),
TTSA (Hong et al., 2020), StocBiO (Ji et al., 2020), ALSET
(Chen et al., 2021), to name a few.
Decentralized bilevel optimization aims at solving bilevel
problems in a decentralized setting, which provides additional benefits such as faster convergence, data privacy
preservation and robustness to low network bandwidth compared to the centralized setting and the single-agent training
(Lian et al., 2017). For example, decentralized meta learning, which is a special case of decentralized bilevel optimization, arise naturally in the context of medical data analysis
in the context of protecting patient privacy; see, for example,
Altae-Tran et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2019); Kayaalp et al.
(2022). Motivated by such applications, the works of Lu
et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022b); Yang et al. (2022); Gao
et al. (2022) proposed and analyzed various decentralized
stochastic bilevel optimization (DSBO) algorithms.

1. Introduction
Many machines learning problems can be formulated as a
bilevel optimization problem of the form,

From a mathematical perspective, DSBO aims at solving
the following problem in a distributed setting:

1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Davis,
USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, USA 3 Department of Computational
Applied Mathematics and Operations Research, Rice University,
Houston, USA 4 Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis, USA. Correspondence to: Xuxing Chen <xuxchen@ucdavis.edu>.

n

minp

Φ(x) =

x∈R

1X
fi (x, y ∗ (x))
n i=1
n

s.t.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

(2)

1X
y (x) = arg min g(x, y) :=
gi (x, y),
n i=1
y∈Rq
∗

where x ∈ Rp , y ∈ Rq . fi is possibly nonconvex and gi is
strongly convex in y. Here n denotes the number of agents,
1

