Constrained Causal Bayesian Optimization

Virginia Aglietti 1 Alan Malek 1 Ira Ktena 1 Silvia Chiappa 1

Abstract

PKC

(a)

We propose constrained causal Bayesian optimization (cCBO), an approach for finding interventions
in a known causal graph that optimize a target variable under some constraints. cCBO first reduces
the search space by exploiting the graph structure
and, if available, an observational dataset; and
then solves the restricted optimization problem by
modelling target and constraint quantities using
Gaussian processes and by sequentially selecting
interventions via a constrained expected improvement acquisition function. We propose different
surrogate models that enable to integrate observational and interventional data while capturing
correlation among effects with increasing levels
of sophistication. We evaluate cCBO on artificial
and real-world causal graphs showing successful
trade off between fast convergence and percentage
of feasible interventions.

Raf

P 38

(b)

CI Height

BMR

Weight
PKA

J nk

BMI

Age
Aspirin

M ek

E rk A kt

Statin

PSA

Figure 1: (a) Protein-signaling network and (b) causal PSA
graph. Red, grey and pink nodes indicate target, intervenable, and constrained variables respectively.

the causal relationships between prostate specific antigen
(PSA) and its risk factors, some of which might be due to
an existing policy at the time of study (Ferro et al., 2015).
An investigator might wish to understand which variables
among Aspirin, Statin, and Calories Intake (CI) to fix and to
which values in order to minimize PSA, under the constraint
of keeping BMI below a certain value.
In this paper, we propose constrained causal Bayesian optimization (cCBO), a sequential approach for efficiently solving such constrained optimization problems in the setting of
known causal graph that builds on the literature on causal
Bayesian optimization (Aglietti et al., 2020), constrained
Bayesian optimization (Gardner et al., 2014), and multitask learning with Gaussian processes (GPs) (Alvarez et al.,
2011). Our contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
The problem of understanding which interventions in a system optimize a target variable is of relevance in many scientific disciplines, including biology, medicine, and social sciences. Often, the investigator might want to solve this problem while also ensuring that interventions satisfy some constraints. As an example, consider the protein-signalling network of Fig. 1(a), which describes the causal pathways linking several phosphorylated proteins and phospholipids in human immune system cells, including the mitogen-activated
protein kinases Erk studied in cancer therapy (Frémin & Meloche, 2010; Sachs et al., 2005). An investigator might wish
to find which variables among Mek, PKC, PKA and Akt to
perturb and to which levels in order to minimize Erk, under
the constraints of not inhibiting PKA and PKC which play
an important role in the functioning of healthy cells. As
another example, consider the graph of Fig. 1(b) describing

• We provide a formalization of the constrained optimization problem using the framework of structural causal
models (SCMs).
• We introduce a novel theory for reducing the search space
of interventions that eliminates intervention sets of higher
cardinality.
• We propose different GP surrogate models for the
unknown target and constraint quantities that leverage
observational data, interventional data and the SCM
structure, capturing correlations with increasing level of
sophistication. This enables uncertainty quantification
thereby speeding up the identification of an optimal
intervention while limiting the number of infeasible
interventions, i.e. not satisfy the constraints.
• We propose a constrained expected improvement acquisition function for sequentially selecting interventions

1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Virginia Aglietti
<aglietti@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

