Quantifying the Variability Collapse of Neural Networks

Jing Xu * 1 Haoxiong Liu * 1

Abstract

The performance of a pretrained model is closely related
to the quality of the features it produces. The recently proposed concept of neural collapse (NC) (Papyan et al., 2020)
provides a paradigmatic way to study the representation of
neural networks. According to neural collapse, the last layer
features of neural networks adhere to the following rule of
variability collapse (NC1): As the training proceeds, the
representation of a data point converges to its corresponding
class mean. Consequently, the within-class variation of the
features converges to zero.

Recent studies empirically demonstrate the positive relationship between the transferability of
neural networks and the within-class variation of
the last layer features. The recently discovered
Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon provides a
new perspective of understanding such last layer
geometry of neural networks. In this paper, we
propose a novel metric, named Variability Collapse Index (VCI), to quantify the variability collapse phenomenon in the NC paradigm. The VCI
metric is well-motivated and intrinsically related
to the linear probing loss on the last layer features. Moreover, it enjoys desired theoretical and
empirical properties, including invariance under
invertible linear transformations and numerical
stability, that distinguishes it from previous metrics. Our experiments verify that VCI is indicative
of the variability collapse and the transferability
of pretrained neural networks.

The deep connection between transferability and neural collapse is rooted in the variability collapse criterion. Previous
works (Feng et al., 2021; Kornblith et al., 2021; Sariyildiz
et al., 2022) empirically find that although models with
collapsed last-layer feature representations exhibit better
pretraining accuracy, they tend to yield worse performance
for downstream tasks. These works give an intuitive explanation that pushing the feature to their class means results
in the loss of the diverse structures useful for downstream
tasks. Building upon this understanding, researchers design
various algorithms (Jing et al., 2021; Kini et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2022; Dubois et al., 2022; Sariyildiz et al., 2023)
that either explicitly or implicitly levarage the variability
collapse criterion to retain the feature diversity in the pretraining phase, and thereby improve the transferability of
the models.

1. Introduction
The pursuit of powerful models capable of extracting features from raw data and performing well on downstream
tasks has been a constant endeavor in the machine learning community (Bommasani et al., 2021). In the past few
years, researchers have developed various pretraining methods (Chen et al., 2020; Khosla et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020;
He et al., 2022; Baevski et al., 2022) that enable models
to learn from massive real world datasets. However, there
is still a lack of systematic understanding regarding the
transferability of deep neural networks, i.e., whether they
can leverage the information in the pretraining datasets to
achieve high performance in downstream tasks (Abnar et al.,
2021; Fang et al., 2023).

Straightforward as it is stated, the variability criterion is still
not thoroughly understood. One fundamental question is
how to mathematically quantify variability collapse. Previous works propose variability collapse metrics that are
meaningful in specific settings (Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu
et al., 2021; Kornblith et al., 2021; Hui et al., 2022). However, a more principled characterization is required when
we want to use variability collapse to analyze transferability.
For example, in the linear probing setting, the loss function
is invariant to invertible linear transformations on the last
layer features. Consequently, it is reasonable to expect that
the collapse metric of the features would also be invariant
under such transformations, in order to properly reflect the
models performance on downstream tasks. However, as
we will point out in Section 4.2, no previous metric can
achieve this high level of invariance, to the best of the authors’ knowledge.

*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Jing Xu <xujing21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Haoxiong Liu
<liuhx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

