Robust Perception through Equivariance
Chengzhi Mao 1 Lingyu Zhang 1 Abhishek Vaibhav Joshi 1 Junfeng Yang 1 Hao Wang 2 Carl Vondrick 1
Why Equivariance?

Abstract
F(x)

Deep networks for computer vision are not reliable when they encounter adversarial examples.
In this paper, we introduce a framework that uses
the dense intrinsic constraints in natural images to
robustify inference. By introducing constraints at
inference time, we can shift the burden of robustness from training to testing, thereby allowing the
model to dynamically adjust to each individual
image’s unique and potentially novel characteristics at inference time. Our theoretical results
show the importance of having dense constraints
at inference time. In contrast to existing singleconstraint methods, we propose to use equivariance, which naturally allows dense constraints
at a fine-grained level in the feature space. Our
empirical experiments show that restoring feature
equivariance at inference time defends against
worst-case adversarial perturbations. The method
obtains improved adversarial robustness on four
datasets (ImageNet, Cityscapes, PASCAL VOC,
and MS-COCO) on image recognition, semantic
segmentation, and instance segmentation tasks.

g 1 F g(x)

g(x)
F g(x)

Figure 1. Equivariance is shared across the input images (left) and
the output labels (right), providing a dense constraint. The predictions from a model F (x) should be identical to performing a
spatial transformation on x, a forward pass of F , and undoing that
spatial transformation on the output space (black).

Due to the importance of this problem, there has been a
large number of investigations aiming to improve the training algorithm to establish reliability. For example, data
augmentation (Yun et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2021)
and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017; Carmon et al.,
2019) improve robustness by training the model on anticipated distribution shifts and worst-case images. However,
placing the burden of robustness on the training algorithm
means that the model can only be robust to the corruptions
that are anticipated ahead of time, which is an unrealistic
assumption in an open world. In addition, retraining the
model on new distributions each time can be expensive.

1. Introduction

To address this challenge, we propose to robustify the model
at inference time. Specifically, instead of retraining the
whole model on the new distribution, our inference-time defense shifts the burden to test time with our robust inference
algorithm without updating the model. Prior work (Mao
et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021) is limited
to a single constraint at inference time and hence may not
provide the model with enough information to dynamically
adjust to the unique and potentially novel characteristics of
the corruption in the testing image. We therefore ask the
natural question: Can we further improve the robustness
through increasing the number of constraints?

Despite the strong performance of deep networks on computer vision benchmarks (He et al., 2016; 2017; Yu et al.,
2017), state-of-the-art systems are not reliable when evaluated in open-world settings (Geirhos et al., 2019; Hendrycks
et al., 2021; Szegedy et al., 2013; Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019; Croce & Hein, 2020; Carlini & Wagner, 2017). However, the robustness against a large number of adversarial
cases remains a prerequisite necessary to deploy models in
real-world applications, such as in medical imaging, healthcare, and robotics.
1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Chengzhi Mao
<cm3797@columbia.edu>.

We start with theoretical analysis and prove that applying
more constraints at inference time strictly improves the
model’s robustness. The next question is then: How to efficiently apply multiple constraints at inference time? One
approach is to directly apply multiple feature invariance

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

