A Category-theoretical Meta-analysis of Definitions of Disentanglement

Yivan Zhang 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract

and models. Some definitions are based on the intuition
that: (1. modularity) a change in one factor should lead to a
change in a single code; (2. compactness/completeness)
a factor should be associated with only one code; and
(3. explicitness/informativeness) the code should be able to
predict the factor (Ridgeway & Mozer, 2018; Eastwood &
Williams, 2018). Another line of research is based on group
theory and representation theory (Cohen & Welling, 2014;
2015; Higgins et al., 2018), where the mapping from the data
to the code is required to be equivariant to product group
actions, preserving the product structure of automorphisms
(a.k.a. symmetries). Meanwhile, information theory (Chen
et al., 2018) and invariance (Higgins et al., 2017) also play
an important role in characterizing disentanglement.

Disentangling the factors of variation in data is
a fundamental concept in machine learning and
has been studied in various ways by different
researchers, leading to a multitude of definitions.
Despite the numerous empirical studies, more
theoretical research is needed to fully understand
the defining properties of disentanglement and
how different definitions relate to each other.
This paper presents a meta-analysis of existing
definitions of disentanglement, using category
theory as a unifying and rigorous framework. We
propose that the concepts of the cartesian and
monoidal products should serve as the core of
disentanglement. With these core concepts, we
show the similarities and crucial differences in
dealing with (i) functions, (ii) equivariant maps,
(iii) relations, and (iv) stochastic maps. Overall,
our meta-analysis deepens our understanding of
disentanglement and its various formulations and
can help researchers navigate different definitions
and choose the most appropriate one for their
specific context.

Then why do we want to conduct a meta-analysis? Because
we study the theories and techniques of disentanglement,
yet our definitions of it are quite entangled. Although largescale experimental studies exist (Locatello et al., 2019),
theoretical analyses and systematic comparisons are limited
(Sepliarskaia et al., 2019; Carbonneau et al., 2022). Several
important questions remain to be answered:
What are the defining properties of disentanglement?
What operations and structures are essential, and what
are specific to the task?
Given two definitions or metrics, does one imply the
other in any situation?
Are the existing algebraic and statistical approaches
compatible with one another?

1. Introduction
Disentanglement, in machine learning, refers to the ability to
identify and separate the underlying factors that contribute
to a particular variation in data (Bengio et al., 2013). It is
a process of breaking down a complex phenomenon into
simpler components. It has been suggested that disentangled
representation learning is a promising way toward reliable,
interpretable, and data-efficient machine learning (Locatello
et al., 2019; Montero et al., 2020; Dittadi et al., 2021).

Things quickly become complicated without an abstract
language to describe existing results.
Category theory (Borceux, 1994; Awodey, 2006; Leinster,
2014) is particularly suitable for designing and organizing a
system of this level of complexity. It has found applications
in many scientific fields (Baez, 2017; Bradley, 2018;
Fong & Spivak, 2019), recently also in machine learning
(Gavranović, 2019; de Haan et al., 2020; Shiebler et al.,
2021; Dudzik & Veličković, 2022). In this work, we aim
to disentangle the definitions of disentanglement from a
categorical perspective.

Because disentanglement is an important concept, many
researchers have approached this problem from different
angles, resulting in various definitions, metrics, methods,
1

2

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan RIKEN AIP, Tokyo,
Japan. Correspondence to: Yivan Zhang <yivanzhang@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>.

In Section 2, we first introduce the essential concepts of the
cartesian product and monoidal product, which we argue
should be the core of disentanglement. Next, we look into

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

