Controlled Text Generation with Natural Language Instructions

Wangchunshu Zhou 1 Yuchen Eleanor Jiang 1 Ethan Wilcox 1 Ryan Cotterell 1 Mrinmaya Sachan 1

Abstract

For instance, a question generation system may require that
the model incorporates certain keywords during generation,
and a dialog system may be expected to generate responses
that have a certain tone.

Large language models can be prompted to produce fluent output for a wide range of tasks without being specifically trained to do so. Nevertheless, it is notoriously difficult to control their
generation in such a way that it satisfies userspecified constraints. In this paper, we present I N STRUCT CTG, a simple controlled text generation
framework that incorporates different constraints
by verbalizing them as natural language instructions. We annotate natural texts through a combination of off-the-shelf NLP tools and simple
heuristics with the linguistic and extra-linguistic
constraints they satisfy. Then, we verbalize the
constraints into natural language instructions to
form weakly supervised training data, i.e., we
prepend the natural language verbalizations of the
constraints in front of their corresponding natural
language sentences. Next, we fine-tune a pretrained language model on the augmented corpus.
Compared to existing methods, I NSTRUCT CTG
is more flexible in terms of the types of constraints it allows the practitioner to use. It also
does not require any modification of the decoding procedure. Finally, I NSTRUCT CTG allows
the model to adapt to new constraints without retraining through the use of in-context learning.
Our code is available at https://github.com/
MichaelZhouwang/InstructCTG.

The dominant paradigm for controlled text generation
involves incorporating the constraints into the decoding
algorithm itself. Prior work either includes constraints in
the search algorithm by modifying beam search (Hokamp
and Liu, 2017; Anderson et al., 2017; Post and Vilar, 2018;
Lu et al., 2021; 2022) or by converting the constraints
into classifiers, which are then used to guide the decoding
process (Qin et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022;
Amini et al., 2023). While effective at requiring the model
to enforce the constraints on the generated text, existing
decoding-time methods for controlled text generation suffer
from a number of limitations. First, decoding-time methods
modify the output sequence distribution and, thus, can result
in lower-quality text (Lin et al., 2020). Second, they may
require extra computation and lead to slower generation
speed (Post and Vilar, 2018; Li et al., 2022). Third, they
are often less able to deal with new kinds of constraints or a
novel composition of existing constraints. Finally, they may
require practitioners to design new, bespoke features or train
additional classifiers to accommodate novel constraints.
In this paper, we present I NSTRUCT CTG, a simple
paradigm for controlled generation, which presents an alternative to decoding-time-constrained generation methods.
In contrast, we adopt a training-time approach. Under I N STRUCT CTG, we construct a corpus in a weakly supervised
fashion where each sentence in the corpus is treated as if
it had been constructed under the influence of one or more
latent constraints. We automatically impute these latent constraints using off-the-shelf NLP tools or simple rules. Then,
I NSTRUCT CTG incorporates the constraints into generation
through a prompt that verbalizes the constraint into a natural
language instruction. As a concrete example, in order to
generate sentences with a length constraint, we collect
a large corpus of sentences and automatically derive the
length of each sentence by using a pre-trained tokenizer and
counting the number of tokens. Then, in order to conduct
controlled generation, we verbalize the length constraints as
natural language instructions and instruction-tune the model
using the augmented corpus (Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al.,
2022). To avoid the cost of always having to fine-tune for

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) pre-trained on web-scale
corpora (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020)
have demonstrated the ability to generate fluent and realistic
text. Yet, many text generation applications require the
model to generate text that not only possesses a high degree
of naturalness but also adheres to task-specific constraints.
1
ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Wangchunshu Zhou
<wangchunshu.zhou@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

