One-vs-the-Rest Loss to Focus on Important Samples in Adversarial Training

Sekitoshi Kanai 1 Shin’ya Yamaguchi 1 2 Masanori Yamada 1
Hiroshi Takahashi 1 Kentaro Ohno 1 Yasutoshi Ida 1
Various methods have been presented to search the adversarial examples, and Auto-Attack (Croce & Hein, 2020) is one
of the most successful methods at finding the worst-case
attacks. For trustworthy deep learning applications, classifiers should be robust against the worst-case attacks. To
improve the robustness, many defense methods have also
been presented (Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2020b; Cohen et al., 2019). Among them, adversarial training is a promising method, which empirically
achieves good robustness (Carmon et al., 2019; Kurakin
et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2018). However, adversarial training is more difficult than standard training, e.g., it requires
higher sample complexity (Schmidt et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2020a) and model capacity (Zhang et al., 2021b).

Abstract
This paper proposes a new loss function for adversarial training. Since adversarial training has
difficulties, e.g., necessity of high model capacity,
focusing on important data points by weighting
cross-entropy loss has attracted much attention.
However, they are vulnerable to sophisticated
attacks, e.g., Auto-Attack. This paper experimentally reveals that the cause of their vulnerability
is their small margins between logits for the true
label and the other labels. Since neural networks
classify the data points based on the logits, logit
margins should be large enough to avoid flipping
the largest logit by the attacks. Importance-aware
methods do not increase logit margins of important samples but decrease those of less-important
samples compared with cross-entropy loss. To
increase logit margins of important samples, we
propose switching one-vs-the-rest loss (SOVR),
which switches from cross-entropy to one-vs-therest loss for important samples that have small
logit margins. We prove that one-vs-the-rest loss
increases logit margins two times larger than the
weighted cross-entropy loss for a simple problem.
We experimentally confirm that SOVR increases
logit margins of important samples unlike existing
methods and achieves better robustness against
Auto-Attack than importance-aware methods.

To address these difficulties, several methods focus on
the difference in importance of data points (Wang et al.,
2020a; Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021b). These studies
hypothesize that data points closer to a decision boundary
are more important for adversarial training (Wang et al.,
2020a; Zhang et al., 2021b; Liu et al., 2021). To focus
on such data points, GAIRAT (Zhang et al., 2021b) and
MAIL (Liu et al., 2021) use weighted softmax cross-entropy
loss, which controls weights on the losses on the basis
of the closeness to the boundary. As the measure of the
closeness, GAIRAT uses the least number of steps at which
the iterative attacks make models misclassify the data
point. On the other hand, MAIL uses the measure based
on the softmax outputs. However, these importance-aware
methods tend to be more vulnerable to the robustness
against Auto-Attack than naı̈ve adversarial training. Thus,
it is still unclear whether focusing on the important training
data points enhances the robustness in adversarial training.

1. Introduction
For multi-class classification problems, deep neural networks have become the de facto standard method in this
decade. They classify a data point into the label that has
the largest logit, which is the input of a softmax function.
However, the largest logit is easily flipped, and deep neural networks can misclassify slightly perturbed data points,
which are called adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013).

To answer this question, we investigate the cause of the
vulnerability of importance-aware methods via margins between logits for the true label and the other labels. Since
neural networks classify the data into the largest logit class,
logit margins should be large enough to avoid the flipping of
the largest logit class by the attacks. Through the histogram
of logit margins, we first confirmed that there is actually
a difference in the data points when using naı̈ve adversarial training (AT). AT has two peaks in the histogram, i.e.,
large and small logit margins. This indicates that there are
difficult samples of which logit margins are difficult to be

1
NTT, Tokyo, Japan 2 Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence to: Sekitoshi Kanai <sekitoshi.kanai@ntt.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

