Do Not Train It: A Linear Neural Architecture Search of Graph Neural
Networks
Peng Xu 1 * Lin Zhang 2 * Xuanzhou Liu 3 Jiaqi Sun 3 Yue Zhao 4 Haiqin Yang 2 Bei Yu 1

90

Neural architecture search (NAS) for Graph neural networks (GNNs), called NAS-GNNs, has
achieved significant performance over manually
designed GNN architectures. However, these
methods inherit issues from the conventional NAS
methods, such as high computational cost and
optimization difficulty. More importantly, previous NAS methods have ignored the uniqueness
of GNNs, where GNNs possess expressive power
without training. With the randomly-initialized
weights, we can then seek the optimal architecture parameters via the sparse coding objective
and derive a novel NAS-GNNs method, namely
neural architecture coding (NAC). Consequently,
our NAC holds a no-update scheme on GNNs and
can efficiently compute in linear time. Empirical
evaluations on multiple GNN benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our approach leads to state-ofthe-art performance, which is up to 200× faster
and 18.8% more accurate than the strong baselines.

85
Accuracy (%)

Abstract

NAC

SANE

80
75
70
100

RS GraphNAS-WS
BayesianGraphNAS
101
102
Running Time (Min) in log base 10

Figure 1: Accuracy vs. running time on Cora. NAC (ours) outperforms the leading methods significantly in both accuracy and speed
(in minutes).

and datasets (You et al., 2020), which limits the usability of
GNNs. To automate the process, researchers have made efforts to leverage neural architecture search (NAS) (Liu et al.,
2019a; Zhang et al., 2021b) for GNNs, including GraphNAS (Gao et al., 2020), Auto-GNN (Zhou et al., 2019),
PDNAS (Zhao et al., 2020) and SANE (Zhao et al., 2021b).
In this work, we refer the problem of NAS for GNNs as
NAS-GNNs.

*
Equal contribution 1 The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, China 2 International Digital Economy Academy, China
3
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China 4 Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Bei Yu <byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Lin Zhang
<linzhang0529@gmail.com>.

While NAS-GNNs have shown promising results, they inherit issues from general NAS methods and fail to account
for the unique properties of GNN operators. It is important to understand the difficulty in general NAS training
(e.g., architecture searching and weight evaluation). Based
on the searching strategy, NAS methods can be categorized into three types: reinforcement learning-based methods (Zoph & Le, 2017), evolutionary algorithms-based methods (Jozefowicz et al., 2015), and differential-based methods (Liu et al., 2019a; Wu et al., 2019a). Both reinforcement
learning-based and evolutionary algorithm-based methods
suffer from high computational costs due to the need to retrain sampled architectures from scratch. On the contrary, the
weight-sharing differential-based paradigm reuses the neural
weights to reduce the search effort and produces the optimal sub-architecture directly without excessive processes,
such as sampling, leading to significant computational cost
reduction and becoming the new frontier of NAS.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

However, the weight sharing paradigm requires the neural weights to reach optimality so as to obtain the optimal
sub-architecture based on its bi-level optimization (BLO)

1. Introduction
Remarkable progress of graph neural networks (GNNs) has
boosted research in various domains, such as traffic prediction, recommender systems, etc., as summarized in (Wu
et al., 2021). The central paradigm of GNNs is to generate node embeddings through the message-passing mechanism (Hamilton, 2020), including passing, transforming, and
aggregating node features across the input graph. Despite
its effectiveness, designing GNNs requires laborious efforts
to choose and tune neural architectures for different tasks

1

