Continuous Spatiotemporal Transformer

Antonio Henrique de Oliveira Fonseca 1 Emanuele Zappala 2 Josue Ortega Caro 3 4 David van Dijk 2 5 6 4

Abstract

a deeper understanding of the phenomena, allowing for predictions of the system state continuously in time (Ghadami
& Epureanu, 2022; Krishnapriyan et al., 2022). Such dynamical systems can be found throughout engineering and
science. In biology, the brain is a notably complex dynamical system (Wang & Kennedy, 2016). The spiking activity
of neurons within the neural population produces complex
spatiotemporal patterns (Muller et al., 2018). These neural
activity patterns represent a dynamical system that evolves
over time, where the state of the system is defined in terms
of the joint firing patterns of the neural populations (Vyas
et al., 2020). For complex systems such as the brain, modelbased approaches for learning dynamics are not amenable,
thus the dynamics have to be learned directly from collected
data. However, learning continuous dynamics from discretely sampled data is challenging and is an active area of
study in machine learning (Willard et al., 2020).

Modeling spatiotemporal dynamical systems is
a fundamental challenge in machine learning.
Transformer models have been very successful
in NLP and computer vision where they provide
interpretable representations of data. However, a
limitation of transformers in modeling continuous
dynamical systems is that they are fundamentally
discrete time and space models and thus have no
guarantees regarding continuous sampling. To
address this challenge, we present the Continuous Spatiotemporal Transformer (CST), a new
transformer architecture that is designed for modeling of continuous systems. This new framework
guarantees a continuous and smooth output via optimization in Sobolev space. We benchmark CST
against traditional transformers as well as other
spatiotemporal dynamics modeling methods and
achieve superior performance in a number of tasks
on synthetic and real systems, including learning
brain dynamics from calcium imaging data.

Among the continuous time model approaches, Neural
ODEs (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019) have found
important applications. While effective in modeling temporal dynamics, these models are unable to capture long-range
spatiotemporal relations in the data and do not provide interpretable models (Zappala et al., 2022). In the meantime,
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become state-ofthe-art in several tasks across domains (Lu et al., 2021a),
wherein their performance is mainly attributed to their capacity to capture long-range dependencies in the data as
well as their training scalability (Bertasius et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The theory of dynamical systems has found profound applications throughout the sciences, both theoretical and applied.
Traditionally, dynamical system analysis aims to find the
rules that govern the dynamics of an underlying system.
In this setting, we first obtain a model that describes the
given system, either through theoretical principles (modelbased) or through experimental data (data-driven) (Ghadami
& Epureanu, 2022), and then study the mathematical properties of it. Having a model of the dynamical system grants

Despite their widespread use across domains (Lu et al.,
2021a), Transformers are still restricted to discrete space
and time applications. In this work, we demonstrate that
the standard Transformer has limitations in modeling continuous systems. To address this, we introduce new regularizations to the Transformer architecture, resulting in a
new framework hereafter called Continuous Spatiotemporal Transformer (CST). We show that CST is capable of
modeling continuous data, resulting in smooth output and
good interpolation performance. To showcase our method,
we first validate CST on a toy-dataset and different popular benchmark datasets. Finally, we test CST in modeling
dynamics in neural experimental data. We compare CST
to other commonly used methods for modeling sequential
data in three tasks: 1) modeling 2D spirals generated by
integral equations (Sec. 4.1); 2) modeling a benchmark

1

Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Yale
University, New Haven, CT, USA 3 Department of Neuroscience,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 4 Wu Tsai Institute,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 5 Department of Internal
Medicine (Cardiology), Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
6
Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence
to: David van Dijk <david.vandijk@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

