Robust Collaborative Learning with Linear Gradient Overhead

Sadegh Farhadkhani 1 Rachid Guerraoui 1 Nirupam Gupta 1
Lê Nguyên Hoang 2 3 Rafael Pinot 1 John Stephan 1

Abstract

a high accuracy on the union of their local datasets (Boyd
et al., 2011). This paradigm facilitates the training of complex models over a large volume of data, while addressing concerns on data locality and ownership. The general task of collaborative learning can be formulated as
follows. Consider a parameter space Rd , a data space X
and a loss function q : Rd × X → R. Given a parameter
θ ∈ Rd , a data point x ∈ X incurs a loss of value q(θ, x).
The system comprises n nodes. Each node i samples data
from distribution Di , and thus has a local loss function
Q(i) (θ) := Ex∼Di [q(θ, x)]. The goal for each node i is to
(i)
compute θ∗ minimizing the global average loss, i.e.,

Collaborative learning algorithms, such as distributed SGD (or D-SGD), are prone to faulty
machines that may deviate from their prescribed
algorithm because of software or hardware bugs,
poisoned data or malicious behaviors. While
many solutions have been proposed to enhance
the robustness of D-SGD to such machines, previous works either resort to strong assumptions
(trusted server, homogeneous data, specific noise
model) or impose a gradient computational cost
that is several orders of magnitude higher than
that of D-SGD. We present M O NNA, a new algorithm that (a) is provably robust under standard assumptions and (b) has a gradient computation overhead that is linear in the fraction
of faulty machines, which is conjectured to be
tight. Essentially, M O NNA uses Polyak’s momentum of local gradients for local updates and
nearest-neighbor averaging (NNA) for global mixing, respectively. While M O NNA is rather simple
to implement, its analysis has been more challenging and relies on two key elements that may
be of independent interest. Specifically, we introduce the mixing criterion of (α, λ)-reduction
to analyze the non-linear mixing of non-faulty
machines, and present a way to control the tension between the momentum and the model
drifts. We validate our theory by experiments
on image classification and make our code available at https://github.com/LPD-EPFL/
robust-collaborative-learning.

n

(i)

θ∗ ∈ arg min
θ∈Rd

1 X (j)
Q (θ) .
n j=1

(1)

Collaborative learning with D-SGD. The most standard way of solving the optimization problem (1) is
through the use of the celebrated distributed SGD (D-SGD)
method (Tang et al., 2018; Koloskova et al., 2020). Each
node maintains a local parameter, approximating a solution
of the optimization problem (1), which is updated iteratively
in two phases. In the first phase, also called the local phase,
each node updates its current parameter partially using a
stochastic estimate of its local loss function’s gradient. In
the second phase, also called the coordination phase, the
nodes exchange their partially updated parameters with each
other over a network, and then each node replaces its current parameter by the average of all the partially updated
parameters. While the former is essential for reducing the
local loss functions, the latter yields reduction in the global
average loss function. Alternately, as is the case in federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2021), the nodes may rely
on a trusted coordinator (called the server) to execute the
coordination phase involving the averaging operation.

1. Introduction
Collaborative learning allows multiple machines (or nodes),
each with a local dataset, to learn local models that offer

Robustness issue. D-SGD is not very robust: a handful
of faulty nodes, deviating from their prescribed algorithm,
may prevent the remaining non-faulty (or correct) nodes
from computing a valid solution (Su & Vaidya, 2016). Such
behavior may result from software and hardware bugs, poisoned data, or malicious adversaries controlling part of the
network. We consider a setting where at most f (out of n)
nodes in the system are faulty and assume that these can

1

EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. 2 Tournesol, 3 Calicarpa,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Sadegh Farhadkhani
<sadegh.farhadkhani@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

