Regions of Reliability in the Evaluation of Multivariate Probabilistic Forecasts

Étienne Marcotte † Valentina Zantedeschi † Alexandre Drouin † Nicolas Chapados †

Abstract

critical to develop methodological tools to assess the quality
of distributional forecasts produced by statistical models.

Multivariate probabilistic time series forecasts are
commonly evaluated via proper scoring rules, i.e.,
functions that are minimal in expectation for the
ground-truth distribution. However, this property
is not sufficient to guarantee good discrimination
in the non-asymptotic regime. In this paper,
we provide the first systematic finite-sample
study of proper scoring rules for time-series
forecasting evaluation. Through a power analysis,
we identify the “region of reliability” of a scoring
rule, i.e., the set of practical conditions where
it can be relied on to identify forecasting errors.
We carry out our analysis on a comprehensive
synthetic benchmark, specifically designed to test
several key discrepancies between ground-truth
and forecast distributions, and we gauge the
generalizability of our findings to real-world tasks
with an application to an electricity production
problem. Our results reveal critical shortcomings
in the evaluation of multivariate probabilistic
forecasts as commonly performed in the literature.

For this, the literature has primarily focused on developing
proper scoring rules (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007), which
are designed to reach a minimum when the forecast and
the ground-truth distributions match. Among them, the
Negative Log-Likelihood has been shown to be an optimal
discriminator of erroneous distributions (Neyman & Pearson,
1933). However, the use of the likelihood is not always
practical since many models do not allow for its efficient
calculation. Hence, time-series practitioners have turned to
other proper scoring rules, such as the Continuous Ranked
Probability Score (CRPS; Matheson & Winkler 1976) to
evaluate forecasts. While proper in theory, the discriminative
performance of such scoring rules in practical conditions,
where the dimensionality of the problem is large and the
sample size is small in comparison, is poorly understood.
This work aims to study the reliability of proper scoring
rules for the evaluation of multivariate probabilistic forecasts
in realistic finite-sample settings. We quantify reliability
as the statistical power of a rule at discriminating between
data sampled respectively from the ground truth and
an erroneous forecast. We introduce a comprehensive
benchmark to systematically measure the ability of scoring
rules to detect failures in forecasts of practical interest. Our
results emphasize sets of conditions (in terms of problem
dimensionality and Monte Carlo approximation quality)
under which each scoring rule is reliable, dubbed regions
of reliability,1 and, most interestingly, reveal significant
shortcomings such as the general inability of the studied
scoring rules at detecting some basic forecasting errors.

1. Introduction
The forecasting of time-varying quantities is a fundamental
component of decision-making in fields like economics,
operation management, and healthcare (Peterson, 2017;
Heizer et al., 2023). In this context, a proper characterization
of uncertainty is key to reasoning about potential futures and
their respective likelihood. This has motivated the problem
of multivariate probabilistic forecasting, which consists
in estimating the joint distribution of the future values of
quantities of interest (Gneiting & Katzfuss, 2014).

Contributions:
• We propose a methodology, based on power analysis,
to assess the reliability of proper scoring rules in the
evaluation of multivariate probabilistic forecasts (§4);
• We propose an extensive benchmark that reveals regions
of reliability for five common proper scoring rules and
19 types of forecasting errors (§5);
• We show that our findings generalize to three real-world

In this setting, all estimates are not equal. Depending on the
application, certain kinds of errors, e.g., failures to properly
model statistical dependencies between variables, can have
a catastrophic impact on downstream decisions. It is thus
†
ServiceNow Research, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence
to: Étienne Marcotte <etienne.marcotte@servicenow.com>.

1

We note that our regions of reliability are distinct from
reliability diagrams, which are graphical tools for checking forecast
calibration.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

