MultiAdam: Parameter-wise Scale-invariant Optimizer for
Multiscale Training of Physics-informed Neural Networks

Jiachen Yao * 1 2 Chang Su * 1 2 Zhongkai Hao 1 Songming Liu 1 Hang Su 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract

dle PDEs in high dimensions (Zhu et al., 2019). Therefore,
it has attracted an increasing amount of attention to combine
machine learning techniques for solving PDEs. Physicsinformed Neural Network (PINN) (Raissi et al., 2019) is
one of the representative approaches that approximate solutions by training neural networks to minimize a weighted
sum of PDE loss and boundary loss — the former is induced from differential equations while the latter is induced
from boundary and initial conditions. PINN has shown
its effectiveness in various sophisticated cases, which has
been applied in various fields including fluids mechanics
(Raissi et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020), and bio-engineering
(Sahli Costabal et al., 2020; Kissas et al., 2020).

Physics-informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have
recently achieved remarkable progress in solving
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) in various
fields by minimizing a weighted sum of PDE loss
and boundary loss. However, there are several
critical challenges in the training of PINNs, including the lack of theoretical frameworks and
the imbalance between PDE loss and boundary
loss. In this paper, we present an analysis of
second-order non-homogeneous PDEs, which are
classified into three categories and applicable to
various common problems. We also characterize
the connections between the training loss and actual error, guaranteeing convergence under mild
conditions. The theoretical analysis inspires us
to further propose MultiAdam, a scale-invariant
optimizer that leverages gradient momentum to
parameter-wisely balance the loss terms. Extensive experiment results on multiple problems from
different physical domains demonstrate that our
MultiAdam solver can improve the predictive accuracy by 1-2 orders of magnitude compared with
strong baselines.

However, the vanilla PINN still suffers from some challenges during training (Hao et al., 2022). One main challenge is the gap between PINN’s loss function and the actual
performance, which is often characterized by an absolute
error. In practical scenarios, certain loss terms, such as
the PDE loss, might surpass others (e.g., boundary loss) by
several orders of magnitude, consequently dominating the
training process. This scenario can lead to situations where
a reduced training objective—defined as a weighted sum of
losses—does not necessarily yield a better approximation
of the true solution (Peng et al., 2020). Our observations
suggest that a key factor contributing to this challenge lies
in the improper scaling of the PDE’s domain. The scale of
the domain can significantly affect PDE losses, especially
when the PDE is not invariant to scaling—an occurrence
that is quite common (see Theorem 4.1). Specificaly, the
scaling leads to two concrete issues:

1. Introduction
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are important topics
in applied mathematics, with a wide range of applications
in various fields. The traditional approach to solving PDEs
involves utilizing numerical techniques, such as the finite
difference methods (Grossmann et al., 2007) and finite element methods (Bathe, 2006). Nevertheless, numerical
methods may generate unrealistic predictions for specific
scientific problems, and it is hard for these methods to han-

1. Due to the imbalance between PDE loss and boundary
loss, the conventional optimizers like SGD and Adam
might not sufficiently train the PINN model, motivating
the development of more effective solvers.

*
Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute
for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI
Lab, Tsinghua University 2 Zhili College, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

2. Given the observed discrepancy between the PINN’s
loss function and its actual performance, it becomes
crucial to reevaluate the well-posedness of the optimization objective.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To address the first issue, much work has focused on adjusting the relative importance of different loss terms by
1

