Approximation Algorithms for Fair Range Clustering

Sèdjro S. Hotegni * 1 Sepideh Mahabadi * 2 Ali Vakilian * 3

Abstract

the pipeline rather than later.

This paper studies the fair range clustering problem in which the data points are from different
demographic groups and the goal is to pick k
centers with the minimum clustering cost such
that each group is at least minimally represented
in the centers set and no group dominates the
centers set. More precisely, given a set of n
points in a metric space (P, d) where each point
belongs to one of the ℓ different demographics
(i.e., P = P1 ⊎ P2 ⊎ · · · ⊎ Pℓ ) and a set of ℓ intervals [α1 , β1 ], · · · , [αℓ , βℓ ] on desired number
of centers from each group, the goal is to pick a
set of k centers
C with minimum ℓp -clustering
P
cost (i.e., ( v∈P d(v, C)p )1/p ) such that for each
group i ∈ ℓ, |C ∩ Pi | ∈ [αi , βi ]. In particular,
the fair range ℓp -clustering captures fair range kcenter, k-median and k-means as its special cases.
In this work, we provide an efficient constant factor approximation algorithm for the fair range
ℓp -clustering for all values of p ∈ [1, ∞).

Fair clustering was first studied by Chierichetti et al. (2017)
and since then it has been studied with respect to various
notions of fairness (Bera et al., 2019; Jung et al., 2020; Mahabadi & Vakilian, 2020; Ahmadi et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2019; Abbasi et al., 2021; Ghadiri et al., 2021; Brubach et al.,
2020; 2021). Motivated by the application of centroid-based
clustering as a means of data summarization (e.g., (Moens
et al., 1999; Girdhar & Dudek, 2012)) for socioeconomic
data, Kleindessner, Awasthi, and Morgenstern (2019) studied a notion of fair clustering in which the points belong to
disjoint protected groups P1 , · · · , Pℓ , and the goal is to pick
exactly ki centers from each population Pi , s.t. it minimizes
the k-center clustering cost (i.e., maximum
Pdistance of any
point to the selected centers), where k = i∈[ℓ] ki .
To give an example, consider an image search system. In
practice, when a query is made, the user will only check
the first few images output by the system. Those images
(say, the first k ones) act as a summary or representative of
the relevant images to the searched query. Notably, (Kay
et al., 2015) observed that in a few jobs, including CEO,
women are significantly underrepresented in Google image
search results.1 An approach to get around this disparity,
as proposed by Kleindessner et al. (2019), is to force the
solution to contain exactly ki examples (or representative)
from each protected group i, where ki s are input parameters.
Although this strict center selection requirement seems to
be a plausible fix for the unfairness issue, it may incur a
significant loss in the quality of the output solution! See
Figure 1.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the centroid-based clustering problem has
been studied extensively from the fairness point of view.
As in the human-centric applications, the input data usually
comes from different demographics and the solution has
supposedly some (in many cases, long-lasting) effects on
the participants (e.g., college admissions, loan applications,
and criminal justice), it is crucial to take into account the
societal implications of the solution output by large scale
automated processes in use. Specifically, since clustering
is commonly used as a prepossessing step for more complicated ML pipelines, it is both easier and more effective to
handle fairness consideration and bias reduction earlier in

In this paper, we study a relaxed requirement, called fair
range, which only requires the number of selected centers
from each protected group to be in a given interval specified
by a lower bound and an upper bound. As we can easily
tolerate slight deviations from the “expected” presence of
each protected group, fair range is a more natural requirement and has a better alignment with practice, compared
to the strict requirement. On the other hand, the larger
the requirement interval becomes, the better the quality of
the clustering becomes. While fair clustering with strict

*

Equal contribution 1 African Institute for Mathematical
Sciences–Rwanda 2 Microsoft Research–Redmond 3 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Correspondence to: Sepideh
Mahabadi <smahabadi@microsoft.com>, Ali Vakilian <vakilian@ttic.edu>.

1
More recent studies also show that this phenomenon of unfairness in image search results is not fully resolved yet, e.g., (Feng &
Shah, 2022).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

