Neural Prediction Errors enable Analogical Visual Reasoning
in Human Standard Intelligence Tests

Lingxiao Yang 1 Hongzhi You 2 Zonglei Zhen 3 Da-Hui Wang 3
Xiaohong Wan 3 Xiaohua Xie 1 Ru-Yuan Zhang 4

Abstract
Deep neural networks have long been criticized
for lacking the ability to perform analogical visual reasoning. Here, we propose a neural network model to solve Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) — one of the standard intelligence
tests in human psychology. Specifically, we design a reasoning block based on the well-known
concept of prediction error (PE) in neuroscience.
Our reasoning block uses convolution to extract
abstract rules from high-level visual features of
the 8 context images and generates the features
of a predicted answer. PEs are then calculated
between the predicted features and those of the
8 candidate answers, and are then passed to the
next stage. We further integrate our novel reasoning blocks into a residual network and build a
new Predictive Reasoning Network (PredRNet).
Extensive experiments show that our proposed
PredRNet achieves state-of-the-art average performance on several important RPM benchmarks.
PredRNet also shows good generalization abilities in a variety of out-of-distribution scenarios
and other visual reasoning tasks. Most importantly, our PredRNet forms low-dimensional representations of abstract rules and minimizes hierarchical prediction errors during model training, supporting the critical role of PE minimization in visual reasoning. Our work highlights
the potential of using neuroscience theories to
solve abstract visual reasoning problems in artificial intelligence. The code is available at
https://github.com/ZjjConan/AVR-PredRNet.

Context Images

Context Images

Answer Images

Answer Images

(a) From the RAVEN dataset

(b) From the PGM dataset

Figure 1: An illustration of typical RPM questions from (a)
the RAVEN (Zhang et al., 2019a) and (b) the PGM (Barrett
et al., 2018) datasets. In both datasets, eight context images
are provided. The goal of each RPM is to choose the correct
one (highlighted in red) from eight answer images to fill in
the missing one (denoted by ?), making three rows or three
columns with similar patterns. Obviously, a subject should
recognize diverse visual objects, and then discover abstract
relationships among these objects for inference.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016; Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) have shown superior performance
in a variety of tasks, such as text classification (Conneau
et al., 2016), machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Bahdanau et al., 2015), image restoration (Kim et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2017a), object classification and detection
(Deng et al., 2009; Ren et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016), video
understanding (Karpathy et al., 2014; Tran et al., 2015;
Donahue et al., 2015), and visual question answering (Antol
et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2016; Fukui et al., 2016). Despite
their great success in these tasks, DNNs have long been
criticized for falling short of abstract reasoning, which is a
hallmark of human intelligence.

1
Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China 3 Beijing Normal University,
China 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to:
Ru-Yuan Zhang <ruyuanzhang@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

