Surrogate Module Learning:
Reduce the Gradient Error Accumulation in Training Spiking Neural Networks

Shikuang Deng 1 2 Hao Lin 1 Yuhang Li 3 Shi Gu 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Inspired by biological networks, the spike neural network
(SNN) selects the binary spike signal as the information
carrier, giving it the potential for high speed and low energy
consumption (Maass, 1997; Roy et al., 2019). The neuron
in SNN activates and fires, which is emitted only when the
membrane potential exceeds the threshold. Spikes can be
expressed numerically as 0 and 1, where 0 indicates the
neuron is at rest and 1 indicates the neuron is active. The
input of the network between each layer is only 0 or 1, so
the high-precision multiplication operation of the matrix can
degenerate into a high-precision addition operation. When
embedded in the neuromorphic hardware (DeBole et al.,
2019; Davies et al., 2018), this characteristic significantly
increases the computing speed of the SNN and reduces the
network’s energy consumption (Shrestha & Orchard, 2018;
Kim et al., 2019).

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) provide an alternative solution to conventional artificial neural
networks with energy-saving and high-efficiency
characteristics after hardware implantation.
However, due to its non-differentiable activation
function and the temporally delayed accumulation in outputs, the direct training of SNNs is
extraordinarily tough even adopting a surrogate
gradient to mimic the backpropagation. For SNN
training, this non-differentiability causes the
intrinsic gradient error that would be magnified
through layerwise backpropagation, especially
through multiple layers. In this paper, we propose
a novel approach to reducing gradient error
from a new perspective called surrogate module
learning (SML). Surrogate module learning tries
to construct a shortcut path to back-propagate
a more accurate gradient to a certain SNN part
utilizing the surrogate modules. Then, we develop
a new loss function for concurrently training the
network and enhancing the surrogate modules’
surrogate capacity. We demonstrate that when the
outputs of surrogate modules are close to the SNN
output, the fraction of the gradient error drops
significantly. Our method consistently and significantly enhances the performance of SNNs on all
experiment datasets, including CIFAR-10/100,
ImageNet, and ES-ImageNet. For example, for
spiking ResNet-34 architecture on ImageNet,
we increased the SNN accuracy by 3.46%.
Codes are available at https://github.
com/brain-intelligence-lab/
surrogate_module_learning.

Although the inclusion of binary spiking signals gives SNNs
the potential for high speed and low energy consumption,
the discrete nature of the activation function makes training SNNs extremely challenging. In a traditional artificial neural network (ANN), the update gradient of the network weights is calculated by a back-propagation algorithm,
which is feasible for continuous numerical signals. Nevertheless, due to the discrete nature of the spike signal in
SNNs, the back-propagation technique cannot be directly
used to compute the gradient. The surrogate gradient (SG)
technique is a common solution to this problem (Lee et al.,
2016; Wu et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2021). The surrogate
gradient method makes gradient computation feasible by
replacing the non-derivable step function (spike activate
function) with a smooth curve. Although the surrogate
gradient algorithm allows us to flexibly design the network
structure and requires few simulation time steps (Deng et al.,
2021), on deep architectures, the performance of SNNs is
still lower than that of ANNs due to the surrogate gradient
error accumulation. Some recent works have emerged to
design or search for a better surrogate gradient shape to
reduce the gradient error (Li et al., 2021; Herranz-Celotti &
Rouat, 2022; Suetake et al., 2022). These researches have
enhanced the SNN performance, but they still have a gap
between ANN. And under the same network architecture,

1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC 3 Yale University.
Correspondence to: Shi Gu <gus@uestc.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

