Poisoning Generative Replay in Continual Learning to Promote Forgetting

Siteng Kang 1 Zhan Shi 1 Xinhua Zhang 1

Abstract

(2020) enables the adversary to control the output image
by planting a trigger in the input image or noise. Both are
backdoor attacks requiring write access to test data, and
work in batched learning scenarios.

Generative models have grown into the workhorse
of many state-of-the-art machine learning methods. However, their vulnerability under poisoning
attacks has been largely understudied. In this
work, we investigate this issue in the context of
continual learning, where generative replayers
are utilized to tackle catastrophic forgetting. By
developing a novel customization of dirty-label
input-aware backdoors to the online setting, our
attacker manages to stealthily promote forgetting
while retaining high accuracy at the current task
and sustaining strong defenders. Our approach
taps into an intriguing property of generative models, namely that they cannot well capture inputdependent triggers. Experiments on four standard
datasets corroborate the poisoner’s effectiveness.

The increasing penetration of generative models in machine
learning urges the investigation of poisoning attacks in a
broader range of learning paradigms. In this work, we focus
on continual learning, a prominent setting where tasks arrive
in streams and each of them corresponds to a discriminative
learning problem such as classification (Chen & Liu, 2018).
Since the tasks are streamed and cannot be stored, the running classifier often suffers from catastrophic forgetting,
where the performance on older tasks gradually deteriorates
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).
Deep generative replay (DGR) is a natural tool to bring back
the memory of the previous tasks by learning a generative
model to fit the data of these tasks (Shin et al., 2017; Cong
et al., 2020). Despite their effectiveness, new vulnerabilities are also opened up where misleading examples can
be injected to the training data Dt for the current task t,
so that catastrophic forgetting can be promoted when such
poisoned Dt is used for training both the replayer Gt and
the classifier. In this work, we seek practical and stealthy
poisoning attacks on DGR that achieve three objectives:

1. Introduction
The vulnerability of machine learning systems must be scrutinized before they can be deployed to security-critical applications. The common evasion attack assumes that clean
target instances can be manipulated at test time, which can
be unrealistic in many scenarios. In contrast, poisoning attacks only make malicious and imperceptible modifications
to the training set, so that the prediction on test examples
can be mistaken. The threat models may insert poison examples (Chen et al., 2017), flip the training labels (Xiao
et al., 2012; Levine & Feizi, 2021), or modify the training
example inputs (Biggio et al., 2012; Shafahi et al., 2018).

• Oeff (effective): After moving past task t, the classifier
will soon forget what was learned from it (i.e., perform
poorly on clean test examples drawn from it) despite
using a replayer for all the tasks seen so far.
• Oste (stealthy): During task t, the classifier trained from
poisoned data does not suffer degradation of test accuracy
on task t itself. This is important because poor performance on the current task raises immediate suspicion. In
contrast, by promoting forgetting, the harm will manifest
itself only after the victim has moved on to the next task,
by which time it will have become too late because access
to the samples of task t is already lost.

Although poisoning attacks have been extensively studied
under discriminative learning, their potential risk in generative learning has been largely understudied. Ding et al.
(2019) poisons the training examples so that the learned
generator covertly changes some important part of the output image, e.g., turning a red light into green. Salem et al.

• Orob (robust): The poisoned data should be robust to solid
defenses deployed by both the classifier and the replayer.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Chicago. Correspondence to: Siteng Kang and Xinhua Zhang
<{skang98,zhangx}@uic.edu>.

The main difficulty lies in two folds. Firstly, although both
Oeff and Oste are straightforward to fulfill individually, they
are at odds with each other and are hard to fulfill simultaneously. Secondly, since the tasks are streamed, the adversary

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

