Parameter-Level Soft-Masking for Continual Learning

Tatsuya Konishi 1 † Mori Kurokawa 1 Chihiro Ono 1 Zixuan Ke 2 Gyuhak Kim 2 Bing Liu 2

Abstract

This work further investigates these problems in the popular
CL paradigm, task-incremental learning (TIL). In TIL, each
task consists of several classes of objects to be learned.
Once a task is learned, its data is discarded and will not be
available for later use. During testing, the task id is provided
for each test sample so that the corresponding classification
head of the task can be used for prediction.

Existing research on task incremental learning in
continual learning has primarily focused on preventing catastrophic forgetting (CF). Although
several techniques have achieved learning with no
CF, they attain it by letting each task monopolize a
sub-network in a shared network, which seriously
limits knowledge transfer (KT) and causes overconsumption of the network capacity, i.e., as more
tasks are learned, the performance deteriorates.
The goal of this paper is threefold: (1) overcoming
CF, (2) encouraging KT, and (3) tackling the capacity problem. A novel technique (called SPG) is
proposed that soft-masks (partially blocks) parameter updating in training based on the importance
of each parameter to old tasks. Each task still uses
the full network, i.e., no monopoly of any part of
the network by any task, which enables maximum
KT and reduction in capacity usage. To our knowledge, this is the first work that soft-masks a model
at the parameter-level for continual learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of SPG in achieving all three objectives. More
notably, it attains significant transfer of knowledge not only among similar tasks (with shared
knowledge) but also among dissimilar tasks (with
little shared knowledge) while mitigating CF.

Several effective approaches have been proposed for TIL
that can achieve learning with little or no CF. Parameter
isolation is perhaps the most successful one in which the system learns to mask a sub-network for each task in a shared
network. HAT (Serra et al., 2018) and SupSup (Wortsman et al., 2020) are two representative systems. HAT set
binary/hard masks on neurons (not parameters) that are important for each task. In learning a new task, those masks
block the gradient flow through the masked neurons in the
backward pass. Only those free (unmasked) neurons and
their parameters are trainable. Thus, as more tasks are
learned, the number of free neurons left becomes fewer,
making later tasks harder to learn, which results in gradual
performance deterioration (see Section 4.2.1). Further, if a
neuron is masked, all the parameters feeding to it are also
masked, which consumes a great deal of network capacity
(hereafter referred to as the “capacity problem”). As the
sub-networks for old tasks cannot be updated, it has limited
knowledge transfer. CAT (Ke et al., 2020) tries to improve
KT of HAT by detecting task similarities. If the new task is
found similar to some previous tasks, these tasks’ masks are
removed so that the new task training can update the parameters of these tasks for backward pass. However, this is risky
because if a dissimilar task is detected as similar, serious
CF occurs, and if similar tasks are detected as dissimilar, its
knowledge transfer will be limited. SupSup uses a backbone
network (randomly initialized) and finds a sub-network for
each task. The sub-network is represented by a mask, which
is a set of binary gates indicating which parameters in the
network are used. The mask for each task is saved. Since
the network is not changed, SupSup has no CF or capacity
problem, but since each mask is independent of other masks,
SupSup by design has no KT.

1. Introduction
Catastrophic forgetting (CF) and knowledge transfer (KT)
are two key challenges of continual learning (CL), which
learns a sequence of tasks incrementally. CF refers to the
phenomenon where a model loses some of its performance
on previous tasks once it learns a new task. KT means that
tasks may help each other to learn by sharing knowledge.
†

The work was done when this author was visiting Bing
Liu’s group at University of Illinois at Chicago. 1 KDDI Research, Inc., Fujimino, Japan. 2 University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, United States. Correspondence to: Tatsuya Konishi <ttkonishi@kddi.com>.

To tackle these problems, we propose a very different approach, named “Soft-masking of Parameter-level Gradient
flow” (SPG). It is surprisingly effective and contributes in
following ways:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

