Reflected Diffusion Models
Aaron Lou 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract

Diffusion models learn to reverse a stochastic process that
maps data to noise, but, as a result of inherent approximation error of both the SDE discretization and score matching,
they often follow incorrect trajectories. This behavior compounds error, so models can diverge and generate highly
unnatural samples on more complex tasks (see for instance
Figure 3). To mitigate this degeneration, many diffusion
models modify the sampling process by projecting to the
support of the data after each diffusion step (Ho et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2022), a technique known as thresholding. This
incorporates the known constraints of the data distribution,
stabilizing sampling and avoiding divergent behavior. Notably, this oft-overlooked detail underlies many pixel-based
image diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021) (appearing as a [0, 255] clipping function at each diffusion step) and is essential for text-to-image generation
(Saharia et al., 2022). Although thresholding avoids failure, it is theoretically unprincipled because it leads to a
mismatch between the training and generative processes.
Furthermore, this mismatch can introduce artifacts such
as oversaturation (Ho & Salimans, 2022) that necessitate
further modifications (Saharia et al., 2022).

Score-based diffusion models learn to reverse a
stochastic differential equation that maps data to
noise. However, for complex tasks, numerical
error can compound and result in highly unnatural samples. Previous work mitigates this drift
with thresholding, which projects to the natural
data domain (such as pixel space for images) after
each diffusion step, but this leads to a mismatch
between the training and generative processes.
To incorporate data constraints in a principled
manner, we present Reflected Diffusion Models,
which instead reverse a reflected stochastic differential equation evolving on the support of the data.
Our approach learns the perturbed score function
through a generalized score matching loss and extends key components of standard diffusion models including diffusion guidance, likelihood-based
training, and ODE sampling. We also bridge the
theoretical gap with thresholding: such schemes
are just discretizations of reflected SDEs. On standard image benchmarks, our method is competitive with or surpasses the state of the art without
architectural modifications and, for classifier-free
guidance, our approach enables fast exact sampling with ODEs and produces more faithful samples under high guidance weight.

In this work, we present Reflected Diffusion Models, a class
of diffusion models that, by design, respects the known
support of the data distribution. Unlike standard diffusion
models, which perturbs the data density with Brownian
motion, our method evolves the distribution with reflected
Brownian motion that always stays within the boundary. We
then parameterize the reversed diffusion process with the
scores of the perturbed density, which we learn using a new
score matching method on bounded domains. The resulting
generative model is a reflected SDE that automatically incorporates the data constraints without altering the generative
process. We provide an overview of our method in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Originally introduced in Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) and
later augmented in Song & Ermon (2019b); Ho et al. (2020);
Song et al. (2021b), diffusion models have quickly become
one of the most ubiquitous deep generative models, with
applications in many domains including images (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021), natural language (Li et al., 2022), and
molecule generation (Xu et al., 2022). Additionally, their
stability and scabality have enabled the deployment of large
text-to-image systems (Ramesh et al., 2022).

Our proposed methodology has several merits:
Scales to high dimensions. To learn the score function on
a general bounded domain, we introduce constrained denoising score matching (CDSM). Unlike previous methods
(Hyvärinen, 2007), CDSM scales to high dimensions, and
we develop an algorithm for fast computation. Since reflection operations are negligible compared to neural network
computation, our training and inference times are effectively
equivalent to those of standard diffusion models.

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Aaron Lou <aaronlou@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
Code Link: https://github.com/louaaron/Reflected-Diffusion/

1

