Polarity Is All You Need to Learn and Transfer Faster

Qingyang Wang 1 2 Michael A. Powell 3 2 4 Eric W. Bridgeford 5 2 Ali Geisa 3 2 Joshua T. Vogelstein 3 1 5 6 2

Abstract

achievements when prohibitive amounts of data and training
resources are available. Such gaps in learning speed and
data efficiency between NI and AI have baffled and motivated many AI researchers. A subfield of AI is dedicated to
achieving few-shot learning using DNNs (Hoffer & Ailon,
2015; van der Spoel et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell
et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017). Many research teams have
achieved high performance on benchmark datasets (Lazarou
et al., 2022; Bendou et al., 2022). However, the products
of such engineering efforts greatly deviate from the brain.
What are the design principle differences between NIs and
AIs that contribute to such a gap in learning efficiency? In
this paper, we propose two possible design differences under
one theme: weight polarity.

Natural intelligences (NIs) thrive in a dynamic
world – they learn quickly, sometimes with only
a few samples. In contrast, artificial intelligences
(AIs) typically learn with a prohibitive number of
training samples and computational power. What
design principle difference between NI and AI
could contribute to such a discrepancy? Here,
we investigate the role of weight polarity: development processes initialize NIs with advantageous polarity configurations; as NIs grow and
learn, synapse magnitudes update, yet polarities
are largely kept unchanged. We demonstrate with
simulation and image classification tasks that if
weight polarities are adequately set a priori, then
networks learn with less time and data. We also
explicitly illustrate situations in which a priori setting the weight polarities is disadvantageous for
networks. Our work illustrates the value of weight
polarities from the perspective of statistical and
computational efficiency during learning.

NIs are blessed with hundreds of millions of years of optimization through evolution. Through trial and error, the
most survival-advantageous circuit configurations emerge,
refine, and slowly come into the form that can thrive in an
ever-changing world. Such circuit configurations are embedded into genetic code, establishing a blueprint to be carried
out by development. It is hypothesized that such canonical
circuits provide an innate mechanism that facilitates rapid
learning for NIs (Zador, 2019). Unlike transfer learning for
AIs where the entirety of the weights is adopted as a form
of prior knowledge, NIs pay substantial, if not exclusive,
attention to polarity patterns (excluding magnitudes) when
transferring such canonical circuits across generations. On
the one hand, polarity is a more compressed knowledge
carrier than weight, rendering it a genetic-code-saving design choice. On the other hand, is polarity alone enough
to transfer knowledge between networks? NIs suggest yes;
AIs’ answers are yet to be explored.

1. Introduction
Natural intelligences (NIs), including those of animals and
humans, are able to learn and adapt rapidly in real world
environments with limited samples. Artificial intelligences
(AIs), specifically deep neural networks (DNNs), can now
compete with or even surpass humans in certain tasks, e.g.,
the game GO (Silver et al., 2017), object recognition (Russakovsky et al., 2015), protein folding analysis (Jumper
et al., 2021), etc. However, a DNN is only capable of such

Furthermore, post-development neuronal connections in the
brain rarely see polarity switch (Spitzer, 2017). After development, NIs learn and adapt through synaptic plasticity – a
connection between a pair of neurons can change its strength
but rarely its excitatory or inhibitory nature; on the contrary,
a connection (weight) between a pair of units in a DNN can
freely change its sign (polarity). For the rare times polarity
switching is observed in the brain, they never appeared in
sensory and motor cortices (Spitzer, 2017) where visual,
auditory and motor processing take place. It seems a rather
rigid design choice to fix a network’s connection polarity.
Is it a mere outcome of an implementation-level constraint?

1

Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD US 2 Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD US 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD US 4 Current location:
United States Military Academy, Department of Mathematical Sciences, West Point NY US 5 Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD US 6 Institute for Computational
Medicine, Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD US. Correspondence to: Qingyang
Wang <qwang88@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

