Revisiting Discriminative vs. Generative Classifiers: Theory and Implications

Chenyu Zheng 1 Guoqiang Wu 2 Fan Bao 3 Yue Cao 4 Chongxuan Li 1 Jun Zhu 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep representation learning has achieved great success
in many fields such as computer vision (Ren et al., 2015;
He et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020b; Chen & He, 2021; Grill et al., 2020; He et al.,
2022), natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020) and cross-modal
learning (Radford et al., 2021) over the past few years. The
common paradigm behind them is to (pre-)train a largescale model on an enormous amount of labeled or unlabeled
data and transfer it to downstream tasks. During the transfer, linear evaluation (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020b; Grill et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021)
freezes all parameters in the pre-trained model and learns
a linear classifier separately. Theoretically, it is validated
by the (approximate) linear separability of the representations extracted by pre-trained models (Saunshi et al., 2019;
Lee et al., 2021; Tosh et al., 2021; HaoChen et al., 2021).
Practically, linear evaluation is an efficient and attractive
alternative to fine-tuning, considering the extremely large
and continually growing size of modern pre-trained models.

A large-scale deep model pre-trained on massive
labeled or unlabeled data transfers well to downstream tasks. Linear evaluation freezes parameters in the pre-trained model and trains a linear
classifier separately, which is efficient and attractive for transfer. However, little work has investigated the classifier in linear evaluation except
for the default logistic regression. Inspired by
the statistical efficiency of naïve Bayes, the paper
revisits the classical topic on discriminative vs.
generative classifiers (Ng & Jordan, 2001). Theoretically, the paper considers the surrogate loss instead of the zero-one loss in analyses and generalizes the classical results from binary cases to multiclass ones. We show that, under mild assumptions, multiclass naïve Bayes requires O(log n)
samples to approach its asymptotic error while
the corresponding multiclass logistic regression
requires O(n) samples, where n is the feature
dimension. To establish it, we present a multiclass H-consistency bound framework and an explicit bound for logistic loss, which are of independent interests. Simulation results on a mixture
of Gaussian validate our theoretical findings. Experiments on various pre-trained deep vision models show that naïve Bayes consistently converges
faster as the number of data increases. Besides,
naïve Bayes shows promise in few-shot cases and
we observe the “two regimes” phenomenon in pretrained supervised models. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ML-GSAI/Revisiting-Dis-vsGen-Classifiers.

Although new algorithms and models for deep pre-training
emerge in endlessly, little work has investigated the classifier except for the default logistic regression. Directly
inspired by the classical work (Efron, 1975; Ng & Jordan,
2001) (detailed in Section 2) on the statistical efficiency of
generative linear classifiers (e.g. naïve Bayes), we revisit
the discriminative vs. generative linear classifiers in the
context of deep representation learning.
In Section 3, we improve the classical theory (Ng & Jordan, 2001) in two aspects for subsequent analysis in deep
representation learning. First, we characterize asymptotic
behaviors of both multiclass naïve Bayes and logistic regression, generalizing the results in binary classification (Ng &
Jordan, 2001). Second, in logistic regression, we consider
the practically used surrogate loss in our analysis instead
of directly optimizing the zero-one loss as assumed in (Ng
& Jordan, 2001). To establish it, we introduce a general
multiclass H-consistency bound framework upon recent
advances (Awasthi et al., 2022a) and a nontrivial explicit
bound for multiclass logistic regression, which are of independent interests. We prove that for a fixed number of
classes, the number of samples required to approach the

1
Gaoling School of AI, Renmin University of China; Beijing
Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods,
Beijing, China 2 School of Software, Shandong University 3 Dept.
of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Huawei Joint
Center for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to:
Chongxuan Li <chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

