Does a Neural Network Really Encode Symbolic Concepts?

Mingjie Li 1 Quanshi Zhang 1

Abstract

pose an exact formulation for the concepts encoded by
a DNN. Specifically, these studies discovered that a welltrained DNN usually encoded various interactions between
different input variables, and the inference score on a specific input sample could be explained by numerical effects
of different interactions. Thus, they claimed that each interaction pattern was a symbolic concept encoded by the
DNN.

Recently, a series of studies have tried to extract
interactions between input variables modeled
by a DNN and define such interactions as
concepts encoded by the DNN. However, strictly
speaking, there still lacks a solid guarantee
whether such interactions indeed represent
meaningful concepts. Therefore, in this paper,
we examine the trustworthiness of interaction
concepts from four perspectives. Extensive
empirical studies have verified that a well-trained
DNN usually encodes sparse, transferable, and
discriminative concepts, which is partially aligned
with human intuition. The code is released at
https://github.com/sjtu-xai-lab/
interaction-concept.

Specifically, let us consider a DNN given a sample with n
input variables N = {1, 2, ..., n} e.g., given a sentence with
five words “he is a green hand.” The DNN usually does
not use each individual input variable for inference independently. Instead, the DNN lets different input variables
interact with each other to construct concepts for inference.
For example, a DNN may memorize the interaction between
words in S = {green, hand} with a specific numerical contribution I(S) to push the DNN’s inference towards the
meaning of a “beginner.” Such a combination of words is
termed an interaction concept. Each interaction concept
S ⊆ N represents the AND relationship between input variables in S . Only the co-appearance of input variables in
S can make an interaction effect I(S) on the network output. In contrast, masking any word in {green, hand} removes
the interaction effect I(S). In this way, Ren et al. (2021a)
proved that the inference score y of a trained DNN on each
sample can be written as the sum of effects of all potential
P
symbolic concepts S ⊆ N , i.e. y = S⊆N I(S).

1. Introduction
Understanding the black-box representation of deep neural
networks (DNNs) has received increasing attention in recent
years. Unlike graphical models with interpretable internal
logic, the layerwise feature processing in DNNs makes it
naturally difficult to explain DNNs from the perspective
of symbolic concepts. Instead, previous studies interpreted
DNNs from other perspectives, such as illustrating the visual
appearance that maximizes the inference score (Simonyan
et al., 2013; Yosinski et al., 2015), and estimating attribution/importance/saliency of input variables (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Lundberg & Lee, 2017a).
Zhou et al. (2015); Bau et al. (2017); Kim et al. (2018) visualized the potential correspondence between convolutional
filters in a DNN and visual concepts in an empirical manner.

However, the claim that “a DNN encodes symbolic concepts” is too counter-intuitive. Ren et al. (2021a) just
P
formulated I(S) that satisfied y = S⊆N I(S). Current
studies have not provided sufficient support for the claim
that a DNN really learns symbolic concepts. In fact, we
should not ignore another potential situation that the defined effect I(S) is just a mathematical transformation that
ensures the decomposition of network output into concepts
P
y = S⊆N I(S), rather than faithfully representing a meaningful and transferable concept learned by a DNN.

Unlike previous studies, a series of studies (Ren et al.,
2021a; 2023a; Deng et al., 2022a) tried to define and pro*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Quanshi Zhang. Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding
author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China. <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Therefore, in this paper, we aim to give a quantitative verification of the concept-emerging phenomenon, i.e., whether a
well-trained DNN summarizes transferable symbolic knowledge from chaotic raw data, like what human brain does. Or
the defined effect I(S) is just a mathematical game without
clear meanings. To this end, we believe that if a well-trained

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

