A Robust Optimisation Perspective on
Counterexample-Guided Repair of Neural Networks
David Boetius 1 Stefan Leue 1 Tobias Sutter 1

Abstract

environmental disaster, we require mathematical guarantees
on the correct functioning of the neural networks involved.
Formal methods, including verification and repair, allow
obtaining such guarantees (Pulina & Tacchella, 2010). As
the inner workings of neural networks are opaque to human
engineers, automated repair is a vital component for creating
safe neural networks.

Counterexample-guided repair aims at creating neural networks with mathematical safety
guarantees, facilitating the application of neural networks in safety-critical domains. However, whether counterexample-guided repair is
guaranteed to terminate remains an open question. We approach this question by showing that
counterexample-guided repair can be viewed as a
robust optimisation algorithm. While termination
guarantees for neural network repair itself remain
beyond our reach, we prove termination for more
restrained machine learning models and disprove
termination in a general setting. We empirically
study the practical implications of our theoretical
results, demonstrating the suitability of common
verifiers and falsifiers for repair despite a disadvantageous theoretical result. Additionally, we
use our theoretical insights to devise a novel algorithm for repairing linear regression models based
on quadratic programming, surpassing existing
approaches.

Alternating search for violations and removal of violations
is a popular approach for repairing neural networks (Pulina
& Tacchella, 2010; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Guidotti et al.,
2019a; Dong et al., 2021; Goldberger et al., 2020; Sivaraman
et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2021; Bauer-Marquart et al., 2022).
We study this approach under the name counterexampleguided repair. Counterexample-guided repair uses inputs
for which a neural network violates the specification (counterexamples) to iteratively refine the network until the network satisfies the specification. While empirical results
demonstrate the ability of counterexample-guided repair to
successfully repair neural networks (Bauer-Marquart et al.,
2022), a theoretical analysis of counterexample-guided repair is lacking.
In this paper, we study counterexample-guided repair
from the perspective of robust optimisation. Viewing
counterexample-guided repair as an algorithm for solving
robust optimisation problems allows us to encircle neural
network repair from two sides. On the one hand side, we are
able to show termination and optimality for counterexampleguided repair of linear regression models and linear classifiers, as well as single ReLU neurons. Coming from the
other side, we disprove termination for repairing ReLU networks to satisfy a specification with an unbounded input set.
Additionally, we disprove termination of counterexampleguided repair when using generic counterexamples without
further qualifications, such as being most-violating. While
we could not address termination for the precise robust program of neural network repair with specifications having
bounded input sets, such as L∞ adversarial robustness or
the ACAS Xu safety properties (Katz et al., 2017), our robust optimisation framework provides, for the first time to
the best of our knowledge, fundamental insights into the
theoretical properties of counterexample-guided repair.

1. Introduction
The success of artificial neural networks in such diverse
domains as image recognition (LeCun et al., 1998), natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020), predicting
protein folding (Senior et al., 2020), and designing novel
algorithms (Fawzi et al., 2022) sparks interest in applying
them to more demanding tasks, including applications in
safety-critical domains. Neural networks are proposed to
be used for medical diagnosis (Amato et al., 2013), autonomous aircraft control (Jorgensen, 1997; Julian et al.,
2018), and self-driving cars (Bojarski et al., 2016). Since a
malfunctioning of such systems can threaten lives or cause
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Konstanz, Konstanz, Baden-Württemberg, Germany. Correspondence to: David Boetius <david.boetius@uni-konstanz.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our analysis establishes a theoretical limitation of repair
1

