A Large-Scale Study of Probabilistic Calibration
in Neural Network Regression
Victor Dheur 1 Souhaib Ben Taieb 1

Abstract

tic calibration is an important property that states that all
quantiles must be calibrated, i.e., the frequency of realizations below these quantiles must match the corresponding
quantile level. Additionally, predictive distributions should
be sufficiently sharp (i.e., concentrated around the realizations) and leverage the information in the inputs.

Accurate probabilistic predictions are essential
for optimal decision making. While neural network miscalibration has been studied primarily
in classification, we investigate this in the lessexplored domain of regression. We conduct the
largest empirical study to date to assess the probabilistic calibration of neural networks. We also
analyze the performance of recalibration, conformal, and regularization methods to enhance probabilistic calibration. Additionally, we introduce
novel differentiable recalibration and regularization methods, uncovering new insights into their
effectiveness. Our findings reveal that regularization methods offer a favorable tradeoff between
calibration and sharpness. Post-hoc methods exhibit superior probabilistic calibration, which we
attribute to the finite-sample coverage guarantee
of conformal prediction. Furthermore, we demonstrate that quantile recalibration can be considered
as a specific case of conformal prediction. Our
study is fully reproducible and implemented in a
common code base for fair comparisons.

In the classification setting, Guo et al. (2017) found that
common neural architectures trained on image and text data
were miscalibrated, sparking increased interest in neural
network calibration. In a follow-up study, Minderer et al.
(2021) showed that more recent neural architectures demonstrate improved calibration. However, there has been less
research on calibration for neural probabilistic regression
models compared to classification. Therefore, it remains
uncertain whether the same results apply to the regression
setting. This paper addresses this gap by conducting a comprehensive study on probabilistic calibration for regression
using tabular data. We explore various calibration methods, including quantile recalibration (Kuleshov, Fenner, et
al., 2018) and conformalized quantile regression (Romano,
Patterson, et al., 2019). We also consider regularization
methods, which have been shown to perform well in the
classification setting (Karandikar et al., 2021; Popordanoska
et al., 2022; Yoon et al., 2023).
We make the following main contributions:

1. Introduction
Neural network predictions affect critical decisions in many
applications, including medical diagnostics and autonomous
driving (Gulshan et al., 2016; Guizilini et al., 2020). However, effective decision making often requires accurate probabilistic predictions (Gawlikowski et al., 2021; Abdar et
al., 2021). For example, consider a probabilistic regression
model that produces 90% prediction intervals. An important
property would be that 90% of these prediction intervals
contain the realizations.

1. We conduct the largest empirical study to date on probabilistic calibration of neural regression models using
57 tabular datasets (Sections 4 and 6). We consider
multiple state-of-the-art calibration methods (Section
5), including post-hoc recalibration, conformal prediction, and regularization methods, with various scoring
rules and predictive models.
2. Building on quantile recalibration, we propose a new
differentiable calibration map using kernel density
estimation, which provides improved negative loglikelihood compared to baselines. We also introduce
two new regularization objectives based on the probabilistic calibration error (Section 5).

For models that output a predictive distribution, probabilis1

Department of Computer Science, University of Mons,
Mons, Belgium. Correspondence to: Victor Dheur <victor.dheur@umons.ac.be>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

3. We show that quantile recalibration is a special case
of conformal prediction, providing an explanation for
1

