Fast Excess Risk Rates via Offset Rademacher Complexity

Chenguang Duan 1 2 3 Yuling Jiao 1 2 3 Lican Kang 1 4 Xiliang Lu 1 2 3 Jerry Zhijian Yang 1 2 3

Abstract

where R(f ) := Eℓ(Y, f (X)) refers to the population risk
of f ∈ F, and J ⊇ F is a reference function class which
may be different from the admissible set F. We call the
learning model well-specified when J = F, otherwise it
is called misspecified. Obviously, it incurs an additional
approximation error denoted by Eapp = inf f ∈F R(f ) −
inf f ∈J R(f ) in misspecified settings.

Based on the offset Rademacher complexity, this
work outlines a systematical framework for deriving sharp excess risk bounds in statistical learning without Bernstein condition. In addition to
recovering fast rates in a unified way for some
parametric and nonparametric supervised learning models with minimum identifiability assumptions, we also obtain new and improved results
for LAD (sparse) linear regression and deep logistic regression with deep ReLU neural networks,
respectively.

Deriving the convergence rate of (2) i.e., providing a generalization analysis for the ERM fˆn in (1) stands a central
place in machine learning and statistics since it quantifies
whether the ERM learning procedure obtained from the
training data generalize well on unseen data. With tools
of symmetrization and Lipschitz contraction, the classical
method for bounding (2) in the well-specified setting is
transforming into bounding the global Rademacher average,
denoted as
n
i
h
1X
τi f (Xi ) ,
(3)
E sup
f ∈F n i=1

1. Introduction
Let (X, Y ) ∈ X × Y denote the predictor and response random variables pair distributed from an unknown probability
distribution µ, where X ⊆ Rd and Y ⊆ R. In statistics
learning problems, we usually observe an independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) sample D := {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1
drawn from µ. With this sample in mind, we can establish
a statistical procedure, a measurable function mapping X
to Y. Specifically, let F be a class of measurable functions
and introduce a loss function ℓ(·, ·) : Y × R → [0, ∞), then
we denote the empirical risk minimizer (ERM) as
n
1X
ℓ(Yi , f (Xi )).
fˆn ∈ arg min Rn (f ) :=
n i=1
f ∈F

where {τi }ni=1 are i.i.d. Rademacher random variables, that
is, P (τi = 1) = P (τi = −1) = 1/2. Thereafter, global
Rademacher average (3) can be bounded in terms of the
complexity of function class F, say Complex(F), such as
covering number or VC-dimension, see Van Der Vaart &
Wellner (1996); Van de Geer & van de Geer (2000); Van der
Vaart (2000); Giné & Nickl (2021) for detailed analysis
from the viewpoint of the empirical process. But, global
Rademacher average (3) may
q lead to a suboptimal error

(1)

)
bound taking the order of O( Complex(F
). Subsequently,
n
Bartlett et al. (2005); Koltchinskii (2006) proposed local
Rademacher average
"
#
n
1X
E
sup
τi f (Xi ) ,
(4)
f ∈F :E[f (X)2 ]≤r n i=1

To characterize the finite-sample performance of ERM fˆn
in (1), we can consider the excess risk, denoted by
R(fˆn ) − inf R(f )
f ∈J

(2)

where r > 0. Obviously, local Rademacher average (4)
utilizes the local structure of function class F, and it can
)
reach the sharp error bound with the order of O( Complex(F
)
n
in some scenarios. However, this improvement needs the
so-called Bernstein condition which reads for each f ∈ F,

1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, 430072, P.R. China. 2 Hubei National Center for Applied Mathematics, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P.R. China.
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Computational Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, P.R. China. 4 Center for Quantitative
Medicine, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore. Correspondence to: Jerry Zhijian Yang <zjyang.math@whu.edu.cn>.

E[|f (X) − f ∗ (X)|2 ] ≤ BE[ℓ(Y, f (X)) − ℓ(Y, f ∗ (X))],
for some B > 0, where f ∗ minimizes in F the functional
f 7→ E[ℓ(Y, f (X))]. In this case, the application of local Rademacher complexity is restricted to some strongly

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

