PAC-Bayesian Generalization Bounds for Adversarial Generative Models

Sokhna Diarra Mbacke 1 Florence Clerc 2 Pascal Germain 1

Abstract

evaluation metrics (Theis et al., 2016; Borji, 2019), and it
can be quite challenging to detect when the generator only
produces slight variations of the training samples. Moreover,
having generalization bounds not only contributes to the theoretical understanding of GANs themselves, but also to the
understanding of the structure of real-life datasets, if those
can be provably approximated by GAN-generated data. In
addition, given that GANs are used for data-augmentation
in fields such as medical image classification (see e.g. FridAdar et al., 2018), theoretical guarantees can substantiate
the soundness of such applications.

We extend PAC-Bayesian theory to generative
models and develop generalization bounds for
models based on the Wasserstein distance and
the total variation distance. Our first result on
the Wasserstein distance assumes the instance
space is bounded, while our second result takes
advantage of dimensionality reduction. Our results naturally apply to Wasserstein GANs and
Energy-Based GANs, and our bounds provide
new training objectives for these two. Although
our work is mainly theoretical, we perform numerical experiments showing non-vacuous generalization bounds for Wasserstein GANs on synthetic
datasets.

1.1. Notations and Preliminaries.
The set of K-Lipschitz functions defined on a space X is
denoted LipK and the set of probability measures on X is
denoted M1+ (X ). Integral Probability Metrics (IPM, see
Müller, 1997) are a class of pseudometrics1 defined on the
space of probability measures. Given P, Q ∈ M1+ (X ) and
a space F of real-valued functions defined on X , the IPM
induced by F is defined as
Z
Z
dF (P, Q) = sup
f dP − f dQ .
(1)

1. Introduction
Deep Generative models have become a central research
area in machine learning. Two of the most popular families
of deep generative models are Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). GANs are known for producing impressive
results in image generation (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al.,
2019), generating fake images indistinguishable from real
ones. They also have been applied to video (Acharya et al.,
2018), text (de Rosa & Papa, 2021) and protein generation
(Repecka et al., 2021).

f ∈F

Examples of IPMs include the total variation distance dT V ,
corresponding to the case F = {f : X → R : −1 ≤ f ≤ 1}
and the Wasserstein distance W1 , corresponding to
F = Lip1 .
Generative Adversarial Networks. GANs have two
main components: the generator g ∈ G and the critic f ∈ F,
where both G and F are parameterized by neural networks.
Given a n-sized training set S = {x1 , . . . , xn } iid sampled
from an unknown distribution P ∗ on a space X , the generator is trained to produce samples that “look like” they came
from P ∗ and the critic is trained to tell apart the real samples
from the fake ones. The original GAN of Goodfellow et al.
(2014) has been shown to minimize the Jensen-Shannon
divergence (JS) between the true distribution P ∗ and the
generator’s distribution, denoted P g .

Motivation. In this work, we study the generalization
properties of GANs using PAC-Bayesian theory. Considering the prevalence of GANs in machine learning, the question of generalization is important for numerous reasons.
First, quantitatively measuring the discrepancy between the
generator’s distribution and the true distribution is a difficult
problem. Indeed, there are known issues with the current
1
Université Laval 2 McGill University. Correspondence to:
Sokhna Diarra Mbacke <sokhna-diarra.mbacke.1@ulaval.ca>,
Florence Clerc <florence.clerc@mail.mcgill.ca>, Pascal Germain
<pascal.germain@ift.ulaval.ca>.

The original GAN suffers from many problems such as
training instability and mode collapse (Salimans et al., 2016).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
For the sake of readability, we will call also call pseudometrics
distances in this work.

1

