An SDE for Modeling SAM: Theory and Insights

Enea Monzio Compagnoni 1 Luca Biggio 2 Antonio Orvieto 2 Frank Norbert Proske 3 Hans Kersting 4
Aurelien Lucchi 1
notation, x ∈ Rd is a vector of trainable parameters and N
is the size of the dataset.

Abstract
We study the SAM (Sharpness-Aware Minimization) optimizer which has recently attracted a lot
of interest due to its increased performance over
more classical variants of stochastic gradient descent. Our main contribution is the derivation of
continuous-time models (in the form of SDEs)
for SAM and two of its variants, both for the fullbatch and mini-batch settings. We demonstrate
that these SDEs are rigorous approximations of
the real discrete-time algorithms (in a weak sense,
scaling linearly with the learning rate). Using
these models, we then offer an explanation of
why SAM prefers flat minima over sharp ones –
by showing that it minimizes an implicitly regularized loss with a Hessian-dependent noise structure. Finally, we prove that SAM is attracted to
saddle points under some realistic conditions. Our
theoretical results are supported by detailed experiments.

Solving Eq. (1) is typically achieved via Gradient Descent
(GD) methods that, starting from a given estimate x0 , iteratively update an estimate xk as follows,
xk+1 = xk − η∇f (xk ),

where η > 0 is the learning rate. Since ∇f (x) requires
computing the average of the N gradients ∇fi (x) (which is
computationally expensive for large datasets where N ≫ 1),
it is common to instead replace ∇f (xk ) with a gradient
estimated on a subset γk of size B ≥ 1 of the dataset which
is called a mini-batch. The resulting algorithm is known as
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) whose update is
xk+1 = xk − η∇fγk (xk ),

(3)

where {γk } are modelled here as i.i.d. random variables
uniformly distributed and taking value in {1, · · · , N }.
Recently, Foret et al. (2021) proposed a stochastic optimizer
known as Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), which
yields significant performance gains in various fields such
as computer vision and natural language processing (Bahri
et al., 2022; Foret et al., 2021). The general idea behind
SAM is to seek parameters in low-loss regions that have
a flatter curvature, which has been shown to improve the
generalization of the model (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Keskar et al., 2017; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Jiang
et al., 2019). For a radius ρ > 0, the iteration of SAM is


∇fγk (xk )
xk+1 = xk − η∇fγk xk + ρ
. (4)
∥∇fγk (xk )∥

1. Introduction
Optimization plays a fundamental role in the performance
of machine learning models. The core problem it addresses
is the minimization of the following optimization problem:
#
N
1 X
fi (x) ,
min f (x) :=
N i=1
x∈Rd

(2)

"

(1)

where f, fi : Rd → R for i = 1, . . . , N . In machine
learning, f is an empirical risk (or loss) function where
fi are the contributions due to the i-th data point. In this

Numerous works have studied SAM and proposed variants
such as ESAM (Du et al., 2022), ASAM (Kwon et al., 2021),
GSAM (Zhuang et al., 2022), as well as Random SAM and
Variational SAM (Ujváry et al., 2022). Since SAM is hard to
treat theoretically, (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2022)
introduced USAM which is more easily analyzable as it
drops the gradient normalization in Eq. (4), thus yielding
the following update:

1

Department of Mathematics & Computer Science, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 3 Department
of Mathematics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 4 Inria,
Ecole Normale Supérieure PSL Research University, Paris,
France.
Correspondence to: Enea Monzio Compagnoni
<enea.monziocompagnoni@unibas.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

xk+1 = xk − η∇fγk (xk + ρ∇fγk (xk )) .
1

(5)

