Taxonomy-Structured Domain Adaptation

Tianyi Liu * 1 Zihao Xu * 1 Hao He 2 Guang-Yuan Hao 3 Guang-He Lee Hao Wang 1

Abstract

A series of work has attempted to accomplish transfer learning via domain adaptation (Pan & Yang, 2009; Pan et al.,
2010; Long et al., 2018; Saito et al., 2018; Sankaranarayanan
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2019; Dai et al., 2019; Nguyen-Meidine et al., 2021), i.e.,
learning representations whose distribution is well aligned
across different domains. This is typically done through
learning against an adversary who tries to distinguish different domains. While the approach is widely studied both
theoretically and empirically (Redko et al., 2020; Ben-David
et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Zhao et al.,
2019), the representation of domains is almost entirely limited to simple categories. This is problematic since categorical variables do not admit any meaningful measurements
of similarity or distance. Indeed, an ideal transfer learning
approach should be able to control the transferability depending on the similarity across domains. For instance, if
we treat dog breeds as domains, an ideal video segmentation
system for bassets should behave more similarly for beagles
than for pomeranians. While existing adversarial approach
mitigates the shifts among domains, the solution can still
be inadequate since it ignores the potential structure among
domains.

Domain adaptation aims to mitigate distribution
shifts among different domains. However, traditional formulations are mostly limited to categorical domains, greatly simplifying nuanced
domain relationships in the real world. In this
work, we tackle a generalization with taxonomystructured domains, which formalizes domains
with nested, hierarchical similarity structures such
as animal species and product catalogs. We build
on the classic adversarial framework and introduce a novel taxonomist, which competes with
the adversarial discriminator to preserve the taxonomy information. The equilibrium recovers
the classic adversarial domain adaptation’s solution if given a non-informative domain taxonomy
(e.g., a flat taxonomy where all leaf nodes connect to the root node) while yielding non-trivial
results with other taxonomies. Empirically, our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
both synthetic and real-world datasets with successful adaptation. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Wang-ML-Lab/TSDA.

To this end, we extend domain adaptation to taxonomystructured domains (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 for some example
taxonomies). Taxonomies abound in our culture for categorizing items, ranging from biological studies to library classification systems. Mathematically, “taxonomy” is a nested
hierarchical representation (Rangapuram et al., 2023). Each
node in the taxonomy specifies a level of invariance that
holds for the domains within the node, which can be further
broken down to a lower level of invariance in its child nodes.
Finally, the lowest level of invariance is simply a single domain. We emphasize that a taxonomy of domains is different
from a tree of domains, as a non-leaf node in a taxonomy
typically involves multiple domains. The specification of
invariance among domains thus becomes nested, which can
be naturally translated to the induced similarities. Indeed,
the similarity between two domains can be easily gauged
through their common ancestors, which are also nested.

1. Introduction
Learning generalizable models is a central goal in machine
learning. The majority of the literature has been devoted to
the standard i.i.d. setting where training data and testing data
are assumed to have the same distribution. However, many
real world problems inherently exhibit distributional shifts.
For example, to make commercial impacts, a company must
be able to reach brand-new groups of users, whose data are
not likely to be the same as the data used to fit production
models. As a rapidly emerging sub-field, transfer learning
aims to tackle this problem (Zhuang et al., 2020).
*

Equal contribution 1 Rutgers University 2 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Tianyi Liu <tl579@scarletmail.rutgers.edu>,
Zihao
Xu
<zihao.xu@rutgers.edu>,
Hao
Wang
<hw488@cs.rutgers.edu>.

In this work, we propose Taxonomy-Structured Domain
Adaptation (TSDA), a plug-in extension of adversarial domain adaption by introducing a novel taxonomist, who
guides the representation to exhibit the given domain tax-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

