Learning GFlowNets From Partial Episodes
For Improved Convergence And Stability

Kanika Madan 1 2 Jarrid Rector-Brooks * 1 2 Maksym Korablyov * 1 2 Emmanuel Bengio 3 Moksh Jain 1 2
Andrei Nica 1 4 Tom Bosc 1 2 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 5 Nikolay Malkin 1 2

Abstract

metric policy that can generalize to states not seen during
training makes them a competitive alternative to methods
based on local exploration in various probabilistic modeling
tasks (Bengio et al., 2021a; Malkin et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022; Jain et al., 2022; Deleu et al., 2022).

Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) are a family of algorithms for training a sequential sampler
of discrete objects under an unnormalized target
density and have been successfully used for various probabilistic modeling tasks. Existing training objectives for GFlowNets are either local to
states or transitions, or propagate a reward signal
over an entire sampling trajectory. We argue that
these alternatives represent opposite ends of a gradient bias-variance tradeoff and propose a way to
exploit this tradeoff to mitigate its harmful effects.
Inspired by the TD(𝜆) algorithm in reinforcement
learning, we introduce subtrajectory balance or
SubTB(𝜆), a GFlowNet training objective that can
learn from partial action subsequences of varying
lengths. We show that SubTB(𝜆) accelerates sampler convergence in previously studied and new
environments and enables training GFlowNets in
environments with longer action sequences and
sparser reward landscapes than what was possible
before. We also perform a comparative analysis
of stochastic gradient dynamics, shedding light on
the bias-variance tradeoff in GFlowNet training
and the advantages of subtrajectory balance.

GFlowNets solve the variational inference problem of approximating a target distribution over X with the distribution
induced by the sampling policy, and they are trained by algorithms reminiscent of reinforcement learning (although
GFlowNets model the diversity present in the reward distribution, rather than maximizing reward by seeking its mode).
In most past works (Bengio et al., 2021a; Malkin et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022), GFlowNets are
trained by exploratory sampling from the policy and receive
their training signal from the reward of the sampled object.
The flow matching (FM) and detailed balance (DB) learning
objectives for GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a;b) resemble
temporal difference learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
A third objective, trajectory balance (TB), was proposed in
Malkin et al. (2022) to address the problem of slow temporal
credit assignment with the FM and DB objectives. The TB
objective propagates learning signals over entire episodes,
while the temporal difference-like objectives make updates
local to states or actions. It has been hypothesized by Malkin
et al. (2022) that the improved credit assignment with TB
comes at the cost of higher gradient variance, analogous
to the bias-variance tradeoff seen in temporal difference
learning (TD(𝑛) or TD(𝜆)) with different eligibility trace
schemes (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Kearns & Singh, 2000; van
Hasselt et al., 2018; Bengio et al., 2020). This hypothesis
is one of the starting points for the present paper.

1. Introduction
Generative flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021a)
are generative models that construct objects lying in a target
space X by taking sequences of actions sampled from a
learned policy. GFlowNets are trained so as to make the
probability of sampling an object 𝑥 ∈ X proportional to a
given nonnegative reward 𝑅(𝑥). GFlowNets’ use of a para-

We propose a new learning objective for GFlowNets, called
subtrajectory balance (SubTB, or SubTB(𝜆) when its hyperparameter 𝜆 is specified). Building upon results of Bengio
et al. (2021b); Malkin et al. (2022), we show how SubTB(𝜆)
allows the flexibility of learning from partial experiences
of any length. Experiments on two synthetic and four realworld domains support three empirical claims:

* Equal contribution 1 Mila – Québec AI Institute 2 Université

de Montréal 3 Recursion 4 Politehnica University of Bucharest
5 CIFAR Fellow.
Correspondence to:
Kanika Madan
<madankanika.s@gmail.com>.

(1) SubTB(𝜆) improves convergence of GFlowNets in previously studied environments: models trained with

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

