Multi-Agent Best Arm Identification with Private Communications

Alexandre Rio 1 Merwan Barlier 1 Igor Colin 1 Marta Soare 2

Abstract

data streams. Clinical trials involve many participants to
select the most appropriate drug for the majority of the population. Antennas are generally distributed over networks
spanning a specific region. Moreover, in many situations,
data is distributed by nature, and cannot be consolidated
and processed on a single server. It is therefore interesting
for the companies to model such problems as multi-agent
systems and try to exploit the data collected by each agent
(i.e., locally) to learn the optimal decision at the system
level (i.e., globally). We therefore refer to this problem as
multi-agent best arm identification. Collaboration among
agents is made effective as each agent broadcasts messages,
reflecting the feedback they receive from the system, to a
central coordinator involved in the decision process.

We address multi-agent best arm identification
with privacy guarantees. In this setting, agents
collaborate by communicating to find the optimal arm. To avoid leaking sensitive data through
messages, we consider two notions of privacy
withholding different kinds of information: differential privacy and (ϵ, η)-privacy. For each privacy definition, we propose an algorithm based
on a two-level successive elimination scheme.
We provide theoretical guarantees for the privacy
level, accuracy and sample complexity of our algorithms. Experiments on various settings support
our theoretical findings.

Large amounts of data can be handled during such learning processes, and some of them are potentially sensitive
(e.g., personal data or highly valued industrial information).
Hence, it is critical to design multi-agent BAI methods that
ensure the privacy of the data identified as sensitive. In many
applications, one may want to protect the rewards used as
inputs of the learning algorithm, especially since they reflect the preferences of the agents. For instance, confidential
medical data may be at risk during a drug selection study.
In this situation, the well-known differential privacy (DP)
(Dwork, 2006) framework ensures good guarantees against
privacy leakage. Some other cases may require protecting
the algorithm’s output, that is the global optimal action. In
our motivating examples, both the optimal antenna configuration and the best candidate drug are indeed of great value,
as the product of the expertise of the engineers. Protecting
it from competing firms is therefore of high importance.
These concerns call for another notion of privacy, like the
lesser known (ϵ, η)-privacy from Féraud et al. (2019).

1. Introduction
The process of gathering data to identify the best option in a
stochastic multi-armed bandit is known as pure exploration
or best arm identification (BAI). The goal for the learner is
to suggest the most valuable option given the data collected
through sequential interaction with the system. In the specific fixed-confidence setting, we seek to achieve this goal
using as few interactions as possible, while guaranteeing that
the actual best option is returned with fixed, high probability.
Motivating examples include automatic parameter tuning
of telecommunication antennas and pharmaceutical drug
selection. Antenna performance depends on a large number
of parameters, making it difficult and time-consuming for
engineers to manually explore the space of configurations
and find the one that will optimize the user experience. Selecting the best drug among multiple candidates is also a
complex and costly process. Re-framing these problems as
best arm identification in multi-armed bandits and relying
on automatic strategies can be very effective.

However, if it may be possible to protect the data held
by the different participants (the central coordinator and
the agents), the communications may still be easily intercepted by an adversary. Moreover, they cannot always be
encrypted, especially in the multi-agent setting where the
computational overhead would increase significantly and
where the exchange of keys is not obvious. Consequently,
whereas communications from agents are a crucial building block of multi-agent algorithms, they are often a weak
link in terms of privacy. Indeed, if these messages carry
enough information, they can leak sensitive data. Designing

Such problems usually involve multiple agents that share
and interact with the same environment, generating as many
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Paris, France 2 Université d’Orléans,
Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS LIG, France. Correspondence
to: Alexandre Rio <alexandre.rio2@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

