Sample Complexity of Probability Divergences under Group Symmetry

Ziyu Chen 1 Markos A. Katsoulakis 1 Luc Rey-Bellet 1 Wei Zhu 1

Abstract
We rigorously quantify the improvement in the
sample complexity of variational divergence estimations for group-invariant distributions. In
the cases of the Wasserstein-1 metric and the
Lipschitz-regularized α-divergences, the reduction of sample complexity is proportional to
an ambient-dimension-dependent power of the
group size. For the maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD), the improvement of sample complexity
is more nuanced, as it depends on not only the
group size but also the choice of kernel. Numerical simulations verify our theories.

Figure 1. The distribution of the whole-slide prostate cancer images (LYSTO data set (Ciompi et al., 2019)) is rotation-invariant,
i.e., an image and its rotated copies are equiprobable.

studied without any a priori structural assumption on the
probability measures. Many distributions in real life, however, are known to have intrinsic structures, such as group
symmetry. For example, the distribution of the medical
images collected without preferred orientation should be
rotation-invariant, i.e., an image is supposed to have the
same likelihood as its rotated copies; see Figure 1. Such
structural information could be leveraged to improve the accuracy and/or sample-efficiency for divergence estimation.

1. Introduction
Probability divergences provide means to measure the discrepancy between two probability distributions. They have
broad applications in a variety of inference tasks, such as
independence testing (Zhang et al., 2018; Kinney & Atwal,
2014), independent component analysis (Hyvarinen et al.,
2002), and generative modeling (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Nowozin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al.,
2017; Tolstikhin et al., 2018; Nietert et al., 2021).

Indeed, the recent work by Birrell et al. (2022c) shows
that one can develop an improved variational representation for divergences between group-invariant distributions.
The key idea is to reduce the test function space in the
variational formula to its subset of group-invariant functions, which effectively acts as an unbiased regularization.
When used in a generative adversarial network (GAN) for
group-invariant distribution learning, Birrell et al. (2022c)
empirically show that divergence estimation/optimization
based on their proposed variational representation under
group symmetry leads to significantly improved sample
generation, especially in the small data regime.

A key task within the above applications is the computation
and estimation of the divergences from finite data, which
is known to be a difficult problem (Paninski, 2003; Gao
et al., 2015). Empirical estimators based on the variational
representations for the probability divergences are generally
favored and widely used due to their scalability to both
the data size and the ambient space dimension (Belghazi
et al., 2018; Birrell et al., 2022b; Nguyen et al., 2007; 2010;
Ruderman et al., 2012; Sreekumar & Goldfeld, 2022; Birrell
et al., 2021; 2022d; Sriperumbudur et al., 2012; Gretton
et al., 2006; 2007; 2012; Genevay et al., 2019).

The purpose of this work is to rigorously quantify the performance gain of divergence estimation under group symmetry. More specifically, we analyze the reduction in sample
complexity of divergence estimation in terms of the (finite)
group size. We focus, in particular, on three types of probability divergences: the Wasserstein-1 metric, the maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD), and the family of Lipschitzregularized α-divergences; see Section 3.1 for the exact definition. Our main results show that the reduction of samples
needed for guaranteed fidelity in statistical estimation of
divergences is proportional to a dimension-dependent power
of the group size; see Theorem 4.1 for the Wasserstein-1
metric and Theorem 4.8 for the Lipschitz-regularized α-

Empirical computation of the probability divergences and
theoretical analysis on their sample complexity are typically
1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. Correspondence
to: Ziyu Chen <ziyuchen@umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

