Learning Perturbations to Explain Time Series Predictions

Joseph Enguehard 1 2

Abstract
Explaining predictions based on multivariate time
series data carries the additional difficulty of handling not only multiple features, but also time
dependencies. It matters not only what happened,
but also when, and the same feature could have a
very different impact on a prediction depending
on this time information. Previous work has used
perturbation-based saliency methods to tackle this
issue, perturbing an input using a trainable mask
to discover which features at which times are driving the predictions. However these methods introduce fixed perturbations, inspired from similar
methods on static data, while there seems to be
little motivation to do so on temporal data. In this
work, we aim to explain predictions by learning
not only masks, but also associated perturbations.
We empirically show that learning these perturbations significantly improves the quality of these
explanations on time series data.

Figure 1. Illustration of different perturbations on a time-series
(first plot). We aim to evaluate the importance of the third spike
here. It is very likely that this spike is unimportant, as it is a
regularity in the data, and only the last, larger spike, could matter. However, using a Gaussian blur (second plot) or replacing
the original data with an average (third plot) changes the input
significantly, which could lead an explanation method to wrongly
state that this spike is important. Our learned perturbation (last
plot) should on the other hand replace the explained data with another spike, leading to little difference in the output, and therefore
correctly stating that this data is unimportant.

1. Introduction
Explaining neural networks predictions has received increasing attention, as these models become more embedded in
many decision processes. It is indeed important to understand why such models, which are intrinsically difficult to
explain and are often qualified as “black boxes”, made a
specific prediction. This information is crucial to assess
the fairness of an algorithm in impactful situations, such as
when providing a medical diagnosis (Ahuja, 2019) or computing a credit score (Moscato et al., 2021). Explaining a
deep neural network’s predictions is also important to build
trust for the users of such technologies. In the medical field,
this has been proven to be a crucial step in building this trust
(LaRosa & Danks, 2018).

As a result, multiple methods to explain why a model made
a specific prediction have been recently developed. Some of
these methods, such as Lime (Ribeiro et al., 2016) or Shap
(Lundberg & Lee, 2017) explain a model’s predictions by
approximating it locally using a transparent method, in this
case a weighted linear regression. Other methods aim to
specifically explain a neural network’s output by leveraging
the back-propagation algorithm to compute the gradient of
an output w.r.t. an input (Simonyan et al., 2013). A feature
with an associated high gradient can indeed be interpreted
as important, the sign of this gradient indicating if this
feature influences the prediction positively or negatively.
Several variations of this method have also been developed

1
Babylon Health, 1 Knightsbridge Grn, London SW1X 7QA
United Kingdom 2 Skippr, 99 Milton Keynes Business Centre, Milton Keynes MK14 6GD United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Joseph Enguehard <joseph@skippr.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

