Approximately Optimal Core Shapes for Tensor Decompositions

Mehrdad Ghadiri * 1 Matthew Fahrbach * 2 Gang Fu 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract
This work studies the combinatorial optimization
problem of finding an optimal core tensor shape,
also called multilinear rank, for a size-constrained
Tucker decomposition. We give an algorithm with
provable approximation guarantees for its reconstruction error via connections to higher-order singular values. Specifically, we introduce a novel
Tucker packing problem, which we prove is NPhard, and give a polynomial-time approximation
scheme based on a reduction to the 2-dimensional
knapsack problem with a matroid constraint. We
also generalize our techniques to tree tensor network decompositions. We implement our algorithm using an integer programming solver, and
show that its solution quality is competitive with
(and sometimes better than) the greedy algorithm
that uses the true Tucker decomposition loss at
each step, while also running up to 1000x faster.

Figure 1. Pareto frontier of core shapes r ∈ [20]3 for hyperspectral
tensor X ∈ R1024×1344×33 . Plots the RRE, i.e., L(X, r)/∥X∥2F ,
as a function of compression rate. RRE-greedy builds core shapes
by computing Tucker decompositions at each step. HOSVD-IP
is Algorithm 2 with integer programming, which builds core shapes
via a surrogate packing problem on higher-order singular values.

notion of multilinear rank r = (R1 , . . . , RN ) puts practitioners in a challenging spot because the set of feasible core
shapes can be exponentially large. Furthermore, searching
in this state space can be prohibitively expensive because
evaluating the true quality of a core shape requires computing a Tucker decomposition, which for large tensors can take
hours and consume hundreds of GB of RAM. For example,
in the MATLAB Tensor Toolbox (Bader & Kolda, 2022), we
need to specify the core shape parameter ranks in advance
before computing a size-constrained Tucker decomposition.

1. Introduction
Low-rank tensor decomposition is a powerful tool in the
modern machine learning toolbox. Like low-rank matrix
factorization, it has countless applications in scientific computing, data mining, and signal processing (Kolda & Bader,
2009; Sidiropoulos et al., 2017), e.g., anomaly detection in
data streams (Jang & Kang, 2021) and compressing convolutional neural networks on mobile devices for faster inference
while reducing power consumption (Kim et al., 2016).

In practice, the most popular Tucker decomposition algorithms are the r-truncated higher-order singular value decomposition (HOSVD) in De Lathauwer et al. (2000a),
sequentially truncated ST-HOSVD in Vannieuwenhoven
et al. (2012), and higher-order orthogonal iteration (HOOI),
which is a structured alternating least squares algorithm.

The most widely used tensor decompositions are the canonical polyadic (CP) decomposition, Tucker decomposition,
and tensor-train decomposition (Oseledets, 2011)—the last
two being instances of tree tensor networks (Krämer, 2020).
CP decomposition factors a tensor into the sum of r rankone tensors. Tucker decomposition, however, specifies the
rank Rn in each dimension n and relies on a core tensor
G ∈ RR1 ×···×RN for reconstructing the decomposition. The

We explore the simple but fundamental discrete optimization
problem for low-rank tensor decompositions:
If a Tucker decomposition of X can use at most c
parameters, which core tensor shape minimizes
the reconstruction error?

*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Tech 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Mehrdad Ghadiri <mehrdad29@gmail.com>.

This is a multilinear generalization of the best rank-r matrix
approximation problem. While there are many parallels to
low-rank matrix factorization, tensor rank-related problems
can be thoroughly different and more challenging than their

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

