Convex Geometry of ReLU-Layers,
Injectivity on the Ball and Local Reconstruction

Daniel Haider 1 2 Martin Ehler 2 Peter Balazs 1

Abstract

offering exact and efficient likelihood estimations (Dinh
et al., 2017; Donahue et al., 2017). Mathematically speaking, the forward process in such an invertible architecture
must be injective, guaranteeing the existence of a left-inverse
that allows perfect reconstruction of any input. A ReLUlayer is a mapping that is designed to provide sparse output.
Hence, its injectivity is an interesting property that has been
tackled from a theoretical point of view only little in the
literature. Bruna et al. characterized a ReLU-layer to be
injective in terms of an admissibility condition for index sets
and proved a bi-Lipschitz stability condition for an injective
ReLU-layer, see Proposition 2.2 in (Bruna et al., 2014). Just
recently, Puthawala et al. formulated a condition in terms of
spanning sets that is equivalent to the one in (Bruna et al.,
2014) (with a slight modification) and describes the injectivity of ReLU-networks consisting of many ReLU-layers
see Theorem 2 in (Puthawala et al., 2022). Both conditions,
however, are not applicable to verify the injectivity of a
ReLU-layer for a given weight matrix in practice. The presented work provides exactly that. We found the convex
geometry of the weight matrix to play an essential role in
the injectivity analysis for the associated ReLU-layer, using
a concept that Behrmann et al. introduced in Theorem 4 of
(Behrmann et al., 2018). The geometrical perspective helps
profoundly to strengthen the intuition on the effect of the
ReLU function. It allows to formulate a computationally
feasible method to give a sufficient condition for injectivity.
This shall contribute to the enhancement of the interpretability of neural networks in terms of a way to quantify the
invertibility of a ReLU-layer with corresponding exact reconstruction formulas. Aiming to set a rigorous foundation
for future work on this topic, we formulate all results in an
abstract mathematical manner, using the language of frame
theory which we find to be especially well-suited.

The paper uses a frame-theoretic setting to study
the injectivity of a ReLU-layer on the closed ball
of Rn and its non-negative part. In particular,
the interplay between the radius of the ball and
the bias vector is emphasized. Together with a
perspective from convex geometry, this leads to
a computationally feasible method of verifying
the injectivity of a ReLU-layer under reasonable
restrictions in terms of an upper bound of the
bias vector. Explicit reconstruction formulas are
provided, inspired by the duality concept from
frame theory. All this gives rise to the possibility
of quantifying the invertibility of a ReLU-layer
and a concrete reconstruction algorithm for any
input vector on the ball.

1. Introduction
The Rectified Linear Unit ReLU(s) = max(0, s), s ∈ R
has become indispensable in modern neural network architecture. It is applied component-wise on the output of an
affine linear function Ax − b, comprising of the multiplication by a weight matrix A and the shift by a bias vector b.
The combined mapping is called a ReLU-layer. This has
proven to be a simple, yet effective non-linear mapping to
handle fundamental problems in the training of deep neural
networks well (Glorot et al., 2011; Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Goodfellow et al., 2016; Nair & Hinton, 2010). Despite its
simplicity, yet, the ReLU function still hides some mysteries
and is an active topic of research (Dittmer et al., 2020).
Recently, invertible network architectures have been getting
a lot of attention due to their increased interpretability and
the possibility of reversing the forward process analytically,
which is especially interesting in a generative setting. This
found many applications in the context of normalizing flows,

In Section 2 we interpret a ReLU-layer by means of frame
theory and motivate the restriction to the ball. Section 3 is
dedicated to the injectivity of a ReLU-layer theoretically. In
Section 4 we introduce a method to obtain an upper bound
for all biases, such that the corresponding ReLU-layer is
injective on the ball and its non-negative part. Explicit reconstruction formulas are stated. Finally, Section 5 demonstrates how the method can be used to analyze the injectivity
behavior of a ReLU-layer in numerical experiments.

1

Acoustics Research Institute, Vienna, Austria 2 University of
Vienna, Department of Mathematics, Austria. Correspondence to:
Daniel Haider <daniel.haider@oeaw.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

