Learning Expressive Priors for Generalization and
Uncertainty Estimation in Neural Networks

Dominik Schnaus * 1 Jongseok Lee * 2 3 Daniel Cremers 1 Rudolph Triebel 2 3

Abstract

generally unknown in neural networks. Consequently, many
current approaches have resorted to uninformative priors,
like isotropic Gaussian, despite reported signs of prior misspecifications (Wenzel et al., 2020; Fortuin, 2022).

In this work, we propose a novel prior learning
method for advancing generalization and uncertainty estimation in deep neural networks. The
key idea is to exploit scalable and structured posteriors of neural networks as informative priors
with generalization guarantees. Our learned priors
provide expressive probabilistic representations
at large scale, like Bayesian counterparts of pretrained models on ImageNet, and further produce
non-vacuous generalization bounds. We also extend this idea to a continual learning framework,
where the favorable properties of our priors are
desirable. Major enablers are our technical contributions: (1) the sums-of-Kronecker-product computations, and (2) the derivations and optimizations of tractable objectives that lead to improved
generalization bounds. Empirically, we exhaustively show the effectiveness of this method for
uncertainty estimation and generalization.

To address the problem of prior specification, we propose a
prior learning method for BNNs. Our method is grounded
in sequential Bayesian inference (Opper, 1999), where the
posteriors from the past are used as the prior for the future.
We achieve this by relying on Laplace Approximation (LA)
(MacKay, 1992) with Kronecker-factorization of the posteriors (Ritter et al., 2018b; Daxberger et al., 2021). Within
this framework, we devise key technical novelties to learn
expressive BNN priors with generalization guarantees. First,
we demonstrate the sums-of-Kronecker-product computations so that the posteriors in matrix normal distributions,
i.e., Gaussian with Kronecker-factorized covariance matrices (Gupta & Nagar, 2000), can be tractably used as expressive BNN priors. Second, to explicitly improve generalization, we derive and optimize over a tractable approximation
of PAC-Bayes bounds (McAllester, 1999b; Germain et al.,
2016) that lead to non-vacuous bounds, i.e., smaller than
the upper bound of the loss. Finally, as an added benefit of
our idea, a Bayesian re-interpretation to a popular continual
learning architecture, namely progressive neural networks
(Rusu et al., 2016), is provided for uncertainty-awareness,
generalization, and resiliency to catastrophic forgetting.

1. Introduction
Within the deep learning approach to real-world AI problems such as autonomous driving, generalization and uncertainty estimation are one of the most important pillars. To
achieve this, Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) (MacKay,
1992; Hinton & van Camp, 1993; Neal, 1996) leverage the
tools of Bayesian statistics in order to improve generalization and uncertainty estimation in deep neural networks.
Due to their potential and advancements so far, BNNs have
become increasingly popular research topics (Gawlikowski
et al., 2021). However, one of the open problems in BNNs
is the prior specifications. While it is widely known that
prior selection is a crucial step in any Bayesian modeling (Bayes, 1763), the choice of well-specified priors is

By design, our method has many advantages for generalization and uncertainty estimation in neural networks. The proposed method achieves non-vacuous generalization bounds
in deep learning models, while potentially avoiding prior
misspecification for uncertainty estimation using BNNs.
For these features, we provide computationally tractable
techniques in order to learn expressive priors from large
amounts of data and deep network architectures. We contend that such probabilistic representation at a large scale,
e.g., pre-trained BNNs on ImageNet, can be beneficial in
downstream tasks for both transfer and continual learning
set-ups. Therefore, we further provide ablation studies and
various experiments to show the aforementioned benefits
of our method within the small and large-scale transfer
and continual learning tasks. In particular, we empirically
demonstrate that our priors mitigate cold posterior effects

*

Equal contribution 1 TU Munich 2 DLR 3 KIT. Correspondence
to: Dominik Schnaus <dominik.schnaus@tum.de>, Jongseok Lee
<jongseok.lee@dlr.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

