Certified Robust Neural Networks: Generalization and Corruption Resistance

Amine Bennouna 1 Ryan Lucas 1 Bart Van Parys 1

Abstract

perform well despite being trained on corrupted training
data and evaluated on perturbed test data.

Recent work have demonstrated that robustness
(to “corruption”) can be at odds with generalization. Adversarial training, for instance, aims to
reduce the problematic susceptibility of modern
neural networks to small data perturbations. Surprisingly, overfitting is a major concern in adversarial training despite being mostly absent in
standard training. We provide here theoretical
evidence for this peculiar “robust overfitting” phenomenon. Subsequently, we advance a novel
distributionally robust loss function bridging robustness and generalization. We demonstrate
both theoretically as well as empirically the loss
to enjoy a certified level of robustness against
two common types of corruption—data evasion
and poisoning attacks—while ensuring guaranteed generalization. We show through careful
numerical experiments that our resulting holistic
robust (HR) training procedure yields state of the
art performance. Finally, we indicate that HR
training can be interpreted as a direct extension
of adversarial training and comes with a negligible additional computational burden. A readyto-use python library implementing our algorithm is available at https://github.com/
RyanLucas3/HR_Neural_Networks.

Data corruption can be due to multiple causes ranging from
benign imprecise data collection to malicious adversaries.
Two types of corruption, each associated with a distinct
cause, stand out in prior work which we briefly discuss.
Evasion Corruption. This type of corruption results in
small, often imperceptible, perturbations of all the test or
train instances and may fool a naively trained model to suffer
poor performance at deployment time. Goodfellow et al.
(2014) study evasion attacks at test time and show that neural
network models can suffer a severe decrease in accuracy
when test instances are subjected to an imperceptible amount
of noise. This pioneering work spurred on a rich literature
on attacks (Tramer et al., 2020) as well as defense strategies
such as the popular adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018;
Bai et al., 2021). Evasion corruption need not necessarily
be caused by an adversary or even take place at test time.
Indeed, noise is present in training data as well often as
a result of measurement imperfections. Examples include
street noise and background chatter in speech recognition
(Li et al., 2014; Mitra et al., 2017) or impulse noise and
blur in image classification (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019;
Hendrycks et al., 2021).
Poisoning Corruption. In this type of corruption, a certain fraction of the training data points is drastically changed.
This alteration of the training dataset may then mislead the
learning in selecting a “bad” model. Clearly, if a large
majority of data points is affected, the data set is wholly
corrupted and there is no point in hoping for a good performance. Hence, poisoning corruption is assumed to affect
only a small fraction of the data points. One example is
label flipping in classification problems, where a small portion of the training data points are wrongly labeled or an
adversary can select a small number of labels to flip before
training time (Biggio et al., 2012). Poisoning corruption has
also been shown to considerably degrade performance at
deployment time. For instance, Nelson et al. (2008) shows
that altering only 1% of email spam labels can completely
fool commercial spam filters. Several related attacks and
defense mechanisms have been identified in follow-up work
(Goldblum et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Recent work has shown that many modern neural networks
are vulnerable to data corruption putting into question the
reliability and performance of such models at deployment
time. Robustness has in recent years, next to out-of-sample
generalization, become a central research topic in the machine learning community. The key question is how to
develop machine learning models which are reliable and
1
Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Amine Bennouna <amineben@mit.edu>, Ryan Lucas <ryanlu@mit.edu>,
Bart Van Parys <vanparys@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

