Critical Points and Convergence Analysis of Generative Deep Linear Networks
Trained with Bures-Wasserstein Loss
Pierre Bréchet 1 Katerina Papagiannouli 1 Jing An 2 Guido Montúfar 1 3

Abstract

networks, which are currently not as well understood as
discriminative models.

We consider a deep matrix factorization model
of covariance matrices trained with the BuresWasserstein distance. While recent works have
made advances in the study of the optimization
problem for overparametrized low-rank matrix
approximation, much emphasis has been placed
on discriminative settings and the square loss. In
contrast, our model considers another type of loss
and connects with the generative setting. We characterize the critical points and minimizers of the
Bures-Wasserstein distance over the space of rankbounded matrices. The Hessian of this loss at lowrank matrices can theoretically blow up, which
creates challenges to analyze convergence of gradient optimization methods. We establish convergence results for gradient flow using a smooth
perturbative version of the loss as well as convergence results for finite step size gradient descent
under certain assumptions on the initial weights.

The optimization landscapes and the properties of parameter
optimization procedures for neural networks are among the
most puzzling and actively studied topics in theoretical deep
learning (see, e.g. Mei et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2022). Deep
linear networks, i.e. neural networks having the identity
as activation function, serve as simplified models for such
investigations (Baldi & Hornik, 1989; Kawaguchi, 2016;
Trager et al., 2020; Kohn et al., 2022; Bah et al., 2021).
The study of linear networks has guided the development
of several useful notions and intuitions in the theoretical
analysis of neural networks, from the absence of bad local
minima to the role of parametrization and overparametrization in gradient optimization (Arora et al., 2018; 2019a;b).
Many previous works have focused on discriminative or
autoregressive settings and have emphasized the squared
error loss. Although this loss is indeed a popular choice in
regression tasks, it interacts in a very special way with the
particular geometry of linear networks (Trager et al., 2020).
The behavior of linear networks optimized with different
losses has also been considered in several works (Laurent &
Brecht, 2018; Lu & Kawaguchi, 2017; Trager et al., 2020)
but is less well understood.

1. Introduction
We investigate generative deep linear networks and their
optimization using the Bures-Wasserstein distance. More
precisely, we consider the problem of approximating a target
Gaussian distribution with a deep linear neural network generator of Gaussian distributions by minimizing the BuresWasserstein distance. This problem is of interest in two
ways. First, it pertains to the optimization of deep linear
networks for a type of loss that is qualitatively different
from the well-studied and very particular squared error loss.
Second, it can be regarded as a simplified but instructive instance of the parameter optimization problem in generative
networks, specifically Wasserstein generative adversarial

The Bures-Wasserstein distance was introduced by Bures
(1969) to study Hermitian operators in quantum information, particularly density matrices. It induces a metric on the
space of positive semi-definite matrices, and corresponds to
the 2-Wasserstein distance between two centered Gaussian
distributions (Bhatia et al., 2019). Wasserstein distances
have several useful properties, e.g. they remain well defined
between disjointly supported measures and have duality
formulations (Villani, 2003) that allow for practical implementations. This makes them good candidates and indeed
popular choices for learning generative models, with a wellknown case being the Wasserstein Generative Adversarial
Networks (WGANs) (Arjovsky et al., 2017). While the 1Wasserstein distance has been most commonly used in this
context, the Bures-Wasserstein distance has also attracted interest, e.g. in the works of Muzellec & Cuturi (2018); Chewi
et al. (2020); Mallasto et al. (2022), and has also appeared
in the context of linear quadratic Wasserstein generative
adversarial networks (Feizi et al., 2020).

1

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig,
Germany 2 Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA 3 Departments of Mathematics and Statistics, UCLA,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Pierre Bréchet
<pierre.brechet@mis.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

