AutoCoreset: An Automatic Practical Coreset Construction Framework
Alaa Maalouf 1 * Murad Tukan 2 * Vladimir Braverman 3 Daniela Rus 1

Abstract

1. Introduction and Motivation
In many machine learning (ML) problems, the input is usually a set P = {p1 , · · · , pn } of n items, a (probably infinite)
set of candidate solutions X called query set, and a loss
function f : P × X → [0, ∞]). The goal is to
a query
Pfind
n
(model, classifier) x∗ that minimizes the sum i=1 f (pi , x)
over every query x ∈ X . Notably, many of these optimization/learning tasks are typically challenging to approximate
when the input is very large. Furthermore, in the era of
big data, we usually aim towards maintaining a solution for
streaming and/or distributed input data, while consuming
small memory. Finally, even well-known problems with a
close optimal solution, such as ridge regression and other
classes of convex optimization involving Cross-validation
methods or hyper-parameter tuning methods, must analyze
under many restrictions several queries for various subsets
of data, leading to a drastic increase in the running time.

A coreset is a tiny weighted subset of an input set,
that closely resembles the loss function, with respect to a certain set of queries. Coresets became
prevalent in machine learning as they have shown
to be advantageous for many applications. While
coreset research is an active research area, unfortunately, coresets are constructed in a problemdependent manner, where for each problem, a
new coreset construction algorithm is usually suggested, a process that may take time or may be
hard for new researchers in the field. Even the
generic frameworks require additional (problemdependent) computations or proofs to be done
by the user. Besides, many problems do not have
(provable) small coresets, limiting their applicability. To this end, we suggest an automatic practical
framework for constructing coresets, which requires (only) the input data and the desired cost
function from the user, without the need for any
other task-related computation to be done by the
user. To do so, we reduce the problem of approximating a loss function to an instance of vector
summation approximation, where the vectors we
aim to sum are loss vectors of a specific subset of
the queries, such that we aim to approximate the
image of the function on this subset. We show that
while this set is limited, the coreset is quite general. An extensive experimental study on various
machine learning applications is also conducted.
Finally, we provide a “plug and play” style implementation, proposing a user-friendly system that
can be easily used to apply coresets for many problems. We believe that these contributions enable
future research and easier use and applications of
coresets.

Coresets. A common approach to solve such issues is
to use data summarization techniques, namely Coresets,
which got increasing attention over recent years (Bachem
et al., 2018a;b; Bădoiu & Clarkson, 2008; Balcan et al.,
2013; Braverman et al., 2019; Curtain et al., 2019; Feldman
et al., 2010; 2014; Karnin & Liberty, 2019); see surveys
in (Feldman, 2020; Munteanu & Schwiegelshohn, 2018;
Phillips, 2016). A coreset, informally, is a tiny weighted
subset of the input set P , roughly approximating the loss
of P for every possible query x ∈ X , up to a bound of
1 ± ε factor (0 ≤ ε < 1). The size of the coreset is often
independent or close to logarithmic in the amount of the
input points n, but polynomial in 1/ε. Coresets are useful
in ML as they significantly increase the efficiency of ML
solvers. Specifically, employing conventional methods on
the constructed coresets should approximate the optimal
solution on the entire dataset, in orders of magnitude less
expensive time and memory. Furthermore, by repeatedly
running existing heuristics on the coreset in the time it takes
to run them once on the original (large) dataset, heuristics
that are already quick can be more accurate. Additionally,
coresets can be maintained for distributed and streaming
data.

*

1
Equal contribution
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, USA.
3
DataHeroes, Israel. Department of Computer science, Rice university. Correspondence to: Alaa Maalouf <alaam@mit.edu>.
2

So what’s the problem? Obtaining non-trivial theoretical
guarantees is frequently impossible in many contemporary
machine learning problems due to either the target model
being highly complex or since every input element p ∈ P is

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

