Understanding Incremental Learning of Gradient Descent:
A Fine-grained Analysis of Matrix Sensing

Jikai Jin 1 Zhiyuan Li 2 Kaifeng Lyu 3 Simon S. Du 4 Jason D. Lee 5

Abstract

found can generalize well (Hardt et al., 2016).

It is believed that Gradient Descent (GD) induces
an implicit bias towards good generalization in
training machine learning models. This paper provides a fine-grained analysis of the dynamics of
GD for the matrix sensing problem, whose goal
is to recover a low-rank ground-truth matrix from
near-isotropic linear measurements. It is shown
that GD with small initialization behaves similarly to the greedy low-rank learning heuristics (Li
et al., 2020) and follows an incremental learning
procedure (Gissin et al., 2019): GD sequentially
learns solutions with increasing ranks until it recovers the ground truth matrix. Compared to existing works which only analyze the first learning
phase for rank-1 solutions, our result provides
characterizations for the whole learning process.
Moreover, besides the over-parameterized regime
that many prior works focused on, our analysis of
the incremental learning procedure also applies
to the under-parameterized regime. Finally, we
conduct numerical experiments to confirm our
theoretical findings.

One influential line of works provides theoretical analysis
of the implicit bias of GD/SGD. These results typically
exhibit theoretical settings where the low-loss solutions
found by GD/SGD attain certain optimality conditions of a
particular generalization metric, e.g., the parameter norm (or
the classifier margin) (Soudry et al., 2018; Gunasekar et al.,
2018; Nacson et al., 2019; Lyu & Li, 2020; Ji & Telgarsky,
2020), the sharpness of local loss landscape (Blanc et al.,
2020; Damian et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022a; Lyu et al., 2022).
Among these works, a line of works seek to characterize
the implicit bias even when the training is away from convergence. Kalimeris et al. (2019) empirically observed that
SGD learns model from simple ones, such as linear classifiers, to more complex ones. As a result, SGD always
tries to fit the training data with minimal model complexity.
This behavior, usually referred to as the simplicity bias or
the incremental learning behavior of GD/SGD, can be a
hidden mechanism of deep learning that prevents highly
over-parameterized models from overfitting. In theory, Hu
et al. (2020); Lyu et al. (2021); Frei et al. (2021) established
that GD on two-layer nets learns linear classifiers first.
The goal of this paper is to demonstrate this simplicity
bias/incremental learning in the matrix sensing problem,
a non-convex optimization problem that arises in a wide
range of real-world applications, e.g., image reconstruction
(Zhao et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2014), object detection (Shen
& Wu, 2012; Zou et al., 2013) and array processing systems
(Kalogerias & Petropulu, 2013). Moreover, this problem can
serve as a standard test-bed of the implicit bias of GD/SGD
in deep learning theory, since it retains many of the key
phenomena in deep learning while being simpler to analyze.

1. Introduction
Understanding the optimization and generalization properties of optimization algorithms is one of the central topics
in deep learning theory (Zhang et al., 2017; Sun, 2019). It
has long been a mystery why simple algorithms such as Gradient Descent (GD) or Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
can find global minima even for highly non-convex functions (Du et al., 2019), and why the global minima being

Formally, the matrix sensing problem asks for recovering
a ground-truth matrix Z ∗ ∈ Rd×d given m observations
y1 , . . . , ym . Each observation yi here is resulted from a
linear measurement yi = ⟨Ai , Z ∗ ⟩, where {Ai }1≤i≤m is
a collection of symmetric measurement matrices. In this
paper, we focus on the case where Z ∗ is symmetric, positive semi-definite (PSD) and low-rank, i.e., Z ∗ ⪰ 0 and
rank(Z ∗ ) = r∗ ≪ d.

1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University 4 Paul
G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington 5 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Jikai Jin
<jinjikai7@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

An intriguing approach to solve this problem is to use the
1

