Speed-Oblivious Online Scheduling: Knowing (Precise) Speeds is not Necessary

Alexander Lindermayr * 1 Nicole Megow * 1 Martin Rapp * 2

Speedup big over LITTLE

Abstract
We consider online scheduling on unrelated (heterogeneous) machines in a speed-oblivious setting, where an algorithm is unaware of the exact job-dependent processing speeds. We show
strong impossibility results for clairvoyant and
non-clairvoyant algorithms and overcome them in
models inspired by practical settings: (i) we provide competitive learning-augmented algorithms,
assuming that (possibly erroneous) predictions on
the speeds are given, and (ii) we provide competitive algorithms for the speed-ordered model,
where a single global order of machines according
to their unknown job-dependent speeds is known.
We prove strong theoretical guarantees and evaluate our findings on a representative heterogeneous
multi-core processor. These seem to be the first
empirical results for scheduling algorithms with
predictions that are evaluated in a non-synthetic
hardware environment.

fmm
with diff. input data
water-nsquared
with diff. input data
Other jobs

10
8
6
4
2
1
0

0

50

100
150
200
Execution time on big [s]

250

Figure 1. The execution time and speedup of the big over LITTLE
cores on an Arm big.LITTLE heterogeneous processor varies
strongly between jobs and different input data. Variations of
the speedup w.r.t. input data are large for some jobs (e.g., waternsquared) but small for others (e.g., fmm).

benchmark suites (PARSEC-3.0, SPLASH-3, Polybench)
running on big and LITTLE cores of a Kirin 970 smartphone
system-on-chip (SoC) with Arm big.LITTLE architecture.

1. Introduction

These advances show the demand for schedulers that respect
job-dependent heterogeneity. Formally, the (processing)
speed sij of job j on machine i is the amount of processing
that j receives when running on i for one time unit. Despite
the relevance of values sij for high-performance scheduling, there is a big discrepancy between how theory and
practice handle them: while scheduling theory most commonly assumes that speeds are known to an algorithm, this
is typically not the case in practice. Hence, algorithms that
perform well in theory are often not applicable in practice.

Heterogeneous processors are getting more and more common in various domains. For several years now, efficiency
and performance gains in smartphone chips have depended
crucially on the combination of high-performance and lowperformance (but energy-efficient) cores (ARM Limited,
2013). Heterogeneity has recently been introduced also to
the desktop market with Intel Alder Lake (Q1’2022) (Rotem
et al., 2022) and AMD Zen 5 (announced for 2023). Further, jobs differ in their instruction mix and memory access patterns, and hence may not benefit uniformly from
the high-performance cores, which typically feature larger
caches, out-of-order execution, and a higher CPU frequency.
Figure 1 shows job-dependent speed varieties in common

In this work, we propose new models and algorithms to
bridge this gap. In particular, we introduce speed-oblivious
algorithms, which do not rely on knowing (precise) speeds.
Thereby we focus on (non-)clairvoyant scheduling subject
to minimizing the total (weighted) completion time.

*

Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany 2 Department
of Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. Correspondence to: Alexander Lindermayr <linderal@unibremen.de>.

Formally, an instance of this scheduling problem is composed of a set J of n jobs, a set I of m machines, and a
time-discretization. The characteristics of a job j ∈ J are
its processing requirement pj , its weight wj , and for every
machine i ∈ I its individual processing speed sij > 0. A
job j arrives online at its release date rj , i.e., an algorithm
is unaware of its existence before that time. A schedule

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

