Neural networks trained with SGD learn distributions of increasing complexity

Maria Refinetti 1 2 Alessandro Ingrosso 3 Sebastian Goldt 4

Abstract

networks trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
learn “simple” functions first, and increase their complexity only as far as this is required to fit the data. This bias
towards simple functions would prevent the network from
overfitting, which is all the more remarkable given that the
training loss of modern neural networks has global minima
with high generalisation error (Liu et al., 2020).

The uncanny ability of over-parameterised neural
networks to generalise well has been explained
using various “simplicity biases”. These theories
postulate that neural networks avoid overfitting by
first fitting simple, linear classifiers before learning more complex, non-linear functions. Meanwhile, data structure is also recognised as a key
ingredient for good generalisation, yet its role in
simplicity biases is not yet understood. Here, we
show that neural networks trained using stochastic
gradient descent initially classify their inputs using lower-order input statistics, like mean and covariance, and exploit higher-order statistics only
later during training. We first demonstrate this
distributional simplicity bias (DSB) in a solvable
model of a single neuron trained on synthetic data.
We then demonstrate DSB empirically in a range
of deep convolutional networks and visual transformers trained on CIFAR10, and show that it
even holds in networks pre-trained on ImageNet.
We discuss the relation of DSB to other simplicity biases and consider its implications for the
principle of Gaussian universality in learning.

Simplicity biases take various forms. Linear neural networks with small initial weights learn the most relevant
directions of their target function first (Le Cun et al., 1991;
Krogh & Hertz, 1992; Saxe et al., 2014; 2019; Advani et al.,
2020). Non-linear neural networks learn increasingly complex functions during training, going from simple linear
functions to more complex, non-linear functions. This behaviour has been demonstrated theoretically in two-layer networks (Schwarze & Hertz, 1992; Saad & Solla, 1995; Engel
& Van den Broeck, 2001; Mei et al., 2018) and was confirmed experimentally in convolutional networks trained on
CIFAR10 by Kalimeris et al. (2019). There is also evidence
for a spectral simplicity bias, whereby lower frequencies
of a target function, or the top eigenfunctions of the neural
tangent kernel, are learnt first during training (Xu, 2018;
Farnia et al., 2018; Rahaman et al., 2019; Jin & Montúfar,
2020; Bowman & Montúfar, 2022; Yang et al., 2022).
Meanwhile, data structure – for example the low intrinsic
dimension of images (Pope et al., 2021) – has been recognised as a key factor enabling good generalisation in neural
networks both empirically and theoretically (Mossel, 2016;
Bach, 2017; Goldt et al., 2020; Spigler et al., 2020; Ghorbani et al., 2020; Pope et al., 2021). However, its role in
simplicity biases is not yet understood.

1. Introduction
The success of neural networks on supervised classification
tasks, and in particular their ability to simultaneously fit
their training data and generalise well, have been explained
using various “simplicity biases” (Saad & Solla, 1995; Farnia et al., 2018; Pérez et al., 2019; Kalimeris et al., 2019;
Rahaman et al., 2019). These theories postulate that neural

Here, we propose a distributional simplicity bias that shifts
the focus from characterising the function that the network
learns, to identifying the features of the training data that
influence the network. We conjecture that any parametric
model, trained on a classification task using SGD, is initially
biased towards exploiting lower-order input statistics to
classify its inputs. As training progresses, the network then
takes increasingly higher-order statistics of the inputs into
account.

1
Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université ParisDiderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France 2 IdePHICS laboratory,
École Fédérale Polytechnique de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
3
The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics
(ICTP), Trieste, Italy 4 International School of Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy. Correspondence to: Sebastian Goldt
<sgoldt@sissa.it>.

We illustrate this idea in Figure 1, where we show the test
accuracy of a ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) during training
on CIFAR10 (dark blue line; details in Section 3). To un-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

