Implicit Regularization Leads to Benign Overfitting
for Sparse Linear Regression

Mo Zhou 1 Rong Ge 1

Abstract

where data (x, y) is generated as

In deep learning, often the training process finds
an interpolator (a solution with 0 training loss),
but the test loss is still low. This phenomenon,
known as benign overfitting, is a major mystery
that received a lot of recent attention. One common mechanism for benign overfitting is implicit
regularization, where the training process leads
to additional properties for the interpolator, often
characterized by minimizing certain norms. However, even for a simple sparse linear regression
problem y = β ∗⊤ x + ξ with sparse β ∗ , neither
minimum ℓ1 or ℓ2 norm interpolator gives the optimal test loss. In this work, we give a different
parametrization of the model which leads to a new
implicit regularization effect that combines the
benefit of ℓ1 and ℓ2 interpolators. We show that
training our new model via gradient descent leads
to an interpolator with near-optimal test loss. Our
result is based on careful analysis of the training
dynamics and provides another example of implicit regularization effect that goes beyond norm
minimization.

y = β ∗⊤ x + ξ.
Here, β ∗ is an unknown vector that we hope to learn, x
is generated from a data distribution and ξ represents the
noise.
One of the major explanations for benign overfitting is implicit regularization, which suggests that the training process promotes additional properties for the interpolator that
it finds. In the context of the simple linear regression, it
was known that fitting the model y = β ⊤ x directly by gradient descent gives the β with minimum ℓ2 norm; while
parametrizing β as β = w⊙2 − u⊙2 (here ⊙2 represents
entry-wise square) gives the β with minimum ℓ1 norm.
However, for sparse linear regression, implicit regularization in the form of ℓ1 or ℓ2 norm minimization does not
lead to benign overfitting. More precisely, if β ∗ ∈ Rd is an
s-sparse vector, given n samples (xi , yi ) for i = 1, 2, ..., n
where n ≪ d, xi ∼ N (0, I) and ξi ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), one
can still hope to find a parameter β such that the test loss
1
⊤
2
2
2 E[(y − β x) ] is on the order of σ s log(d/s)/n. Neither minimum ℓ1 or ℓ2 interpolator achieves anything near
this guarantee: the best ℓ2 norm interpolator achieves a
2
test loss of Ω(∥β ∗ ∥2 ) (Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al.,
2022) while the best ℓ1 norm interpolator achieves a test
loss of Ω(σ 2 / log(d/n)) (Chatterji & Long, 2022; Wang
et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Benign overfitting – the phenomenon that the training loss
becomes 0, but the test loss remains low – is a major mystery in deep learning. Recently, a long line of works (Belkin
et al., 2019; Bartlett et al., 2020; Belkin et al., 2020; Hastie
et al., 2022; Advani et al., 2020; Koehler et al., 2021) tried
to explain why interpolators (solutions with 0 training loss)
can still enjoy good test loss for various models. This phenomenon is interesting and was studied extensively even for
simple models of linear regression (see e.g.,Bartlett et al.
(2020); Tsigler & Bartlett (2020); Hastie et al. (2022)),

In the sparse regression setting, Muthukumar et al.
(2020) showed that when the model is significantly overparametrized (d ≫ n), it is still possible to find an interpolator with near-optimal test loss. The interpolator in
Muthukumar et al. (2020) has to be constructed explicitly
through a 2-stage process which combines ℓ1 and ℓ2 norm
minimization. In this paper, we ask whether such an interpolator can be found via implicit regularization – by directly
minimizing the loss using a new parametrization.

1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham,
NC, US. Correspondence to: Mo Zhou <mozhou@cs.duke.edu>,
Rong Ge <rongge@cs.duke.edu>.

1.1. Our Result and Technique
We show that implicit regularization can indeed give nearoptimal interpolators (up to polylog factors) and therefore
achieve benign overfitting in the sparse regression setting:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

