Nonparametric Generative Modeling with Conditional Sliced-Wasserstein Flows

Chao Du 1 Tianbo Li 1 Tianyu Pang 1 Shuicheng Yan 1 Min Lin 1

Abstract

the distributions characterized by ODEs (Grathwohl et al.,
2018) and diffusion SDEs (Song et al., 2020). The latter
have achieved great success recently due to the decomposition of complex mappings into multi-step easier ones.

Sliced-Wasserstein Flow (SWF) is a promising
approach to nonparametric generative modeling
but has not been widely adopted due to its suboptimal generative quality and lack of conditional
modeling capabilities. In this work, we make two
major contributions to bridging this gap. First,
based on a pleasant observation that (under certain conditions) the SWF of joint distributions
coincides with those of conditional distributions,
we propose Conditional Sliced-Wasserstein Flow
(CSWF), a simple yet effective extension of SWF
that enables nonparametric conditional modeling.
Second, we introduce appropriate inductive biases
of images into SWF with two techniques inspired
by local connectivity and multiscale representation in vision research, which greatly improve the
efficiency and quality of modeling images. With
all the improvements, we achieve generative performance comparable with many deep parametric
generative models on both conditional and unconditional tasks in a purely nonparametric fashion,
demonstrating its great potential.

While most existing models train parametric neural networks as the mapping functions, a less popular but promising alternative is to perform nonparametric mappings, for
which preliminary attempts (Liutkus et al., 2019; Dai &
Seljak, 2021) have been made recently. These works further decompose the mapping between multidimensional
distributions into mappings between one-dimensional distributions, which have closed-form solutions based on the
optimal transport theory (Villani, 2008). The closed-form
solutions enable a nonparametric way to construct the mappings, which makes no (or weak) assumptions about the
underlying distributions and is therefore more flexible. A
promising work is the Sliced-Wasserstein Flows (SWF) (Liutkus et al., 2019), which achieves generative modeling by
building nonparametric mappings to solve the gradient flows
in the space of probability distribution.
Despite the potential advantages, nonparametric methods
like SWF are still in the early stage of development. First, it
is underexplored how they can be applied to various tasks
besides unconditional generation, such as conditional generation and image inpainting (Meng et al., 2021). In contrast,
parametric probability models have mature techniques for
constructing conditional distributions and end-to-end gradient descent training, making tasks such as text-to-image
generation and image inpainting more straightforward to
implement (Mirza & Osindero, 2014; Van den Oord et al.,
2016; Perez et al., 2018). Similar mechanisms have yet to
be developed for SWF, obstructing its applications in conditional modeling. Second, the quality and efficiency are
still quite limited when applied to high-dimensional data
such as images. While parametric models can leverage the
sophisticated inductive biases of neural networks (e.g., the
U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) in diffusion models) and
are able to process full-resolution images directly, the nonparametric counterpart either operates on low-dimensional
features processed from a pre-trained auto-encoder (Kolouri
et al., 2018; Liutkus et al., 2019) or relies on a carefully
designed patch-based approach (Dai & Seljak, 2021). Although several variants have been proposed to incorporate
convolutional architectures (Nguyen & Ho, 2022b; Laparra

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have made several breakthroughs in
recent years (Brock et al., 2018; Durkan et al., 2019; Child,
2020; Song et al., 2020), thanks to the powerful function
approximation capability of deep neural networks and the
various families of models tailored for probabilistic modeling. One recurring pattern in deep generative models for
continuous variables is to map a simple prior distribution
to the data distribution (or vice versa). Examples include
those performing single-step mappings via a neural network,
such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), VAEs (Kingma
& Welling, 2013), and normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), and those taking iterative steps to transform
1
Sea AI Lab, Singapore. Correspondence to: Chao Du
<duchao@sea.com>, Min Lin <linmin@sea.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

