Simple and Fast Group Robustness by Automatic Feature Reweighting

Shikai Qiu 1 * Andres Potapczynski 1 * Pavel Izmailov 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

Features such as background (ocean), which are correlated
with but not causally related to the target (waterbird) are
known as spurious features or spurious attributes. By relying on spurious features, a model performs well on the
training data distribution without learning the core features
that are intrinsically descriptive of the targets. Such models
inevitably fail to generalize to new data where the spurious
correlation breaks, such as images of waterbirds appearing
on land backgrounds.

A major challenge to out-of-distribution generalization is reliance on spurious features — patterns
that are predictive of the class label in the training data distribution, but not causally related to
the target. Standard methods for reducing the reliance on spurious features typically assume that
we know what the spurious feature is, which is
rarely true in the real world. Methods that attempt
to alleviate this limitation are complex, hard to
tune, and lead to a significant computational overhead compared to standard training. In this paper, we propose Automatic Feature Reweighting
(AFR), an extremely simple and fast method for
updating the model to reduce the reliance on spurious features. AFR retrains the last layer of a standard ERM-trained base model with a weighted
loss that emphasizes the examples where the ERM
model predicts poorly, automatically upweighting
the minority group without group labels. With this
simple procedure, we improve upon the best reported results among competing methods trained
without spurious attributes on several vision and
natural language classification benchmarks, using
only a fraction of their compute.

The best existing approaches for addressing spurious features require access to group labels on the training data
(Sagawa et al., 2020; Idrissi et al., 2021), which simultaneously specify both the class label and the spurious attribute
for each datapoint. This requirement presents a major limitation: while many real-world problems contain spurious
correlations, we do not know what they are a priori! Moreover, even in rare cases where we could potentially identify
the spurious feature, it can be prohibitively expensive to
manually add group labels to a large dataset. Consequently,
there has been great interest in reducing the reliance on
spurious features without explicit access to the spurious attributes (e.g., Liu et al., 2021; Nam et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022; Lee et al., 2022b). However, compared to standard
training, the resulting methods are generally more complex,
computationally heavy, and difficult to tune, making them
difficult to adopt in practice.
In this paper, we propose Automatic Feature Reweighting
(AFR), a simple and fast method for reducing the reliance
on the spurious attributes with a minimal computational
overhead compared to standard training. As in Kirichenko
et al. (2022), we freeze the feature extractor of the base
model pretrained on a dataset with a spurious correlation,
and focus on retraining the last layer of the model. However, unlike Kirichenko et al. (2022), which uses a groupbalanced dataset for re-training, we use an weighted loss on
a held-out dataset drawn simply from the training distribution for retraining the last layer, where the weights prioritize
datapoints on which the base model performs poorly. These
weights automatically result in an approximately groupbalanced dataset for re-training without either group labels
or intervention in base model training. We illustrate AFR in
Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Most realistic datasets contain features that can be used
to achieve strong performance in-distribution, but that are
not inherently relevant to the predictive task. For example,
on Waterbirds (Sagawa et al., 2020), an image classification dataset where the goal is to distinguish landbirds (e.g.
woodpecker) from waterbirds (e.g. seagull), a model can
reach 95% in-distribution accuracy by only looking at the
background and completely ignoring the actual bird.
*
Equal contribution 1 New York University. Correspondence to: Shikai Qiu <sq2129@nyu.edu>, Andres Potapczynski
<ap6604@nyu.edu>, Pavel Izmailov <pi390@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We show that AFR achieves strong results on vision and lan-

1

