NerfDiff: Single-image View Synthesis with NeRF-guided Distillation
from 3D-aware Diffusion
Jiatao Gu 1 Alex Trevithick 2 Kai-En Lin 2 Josh Susskind 1 Christian Theobalt 3
Lingjie Liu 3 4 Ravi Ramamoorthi 2

Abstract
Novel view synthesis from a single image requires
inferring occluded regions of objects and scenes
whilst simultaneously maintaining semantic and
physical consistency with the input. Existing approaches condition neural radiance fields (NeRF)
on local image features, projecting points to the
input image plane, and aggregating 2D features
to perform volume rendering. However, under
severe occlusion, this projection fails to resolve
uncertainty, resulting in blurry renderings that
lack details. In this work, we propose NerfDiff, which addresses this issue by distilling the
knowledge of a 3D-aware conditional diffusion
model (CDM) into NeRF through synthesizing
and refining a set of virtual views at test-time.
We further propose a novel NeRF-guided distillation algorithm that simultaneously generates
3D consistent virtual views from the CDM samples, and finetunes the NeRF based on the improved virtual views. Our approach significantly
outperforms existing NeRF-based and geometryfree approaches on challenging datasets including ShapeNet, ABO, and Clevr3D. Please see the
supplementary website (https://jiataogu.
me/nerfdiff) for video results.

VisionNeRF (Lin et.al., 2023)

Input Image

Ours

Ground-truth

Figure 1. Renderings from our method in comparison to the SoTA
VisionNeRF (Lin et al., 2023). Note how our method can predict
sharp renderings despite large occlusion, whereas VisionNeRF
cannot handle this uncertainty and shows implausible blurring.

directions. This problem is challenging since novel views
must account for occlusions and unseen regions. This problem has a long history, going back to early work in imagebased rendering (IBR) (Chen & Williams, 1993; Gortler
et al., 1996; Levoy & Hanrahan, 1996; McMillan & Bishop,
1995). However, IBR methods can only produce suboptimal results and are often scene-specific. Recently, neural
radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) have shown
high-quality novel view synthesis results, but NeRF requires
tens or hundreds of images for overfitting a scene and has
no generalization ability to infer new scenes.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is a core component of computer
graphics and vision applications, including virtual and augmented reality, immersive photography, and the creation of
digital replicas. Given a few input views of an object or a
scene, one seeks to synthesize new views from other viewing
1

Apple 2 University of California, San Diego 3 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany 4 University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Jiatao Gu <jiatao@apple.com>, Alex Trevithick
<atrevithick@ucsd.edu>, Kai-En Lin <k2lin@ucsd.edu>,
Lingjie Liu <lingjie.liu@seas.upenn.edu>.

This work focuses on novel view synthesis from a single image. In attempts to do so, generalizable NeRF models (Trevithick & Yang, 2021; Yu et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023)
have been proposed, whereby the NeRF representation is
conditioned by the projection of 3D points and gathering of
corresponding image features. These approaches produce
good results, especially for cameras near the input. How-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

