How Does Information Bottleneck Help Deep Learning?

Kenji Kawaguchi * 1 Zhun Deng * 2 Xu Ji * 3 Jiaoyang Huang 4

Abstract
Numerous deep learning algorithms have been
inspired by and understood via the notion of information bottleneck, where unnecessary information is (often implicitly) minimized while taskrelevant information is maximized. However, a
rigorous argument for justifying why it is desirable to control information bottlenecks has been
elusive. In this paper, we provide the first rigorous learning theory for justifying the benefit
of information bottleneck in deep learning by
mathematically relating information bottleneck
to generalization errors. Our theory proves that
controlling information bottleneck is one way to
control generalization errors in deep learning, although it is not the only or necessary way. We
investigate the merit of our new mathematical
findings with experiments across a range of architectures and learning settings. In many cases,
generalization errors are shown to correlate with
the degree of information bottleneck: i.e., the
amount of the unnecessary information at hidden
layers. This paper provides a theoretical foundation for current and future methods through the
lens of information bottleneck. Our new generalization bounds scale with the degree of information bottleneck, unlike the previous bounds
that scale with the number of parameters, VC
dimension, Rademacher complexity, stability or
robustness. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/xu-ji/information-bottleneck

Figure 1. Illustration of X, Y and Z. This paper studies the relationship between performances of deep neural networks and the
mutual information between X and Z. Our theory proves that
controlling this mutual information is one way to control performances in deep learning, although it is not the necessary way.

minimal sufficient statistics for extracting information about
target Y ∈ Y into representation Z = ϕ(X) ∈ Z from
input X ∈ X . An information bottleneck imposes regularization at representation Z by minimizing the mutual
information between X and Z, I(X; Z), while maximizing
the mutual information between Y and Z, I(Y ; Z).
In practice I(X; Z) is often minimized implicitly, e.g. as
a result of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or an architecture choice (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017). An explicit
minimization of I(X; Z) has been also adopted in the machine learning literature as a regularization technique (Alemi
et al., 2016; 2018), where the mutual information is either
estimated by averaging log probabilities of latent representations over empirical samples or replaced by a tractable
upper bound (Kirsch et al., 2020; Kolchinsky & Tracey,
2017; Alemi et al., 2016). More generally, the notion of
bottlenecks on representation expressivity has been used in
work on structural inductive biases (Goyal & Bengio, 2022).

1. Introduction
The information bottleneck principle (Tishby et al., 1999;
Slonim & Tishby, 2000) has been a great concept in balancing the trade-off between the complexity of representation
and the power of predicting. It is based on the notion of

Consequently, understanding the connection between the
information bottleneck regularizer I(X; Z) and the generalization ability of machine learning models has become an
active area of research. Given its importance, Shwartz-Ziv
et al. (2019) provided the following conjecture:

*

Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.
NUS 2 Columbia University 3 Mila 4 University of Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to: Kenji Kawaguchi <kenji@nus.edu.sg>.

1

Conjecture 1. (Informal version (Shwartz-Ziv et al., 2019))
With probability at least 1 − δ over the training data
s = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 drawn from the same distribution as a
random variable pair (X, Y ), for the generalization error

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

