Fair Densities via Boosting the Sufficient Statistics of Exponential Families

Alexander Soen * 1 2 Hisham Husain * 2 Richard Nock † 3 1

Abstract

race=Caucasian

We introduce a boosting algorithm to pre-process
data for fairness. Starting from an initial fair
but inaccurate distribution, our approach shifts
towards better data fitting while still ensuring a
minimal fairness guarantee. To do so, it learns the
sufficient statistics of an exponential family with
boosting-compliant convergence. Importantly, we
are able to theoretically prove that the learned
distribution will have a representation rate and
statistical rate data fairness guarantee. Unlike recent optimization based pre-processing methods,
our approach can be easily adapted for continuous domain features. Furthermore, when the
weak learners are specified to be decision trees,
the sufficient statistics of the learned distribution
can be examined to provide clues on sources of
(un)fairness. Empirical results are present to display the quality of result on real-world data.

False

True

priors_count=1 to 3

two_year_recid

sex=Female

...

Real

age_cat ≤ 25

age_cat ≤ 25

...

...

Figure 1. Our approach learns weak learners at each boosting iteration of the algorithm. The weak learner attempts to differentiate
between the ‘generated’ current distribution (more blue) versus
the ‘real’ data (more red) — whose predicted ‘realness’ are used
to update the current distribution. The following shows, the first 3
levels of a decision tree weak learner produced in the first round
of boosting M-E-1.0 (with the COMPAS dataset and sensitive attribute = race). The decision tree unveils a race and sex-dependent
segregation. The circular node depicts a leaf node.

Recently, optimization based approaches have been proposed to directly learn debias distributions (Calmon et al.,
2017; Celis et al., 2020). Such approaches share two drawbacks: tuning parameters to guarantee realizable solutions
or fairness guarantees can be tedious, and the distribution
learned has the same discrete support as the training sample.
This latter drawback inherently prevents extending the distribution (support) and its guarantees (fairness) ”beyond the
training sample’s”. On the other hand, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) based approaches have been leveraged
to learn fair distributions (Choi et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018;
Rajabi & Garibay, 2022). These can naturally be adapted to
continuous spaces. Unfortunately, in discrete spaces rounding or domain transformations need to be used. Furthermore,
these approaches often lack any theoretical fairness guarantees; or requires casual structures to be known (van Breugel
et al., 2021). In addition, the fairness of GAN based approaches are difficult to estimate a prior to training, where
fairness is achieved via a regularization penalty or separate
training rounds. A shared downside of optimization and
GAN approaches have is the lack of interpretability of how
the fair distributions are learned.

1. Introduction
It is hard to exaggerate the importance that fairness has
now taken within Machine Learning (ML) (Calmon et al.,
2017; Celis et al., 2020; Williamson & Menon, 2019) (and
references therein). ML being a data processing field, a
common upstream source of biases leading to downstream
discrimination is the data itself (Calders & Žliobaitė, 2013;
Kay et al., 2015; De-Arteaga et al., 2019). Targeting data
is especially important when the downstream use-case is
unknown. As such, pre-processing algorithm have been
introduced to debias data and mitigate unfairness in potential
downstream tasks. These approaches commonly target two
sources of (un)fairness (Celis et al., 2020): ① the balance of
different social groups across the dataset; and ② the balance
of positive outcomes between different social groups.
*
Work complete prior to joining Amazon † Work complete
prior to joining Google Research 1 Australian National University
2
Amazon 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Alexander Soen
<alexander.soen@anu.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our Contributions We propose a novel boosting algorithm to pre-process data: Fair Boosted Density Estimation
1

