A New PHO-rmula for Improved Performance of Semi-Structured Networks

David Rügamer 1 2

Abstract

way that users can directly relate the effects γ to the original
inputs Z. While there is a plethora of literature characterizing the learned DNN effects in terms of Z, we in this work
focus on models that combine a structured linear model-type
predictor η str := Xβ and an unstructured DNN predictor
η unstr := U γ to combine interpretability and predictive
performance. The latent features U are learned from a set
of features Z with arbitrary shape (e.g., image tensors) and
potentially overlapping with X. An example of such a
model is the semi-structured neural network (SSN). SSNs,
exemplary depicted in Figure 1, assume a late fusion of
the structured and unstructured model by combining both
model parts additively, i.e.,

Recent advances to combine structured regression models and deep neural networks for better
interpretability, more expressiveness, and statistically valid uncertainty quantification demonstrate
the versatility of semi-structured neural networks
(SSNs). We show that techniques to properly
identify the contributions of the different model
components in SSNs, however, lead to suboptimal network estimation, slower convergence, and
degenerated or erroneous predictions. In order
to solve these problems while preserving favorable model properties, we propose a non-invasive
post-hoc orthogonalization (PHO) that guarantees
identifiability of model components and provides
better estimation and prediction quality. Our theoretical findings are supported by numerical experiments, a benchmark comparison as well as a
real-world application to COVID-19 infections.

η str + η unstr = Xβ + U γ.

(1)

This simple fusion has some attractive properties. Dorigatti
et al. (2023), e.g., promote SSNs in the medical application
context where researchers require some parts of the network
to be a white box and derive statistically valid uncertainty
quantification for η str . We will motivate our proposed
approach in this paper using SSNs, but later results also
generalize to more complex network structures.

1. Introduction
A linear model in its original form is inherently interpretable
due to its structural model space assumption: Given features
X, the expected outcome E(y|X) of a variable of interest y
is the linear combination Xβ of the features X and weights
β. When fixing all but one of the features xj , the change
in E(y|X) can be easily quantified and interpreted by the
change in xj multiplied by its weight βj (ceteris paribus).
A deep neural network (DNN), on the other hand, can also
be seen as a linear combination of features and weights, say
U γ, where U are latent features learned in the penultimate
layer of the neural network and γ are the weights from the
connection between the last hidden and the output layer (in
this case with linear activation function). As U itself is often
a non-linear and complex transformation of the actual DNN
inputs Z, the linear combination U γ is not “structured” in a

Why make structured model parts explicit? As DNNs
can be designed very flexibly and deep architectures often
come with some form of universal approximation guarantee,
DNNs can also capture linear effects. This raises the question as to why the structured part needs to be made explicit
in models such as the SSN. The reason is the same as for the
usage and success of residual connections (He et al., 2016):
while DNNs can represent increasingly more complex and
non-linear functions with greater depth, it also gets increasingly more difficult to learn the identity function of some
input for these networks. By concatenating the outputs of
(parts of) a DNN with the inputs of this DNN, the identity
map can be made explicit and thereby allows the combined
network to better learn linear effects of the inputs.

1
Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: David Rügamer <david@stat.unimuenchen.de>.
2

Identifiability In late semi-structured fusion models such
as the SSN, the interpretability of the structured part can not
be preserved without additional constraints (see, e.g., Baumann et al., 2021; Fritz et al., 2022; Rügamer et al., 2023).
This is due to an identifiability problem. The DNN can also
capture linear effects – to some extent – but it is unclear

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

