Generative Adversarial Symmetry Discovery

Jianke Yang 1 Robin Walters * 2 Nima Dehmamy * 3 Rose Yu 1

Abstract
Despite the success of equivariant neural networks
in scientific applications, they require knowing
the symmetry group a priori. However, it may be
difficult to know which symmetry to use as an
inductive bias in practice. Enforcing the wrong
symmetry could even hurt the performance. In
this paper, we propose a framework, LieGAN,
to automatically discover equivariances from a
dataset using a paradigm akin to generative adversarial training. Specifically, a generator learns
a group of transformations applied to the data,
which preserve the original distribution and fool
the discriminator. LieGAN represents symmetry
as interpretable Lie algebra basis and can discover
various symmetries such as the rotation group
SO(n), restricted Lorentz group SO(1, 3)+ in trajectory prediction and top-quark tagging tasks.
The learned symmetry can also be readily used in
several existing equivariant neural networks to improve accuracy and generalization in prediction.
Our code is available at https://github.com/RoseSTL-Lab/LieGAN.

Figure 1. Connection between symmetry and data distribution.
MNIST classification is invariant to a subset of SE(2) transformations. If the digits are transformed by random rotations and
translations within this subset, the resulting data distribution pt
remains close to the original distribution pd .

However, a key limitation of equivariant neural networks is
that they require explicit knowledge of the data symmetry
before a model can be constructed. In practice, it is sometimes difficult to identify the true symmetries of the data,
and constraining the model by the exact mathematical symmetry might not be optimal in real-world situations (Wang
et al., 2022). These challenges call for approaches that can
automatically discover the underlying symmetry of the data.
Neural networks that discover unknown symmetry play the
role of AI scientists , not only by making data-driven predictions, but also by identifying and describing physical systems through their symmetries and generating new scientific
insights through the close relationship between symmetry,
conservation laws and underlying governing equations (Alet
et al., 2021). Most existing work on symmetry discovery can
only address a small fraction of potential symmetry types,
such as finite groups (Zhou et al., 2020), subsets of a given
group (Benton et al., 2020) or individual group elements
(Desai et al., 2021). L-conv (Dehmamy et al., 2021) can discover continuous symmetries without discretization of the
groups, but has limited computational efficiency. A more
general framework is needed for the discovery of various
real-world symmetries.

1. Introduction
Symmetry is an important inductive bias in deep learning.
For example, convolutional neural networks (Krizhevsky
et al., 2017) exploit translational symmetry in images, and
graph neural networks utilize permutation symmetry in
graph-structured data (Kipf & Welling, 2016). Equivariant
networks have led to significant improvement in generalization, sample efficiency and scientific validity (Zaheer et al.,
2017; Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Cohen et al., 2019a; Wang et al.,
2021). Interest has surged in both theoretical analysis and
practical techniques for building general group equivariant
neural networks (Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Cohen et al.,
2019b; Bekkers, 2019; Finzi et al., 2021).

In this work, we present a novel framework for discovering
continuous symmetry from data using generative adversarial
training (Goodfellow et al., 2014). We establish the connection between symmetry and data distribution as in figure
1. Our method then trains a symmetry generator that transforms the training data and outputs a similar distribution to
the original dataset, which suggests equivariance or invari-

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California San Diego
2
Northeastern University 3 IBM Research. Correspondence to:
Rose Yu <roseyu@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

