MultiDiffusion: Fusing Diffusion Paths for Controlled Image Generation

Omer Bar-Tal * 1 Lior Yariv * 1 Yaron Lipman 1 2 Tali Dekel 1

Abstract

from scratch or finetuning a given diffusion model for the
task at hand (e.g., inpainting, layout-to-image training, etc.
(Wang et al., 2022a; Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al.,
2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Avrahami et al., 2022b; Brooks
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b)). With the ever-increasing
scale of models and training data, this approach often requires extensive compute and long development period, even
in a finetuning setting. (ii) Reuse a pre-trained model and
add some controlled generation capability. Previously, these
methods have concentrated on specific tasks and designed a
tailored methodology (e.g., replacing objects in an image,
manipulating style, or controlling layout (Tumanyan et al.,
2022; Hertz et al., 2022; Avrahami et al., 2022a)).

Recent advances in text-to-image generation with
diffusion models present transformative capabilities in image synthesis. However, user controllability of the generated image, and fast adaptation to new tasks still remains an open challenge,
currently mostly addressed by costly and long retraining and fine-tuning or ad-hoc adaptations to
specific image generation tasks. In this work, we
present MultiDiffusion, a unified framework that
enables versatile and controllable image generation, using a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
model, without any further training or finetuning.
At the center of our approach is a new generation
process, based on an optimization task that binds
together multiple diffusion generation processes
with a shared set of parameters or constraints. We
show that MultiDiffusion can be readily applied
to generate high quality and diverse images that
adhere to user-provided controls, such as desired
aspect ratio (e.g., panorama), and spatial guiding
signals, ranging from tight segmentation masks to
bounding boxes.

1. Introduction

The goal of this work is to design MultiDiffusion, a new
unified framework that significantly increases the flexibility in adapting a pre-trained (reference) diffusion model
to controlled image generation. The basic idea behind the
MultiDiffusion is to define a new generation process that
is composed of several reference diffusion generation processes binded together with a set of shared parameters or
constraints. In more detail, the reference diffusion model
is applied to different regions in the generated image, predicting a denoising sampling step for each. In turn, the
MultiDiffusion takes a global denoising sampling step reconciling all these different steps via least squares optimal
solution.

Text-to-image generative models have emerged as a “disruptive technology”, demonstrating unprecedented capabilities
in synthesizing high-quality and diverse images from text
prompts, where diffusion models are currently established as
state-of-the-art (Saharia et al., 2022b; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Rombach et al., 2022; Croitoru et al., 2022). While this
progress holds a great promise in changing the way we
can create digital content, deploying text-to-image models
to real-world applications remains challenging due to the
difficulty to provide users with intuitive control over the
generated content. Currently, controllability over diffusion
models is achieved in one of two ways: (i) training a model

For example, consider the task of generating an image at arbitrary aspect ratio given a reference diffusion model trained
on square images (Fig. 2). At each denoising step, the MultiDiffusion fuses the denoising directions, provided by the
reference model, from all the square crops, and strives to
follow them all as closely as possible, constrained by the
fact that nearby crops share common pixels. Intuitively,
we encourage each crop to be a real sample from the reference model. Note that while each crop might pull to a
different denoising direction, our framework yields a unified
denoising step, hence produces high-quality and seamless
images.

*

1
Equal contribution
Weizmann Institute of Science
Meta AI. Correspondence to: Omer Bar-Tal <omer.bartal@weizmann.ac.il>, Lior Yariv <lior.yariv@weizmann.ac.il>.

With MultiDiffusion, we are able to harness a reference
pre-trained text-to-image to different applications including
synthesizing images at desired resolution or aspect ratio, or

2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Project page is available at https://multidiffusion.
github.io.

1

