Revisiting Bellman Errors for Offline Model Selection

Joshua P Zitovsky 1 Daniel de Marchi 1 Rishabh Agarwal 2 3 * Michael R Kosorok 1 *

Abstract

are based on off-policy evaluation (OPE) algorithms that
estimate the expected returns under a target policy using
only offline data (Voloshin et al., 2021b). Unfortunately,
such estimates are often inaccurate (Fu et al., 2021). As
an alternative, many works have explored using empirical
Bellman errors to perform OMS, but have found them to
be poor predictors of value model accuracy (Irpan et al.,
2019; Paine et al., 2020). This has led to a belief among
many researchers that Bellman errors are not useful for
OMS (Géron, 2019; Fujimoto et al., 2022).

Offline model selection (OMS), that is, choosing the best policy from a set of many policies
given only logged data, is crucial for applying
offline RL in real-world settings. One idea that
has been extensively explored is to select policies based on the mean squared Bellman error
(MSBE) of the associated Q-functions. However,
previous work has struggled to obtain adequate
OMS performance with Bellman errors, leading
many researchers to abandon the idea. To this end,
we elucidate why previous work has seen pessimistic results with Bellman errors and identify
conditions under which OMS algorithms based
on Bellman errors will perform well. Moreover,
we develop a new estimator of the MSBE that is
more accurate than prior methods. Our estimator
obtains impressive OMS performance on diverse
discrete control tasks, including Atari games.

To this end, we propose a new algorithm, Supervised Bellman Validation (SBV), that provides a better proxy for the
true Bellman errors than empirical Bellman errors. SBV
achieves strong performance on diverse tasks ranging from
healthcare problems (Klasnja et al., 2015) to Atari games
(Bellemare et al., 2013). In contrast, competing baselines
suffer from limitations that hinder real-world applicability and perform no better than random chance on certain
tasks. In addition to demonstrating the potential utility
of Bellman errors in OMS, we also investigate when they
are effective by exploring the factors most predictive of
their performance. Our investigations help explain why
Bellman errors have achieved mixed performance in the
past, provide guidance on how to achieve better performance with these errors, and highlight several avenues
for future work. Finally, we open-source our code at
https://github.com/jzitovsky/SBV. To help
others conduct experiments on Atari, our repository includes
over 1000 trained Q-functions as well as efficient implementations for several deep OMS algorithms (Appendix A.2).

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Ernst et al., 2005;
Levine et al., 2020) focuses on training an agent solely
from a fixed dataset of environment interactions. By not
requiring any online interactions, offline RL can be applied
to real-world settings, such as autonomous driving (Yu et al.,
2020) and healthcare (Weltz et al., 2022), where online data
collection may be expensive or unsafe but large amounts of
previously-logged interactions are available.

2. Preliminaries

While there has been a recent surge of methods that can train
an agent offline (Fu et al., 2020; Gulcehre et al., 2020), such
methods typically tune their hyperparameters using online
interactions, which undermines the aim of offline RL. To
this end, we focus on the problem of offline model selection
(OMS), that is, selecting the best policy from a set of many
policies using only logged data. Common OMS approaches

2.1. Offline Reinforcement Learning
In offline RL, we have a static dataset D = {(s, a, r, s′ )}
of transitions, where we observe the reward r and next
state s′ after taking action a on state s. We assume
the data comes from a Markov decision process (MDP)
M = (S, A, T, R, d0 , γ) (Puterman, 1994) with state and
action space S and A, transition probabilities T (s′ |s, a),
rewards R(s, a, s′ ) = r, initial state probabilities d0 (s0 )
and discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1). Throughout we assume that
A is discrete. Our proposed method has limited applicability in continuous control problems for reasons discussed

*

Equal advising 1 Department of Biostatistics, UNC Chapel Hill,
North Carolina USA 2 Google DeepMind 3 Mila. Correspondence
to: Josh Zitovsky <joshz@live.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

