Towards Credible Visual Model Interpretation with Path Attribution

Naveed Akhtar 1 Mohammad A. A. K. Jalwana 1

Abstract
With its inspirational roots in game-theory, path
attribution framework stands out among the posthoc model interpretation techniques due to its
axiomatic nature. However, recent developments
show that despite being axiomatic, path attribution
methods can compute counter-intuitive feature attributions. Not only that, for deep visual models,
the methods may also not conform to the original game-theoretic intuitions that are the basis of
their axiomatic nature. To address these issues,
we perform a systematic investigation of the path
attribution framework. We first pinpoint the conditions in which the counter-intuitive attributions
of deep visual models can be avoided under this
framework. Then, we identify a mechanism of
integrating the attributions over the paths such
that they computationally conform to the original
insights of game-theory. These insights are eventually combined into a method, which provides
intuitive and reliable feature attributions. We also
establish the findings empirically by evaluating
the method on multiple datasets, models and evaluation metrics. Extensive experiments show a
consistent quantitative and qualitative gain in the
results over the baselines.

Figure 1. Feature absence and its (gradually increasing) presence is
generally easy to model in cooprative game setups, which ensures
the axiomatic properties of path attribution framework. However,
in deep vision modelling, ambiguous notion of feature absence not
only compromises the efficacy of the framework, it also leads to
path features that do not conform to the game-theoretic intuitions
behind the technique. This is in addition to provably counterintuitive attributions resulting from the path attribution framework
for deep visual models (Srinivas & Fleuret, 2019).

wal et al., 2021), (Chen et al., 2020), (Simonyan et al., 2014),
(Akhtar & Jalwana, 2023). Whereas rendering the models
intrinsically explainable is an active parallel research direction (Chen et al., 2020), (Blazek & Lin, 2021), (Agarwal
et al., 2021), (Koh et al., 2020), post-hoc interpretation methods are currently highly popular, as they do not interfere
with the standard model training or its performance.
Path attribution methods (Sundararajan et al., 2017), (Erion
et al., 2021), (Kapishnikov et al., 2021), (Pan et al., 2021)
hold a special place among the post-hoc interpretation techniques due to their clear theoretical foundations. These
methods compute attribution scores (or simply attributions)
for the input features to quantify their importance for the
model prediction, where the attributions and the methods
follow certain desirable axiomatic properties (Sundararajan et al., 2017). These properties emerge from the gametheoretic roots of the path attribution framework (Friedman,
2004), (Sundararajan et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
Deep learning is fast approaching the maturity to be commonly deployed in safety-critical domains (Rudin, 2019),
(Nat), (Akhtar et al., 2021). However, its black-box nature
presents a major concern for its use in high-stake applications (Agarwal et al., 2021), (Blazek & Lin, 2021), and its
ethical use in general (Vinuesa & Sirmacek, 2021), (Vinuesa
et al., 2020). These facts have led to numerous techniques
to explain the deep learning models (Jalwana et al., 2021),
(Sundararajan et al., 2017), (Selvaraju et al., 2017), (Agar-

To compute the attribution score for an input feature, the
path attribution framework defines a baseline, and a path
between the input and the baseline. Based on the original
game-theoretic view (Aumann & Shapley, 2015), (Friedman, 2004), the baseline signifies ‘absence’ of the feature,
and the path flows from this absence to the ‘presence’ of the
feature in the input. This intuition has direct implications
for the desirable axiomatic properties of the path attribution framework. However, an unambiguous definition of
feature absence eludes visual modelling (Erion et al., 2021),
(Sturmfels et al., 2020), (Pan et al., 2021). This is not only

1
Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling highway, 6009
Crawley, Australia.
Correspondence to: Naveed Akhtar
<naveed.akhtar@uwa.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

