SRATTA: Sample Re-ATTribution Attack of Secure Aggregation in Federated
Learning.

Tanguy Marchand 1 Regis Loeb* 1 Ulysse Marteau-Ferey* 1 Jean Ogier du Terrail* 1 Arthur Pignet* 1

Abstract

attacks, which endangers privacy.

We consider a cross-silo federated learning (FL)
setting where a machine learning model with
a fully connected first layer is trained between
different clients and a central server using FedAvg, and where the aggregation step can be performed with secure aggregation (SA). We present
SRATTA an attack relying only on aggregated
models which, under realistic assumptions, (i) recovers data samples from the different clients, and
(ii) groups data samples coming from the same
client together. While sample recovery has already been explored in an FL setting, the ability to
group samples per client, despite the use of SA, is
novel. This poses a significant unforeseen security
threat to FL and effectively breaks SA. We show
that SRATTA is both theoretically grounded and
can be used in practice on realistic models and
datasets. We also propose counter-measures, and
claim that clients should play an active role to
guarantee their privacy during training.

Various mechanisms to increase the privacy provided by FL
have been explored by the literature, in particular differential
privacy (DP) and secure aggregation (SA) protocols. Despite the absolute security guarantees they provide (Dwork
et al., 2014), current DP algorithms might impact the models’ performances (El Ouadrhiri & Abdelhadi, 2022). On the
other hand, SA is a cryptographic protocol that "allow[s]
a collection of mutually distrust parties, each holding a
private value, to collaboratively compute the sum of those
values without revealing the values themselves" (Bonawitz
et al., 2017). It can therefore be used to average model
updates during FL training, to hide individual contributions
from clients without impacting model performance. Such
techniques are being used in production (Heyndrickx et al.,
2022) as an effective way to protect user data. By hiding
individual contributions, the effect of SA is twofold: (i)
it virtually increases the number of accumulated gradients
in one update, making gradient and update-based attacks
more difficult and (ii) it prevents reconstructed samples to
be attributed to specific clients.
Recently, the efficiency of SA to prevent reconstruction attacks has been questioned, as gradient attacks (Zhu et al.,
2019) can recover samples from large batches of raw gradients (Yin et al., 2021). In the FL setting, recent attacks (Geiping et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2022; Dimitrov et al., 2022) have
built on these works and manage to partially reconstruct
data from FL updates in specific cases. Despite these recent works in gradient (or FL-update) attacks targeting the
SA setting, the claim that, even though individual samples
might be recovered, SA prevents linking those samples back
to their respective clients has remained unchallenged so far.

1. Introduction and Background
Federated learning (FL) (Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015; McMahan et al., 2017) has been introduced as a privacy-preserving
technique to train a model on multiple data sources or clients.
The applications of FL now span multiple domains from
medicine (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2023) to finance (Long
et al., 2020), giving ways to unlock new sources of data
while remaining privacy-preserving (Zheng et al., 2022).
As the adoption of this new technology grows, so do concerns about the limitations of FL regarding its actual privacy guarantees (Kairouz et al., 2021). Indeed, it has now
become clear that naïve gradient sharing is vulnerable to
data-reconstruction (Zhu et al., 2019), membership (Shokri
et al., 2017), and property inference (Ganju et al., 2018)

In this work we demonstrate for the first time that the nature of FL updates does allow one to link samples, despite
the use of SA, assuming the model has a fully connected
first layer and that we are in the cross-silo FL setting (number of clients from 2 to 50). Targeting this newly found
weakness, we devise an attack, named SRATTA (Sample
Re-ATTribution Attack against Secure Aggregation in Federated learning), to group samples belonging to individual
clients together, recovering per-client contributions up to a
permutation. This is done in the honest but curious setting,

*
Alphabetical order 1 Owkin Inc.. Correspondence to: Tanguy
Marchand <tanguy.marchand@owkin.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

