General Sequential Episodic Memory Model

Arjun Karuvally 1 Terrence J. Sejnowski 2 Hava T. Siegelmann 1

Abstract

a particular object of interest or important dates of events.
Sequence retrieval leads to a recollection process that is
not just a single memory but a trajectory of sequentially
connected memories. Memories organized into these trajectories are called episodes. Memories may come together in
episodes allowing us to link and retrieve sometimes distinct
and representationally unrelated memories. The Sequence
Episodic Memory (SEM) problem in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) pertains to creating and manipulating these
memories and their sequential relationships by encoding
relevant information in some form in the synapses.

The state-of-the-art memory model is the General
Associative Memory Model, a generalization of
the classical Hopfield network. Like its ancestor, the general associative memory has a welldefined state-dependant energy surface, and its
memories correlate with its fixed points. This is
unlike human memories, which are commonly sequential rather than separated fixed points. In this
paper, we introduce a class of General Sequential Episodic Memory Models (GSEMM) that, in
the adiabatic limit, exhibit a dynamic energy surface, leading to a series of meta-stable states capable of encoding memory sequences. A multipletimescale architecture enables the dynamic nature of the energy surface with newly introduced
asymmetric synapses and signal propagation delays. We demonstrate its dense capacity under
polynomial activation functions. GSEMM combines separate memories, short and long sequential episodic memories, under a unified theoretical framework, demonstrating how energy-based
memory modeling can provide robust and scalable
memory systems in static and dynamic memory
cases.

The energy paradigm plays a major role in singleton
episodic memory modeling. The energy paradigm for memory was introduced by Hopfield (Hopfield, 1982; Amari,
2004), who defined energy as a quadratic function of the
neural activity in symmetrically connected networks with
binary neurons. A single memory is stored as a local minimum of the energy surface. The network states update such
that it converges to one of the local minima and retrieves
a stable activity state representing a single memory. The
Hopfield network model has subsequently been generalized
along two directions.
The first direction focuses on memory capacity. Capacity
relates to the number of neurons required in the ensemble
to store and retrieve a certain number of memories without
corruption. The capacity of the original Hopfield model was
14% of the number of neurons, a small fraction of the number of neurons in the population(McEliece et al., 1987; Folli
et al., 2016; Amit et al., 1985). A significant breakthrough
in capacity came with the introduction of Dense Associative
Memory (Krotov & Hopfield, 2016), which introduced a
polynomial non-linearity to separate the contribution of each
memory to the energy minimum. The non-linearity enabled
the models to store more memories than the number of neurons (hence the term dense). Further studies extended these
ideas to continuous state spaces, and exponential memory
capacity (Demircigil et al., 2017). Currently, these models
form the fundamental components of transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017; Ramsauer et al., 2021) with
high levels of performance on large-scale natural language
processing tasks (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019)
and computer vision (Carion et al., 2020) tasks. Recently,
General Associative Memory Model (GAMM) (Krotov &
Hopfield, 2021) unified these advances in associative mem-

Introduction
Episodic memory refers to the conscious recollection of
facts or subjective past experiences and forms an essential
component of long-term memory (Tulving, 2002; Duff et al.,
2019; Renoult et al., 2019). The recollection process may
have both singleton and sequence characteristics. Singleton
retrieval is the associative recall of a single memory from
a retrieval cue. This memory could be the description of
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
Massachusetts Amherst 2 Computational Neurobiology Laboratory,
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies. Correspondence to:
Arjun Karuvally <akaruvally@umass.edu>, Hava T. Siegelmann
<hava@umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

