Conformal Prediction for Federated
Uncertainty Quantification Under Label Shift

Vincent Plassier * 1 2 Mehdi Makni * 1 Aleksandr Rubashevskii 3 4 Eric Moulines 2 4 Maxim Panov 5

Abstract

bandwidth is limited, and agents are not always available
(system heterogeneity). Second, the data distribution at different agents can vary greatly (statistical heterogeneity);
see (Huang et al., 2022; Yoon et al., 2022). These features
lead to serious challenges for both training and inference in
federated systems. The focus of this work is on federated
inference procedures that allow to build prediction sets for
each agent with a confidence level that can be guaranteed.

Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning
framework where many clients collaboratively
train models while keeping the training data decentralized. Despite recent advances in FL, the
uncertainty quantification topic (UQ) remains partially addressed. Among UQ methods, conformal
prediction (CP) approaches provides distributionfree guarantees under minimal assumptions. We
develop a new federated conformal prediction
method based on quantile regression and take into
account privacy constraints. This method takes
advantage of importance weighting to effectively
address the label shift between agents and provides theoretical guarantees for both valid coverage of the prediction sets and differential privacy.
Extensive experimental studies demonstrate that
this method outperforms current competitors.

Conformal Prediction, originally introduced in (Vovk
et al., 1999; Shafer and Vovk, 2008; Balasubramanian et al.,
2014), has recently gained popularity. It generates prediction sets with guaranteed error rates. Conformal algorithms
are shown to be always valid: the actual confidence level is
the nominal one, without requiring any specific assumption
about the distribution of the data beyond exchangeability;
see (Lei et al., 2013; Fontana et al., 2023) and references
therein. With few exceptions, CP methods were developed
for centralized environments.
We consider below a supervised learning problem with features x taking values in X and labels y taking values in
train +N
Y. Let (Xk , Yk )N
be an independent and identically
k=1
distributed (i.i.d.) dataset. We divide the data into a training
and a calibration dataset. Formally, let {Ktrain , Kcal } be a
partition of {1, . . . , Ntrain + N }, and let N = |Kcal |. Without loss of generality, we take Kcal = {1, . . . , N }. We learn
a predictor fˆ: X → ∆|Y| on the training set Ktrain , where
|Y| is the number of classes and ∆|Y| is the |Y|-dimensional
probability simplex. For any covariate x ∈ X associated
with a label y ∈ Y, consider a classification score function S : Y × ∆|Y| → [0, 1], independent of other covariates
and labels, which yields a non-conformity score given by
V (x, y) = S(y, fˆ(x)). This non-conformity measure estimates how unusual an example looks. Based on these
non-conformity scores, standard CP procedure constructs,
for each significance level α ∈ [0, 1], a (measurable) setvalued predictor Cα (x) using {(Xk , Yk )}N
k=1 that satisfies
the following conditions

1. Introduction
Federated learning is an increasingly important framework
for large-scale learning. FL allows many agents to train a
model together under the coordination of a central server
without ever transmitting the agents’ data over the network,
in an attempt to preserve privacy. There has been a considerable amount of FL work over the past 5 years, see
e.g. (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Kairouz
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020). Compared to classical machine
learning techniques, FL has two unique features. First, the
networked agents are massively distributed, communication
*
Equal contribution 1 Lagrange Mathematics and Computing Research Center, Paris, France 2 CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France 3 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of
Artificial Intelligence, Masdar City, UAE 5 Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Correspondence to: Vincent
Plassier <vincent.plassier@polytechnique.edu>, Maxim Panov
<maxim.panov@tii.ae>.

P (YN +1 ∈ Cα (XN +1 )) ≥ 1 − α,

(1)

where (XN +1 , YN +1 ) is a test point that is independent of
Ktrain and Kcal . The quantity 1 − α is called the confidence
level. The guarantee (1) is set up in a centralized environment – all data are available at a central node and usually

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

