Addressing Budget Allocation and Revenue Allocation in Data Market
Environments Using an Adaptive Sampling Algorithm

Boxin Zhao 1 Boxiang Lyu 1 Raul Castro Fernandez 2 Mladen Kolar 1

Abstract

rithm paves the way for the implementation of
practical data markets.

High-quality machine learning models are dependent on access to high-quality training data. When
the data are not already available, it is tedious
and costly to obtain them. Data markets help
with identifying valuable training data: model consumers pay to train a model, the market uses that
budget to identify data and train the model (the
budget allocation problem), and finally the market compensates data providers according to their
data contribution (revenue allocation problem).
For example, a bank could pay the data market
to access data from other financial institutions to
train a fraud detection model. Compensating data
contributors requires understanding data’s contribution to the model; recent efforts to solve this
revenue allocation problem based on the Shapley
value are inefficient to lead to practical data markets. In this paper, we introduce a new algorithm
to solve budget allocation and revenue allocation
problems simultaneously in linear time. The new
algorithm employs an adaptive sampling process
that selects data from those providers who are
contributing the most to the model. Better data
means that the algorithm accesses those providers
more often, and more frequent accesses corresponds to higher compensation. Furthermore, the
algorithm can be deployed in both centralized
and federated scenarios, boosting its applicability.
We provide theoretical guarantees for the algorithm that show the budget is used efficiently and
the properties of revenue allocation are similar to
Shapley’s. Finally, we conduct an empirical evaluation to show the performance of the algorithm
in practical scenarios and when compared to other
baselines. Overall, we believe that the new algo-

1. Introduction
The success of modern machine learning is largely dependent on access to high-quality data. However, in many
scenarios, consumers of machine learning (ML) models do
not have the necessary data to train them, and collecting data
can be impractical; when it is practical it is often tedious
and time-consuming. At the same time, data-rich organizations (providers) may not be aware that their data would
be valuable to prospective consumers. For example, banks
could improve fraud detection if they had access to relevant
data from other banks with similar financial products. Data
markets are a mechanism to address this problem. A wellfunctioning data market compensates providers for the data
they supply, and allocates the data to those consumers (Fernandez et al., 2020) who need it, thus unleashing the value
of data for everyone involved in the transaction. Designing
such data markets remains an open problem.
Consider a group of 10 regional banks. One of them (the
consumer) has detected unusual activity in transactions pertaining to a new credit card product. In response, ML engineers design a fraud detection model for the new product,
but realize that they lack training data. These training data
could be provided by the other 9 banks, the providers, in
exchange for some compensation. Clearly, the consumer
would like to invest their budget in high-quality data that will
contribute to better models (the budget allocation problem).
And providers would like to be compensated according to
the value their data brings to the model (the revenue allocation problem); e.g., if a bank’s data are more relevant to the
task at hand, such bank should be compensated higher than
the others. In this example, a well-functioning data market
aligns the incentives of consumers with those of providers:
it ensures that the budget is used towards obtaining highquality data.

1
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Boxin Zhao <boxinz@uchicago.edu>.

While there is growing literature on data markets (Fernandez et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2021), no existing data market solves the budget allocation and revenue allocation problems simultaneously and

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

