From Hypergraph Energy Functions to Hypergraph Neural Networks

Yuxin Wang 1 2 † Quan Gan 3 Xipeng Qiu 1 4 Xuanjing Huang 1 5 David Wipf 3

Abstract

implicitly or explicitly, on some type of expansion (e.g.,
clique, star), which effectively converts the hypergraph into
a regular graph with a new edge set and possibly additional
nodes as well. For example, one approach is to first extract
a particular expansion graph and then build a graph neural
network (GNN) model on top of it (Zhang et al., 2022).

Hypergraphs are a powerful abstraction for representing higher-order interactions between entities of interest. To exploit these relationships
in making downstream predictions, a variety of
hypergraph neural network architectures have recently been proposed, in large part building upon
precursors from the more traditional graph neural network (GNN) literature. Somewhat differently, in this paper we begin by presenting an
expressive family of parameterized, hypergraphregularized energy functions. We then demonstrate how minimizers of these energies effectively serve as node embeddings that, when paired
with a parameterized classifier, can be trained
end-to-end via a supervised bilevel optimization
process. Later, we draw parallels between the implicit architecture of the predictive models emerging from the proposed bilevel hypergraph optimization, and existing GNN architectures in
common use. Empirically, we demonstrate stateof-the-art results on various hypergraph node
classification benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/yxzwang/PhenomNN.

We instead adopt a different starting point that both allows
us to incorporate multiple expansions if needed, but also
transparently explore the integrated role of each expansion
within a unified framework. To accomplish this, our highlevel strategy is to first define a family of parameterized
hypergraph energy functions, with regularization factors
that we later show closely align with popular existing expansions. We then demonstrate how the minimizers of such energy functions can be treated as learnable node embeddings
and trained end-to-end via a bilevel optimization process.
Namely, the lower-level minimization process produces optimal features contigent on a given set of parameters, while
the higher-level process trains these parameters (and hence
the features they influence) w.r.t. downstream node classification tasks.
To actualize this goal, after presenting related work in
Section 2, we provide relevant background and notation
w.r.t. hypergraphs in Section 3. The remainder of the paper then presents our primary contributions, which can be
summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Hypergraphs represent a natural extension of graphs,
whereby each hyperedge can link an arbitrary number of hypernodes (or nodes for short). This flexibility more directly
facilitates the modeling of higher-order relationships between entities (Chien et al., 2022; Benson et al., 2016; 2017)
leading to strong performance in diverse real-world situations (Agarwal et al., 2005; Li & Milenkovic, 2017; Feng
et al., 2019; Huang & Yang, 2021). Currently, hypergraphgraph-based modeling techniques frequently rely, either

• We present a general class of hypergraph-regularized
energy functions in Section 4 and elucidate their relationship with traditional hypergraph expansions that
have been previously derived from spectral graph theory.
• We demonstrate how minimizers of these energy functions can serve as principled, trainable features for hypergraph prediction tasks in Sections 5 and 6. And by
approximating the energy minimizers using provablyconvergence proximal gradient steps, the resulting architecture borrows the same basic structure as certain
graph neural network layers that: (i) have been finetuned to accommodate hypergraphs, and (ii) maintain
the inductive bias infused by the original energy function.

†

Work completed during an internship at the AWS Shanghai AI
Lab. 1 School of Computer Science, Fudan University 2 Institute of
Modern Languages and Linguistics, Fudan University 3 Amazon
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Shanghai Collaborative Innovation
Center of Intelligent Visual Computing. Correspondence to:
Yuxin Wang <wangyuxin21@m.fudan.edu.cn>, Quan Gan <quagan@amazon.com>, David Wipf <davidwipf@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• The resulting framework, which we name Phe1

