Principled Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback from Pairwise or
K-wise Comparisons

Banghua Zhu 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 Jiantao Jiao 1

Abstract

2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Nakano
et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Menick et al., 2022;
Glaese et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a;
Ganguli et al., 2022; Ramamurthy et al., 2022). Notably,
the language model application ChatGPT is based on RLHF
and this underlies several of its skills: answering followup questions, admitting its mistakes, challenging incorrect
premises, and rejecting inappropriate requests. One of the
key capabilities in RLHF is to learn a reward from human
feedback, in the form of pairwise or K-wise comparisons
between actions (responses). In this paper, we take the
first step towards providing a theoretical framework for
RLHF, with a specific focus on reward learning. We provide
a theoretical analysis that justifies the empirical success
of RLHF in InstructGPT and ChatGPT, along with new
insights for algorithm design.

We provide a theoretical framework for
Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF). Our analysis shows that when the
true reward function is linear, the widely used
maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) converges
under both the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model
and the Plackett-Luce (PL) model. However,
we show that when training a policy based on
the learned reward model, MLE fails while a
pessimistic MLE provides policies with improved
performance under certain coverage assumptions.
Additionally, we demonstrate that under the PL
model, the true MLE and an alternative MLE
that splits the K-wise comparison into pairwise
comparisons both converge. Moreover, the true
MLE is asymptotically more efficient. Our
results validate the empirical success of existing
RLHF algorithms in InstructGPT and provide
new insights for algorithm design. Furthermore,
our results unify the problem of RLHF and Max
Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning, and
provide the first sample complexity bound for
both problems.

Taking InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) as an example,
a typical deployment of RLHF for language modeling
includes the following steps:
(a) Pre-train a Large Language Model (LLM) using
supervised training.
(b) Train a reward model based on the pre-trained LLM
using human feedback.
(c) Fine-tune the existing LLM based on the learned reward
model using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO).

1. Introduction

During the reward training step, the prompts are first
sampled from a pre-collected dataset. Then K responses
are sampled by executing existing models on the sampled
prompts. Based on the prompt provided, a human labeler
ranks all the responses according to her own preference. The
reward model is trained based on a maximum likelihood
estimator (MLE), also known as the learning-to-rank
algorithm or cross-entropy minimization (Liu et al., 2009;
Xia et al., 2008; Cao et al., 2007; Christiano et al., 2017a;
Ouyang et al., 2022).

The alignment problem aims at aligning human values with
machine learning systems and steering learning algorithms
toward the goals and interests of humans. One of the most
promising tools for AI alignment, Reinforcement Learning
with Human Feedback (RLHF), has delivered significant
empirical success in the fields of game playing (Knox and
Stone, 2008; MacGlashan et al., 2017; Christiano et al.,
2017a; Warnell et al., 2018), robotics (Brown et al., 2019;
Shin et al., 2023) and language models (Ziegler et al.,
1

Department of EECS, University
Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
<banghua@berkeley.edu>.

of California,
Banghua Zhu

In the setting of InstructGPT, the ranking of responses is
based purely on the current prompt, which can be viewed
as the state in a contextual bandit. We accordingly start
with the setting of a contextual bandit, and later generalize
our results to Markov Decision Process (MDP) where there

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

