Provable Benefit of Mixup for Finding Optimal Decision Boundaries

Junsoo Oh 1 Chulhee Yun 1

Abstract

of Mixup, several variants of Mixup have appeared in the
literature; e.g., Manifold Mixup (Verma et al., 2019), Cutmix (Yun et al., 2019), Puzzle Mix (Kim et al., 2020), and
Co-Mixup (Kim et al., 2021). The success of Mixup-style
training schemes is not only limited to improved generalization performance in supervised learning; they are known to
be helpful in other aspects including model calibration (Thulasidasan et al., 2019), semi-supervised learning (Berthelot
et al., 2019; Sohn et al., 2020), contrastive learning (Kalantidis et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2021), and natural language
processing (Guo et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020).

We investigate how pair-wise data augmentation
techniques like Mixup affect the sample complexity of finding optimal decision boundaries in a
binary linear classification problem. For a family of data distributions with a separability constant κ, we analyze how well the optimal classifier
in terms of training loss aligns with the optimal
one in test accuracy (i.e., Bayes optimal classifier). For vanilla training without augmentation,
we uncover an interesting phenomenon named the
curse of separability. As we increase κ to make
the data distribution more separable, the sample
complexity of vanilla training increases exponentially in κ; perhaps surprisingly, the task of finding
optimal decision boundaries becomes harder for
more separable distributions. For Mixup training,
we show that Mixup mitigates this problem by
significantly reducing the sample complexity. To
this end, we develop new concentration results
applicable to n2 pair-wise augmented data points
constructed from n independent data, by carefully dealing with dependencies between overlapping pairs. Lastly, we study other masking-based
Mixup-style techniques and show that they can
distort the training loss and make its minimizer
converge to a suboptimal classifier in terms of test
accuracy.

Although Mixup and its variants demonstrate surprising
empirical benefits, a concrete theoretical understanding of
such benefits still remains mysterious. As a result, a recent
line of research (Carratino et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020;
2022; Chidambaram et al., 2021; 2022; Park et al., 2022)
trying to theoretically understand Mixup and its variants has
appeared in the literature. Most results, including this paper,
compare the training procedure with Mixup against solving
the vanilla empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem
without any augmentation. For the remainder of this paper,
we refer to the training loss without augmentation as ERM
loss, and the training loss with Mixup as Mixup loss.
The parallel works of Carratino et al. (2020) and Zhang et al.
(2020) represent the Mixup loss as the ERM loss equipped
with additive data-dependent regularizers which penalize
the gradient and Hessian of a model with respect to data. Using these regularizers, Zhang et al. (2020) show that Mixup
training can yield smaller Rademacher complexity which allows for a smaller uniform generalization bound. Also, Park
et al. (2022) extend these results to several Mixup variants
such as Cutmix (Yun et al., 2019). However, the benefits
of Mixup-style schemes from the Rademacher complexity
view shown by Zhang et al. (2020) and Park et al. (2022)
stand out only if the intrinsic dimension of data is small.

1. Introduction
Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) is a modern technique that augments training data with a random convex combination of
a pair of training points and labels. Zhang et al. (2018)
empirically show that this simple technique has various
benefits, such as better generalization, robustness to label
corruption and adversarial attack, and stabilization of generative adversarial network training. Inspired by the success

Chidambaram et al. (2021) try to understand Mixup by
investigating when Mixup training minimizes the ERM loss.
The authors show failure cases of Mixup and also sufficient
conditions for its success. Chidambaram et al. (2021) also
show that ERM loss and Mixup loss can have the same
optimal classifier by considering linear model and special
types of data distribution. Detailed comparisons to our work
are provided in Section 2.

1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST. Correspondence
to: Chulhee Yun <chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

