Efficient preconditioned stochastic gradient descent for estimation in latent
variable models
Charlotte Baey * 1 Maud Delattre * 2 Estelle Kuhn * 2 Jean-Benoist Leger * 3 Sarah Lemler * 4

Abstract

of an unknown group structure in a population and in an
interaction network, or mixed-effects models whose latent
structure is intended to describe some inter-individual variability (Pinheiro & Bates, 2000b; Lavielle, 2014). While
bringing a certain level of detail to the modeling, the use of
latent variables leads to more complex inference in general,
as the observed likelihood often does not have an explicit
form. This has led to the development of specific numerical methods for parameter estimation in latent variable
models. Among the most common approaches, one can
find the EM algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977) and its variants such as the Stochastic Approximation EM (SAEM)
algorithm (Delyon et al., 1999) or even the Variational EM
(VEM) algorithm (Bernardo et al., 2003). There are also
gradient-based methods (see e.g chapters 10-11 in Cappé
et al. (2005)), in particular some stochastic versions of the
gradient descent algorithm have been specifically developed
for latent variable models (Gu & Kong, 1998; Cai, 2010;
Fang & Li, 2021).

Latent variable models are powerful tools for modeling complex phenomena involving in particular
partially observed data, unobserved variables or
underlying complex unknown structures. Inference is often difficult due to the latent structure
of the model. To deal with parameter estimation
in the presence of latent variables, well-known efficient methods exist, such as gradient-based and
EM-type algorithms, but with practical and theoretical limitations. In this paper, we propose as an
alternative for parameter estimation an efficient
preconditioned stochastic gradient algorithm. Our
method includes a preconditioning step based on
a positive definite Fisher information matrix estimate. We prove convergence results for the
proposed algorithm under mild assumptions for
very general latent variables models. We illustrate
through relevant simulations the performance of
the proposed methodology in a nonlinear mixed
effects model and in a stochastic block model.

EM-type algorithms are popular for their ease of implementation in curved exponential models where only operations
on the sufficient statistics of the model are required at each
iteration. These algorithms can still be applied in more
general latent variable models but the methodology is not
generic and requires new developments for each new model
considered. To face this restrictive assumption, Debavelaere
& Allassonnière (2021) suggested to use the exponentialization trick which consists in performing inference in an
extended model belonging to the curved exponential family
instead of in the initial model. However this approach has
limitations in practice, mainly due to difficult algorithmic
settings and tuning. Besides, the theoretical properties of
EM-type algorithms have been the subject of many contributions. To our knowledge, the existing convergence theorems
however all assume that the model belongs to the curved
exponential family and none of them brings any guarantee
beyond this framework (see Wu (1983) for EM and Delyon
et al. (1999) for SAEM).

1. Introduction
Latent variable models are widely used in many fields to
describe complex phenomena whose mechanisms are indirectly observed and whose consideration in the model
requires the use of unobserved variables. One can mention,
for instance, mixture models (McLachlan & Basford, 1988)
or stochastic block models (Abbe, 2018; Lee & Wilkinson,
2019) that are respectively used to describe the existence
*

Equal contribution 1 Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8524 Laboratoire Paul Painlevé, F-59000 Lille, France 2 Université
Paris-Saclay, INRAE, MaIAGE, 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
3
Université de technologie de Compiègne, CNRS, Heudiasyc,
Compiègne, France 4 Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec,
Mathématiques et Informatique pour la Complexité et les Systèmes,
91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.. Correspondence to: Charlotte Baey <charlotte.baey@univ-lille.fr>, Estelle Kuhn <estelle.kuhn@inrae.fr>.

Gradient-based methods are an attractive alternative when
EM-type algorithms are not easy to implement since their
main ingredient is the log-likelihood gradient which is easily
available in any latent variable model or at least approximated by combining the Fisher’s identity (see Cappé et al.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

