Distilling Internet-Scale Vision-Language Models into Embodied Agents

Theodore Sumers 1 * Kenneth Marino 2 Arun Ahuja 2 Rob Fergus 2 Ishita Dasgupta 2

Abstract
Instruction-following agents must ground language into their observation and action spaces.
Yet learning to ground language is challenging,
typically requiring domain-specific engineering or
large quantities of human interaction data. To address this challenge, we propose using pretrained
vision-language models (VLMs) to supervise embodied agents. We combine ideas from model distillation and hindsight experience replay (HER),
using a VLM to retroactively generate language
describing the agent’s behavior. Simple prompting allows us to control the supervision signal,
teaching an agent to interact with novel objects
based on their names (e.g., planes) or their features (e.g., colors) in a 3D rendered environment.
Fewshot prompting lets us teach abstract category
membership, including pre-existing categories
(food vs toys) and ad-hoc ones (arbitrary preferences over objects). Our work outlines a new and
effective way to use internet-scale VLMs, repurposing the generic language grounding acquired
by such models to teach task-relevant groundings
to embodied agents.

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. A: We use a generative
VLM to re-label agent trajectories for hindsight experience replay. B: Varying the prompt allows us to relabel trajectories along
multiple dimensions to teach the embodied agent different tasks.

Embodied language grounding is particularly difficult because training data are scarce. Passive learning from internet
data has driven a series of revolutions in natural language
processing (Mikolov et al., 2013; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown
et al., 2020), but embodied agents must map language into
their own idiosyncratic observation and action spaces.
Training data for embodied agents thus typically consist
of trajectories paired with linguistic instructions (Tellex
et al., 2011; Abramson et al., 2020, inter alia) or descriptions (Nguyen et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2022; Zhong
et al., 2022). Providing an agent with aligned behavior
and language allows it to learn a mapping between the two.
Unfortunately, such data are expensive (typically requiring
human annotation), under-specified (a trajectory can correspond to several different instructions or descriptions), and
agent-specific (trajectory representations are tightly coupled
with the agent architecture).

1. Introduction
Embodied agents capable of understanding and fulfilling
natural language instructions are a longstanding goal for
artificial intelligence (Winograd, 1972). Such agents must
ground language (Harnad, 1990; Mooney, 2008) by correctly associating words with corresponding referents in
their environment. But grounding language is both philosophically (Quine, 1960) and practically challenging: methods to learn such groundings remain an active area of research (Tellex et al., 2020).

We propose using large-scale vision-language models
(VLMs) to address some of these challenges. Unlike embodied agents, VLMs can be trained on massive internet
data (Radford et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Alayrac
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Here, we use
the Flamingo VLM (Alayrac et al., 2022) to annotate trajectories, leveraging its internet-derived language grounding to
generate training data for the embodied agent (Fig. 1).

*
Work done while interning at DeepMind. 1 Department of
Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
2
DeepMind, New York City, United States. Correspondence to:
Theodore Sumers <sumers@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our approach distills the VLM’s domain-general language
1

