Algorithmic Collective Action in Machine Learning

Moritz Hardt * 1 Eric Mazumdar * 2 Celestine Mendler-Dünner * 1 Tijana Zrnic * 3

Abstract

business as machine learning algorithms power ranking,
scoring, and classification tasks of various kinds (Woodcock
& Graham, 2019; Gray & Suri, 2019; Schor, 2021).

We initiate a principled study of algorithmic collective action on digital platforms that deploy machine learning algorithms. We propose a simple
theoretical model of a collective interacting with
a firm’s learning algorithm. The collective pools
the data of participating individuals and executes
an algorithmic strategy by instructing participants
how to modify their own data to achieve a collective goal. We investigate the consequences of this
model in three fundamental learning-theoretic settings: nonparametric optimal learning, parametric
risk minimization, and gradient-based optimization. In each setting, we come up with coordinated algorithmic strategies and characterize natural success criteria as a function of the collective’s
size. Complementing our theory, we conduct systematic experiments on a skill classification task
involving tens of thousands of resumes from a
gig platform for freelancers. Through more than
two thousand model training runs of a BERT-like
language model, we see a striking correspondence
emerge between our empirical observations and
the predictions made by our theory. Taken together, our theory and experiments broadly support the conclusion that algorithmic collectives of
exceedingly small fractional size can exert significant control over a platform’s learning algorithm.

Troves of academic scholarship document the emergence
and preponderance of precarity in the gig economy. Wood
et al. (2019) argue that platform-based algorithmic control
can lead to “low pay, social isolation, working unsocial and
irregular hours, overwork, sleep deprivation and exhaustion.”
This is further exacerbated by “high levels of inter-worker
competition with few labor protections and a global oversupply of labor relative to demand.” In response, there have
been numerous attempts by gig workers to organize in an
effort to reconfigure working conditions. A growing repertoire of strategies, as vast as it is eclectic, uses both physical
and digital means towards this goal. Indeed, workers have
shown significant ingenuity in creating platform-specific
infrastructure, such as their own mobile apps, to organize
the labor side of the platform (Chen, 2018; Rahman, 2021).
Yet, “the upsurge of worker mobilization should not blind us
to the difficulties of organizing such a diverse and spatially
dispersed labor force.” (Vallas & Schor, 2020)
Beyond the gig economy, evidence of consumers seeking to
influence the algorithms that power a platform’s business is
abundant. Examples include social media users attempting
to suppress the algorithmic upvoting of harmful content
by sharing screenshots rather than original posts (Burrell
et al., 2019), or individuals creating bots to influence crowdsourced navigation systems (Sinai et al., 2014). The ubiquity
of such strategic attempts calls for a principled study of
how coordinated groups can wield control over the digital
platforms to which they contribute data.

1. Introduction
Throughout the gig economy, numerous digital platforms
algorithmically profile, control, and discipline workers that
offer on-demand services to consumers. Data collection
and predictive modeling are critical for a typical platform’s

In this work, we study how a collective of individuals can
algorithmically strategize against a learning platform. We
envision a collective that pools the data of participating individuals and executes an algorithmic strategy by instructing
participants how to modify their own data. The firm in turn
solves a machine learning problem over the resulting data.
The goal of the collective is to redirect the firm’s optimization towards a solution that serves the collective. Notably,
coordination is a crucial lever. When data are plentiful, a
single individual lacks the leverage to unilaterally change
the output of a learning algorithm; in contrast, we show that
even small collectives can exert substantial influence.

*
Alphabetical ordering 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent
Systems, Tübingen, and Tübingen AI Center 2 Caltech 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Moritz Hardt <hardt@is.mpg.de>,
Eric Mazumdar <mazumdar@caltech.edu>, Celestine MendlerDünner <cmendler@tuebingen.mpg.de>, Tijana Zrnic <tijana.zrnic@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

