Conformal Inference is (almost) Free for Neural Networks
Trained with Early Stopping

Ziyi Liang * 1 Yanfei Zhou * 2 Matteo Sesia 2

Abstract

mitigate overfitting, including dropout (Srivastava et al.,
2014), batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), weight
normalization (Salimans & Kingma, 2016), data augmentation (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019), and early stopping
(Prechelt, 1998); the latter is the focus of this paper.

Early stopping based on hold-out data is a popular regularization technique designed to mitigate
overfitting and increase the predictive accuracy of
neural networks. Models trained with early stopping often provide relatively accurate predictions,
but they generally still lack precise statistical guarantees unless they are further calibrated using independent hold-out data. This paper addresses the
above limitation with conformalized early stopping: a novel method that combines early stopping with conformal calibration while efficiently
recycling the same hold-out data. This leads to
models that are both accurate and able to provide
exact predictive inferences without multiple data
splits nor overly conservative adjustments. Practical implementations are developed for different
learning tasks—outlier detection, multi-class classification, regression—and their competitive performance is demonstrated on real data.

Early stopping consists of continuously evaluating after each
batch of stochastic gradient updates (or epoch) the predictive
performance of the current model on hold-out independent
data. After a large number of gradient updates, only the
intermediate model achieving the best performance on the
hold-out data is utilized to make predictions. This strategy
is often effective at mitigating overfitting and can produce
relatively accurate predictions compared to fully trained
models, but it does not fully resolve overconfidence because
it does not lead to models with finite-sample guarantees.
A general framework for quantifying the predictive uncertainty of any black-box machine learning model is that of
conformal inference (Vovk et al., 2005). The key idea of
conformal inference is to apply a pre-trained model to a calibration set of hold-out observations drawn at random from
the target population. If the calibration data are exchangeable with the test point of interest, the model performance
on the calibration set can be translated into statistically rigorous predictive inferences. This framework is flexible and
can accommodate different learning tasks, including out-ofdistribution testing (Smith et al., 2015), classification (Vovk
et al., 2003), and regression (Vovk et al., 2005). For example, in the context of classification, conformal inference can
give prediction sets that contain the correct label for a new
data point with high probability. In theory, the quality of the
trained model has no consequence on the average validity of
conformal inferences, but it does affect their reliability and
usefulness on a case-by-case level. In particular, conformal
uncertainty estimates obtained after calibrating an overconfident model may be too conservative for some test cases
and too optimistic for others (Romano et al., 2020b). The
goal of this paper is to combine conformal calibration with
standard early stopping training techniques as efficiently
as possible, in order to produce more reliable predictive
inferences with a finite amount of available data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks can detect complex data patterns
and leverage them to make accurate predictions in many
applications, including computer vision, natural language
processing, and speech recognition, to name a few examples. These models can sometimes even outperform skilled
humans (Silver et al., 2016), but they still make mistakes.
Unfortunately, the severity of these mistakes is compounded
by the fact that the predictions computed by neural networks are often overconfident (Guo et al., 2017), partly
due to overfitting (Thulasidasan et al., 2019; Ovadia et al.,
2019). Several training strategies have been developed to
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Department of
Data Sciences and Operations, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Matteo Sesia
<sesia@marshall.usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Achieving high accuracy with deep learning often requires
large training sets (Marcus, 2018), and conformal inference
1

