Can Large Language Models Reason about Program Invariants?

Kexin Pei 1 2 David Bieber 2 Kensen Shi 2 Charles Sutton 2 Pengcheng Yin 2

Abstract

has proved challenging even for simple programs.

Identifying invariants is an important program
analysis task with applications towards program
understanding, bug finding, vulnerability analysis, and formal verification. Existing tools for
identifying program invariants rely on dynamic
analysis, requiring traces collected from multiple
executions in order to produce reliable invariants.
We study the application of large language models
to invariant prediction, finding that models trained
on source code and fine-tuned for invariant generation can perform invariant prediction as static
rather than dynamic analysis. Using a scratchpad approach where invariants are predicted sequentially through a program gives the best performance, finding invariants statically of quality
comparable to those obtained by a dynamic analysis tool with access to five program traces.

In the programming languages literature, one of the most
important insights is to reason at the level of abstractions of
program states, e.g., the property “is n >= 1 when line 12 executes?”, rather than concrete states, such as “n = 17 at line
12”. This has been a fundamental insight from some of the
earliest proposals to formalize program semantics (Hoare,
1969; Dijkstra, 1975). This move has computational advantages, because abstracting away details can simplify the
analysis, but it is also representational, because the analysis
task is often to check over all plausible inputs rather than
specific concrete inputs.
If a program property is always true at a given program point,
it is an invariant, which abstracts multiple program states by
finding a common pattern that is easier to reason about. Identifying invariants is undecidable, so previous work has considered predicting them using machine learning (ML), such
as predicting heap invariants (Brockschmidt et al., 2015;
2017), reranking invariants produced by dynamic analysis
(Hellendoorn et al., 2019), combining learning and static
analysis (Ryan et al., 2019; Si et al., 2018; 2020), and predicting specific types of invariants using classification and
regression-based approaches (Sharma et al., 2012; 2013a;
Garg et al., 2014; 2016; Liu et al., 2012; Sagdeo et al., 2011).
Generally speaking, these approaches rely on using taskspecific architectures and training sets, and often focus on
specific types of invariants. However, given the success
of pre-trained LLMs for program synthesis, it is natural to
consider that these methods could be effective for predicting
invariants as well. Thus, this paper considers the following
concrete question: Can we train large language models to
predict program invariants?

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated tremendous promise and impressive capability in generating program source code (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022). As these techniques become more widespread,
it is increasingly important to analyze and explain whether
generated code meets its requirements. This requires making statements about program semantics, which often involve checking whether boolean predicates, called properties (in the sense used by Claessen & Hughes, 2000; Odena
& Sutton, 2020, among many others), hold for all possible
executions of the program, e.g., “for all inputs such that
obj != nil, does the program execute without raising an
exception?” (cf. Bieber et al., 2022). To this end, a line of
work has explored whether neural networks can predict the
results of program execution (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014;
Nye et al., 2021a; Bieber et al., 2020). So far, this problem

To tackle this problem, we create a dataset of Java programs with corresponding invariants generated from the
well-known Daikon dynamic analyzer (Ernst et al., 2007).
Daikon can generate a wide range of invariants based on
its predefined templates, and we consider a subset of them
that are particularly useful for downstream tasks like bug
detection and test generation, such as arithmetic relationships, nullity, and value-set invariants (see Table 2). We
fine-tune an LLM, pre-trained on source code, to take as
input the source code of a program, and a target program
point, and to output a list of invariants for the program state

1
Columbia University 2 Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Kexin Pei <kpei@cs.columbia.edu>, David
Bieber <dbieber@google.com>, Charles Sutton <charlessutton@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

