Architecture-Agnostic Masked Image Modeling – From ViT back to CNN

Siyuan Li * 1 2 Di Wu * 1 2 Fang Wu 1 3 Zelin Zang 1 2 Stan Z. Li 1

Abstract

et al., 2016; Doersch et al., 2015; Gidaris et al., 2018) aim
to capture invariant features through predicting transformations applied to the same image. However, these methods
rely on vision ad-hoc heuristics, and the learned representations are less generic. Recently, contrastive learning approaches (Tian et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; He et al.,
2020) have witnessed significant progress, even outperforming supervised methods on several downstream tasks (Chen
et al., 2020c; Grill et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021). More
recently, inspired by masked autoencoding methods (Devlin
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018) in NLP, Masked Image
Modeling (MIM) methods (Bao et al., 2022; He et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021b) have brought about
new advances for self-supervised pre-training on CV tasks.
The transition from human language understanding to NLP
masked autoencoding is quite natural because the filling
of missing words in a sentence requires comprehensive semantic understanding. In analogy, humans can understand
and imagine masked content by visually filling the missing
structures in an image containing occluded parts.

Masked image modeling, an emerging selfsupervised pre-training method, has shown impressive success across numerous downstream
vision tasks with Vision transformers. Its underlying idea is simple: a portion of the input image is masked out and then reconstructed via a
pre-text task. However, the working principle
behind MIM is not well explained, and previous studies insist that MIM primarily works for
the Transformer family but is incompatible with
CNNs. In this work, we observe that MIM essentially teaches the model to learn better middleorder interactions among patches for more generalized feature extraction. We then propose an
Architecture-Agnostic Masked Image Modeling
framework (A2 MIM), which is compatible with
both Transformers and CNNs in a unified way.
Extensive experiments on popular benchmarks
show that A2 MIM learns better representations
without explicit design and endows the backbone
model with the stronger capability to transfer to
various downstream tasks.

Different from contrastive learning, which yields a clustering effect by pulling similar samples and pushing away dissimilar samples, MIM pre-training methods have not been
extensively explored in the context of the expected knowledge learned. Existing works mainly focus on improving
downstream tasks performance via explicit design such as
trying different prediction targets (Wei et al., 2021), adopting pre-trained tokenizer (Zhou et al., 2021), utilizing complex Transformer decoder (He et al., 2022) or combining
with contrastive learning (El-Nouby et al., 2021). Moreover,
the success of existing MIM methods is largely confined
to Vision Transformer (ViT) structures (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) since it leads to under-performing performance to directly apply mask token (Devlin et al., 2018) and positional
embedding to CNNs.

1. Introduction
Supervised deep learning with large-scale annotated data
has witnessed an explosion of success in computer vision
(CV) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012a; He et al., 2016) and natural
language processing (NLP) (Vaswani et al., 2017). However,
a large number of high-quality annotations are not always
available in real-world applications. Learning representations without supervision by leveraging pre-text tasks has
become increasingly popular.
In CV, early self-supervised learning approaches (Zhang

In this work, we carry out systematic experiments and show
that MIM as a pre-training task essentially teaches the model
to learn better middle-order interactions between patches
for more generalized feature extraction regardless of the
underlying network structure. Compared to the local texture
features learned by low-order interactions between patches,
more complex features such as shape and edge could be
extracted via middle-order interactions among patches. The
interaction of patches could be considered as information

*

Equal contribution 1 AI Lab, Research Center for Industries
of the Future, Westlake University, Hangzhou, 310000, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310000, China 3 Institute of AI Industry Research,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to:
Stan Z. Li <stan.z.li@westlake.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

