Finding the Missing-half: Graph Complementary Learning for
Homophily-prone and Heterophily-prone Graphs

Yizhen Zheng 1 He Zhang 1 Vincent CS Lee 1 Yu Zheng 2 Xiao Wang 3 Shirui Pan 4

Abstract

A

A

A

B

Real-world graphs generally have only one kind
of tendency in their connections. These connections are either homophily-prone or heterophilyprone. While graphs with homophily-prone edges
tend to connect nodes with the same class (i.e.,
intra-class nodes), heterophily-prone edges tend
to build relationships between nodes with different classes (i.e., inter-class nodes). Existing
GNNs only take the original graph during training.
The problem with this approach is that it forgets
to take into consideration the “missing-half” structural information, that is, heterophily-prone topology for homophily-prone graphs and homophilyprone topology for heterophily-prone graphs. In
our paper, we introduce Graph cOmplementAry
Learning, namely GOAL, which consists of two
components: graph complementation and complemented graph convolution. The first component
finds the missing-half structural information for
a given graph to complement it. The complemented graph has two sets of graphs including
both homophily- and heterophily-prone topology.
In the latter component, to handle complemented
graphs, we design a new graph convolution from
the perspective of optimisation. The experiment
results show that GOAL consistently outperforms
all baselines in eight real-world datasets.

B

A

B
A

B

A

B
A

B
B

A
A

B
B

Figure 1. Example illustration of a homophily-prone graph, a
heterophily-prone graph and a complemented graph. The single
lines represent intra-class edges, while the doubled lines represent
inter-class edges. There are two classes of nodes in these graphs,
which are A class (red nodes) and B class (blue nodes).

classification (Xiong et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023b; Zhu
et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022b;c). In addition, they can
be applied to many real-world applications, e.g., anomaly
detection (Liu et al., 2023a; Zheng et al., 2021), neural architecture search (Zheng et al., 2023; 2022a), knowledge
graphs (Luo et al., 2023b), time series forecasting (Jin et al.,
2022b;a) and system security (Zhang et al., 2022b; 2021;
2023; 2022a; Tan et al., 2023). Despite the success of existing GNNs, they overlook the “missing-half” structural
information of the given graph, that is, heterophily-prone
edges for homophily-prone graphs and homophily-prone
edges for heterophily-prone graphs. This is because they
only use the given real-world graph during training, which
normally has only one type of connection: homophily-prone
or heterophily-prone. Figure 1(a) and (b) show examples
of a homophily-prone graph and a heterophily-prone graph,
respectively. In particular, edges in a homophily-prone
graph tend to connect intra-class nodes, whereas edges in a
heterophily-prone graph tend to connect inter-class nodes.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained much attention in recent years due to their promising performance
on various downstream tasks, such as node clustering (Liu
et al., 2022a;b), link prediction (Luo et al., 2023a), and node

Adding the missing-half topology to a graph can enrich its
structural information abundantly. With this information,
we can intuitively know for each node both its intra-class
and inter-class counterparts. We can then assign each node
to be closer to their intra-class peers during training, and the
reverse for their inter-class peers. Thus, a natural question
is “Can we find the missing-half structural information to
complement real-world graphs and utilise them?”

1
Monash University 2 La Trobe University 3 Beihang
University 4 Griffith University.
Correspondence to:
Shirui Pan <s.pan@griffith.edu.au>,
Yizhen Zheng
<yizhen.zheng1@monash.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To overcome this problem,
1

we introduce Graph

