Motion Question Answering via Modular Motion Programs
Mark Endo * 1 Joy Hsu * 1 Jiaman Li 1 Jiajun Wu 1

Abstract
In order to build artificial intelligence systems that
can perceive and reason with human behavior in
the real world, we must first design models that
conduct complex spatio-temporal reasoning over
motion sequences. Moving towards this goal, we
propose the HumanMotionQA task to evaluate
complex, multi-step reasoning abilities of models
on long-form human motion sequences. We generate a dataset of question-answer pairs that require
detecting motor cues in small portions of motion sequences, reasoning temporally about when
events occur, and querying specific motion attributes. In addition, we propose NSPose, a neurosymbolic method for this task that uses symbolic
reasoning and a modular design to ground motion
through learning motion concepts, attribute neural operators, and temporal relations. We demonstrate the suitability of NSPose for the HumanMotionQA task, outperforming all baseline methods.

Query Action
Motion
Sequence:
Ann:

walk transition

take/pick something up

place something

transition left walk

Question: What action does the person do before they move left?
Program: query_action(relate(before, filter(left)))
Answer:

place something

Motion
Sequence:
Ann:

transition kick jump walk, backwards

Question: What action does the person do before they move backwards and after they kick?
Program: query_action(intersection(relate(before, filter(backwards)),
relate(after, filter(kick)))

Answer:

jump
Query Direction

Motion
Sequence:
Ann:

walk transition knock, right hand left walk

Question: What direction does the person move after they use their right hand?
Program: query_direction(relate(after, filter(right hand)))
Answer:

left
Query Body Part

1. Introduction

Motion
Sequence:
Ann:

A longstanding research goal in artificial intelligence is to
build models that can perceive and interact with humans
in the real world. To achieve this goal, we must first understand complex human behavior across space and time;
hence, we are interested in the characterization of longform human motion sequences in 3D scenes. The growing
amount of available human motion capture data in recent
years has enabled the development of a variety of tasks
(Mahmood et al., 2019; Shahroudy et al., 2016; Punnakkal
et al., 2021), including action recognition (Caba Heilbron
et al., 2015), motion forecasting (Martı́nez-González et al.,
2021), and temporal localization (Sedmidubsky et al., 2019).
Although these tasks involve the understanding of motion sequences, none require complex, multi-step reasoning about
both action-level events (e.g., how behaviors are performed

right hand transition jump, kick, right right hand

Question: What body part does the person use after they jump?
Program: query_body_part(relate(after, filter(jump)))
Answer:

right hand

Figure 1. For the task of human motion question answering (HumanMotionQA), we create a dataset (BABEL-QA) that evaluates
models’ ability to learn complex, multi-step reasoning for human
behavior understanding. We present examples of several types of
questions in our dataset, including querying for action, direction,
and body part across temporal relations.

and relate to one another) as well as frame-level fine-grained
detection (e.g., body parts involved in specific frames and
sudden changes of direction).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Mark Endo <markendo@stanford.edu>.

Thus, we propose the task of human motion question answering, HumanMotionQA, to evaluate such complex and
fine-grained human behavior understanding (See Figure 1).
Our task consists of a human motion sequence, paired with
a question in natural language and an answer from a vocabulary of words. The questions pertain to different attributes

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

