A Fast, Well-Founded Approximation to the Empirical Neural Tangent Kernel

Mohamad Amin Mohamadi 1 Wonho Bae 1 Danica J. Sutherland 1 2

Abstract

including ResNets and Transformers. Lee et al. (2019) also
showed that the dynamics of training wide but finite-width
NNs with gradient descent can be approximated by a linear
model obtained from the first-order Taylor expansion of that
network around its initialization. Furthermore, they experimentally showed that this approximation approximation
excellently holds even for networks that are not so wide.

Empirical neural tangent kernels (eNTKs) can provide a good understanding of a given network’s
representation: they are often far less expensive
to compute and applicable more broadly than
infinite-width NTKs. For networks with O output units (e.g. an O-class classifier), however, the
eNTK on N inputs is of size N O × N O, taking
O (N O)2 memory and up to O (N O)3 computation to use. Most existing applications have
therefore used one of a handful of approximations
yielding N × N kernel matrices, saving orders of
magnitude of computation, but with limited to no
justification. We prove that one such approximation, which we call “sum of logits,” converges to
the true eNTK at initialization. Our experiments
demonstrate the quality of this approximation for
various uses across a range of settings.

In addition to theoretical insights, NTKs have had significant
impact in diverse practical settings. Arora et al. (2019b)
show very strong performance of NTK-based models on
a variety of low-data classification and regression tasks.
The condition number of an NN’s NTK has been shown
correlation directly with the trainability and generalization
capabilities of the NN (Xiao et al., 2018; 2020); thus, Park
et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2021) have used this to develop
practical algorithms for neural architecture search. Wei et al.
(2022); Bachmann et al. (2022) estimate the generalization
ability of a specific network, randomly initialized or pretrained on a different dataset, with efficient cross-validation.
Zhou et al. (2021) use NTK regression for efficient metalearning, and Wang et al. (2021); Holzmüller et al. (2022);
Mohamadi et al. (2022) use NTKs for active learning.

1. Introduction
The pursuit of a theoretical foundation for deep learning has
lead researches to uncover interesting connections between
neural networks (NNs) and kernel methods. It has long been
known that randomly initialized NNs in the infinite width
limit are Gaussian processes with the Neural Network Gaussian Process (NNGP) kernel, and training the last layer with
gradient flow under squared loss corresponds to the posterior mean (Neal, 1996; Williams, 1996; Hazan & Jaakkola,
2015; Lee et al., 2017; Matthews et al., 2018; Novak et al.,
2018; Yang, 2019). More recently, Jacot et al. (2018) built
off a line of closely related prior work to show that the same
is true with a different kernel, the Neural Tangent Kernel
(NTK), if we train all the parameters of the network. Yang
(2020); Yang & Littwin (2021) showed this holds not just
for fully-connected NNs but universally across architectures,

There has also been significant theoretical insight gained
from empirical studies of networks’ NTKs. For instance,
Fort et al. (2020) use NTKs to study how the loss geometry
the NN evolves under gradient descent. Franceschi et al.
(2021) employ NTKs to analyze the behaviour of Generative
Adverserial Networks (GANs). Nguyen et al. (2020; 2021)
use NTKs for dataset distillation. He et al. (2020); Adlam
et al. (2020) use NTKs to predict and analyze the uncertainty
of a NN’s predictions. Tancik et al. (2020) use NTKs to
analyze the behaviour of MLPs in learning high frequency
functions, leading to new insights into our understanding of
neural radiance fields. We thus believe NTKs will continue
to be used in both theoretical and empirical deep learning.
Unfortunately, however, computing the NTK for practical
networks is extremely challenging, and usually not computationally feasible. The “empirical” NTK (eNTK; we discuss
the difference from what others term “the NTK” shortly) is

1

Computer Science Department, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence
Institute, Edmonton, Canada. Correspondence to: Mohamad
Amin Mohamadi <lemohama@cs.ubc.ca>, Wonho Bae <whbae@cs.ubc.ca>, Danica J. Sutherland <dsuth@cs.ubc.ca>.

⊤

Θθ (x1 , x2 ) = [Jθ (fθ (x1 ))] [Jθ (fθ (x2 ))] ,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

(1)

where Jθ (fθ (x)) denotes the Jacobian of the function f
at a point x with respect to the flattened vector of all its
1

