Learning to Suggest Breaks:
Sustainable Optimization of Long-Term User Engagement

Eden Saig 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract

ing concern about their tendency to drive users towards
excessive consumption (Elhai et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2014).

Optimizing user engagement is a key goal for
modern recommendation systems, but blindly
pushing users towards increased consumption
risks burn-out, churn, or even addictive habits. To
promote digital well-being, most platforms now
offer a service that periodically prompts users
to take breaks. These, however, must be set up
manually, and so may be suboptimal for both
users and the system. In this paper, we study
the role of breaks in recommendation, and propose a framework for learning optimal breaking
policies that promote and sustain long-term engagement. Based on the notion that recommendation dynamics are susceptible to both positive and
negative feedback, we cast recommendation as a
Lotka-Volterra dynamical system, where breaking
reduces to a problem of optimal control. We then
give an efficient learning algorithm, provide theoretical guarantees, and empirically demonstrate
the utility of our approach on semi-synthetic data.

To preserve user well-being, most major platforms now
provide a service that periodically suggest taking “breaks”
(Constine, 2018; Perez, 2018), with the idea that occasional
intentional disruptions can curb the inertial urge for perpetual consumption, and therefore aid in reducing ‘mindless
scrolling’ (Rauch, 2018), or even addiction (Montag et al.,
2018; Ding et al., 2016). As a general means for promoting
well-being, breaking is psychologically well-grounded (e.g.,
Danziger et al., 2011; Sievertsen et al., 2016).
But from a learning perspective, breaks are puzzling: given
the extensive efforts systems invest in increasing engagement, why should they then deliberately propose the opposite? Our first goal in this paper is hence to ground the role of
breaks in recommendation. The key modeling point is that
engagement, as a dynamic process, is driven by two complementing forces: positive-feedback effects, in which useful recommendations reinforce engagement; and negativefeedback effects, in which persistent consumption gradually
exhausts the drive to engage. Thus, systems that seek to
promote long-term engagement should learn to correctly balance between these two forces. Here we advocate for breaks
as effective means for this, enabling prolonged and sustained
engagement by actively preserving user well-being.

1. Introduction
As consumers of content, we have come to rely extensively
on algorithmic recommendations. This has made the task
of recommending relevant content key to the success of
modern media platforms. Recommendation systems are
built with the primary goal of maximizing user engagement;
this is typically achieved by recommending on the basis of
learned predictive models, trained to predict for each user
the potential relevance of new items. Ideally, improved predictive models should lead to increased engagement due to
better and more useful recommendations. However, with
media platforms becoming more engaging, there is a grow-

Towards this, we begin by presenting a simple but natural
model of recommendation dynamics which incorporates
both feedback types. We then study recommendation in
this setting, and establish when and why breaks make sense.
Intuitively, whereas conventional approaches to recommendation greedily act to maximize immediate engagement,
breaks work to temporarily reduce engagement—but with
the intent of allowing interest to replenish, which is helpful in the long run. Thus, breaks act as a balancing force:
if scheduled correctly, they can sustain, or even increase,
long-term engagement. Our analysis provides conditions
for when it is beneficial to break—and when it is not.

1
Department of Computer Science, Technion – Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence
to: Eden Saig <edens@cs.technion.ac.il>, Nir Rosenfeld
<nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Given these insights, our second goal is to introduce and
study the novel task of learning to suggest a break. Current
breaking solutions are entirely heuristic, in that they rely on
users to manually determine when they should be prompted

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

