Contrastive Learning Meets Homophily: Two Birds with One Stone

Dongxiao He 1 Jitao Zhao 1 Rui Guo 1 Zhiyong Feng 1 Di Jin 1 Yuxiao Huang 2 Zhen Wang 3 Weixiong Zhang 4

Abstract

way with the new group discrimination method
used.

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has recently enjoyed great success as an efficient
self-supervised representation learning approach.
However, the existing methods have focused on
designing of contrastive modes and used data augmentation with a rigid and inefficient one-to-one
sampling strategy. We adopted node neighborhoods to extend positive samplings and made
avoided resorting to data augmentation to create different views. We also considered the
homophily problem in Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) between the inter-class node pairs. The
key novelty of our method hinged upon analyzing this GNNs problem and integrating the GCL
sampling strategy with homophily discrimination,
where we solved these two significant problems
using one approach. We introduced a new parameterized neighbor sampling component to replace
the conventional sub-optimal samplings. By keeping and updating the neighbor sets, both the positive sampling of GCL and the message passing
of GNNs can be optimized. Moreover, we theoretically proved that the new method provided a
lower bound of mutual information for unsupervised semantic learning, and it can also keep the
lower bound with downstream tasks. In essence,
our method is a new self-supervised approach,
which we refer to as group discrimination, and
it can make the downstream fine-tuning efficient.
Our extensive empirical results demonstrate that
the new method can significantly outperform the
existing GCL methods because the former can
solve the homophily problem in a self-supervised

1. Introduction
Graph representation learning aims at learning characteristic
low-dimensional representations for network structured data
to facilitate diverse downstream tasks (Zhu et al., 2019; Cai
et al., 2018). It has many applications in various fields, such
as biology (Duvenaud et al., 2015), social networks (Fan
et al., 2019), finance (Wu et al., 2019), and many text-rich
graph scenarios (Yu et al., 2021b). The current methods of
deep learning on graphs take advantage of the expressive
power of neural networks to encode graph patterns (Wu
et al., 2021; Scarselli et al., 2009). However, these methods
require graph labels, which are challenging and require domain knowledge, making supervised end-to-end training difficult for GNNs. Inspired by the success of self-supervised
learning in other fields (Jing & Tian, 2021; Schmarje et al.,
2020), graph contrastive learning has made remarkable
progress that is comparable to supervised learning but requires no labeled data (Liu et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2021b).
The general objective of contrastive learning is to make positive pairs of instances closer in the embedding space and to
keep negative pairs farther apart, where every two instances
in a positive pair are supposed to have the same label in
downstream tasks. It achieves so mostly by maximizing the
similarity between two data augmentation views of the same
graphs/nodes (a.k.a. positive samplings) and minimizing the
similarity between different graphs/nodes (a.k.a. negative
samplings).
However, the one-to-one sampling strategy of the existing
GCL methods (Zhu et al., 2020b; Thakoor et al., 2021;
Bielak et al., 2021) follow the fixed paradigm limited to
the same index between augmented views. It builds upon
the label consistency assumption (Wang et al., 2022) that
data augmentations would not change the semantic information. However, this is too strict for GCL compared to visual
contrastive learning. First, the semantic labels of graphs
are abstract compared to that of images, which largely depend on domain knowledge and specific conditions. The
existing data augmentation methods based on prior knowledge or random uniform distribution may potentially alter node/graph semantics. Second, representation learning

1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China 2 Department of Data Science, George Washington
University, NW Washington DC, America 3 Department of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China 4 Department of Health
Technology and Informatics, Department of Computing, The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence
to: Rui Guo <961941663@qq.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

