On Bridging the Gap between Mean Field and Finite Width Deep Random
Multilayer Perceptron with Batch Normalization

Amir Joudaki 1 Hadi Daneshmand 2 3 4 Francis Bach 5

Abstract

In this paper, we delve into the role of mean field theory at
initialization when network weights are allocated randomly.
Pioneering works by Glorot & Bengio (2010) and Saxe et al.
(2013) underscored the impact of initialization on training,
paving the way for mean field theory to uncover a wealth
of insights. Examples include identifying connections between wide neural networks and Gaussian processes (Neal,
1995; de G. Matthews et al., 2018; Jacot et al., 2018), examining the concentration of singular values of input-output
Jacobians (Pennington et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2022), and
designing activation functions (Klambauer et al., 2017; Ramachandran et al., 2017; Li et al., 2022). Remarkably, Xiao
et al. (2018) introduced an initialization scheme capable of
training convolutional networks comprising 10000 layers.

Mean-field theory is widely used in theoretical
studies of neural networks. In this paper, we analyze the role of depth in the concentration of
mean-field predictions for Gram matrices of hidden representations in deep multilayer perceptron
(MLP) with batch normalization (BN) at initialization. It is postulated that the mean-field predictions suffer from layer-wise errors that amplify
with depth. We demonstrate that BN avoids this
error amplification with depth. When the chain
of hidden representations is rapidly mixing, we
establish a concentration bound for a mean-field
model of Gram matrices. To our knowledge, this
is the first concentration bound that does not become vacuous with depth for standard MLPs with
a finite width.

A common thread among these studies is the dynamics of
inner products between hidden representations, encoded in
their Gram matrix. Mean field theory models these dynamics via a difference equation derived from the infinite-width
limit of the network. However, mean field analysis is inherently prone to approximation errors when dealing with
networks of finite width. As de G. Matthews et al. (2018)
observed, this error grows with depth, ultimately leading to
vacuous error bounds in the infinite depth limit. To tackle
this issue, they propose to increase the network width proportional to depth. This idea is echoed in other studies
which propose maintaining a constant ratio between depth
and width (Hanin & Nica, 2019; Li et al., 2021), a regime
in which Hanin (2022) confirmed a constant concentration
bound for mean field estimates.

1. Introduction
There is a growing demand for a theoretical understanding of neural networks to improve their safety, robustness,
computational and statistical effectiveness. Originating in
statistical mechanics for investigating complex systems with
interacting particles, this theory has been repurposed in recent years for exploring neural network dynamics under
the regime of infinite width. By going beyond the microscopic changes of individual neurons, mean field analysis
has revealed the collective neuronal behaviors that emerge
at initialization (Pennington et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019;
Pennington & Worah, 2017), throughout training (Jacot
et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Lee et al., 2019), and
after training (Chizat & Bach, 2020; Ba et al., 2019).

Can we achieve a bounded mean field error when the width
is finite? We answer this question affirmatively for MLPs
that are endowed with batch normalization. In particular,
we show that under some technical assumption on the underlying dynamics (as formally expressed in Theorem 1),
the mean field estimation error for Gram matrices remains
bounded at infinite depth. Specifically, we demonstrate
that this error is limited by width−1/2 with high probability.
This contrasts with the vacuous concentration bounds at
infinite depth observed in the absence of normalization (Li
et al., 2022). Our results highlight the importance of existing
mean field analyses of batch normalization by Yang et al.
(2019), and demonstrate their high accuracy in the finite

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Laboratory
for Information and Decision Systems (LIDS), MIT 3 Foundation
of Data Science Institute (FODSI) 4 Hariri Institute for Computing and Computational Science and Engineering, Boston University 5 INRIA-ENS-PSL Paris. Correspondence to: Amir Joudaki
<amir.judaki@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

