On Regularization and Inference with Label Constraints

Kaifu Wang 1 Hangfeng He 2 Tin D. Nguyen 3 Piyush Kumar 4 Dan Roth 1

Abstract

(“before” or “after”) among a set of events, the assigned
labels will need to satisfy a transitivity constraint which
means, for example, the facts that an event E1 is after E2
and that E2 is after E3 imply that E1 is after E3 . The central
question is how to encode such a constraint into a learning
algorithm to ensure better performance and generalization
of the learned model.

Prior knowledge and symbolic rules in machine
learning are often expressed in the form of label constraints, especially in structured prediction
problems. In this work, we compare two common
strategies for encoding label constraints in a machine learning pipeline, regularization with constraints and constrained inference, by quantifying
their impact on model performance. For regularization, we show that it narrows the generalization
gap by precluding models that are inconsistent
with the constraints. However, its preference for
small violations introduces a bias toward a suboptimal model. For constrained inference, we show
that it reduces the population risk by correcting
a model’s violation, and hence turns the violation into an advantage. Given these differences,
we further explore the use of two approaches together and propose conditions for constrained inference to compensate for the bias introduced by
regularization, aiming to improve both the model
complexity and optimal risk.

Practitioners have developed two techniques to encode a
label constraint in a machine learning pipeline. The first,
called regularization with constraints, penalizes a model for
its violation of the constraint in addition to the classification
loss (Ganchev et al., 2010; Li et al., 2019). The second,
called inference with constraints, modifies prediction rules
directly by enforcing strictly constrained inference (Roth &
Yih, 2004; Scholak et al., 2021) or balancing the original
model’s output with the constraint in a soft way (Chang
et al., 2008; 2012).
Although these two learning algorithms have been shown
to be empirically successful, we are not aware of theoretical analyses that elucidate each algorithm’s advantages or
disadvantages in comparison with the other one. Natural
questions include, how do these two differ in their impact
on the learned model? Moreover, in practice, the constraints
could be noisy i.e. (Hu et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2021). In
such cases, do they still improve the model performance? If
so, by how much?

1. Introduction
Domain knowledge in machine learning is often framed as
constraints on the output label space. Such label constraints
have been widely identified in natural language processing tasks (Roth & Yih, 2004; Martins et al., 2009b; Ning
et al., 2018a; Lu et al., 2022) and studied in the context of
structured prediction (Punyakanok et al., 2005; Chang et al.,
2007; 2008; Ganchev et al., 2010; Chang et al., 2012; Pan
et al., 2020). For example, in temporal reasoning (Ning
et al., 2018a) where the model is asked to label the relations

Focusing on multiclass classification with label constraints,
we compare regularization with constraints and constrained
inference. For each algorithm, we quantify its optimal risk
(aka approximation error) and its generalization gap (aka
estimation error). Specifically, in Section 3, we show that
regularization with constraints achieves a smaller generalization error by reducing the model complexity but will
introduce a bias towards a suboptimal model if the risk minimizer and violation minimizer does not coincide. In Section
4, we study a broad family of constrained inference model
called Constrained Conditional Model (CCM) (Chang et al.,
2008; 2012) and point out that the constrained inference
could reduce the risk of a model if and only if the model
violates the constraint more than the true data distribution.
This further suggests finding models with higher violation,
which contrasts the learning objective used in regularization
that discourages violation. Given these contrasts, we further

1

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA (Part of the work
done while at the University of Pennsylvania.) 3 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 Systems and
Technology Research, Woburn, MA USA. Correspondence
to: Piyush Kumar <piyush.kumar@str.us>, Dan Roth <danroth@seas.upenn.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

