The Persistent Laplacian for Data Science: Evaluating Higher-Order Persistent
Spectral Representations of Data

Thomas Davies 1 2 Zhengchao Wan 3 Ruben Sanchez-Garcia 1 2

Abstract

invariants are calculated directly on these discretizations.
Using these, we can convert ‘data’ into ‘shape’, by constructing one of these discretizations from a data set (typically a
simplicial or cubical complex), and then extracting topological features – this is the standard TDA workflow.

Persistent homology is arguably the most successful technique in Topological Data Analysis. It
combines homology, a topological feature of a
data set, with persistence, which tracks the evolution of homology over different scales. The
persistent Laplacian is a recent theoretical development that combines persistence with the combinatorial Laplacian, the higher-order extension
of the well-known graph Laplacian. Crucially,
the Laplacian encodes both the homology of a
data set, and some additional geometric information not captured by the homology. Here, we
provide the first investigation into the efficacy
of the persistent Laplacian as an embedding of
data for downstream classification and regression
tasks. We extend the persistent Laplacian to cubical complexes so it can be used on images, then
evaluate its performance as an embedding method
on the MNIST and MoleculeNet datasets, demonstrating that it consistently outperforms persistent
homology.

A key idea behind many TDA techniques is that of persistence. Instead of counting a topological feature (e.g. number
of connected pieces), we track its evolution on a family of
increasing discretizations, called a filtration, that encodes a
‘shape’, or data set, at different ‘scales’. The combination of
persistence with homology, a powerful topological invariant,
is by far the most successful TDA technique in applications
across a variety of domains (see e.g., Bukkuri et al. (2021)
and Pritchard et al. (2022)).
A natural extension of this approach, moving towards what
one could call Geometric Data Analysis, would be to incorporate more geometrical information missed by homology,
that is, to supplement homology, a purely topological invariant, with some geometrical information of the underlying
data set. The combinatorial, or discrete, Laplacian operator
(Horak & Jost, 2013), a higher-order generalization of the
well-known graph Laplacian (Eckmann, 1944; Goldberg,
2002), is the perfect candidate for this task. It incorporates
the homology, as its 0-eigenspace, while the non-zero spectrum captures aspects of the geometry. As an illustration,
the 0-eigenvalues of the graph Laplacian correspond to the
connected components of a graph (its 0-homology, a topological invariant), while the non-zero eigenvalues relate to
clusters, or ‘almost connected components’, a geometric feature undetected by homology, and the basis of the spectral
clustering algorithms (Von Luxburg, 2007).

1. Introduction
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) encompasses a group of
techniques that use topologically-inspired methods in data
analysis (Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2022; Dey & Wang, 2022).
Topology studies the same objects as geometry (‘shapes’)
but allows extreme deformations such as stretching, twisting,
or bending, and thus it is concerned with properties (called
‘topological invariants’) that remain unchanged under such
deformations. Although we should think of ‘shapes’ as
continuous objects, we can discretise them without losing
any topological information, and, indeed, many topological

The persistent Laplacian, a recent theoretical development
(Lieutier, 2014; Wang et al., 2020; Mémoli et al., 2022), extends the higher-order Laplacian operator to the persistence
setting. In particular, the 0-eigenvalues of the persistent
Laplacians recover information about the persistent homology (Mémoli et al., 2022). This gives a powerful new way
to summarise data that combines topological and geometric
information with the persistence TDA hallmark.

1
University of Southampton, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute,
The British Library, UK 3 Halıcıoǧlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. Correspondence to: Thomas Davies <tdavies@turing.ac.uk>.

In this article, we introduce the persistent Laplacian to the
Machine Learning community as a feature vector which

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

