Learning Deep Time-index Models for Time Series Forecasting

Gerald Woo 1 2 Chenghao Liu 1 Doyen Sahoo 1 Akshat Kumar 2 Steven Hoi 1

Abstract

Train set

Deep learning has been actively applied to time
series forecasting, leading to a deluge of new
methods, belonging to the class of historicalvalue models. Yet, despite the attractive properties of time-index models, such as being able
to model the continuous nature of underlying
time series dynamics, little attention has been
given to them. Indeed, while naive deep timeindex models are far more expressive than the
manually predefined function representations of
classical time-index models, they are inadequate
for forecasting, being unable to generalize to unseen time steps due to the lack of inductive bias.
In this paper, we propose DeepTime, a metaoptimization framework to learn deep time-index
models which overcome these limitations, yielding an efficient and accurate forecasting model.
Extensive experiments on real world datasets in
the long sequence time-series forecasting setting
demonstrate that our approach achieves competitive results with state-of-the-art methods, and
is highly efficient. Code is available at https:
//github.com/salesforce/DeepTime.

Test set

Time
Input

Output

(a) Historical-value Models
Train set

Test set

Output

Time
Input

(b) Time-index Models
Figure 1. Visual comparison between the two paradigms of
historical-value, and time-index models. After the models are
trained on the training set, forecasts are made over the test set,
which may be arbitrarily long. Historical-value models make
predictions conditioning on an input lookback window, whereas
time-index models do not make use of new incoming information
during the test phase.

purely functions of the corresponding time-index features
at future time-step(s), ŷt+1 = f (τt+1 ) (see Figure 1 for
a visual comparison). Historical-value models have been
widely used due to their simplicity. However, they can only
model temporal relationships at the data sampling frequency.
This is an issue since time series observations available
to us tend to have a much lower resolution (sampled at
a lower frequency) than the underlying dynamics (Gong
et al., 2015; 2017), leading historical-value models to be
prone to capturing spurious correlations. On the other
hand, time-index models intrinsically avoid this problem,
directly modeling the mapping from time-index features
to predictions in continuous space and learning signal
representations which change smoothly and correlate with
each other in continuous space.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting has important applications across
business and scientific domains, such as demand forecasting (Carbonneau et al., 2008), capacity planning and
management (Kim, 2003), and anomaly detection (Laptev
et al., 2017). There are two typical approaches to time
series forecasting – historical-value, and time-index models.
Historical-value models predict future time step(s) as a function of past observations, ŷt+1 = f (yt , yt−1 , . . .) (Benidis
et al., 2020), while time-index models, a less studied
approach, are defined to be models whose predictions are

Classical time-index models (Taylor & Letham, 2018;
Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018; Ord et al., 2017) rely
on predefined function forms to generate predictions. They
optionally follow the structural time-series formulation
(Harvey & Shephard, 1993), yt = g(τt ) + s(τt ) + h(τt ),
where g, s, h represent trend, periodic, and holiday components respectively. For example, g could be predefined
as a linear, polynomial, or even a piece-wise linear function.
While these functions are simple and easy to learn, they

1
Salesforce Research Asia 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University. Correspondence to: Gerald Woo <gwoo@salesforce.com>, Chenghao Liu
<chenghao.liu@salesforce.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

