From Adaptive Query Release to Machine Unlearning

Enayat Ullah 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract

as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), California
Consumer Act (CCA) among others, which empower users
to make such requests to the entity possessing user data.
The entity is then required to update the state of the system
such that it is indistinguishable to the state had the user
data been absent to begin with. While as of now, there is
no universally accepted definition of indistinguishibility as
the unlearning criterion, in this work, we consider the most
strict definition, called exact unlearning (see Definition 1).

We formalize the problem of machine unlearning as design of efficient unlearning algorithms
corresponding to learning algorithms which perform a selection of adaptive queries from structured query classes. We give efficient unlearning algorithms for linear and prefix-sum query
classes. As applications, we show that unlearning in many problems, in particular, stochastic
convex optimization (SCO), can be reduced to
the above, yielding improved guarantees for the
problem. In particular, for smooth Lipschitz
losses and any ρ > 0, our results yield an unlearning algorithm
with excess population risk of
√ 
e √1 + d with unlearning query (gradient)
O
nρ
n
complexity e
O(ρ · Retraining Complexity), where
d is the model dimensionality and n is the initial
number of samples. For non-smooth Lipschitz
losses, we give an unlearning algorithm
with ex√ 

1
d 1/2
e
√
cess population risk O n + nρ
with the
same unlearning query (gradient) complexity. Furthermore, in the special case of Generalized Linear Models (GLMs), such as those in linear and
logistic regression, we getdimension-independent
e √1 + 12/3 and O
e √1 + 11/3
rates of O
n
n
(nρ)
(nρ)
for smooth Lipschitz and non-smooth Lipschitz
losses respectively. Finally, we give generalizations of the above from one unlearning request
to dynamic streams consisting of insertions and
deletions.

Motivating Example: The main objective of our work is to
identify algorithmic design principles for unlearning such
that it is more efficient than retraining, the naive baseline
method. Towards this, we first discuss the example of unlearning for Gradient Descent (GD) method, which will
highlight the key challenges as well as foreshadow the formal setup and techniques. GD and its variants are extremely
popular optimization methods with numerous applications
in machine learning and beyond. In a machine learning
context, it is typically
used to minimize the training loss,
Pn
n
b
L(w;
S) = n1 i=1 ℓ(w; zi ) where S = {zi }i=1 is the
training dataset and w, the model. Starting from an initial
model w1 , in each iteration, the model is updated as:
!
n
1X
b
wt+1 = wt − η∇L(wt ; S) = wt − η
∇ℓ(wt ; zi ) ,
n i=1
where η is the learning rate. After training, a data-point,
say zn without loss of generality, is requested to be unn−1
learnt and so the updated training set is S ′ = {zi }i=1 .
We now need to apply an efficient unlearning algorithm
such that its output is equal to that of running GD on S ′ .
Observe that the first iteration of GD is simple enough
to be unlearnt efficiently by computing the newgradient
b 1 ; S ′ ) = 1 n∇L(w
b 1 ; S) − ∇ℓ(w1 ; zn ) and up∇L(w
n−1
′
dating as w2 = w1 − η∇ b
L(w1 ; S ′ ). However, in the second
iteration (and onwards), the gradient is computed on w2′
which can be different from w2 and the above adjustment
can no longer be applied and one may need to retrain from
here onwards. This captures a key challenge for unlearning
in problems solved by simple iterative procedures such as
GD – adaptivity – that is, the gradients (or more generally,
the queries) computed in later iteration depend on the result of the previous iterations. We systematically formalize
such procedures and design efficient unlearning algorithms
for them.

1. Introduction
The problem of machine unlearning is concerned with updating trained machine learning models upon request of
deletions to the training dataset. This problem has recently
gained attention owing to various data privacy laws such
1
Department of Computer Science, The Johns Hopkins University, USA. Correspondence to: Enayat Ullah <enayat@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

