CoDi: Co-evolving Contrastive Diffusion Models
for Mixed-type Tabular Synthesis

Chaejeong Lee * 1 Jayoung Kim * 1 Noseong Park 1

Abstract

Real

With growing attention to tabular data these days,
the attempt to apply a synthetic table to various tasks has been expanded toward various scenarios. Owing to the recent advances in generative modeling, fake data generated by tabular data synthesis models become sophisticated
and realistic. However, there still exists a difficulty in modeling discrete variables (columns)
of tabular data. In this work, we propose to
process continuous and discrete variables separately (but being conditioned on each other) by
two diffusion models. The two diffusion models
are co-evolved during training by reading conditions from each other. In order to further bind
the diffusion models, moreover, we introduce a
contrastive learning method with a negative sampling method. In our experiments with 11 realworld tabular datasets and 8 baseline methods,
we prove the efficacy of the proposed method,
called CoDi. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/ChaejeongLee/CoDi.

CoDi

STaSy

Figure 1: Preliminary experiment on a toy dataset. The
dataset contains 4 columns, which are two continuous (the
x-axis and y-axis) and two discrete (16 colors and 4 circles)
columns. (Left) is a scatter plot of real data, (Bottom) is
synthesized data by STaSy (Kim et al., 2022a), and (Right)
is synthesized data by our proposed method. Detailed information and visualizations are in Appendix A.

methods. To be specific, tabular data usually consists of
mixed data types, i.e., continuous and discrete variables.
Due to the complicated nature of tabular data, pre/postprocessing of the tabular data is inevitable, and the performance of tabular data synthesis methods is highly dependent
on the pre/post-processing method. While various processing methods for continuous variables have been proposed,
e.g., standardizing continuous values using variational Gaussian mixture models (Xu et al., 2019) and applying the logarithm transformation to treat long-tailed distributions (Zhao
et al., 2021), handling discrete variables remains challenging. The most common way to treat discrete variables is to
sample in continuous spaces after their one-hot encoding
(and sometimes via Gumbel-softmax) (Xu et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2021; 2022b;a), which may lead to sub-optimal results
due to sampling mistakes.

1. Introduction
Tabular data is one of the most frequently occurring data
types in real-world applications. Considering that tabular
data attracts much attention these days (Borisov et al., 2021;
Shwartz-Ziv & Armon, 2022; Yin et al., 2020; Gorishniy
et al., 2021), synthesizing tabular data is a timely research
issue. The quality of generated tabular data has significantly
improved owing to recent advancements in the generative
model paradigm (Park et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022a).
In spite of the advancement, there still exists a challenging
issue in the current state-of-the-art tabular data synthesis

Moreover, treating discrete variables in continuous spaces is
also problematic in terms of the entire learned data distribution. When continuous and discrete variables are processed
in a same manner, it is likely that inter-column correlations
— in particular, the correlation between continuous and discrete variables — are compromised in the learned distribution. Therefore, we are interested in processing continuous
and discrete variables in more robust ways.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Noseong
Park <noseong@yonsei.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

