Rethinking Explaining Graph Neural Networks via Non-parametric Subgraph
Matching

Fang Wu 1 2 Siyuan Li 1 Xurui Jin 2 Yinghui Jiang 2 Dragomir Radev 3 Zhangming Niu 2 Stan Z. Li 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have drawn broad interest
due to their success in learning representations of graphstructured data, such as social networks (Fan et al., 2019),
knowledge graphs (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018), traffic networks (Geng et al., 2019), and molecular graphs (Gilmer
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2023). Despite their remarkable
efficacy, GNNs lack transparency as the rationale of their
predictions is not easy for humans to comprehend. This
prohibits practitioners from not only gaining an understanding of the network characteristics but correcting systematic
patterns of mistakes made by models before deploying them
in real-world applications.

The success of graph neural networks (GNNs)
provokes the question about explainability:
“Which fraction of the input graph is the most determinant of the prediction?” Particularly, parametric explainers prevail in existing approaches
because of their more robust capability to decipher the black-box (i.e., target GNNs). In this
paper, based on the observation that graphs typically share some common motif patterns, we propose a novel non-parametric subgraph matching
framework, dubbed MatchExplainer, to explore
explanatory subgraphs. It couples the target graph
with other counterpart instances and identifies the
most crucial joint substructure by minimizing the
node corresponding-based distance. Moreover,
we note that present graph sampling or nodedropping methods usually suffer from the false
positive sampling problem. To alleviate this issue,
we design a new augmentation paradigm named
MatchDrop. It takes advantage of MatchExplainer
to fix the most informative portion of the graph
and merely operates graph augmentations on the
rest less informative part. Extensive experiments
on synthetic and real-world datasets show the
effectiveness of our MatchExplainer by outperforming all state-of-the-art parametric baselines
with significant margins. Results also demonstrate that MatchDrop is a general scheme to be
equipped with GNNs for enhanced performance.
The code is available at https://github.
com/smiles724/MatchExplainer.

Extensive studies have noticed this issue and great efforts
are devoted to explaining GNNs (Yuan et al., 2020b). Researchers strive to answer questions like “What knowledge
of the input graph is the most dominantly important in the
model’s decision?” To this end, feature attribution and selection (Selvaraju et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017;
Ancona et al., 2017) becomes a prevalent paradigm. They
distribute the model’s outcome prediction to the input graph
via gradient-like signals (Baldassarre & Azizpour, 2019;
Pope et al., 2019; Schnake et al., 2020), mask or attention
scores (Ying et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020), or prediction
changes on perturbed features (Schwab & Karlen, 2019;
Yuan et al., 2021), and then choose a salient substructure as
the explanation.
Apart from them, more recent approaches prefer relying
on a deep learning network to parameterize the generation process of explanations (Vu & Thai, 2020; Wang
et al., 2021b). These learning-based mechanisms empirically show superior accuracy than the above-mentioned
non-parametric ones. Some explainer models are optimized
toward local fidelity (Chen et al., 2018), such as GNNExplainer (Ying et al., 2019), PGM-Explainer (Vu & Thai,
2020) and SubgraphX (Yuan et al., 2021). Meanwhile, several others are committed to providing a global understanding of the model prediction, including PGExplainer (Luo
et al., 2020), XGNN (Yuan et al., 2020a), and ReFine (Wang
et al., 2021b).

1

School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
MindrankAI, Hangzhou, China 3 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, United States. Correspondence to: Zhangming Niu <zhangming@mindrank.ai>, Stan Z.
Li <stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Despite the fruitful progress and the popular trend towards
1

