Towards Sustainable Learning: Coresets for Data-efficient Deep Learning

Yu Yang 1 Hao Kang 2 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Abstract

on large data requires expensive computational resources,
which consume substantial energy, leave a massive amount
of carbon footprint, and often soon become obsolete and
turn into e-waste (Asi & Duchi, 2019; Schwartz et al., 2019;
Strubell et al., 2019). While there has been a persistent
effort to improve the performance and reliability of machine
learning models (Brown et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2015; Zhai
et al., 2022), their sustainability is often neglected.

To improve the efficiency and sustainability of
learning deep models, we propose C REST, the
first scalable framework with rigorous theoretical guarantees to identify the most valuable examples for training non-convex models, particularly deep networks. To guarantee convergence
to a stationary point of a non-convex function,
C REST models the non-convex loss as a series of
quadratic functions and extracts a coreset for each
quadratic sub-region. In addition, to ensure faster
convergence of stochastic gradient methods such
as (mini-batch) SGD, C REST iteratively extracts
multiple mini-batch coresets from larger random
subsets of training data, to ensure nearly-unbiased
gradients with small variances. Finally, to further
improve scalability and efficiency, C REST identifies and excludes the examples that are learned
from the coreset selection pipeline. Our extensive
experiments on several deep networks trained on
vision and NLP datasets, including CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, TinyImageNet, and SNLI, confirm
that C REST speeds up training deep networks on
very large datasets, by 1.7x to 2.5x with minimum
loss in the performance. By analyzing the learning
difficulty of the subsets selected by C REST, we
show that deep models benefit the most by learning from subsets of increasing difficulty levels 1 .

Indeed, not all examples are equally valuable or even required to guarantee a good generalization performance. To
address the sustainability and efficiency of machine learning,
one approach involves selecting the most relevant data for
training. A recent line of work (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020;
Killamsetty et al., 2021b;a; Pooladzandi et al., 2022) showed
that for strongly convex models, a weighted subset (coreset) of data that closely matches full gradient—sum of the
gradient of all the training examples—provide convergence
guarantees for (Incremental) Gradient Descent. Such coresets speed up learning by up to 6x. Intuitively, this is possible as for popular strongly convex models—logistic, linear
regression, and regularized support vector machines—the
gradient error of a coreset during the entire training can be
upper-bounded in advanced (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020).
Unfortunately, we cannot simply apply the same idea to
non-convex models, for three reasons. First, for non-convex
models, training dynamics—loss and gradient of examples—drastically change during the training and cannot be
upper-bounded beforehand. As a result, the importance of
examples for learning changes throughout training, and one
coreset cannot guarantee convergence anymore. Second,
non-convex models are learned with (mini-batch) stochastic
gradient methods, such as (mini-batch) SGD, which require
unbiased estimates of the full gradient with a bounded variance. Existing coresets that capture the gradient of the full
data cannot provide any guarantee for stochastic gradient
methods, as the gradient of mini-batches selected from the
coreset may be biased and have a large variance. Finally,
iteratively selecting coresets from full data becomes very
expensive for large datasets, and does not yield speedup.

1. Introduction
Large datasets have enabled over-parameterized neural networks to achieve unprecedented success (Devlin et al., 2018;
Brown et al., 2020; Zhai et al., 2022). However, training such models, with millions or billions of parameters,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California Los Angeles, USA 2 School of Computer
Science, Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Yu
Yang <yuyang@cs.ucla.edu>, Baharan Mirzasoleiman <baharan@cs.ucla.edu>.

In this work, we address the above challenges and propose
C REST, a rigorous method to find coresets for non-convex
models, by making the following contributions:

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code can be found at https://github.com/bigml-cs-ucla/crest

Coreset selection by modeling the non-convex loss. To
1

