The Computational Complexity of Concise Hypersphere Classification

Eduard Eiben 1 Robert Ganian 2 Iyad Kanj 3 Sebastian Ordyniak 4 Stefan Szeider 2

Abstract

viewpoint of XAI. However, unlike previous works on explainability, which have typically targeted questions such as
identifying a suitable interpretable model for (area-specific)
classification (Nori et al., 2021; Shih et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021) or measuring the accuracy cost of explainability (Laber & Murtinho, 2021; Makarychev & Shan, 2021),
the goal of this work is to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the computational complexity of performing
binary classification via one of the most fundamental interpretable models.

Hypersphere classification is a classical and foundational method that can provide easy-to-process
explanations for the classification of real-valued
and binary data. However, obtaining an (ideally
concise) explanation via hypersphere classification is much more difficult when dealing with
binary data than real-valued data. In this paper,
we perform the first complexity-theoretic study of
the hypersphere classification problem for binary
data. We use the fine-grained parameterized complexity paradigm to analyze the impact of structural properties that may be present in the input
data as well as potential conciseness constraints.
Our results include stronger lower bounds and
new fixed-parameter algorithms for hypersphere
classification of binary data, which can find an
exact and concise explanation when one exists.

Consider a set M of either real-valued or binary training
feature points, each represented as a d-dimensional feature
vector over [0, 1] or {0, 1} and labeled as either “blue” (the
set VB ) or “red” (the set VR ). There is, by now, a broad set
of more or less opaque classifiers capable of using such a
training set to classify unlabeled data, where the suitability
of each method depends on the data domain and context;
moreover, some classifiers are tailored to real-valued data,
while others are designed for binary (or, more generally,
categorical) data. In this paper, we consider one of the
two arguably simplest—and hence easiest to explain and
visualize—types of classifiers, which can be used in both
data settings: a hypersphere. More formally, the explanations we consider consist of a cluster center ~c (an element
of [0, 1]d or {0, 1}d ) and distance ` such that each feature
vector is at a distance at most ` from ~c if and only if it is
blue.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of Machine Learning (ML)
models to automate decisions, there has been increasing
interest in explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), where
the ML models can explain their decisions in a way humans
understand. This has led to the reexamination of ML models
that are implicitly easy to explain and interpret with a particular focus on the conciseness of explanations (Doshi-Velez
& Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2018; Monroe, 2018; Ribeiro et al.,
2018; Shih et al., 2018; Barceló et al., 2020; Chalasani et al.,
2020; Darwiche & Hirth, 2020; Blanc et al., 2021; Ignatiev
et al., 2021; Wäldchen et al., 2021; Izza et al., 2022).

The reason for studying the complexity of hypersphere classification does not stem purely from the problem’s connection to explainability. Together with classification by a
separating hyperplane, hypersphere classification represents
one of the most classic explanatory examples of classifiers
(see (Cooper, 1962; Wang et al., 2007; 2005) to name a
few) which have been extensively studied from both the
computational geometry and the machine learning perspectives (Astorino et al., 2016; Astorino & Gaudioso, 2009;
Cooper, 1962; Wang et al., 2007; 2005; O’Rourke et al.,
1986; Agarwal et al., 2006; Hurtado et al., 2003). Moreover, hypersphere classification is of special importance in
one-class classification due to the inherent asymmetry of
the provided explanations (Kim et al., 2021). While hyperplane separation can be encoded as a linear program and
hence is easily polynomial-time solvable for real-valued and
binary data, the computational complexity of hypersphere

In this article, we consider a simple classification task—
one of the cornerstones of machine learning—from the
*

Equal contribution 1 Royal Holloway, University of London,
UK. 2 Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria.
3
DePaul University, USA. 4 University of Leeds, UK.. Correspondence to: Eduard Eiben <eduard.eiben@rhul.ac.uk>, Robert Ganian <rganian@gmail.com>, Iyad Kanj <ikanj@depaul.edu>,
Sebastian Ordyniak <sordyniak@gmail.com>, Stefan Szeider
<sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

