Solving Linear Programs with Fast Online Learning Algorithms

Wenzhi Gao 1 Dongdong Ge 1 Chunlin Sun 2 Yinyu Ye 3

Abstract

and Gondzio, 2016) or rely on sparsity (Nesterov, 2012).

This paper presents fast first-order methods for
solving linear programs (LPs) approximately.
We adapt online linear programming algorithms
to offline LPs and obtain algorithms that avoid
any matrix multiplication. We also introduce a
variable-duplication technique that copies each
variable K times and reduces the optimality
gap
√
and constraint violation by a factor of K. Furthermore, we show how online algorithms can be
effectively integrated into sifting, a column generation scheme for large-scale LPs. Numerical
experiments demonstrate that our methods can
serve as either an approximate direct solver, or
an initialization subroutine for exact LP solving.

In contrast to the LPs discussed above, which we call “offline” LPs, there is another type of LPs called “online” LPs
(Agrawal et al., 2014; Li and Ye, 2022). They come from
revenue management (Talluri et al., 2004) and model the
situation of making sequential decisions on the customer
orders that are described by LP columns. Here an LP column denotes a column in the constraint matrix together
with its corresponding objective value. Due to online nature of the problem, generally an algorithm for online LPs
1). only accesses one LP column at a time; 2). makes decisions instantly. Through making decisions, the behavior of
online algorithms gets refined and improved, which is why
they are also known as “online learning”.
In the line of online LP literature, state-of-the-art online
LP algorithms build on offline LPs as a subroutine (Jiang
et al., 2022; Li and Ye, 2022; Ma et al., 2022), and it seems
that online LP unilaterally benefits from offline LP. It is
therefore natural to ask:

1. Introduction
First-order methods for large-scale linear programs are receiving increasing attention as problem sizes grow beyond
the capacity of traditional simplex (Dantzig, 2016) and interior point methods (Ye, 2011). When a low or moderateaccuracy solution is required, first-order methods often outperform simplex and interior point solvers as they only involve matrix-vector multiplication and are free of matrix
decomposition. A recent practice (Applegate et al., 2021)
demonstrates that fine-tuned first-order methods are also
capable of solving LPs of millions of variables to high accuracy. However, as (Nesterov, 2012) suggests, when the
problem size further reaches trillions of variables or more,
even storing the problem data in memory becomes prohibitive, not to mention performing matrix-vector multiplications. As a result, most first-order methods either resort
to distributed architecture (Basu et al., 2020; Fountoulakis

Does online LP benefit offline LP?
In this paper, we answer this question positively by exploiting a recent research direction on fast online algorithms (Li
et al., 2020; Balseiro et al., 2022). Unlike the offline LPbased online algorithms, these methods build on stochastic first-order oracles, make decisions and refinements in
linear time, and simultaneously estimate primal and dual
solutions in a single pass through the problem data. Also,
they achieve provable optimality guarantees under minimal
assumptions on the problem data. All these motivate us to
study if these time-efficient methods help offline LP solving. In particular, we investigate two popular online algorithms: explicit subgradient (Li et al., 2020) and implicit
proximal point (Kulis and Bartlett, 2010).

1

School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 2 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University 3 Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Wenzhi Gao <gwz@163.shufe.edu.cn>,
Dongdong Ge <ge.dongdong@mail.shufe.edu.cn>, Chunlin Sun
<chunlin@stanford.edu>, Yinyu Ye <yyye@stanford.edu>.

First-order Methods for Linear Programming Firstorder methods for LPs are recently developed and presented as optimization software. Some successful attempts
include ABIP (Lin et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022), COSMO
(Garstka et al., 2021), ECLIPSE (Basu et al., 2020), PDLP
(Applegate et al., 2021) and SCS (O’donoghue et al., 2016).
The listed algorithms target large-scale LPs, and the major computational bottleneck lies in matrix-vector multiplication (sometimes one-time matrix decomposition). Com-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

