Rethinking Visual Reconstruction: Experience-Based Content Completion
Guided by Visual Cues

Jiaxuan Chen 1 2 * Yu Qi 1 3 * Gang Pan 1 2

Abstract
Decoding seen images from brain activities has
been an absorbing field. However, the reconstructed images still suffer from low quality with existing studies. This can be because our visual system
is not like a camera that “remembers” every pixel. Instead, only part of the information can be
perceived with our selective attention, and the
brain “guesses” the rest to form what we think we
see. Most existing approaches ignored the brain
completion mechanism. In this work, we propose
to reconstruct seen images with both the visual perception and the brain completion process,
and design a simple, yet effective visual decoding
framework to achieve this goal. Specifically, we
first construct a shared discrete representation space for both brain signals and images. Then, a
novel self-supervised token-to-token inpainting
network is designed to implement visual content
completion by building context and prior knowledge about the visual objects from the discrete
latent space. Our approach improved the quality
of visual reconstruction significantly and achieved
state-of-the-art.

Figure 1. What we see is a combination of both the visual perceptions (which can be limited, focusing on certain parts mostly) and
the brain completion process (according to our knowledge and
experience). Therefore, using brain signals alone is not sufficient
to reconstruct the seeing image comprehensively.

e.g., neural-prostheses (Qian et al., 2020). Existing studies
have shown that using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), which is a non-invasive technique to measure
brain activities, can effectively reconstruct perceived information with deep neural networks (Shen et al., 2019a; Beliy
et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2020; Mozafari et al., 2020; Ren
et al., 2021; Gaziv et al., 2022; Ozcelik et al., 2022). For
the existing visual reconstruction approaches, one critical
problem lies in that they usually fail to recover the intricate
color and texture in natural scenes, or the reconstructed results are often unfaithful to the real images, especially for
generative adversarial networks (GANs)-based approaches.

1. Introduction

To cope with the existing dilemma in visual decoding, we
need to ask: is the use of fMRI recording alone sufficient to
reconstruct the perceived image with details? One limitation may lie in the capacity for preserving brain activities
of fMRI signals, while another factor is whether our visual system conveys the full visual information to the brain.
Unfortunately, our visual system is not like a camera that
“remembers” every pixel of seen images, and it is usually
difficult for us to describe the detail of a seen scene. In
fact, the visual information provided to the retina is limited
due to the selective visual attention mechanism, such that
only a certain part of the information that interests us is
perceived by the eyes (Desimone et al., 1995). Furthermore,
the number of ganglion cells is far fewer than the photoreceptor cell, which causes the visual stimulus transmitted

Seeking the relationship between brain activities and the
corresponding visual stimulus is an interesting topic in neural decoding, which not only contributes to the development
of intelligence paradigms (Wu et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2015) but also provides vital application values,
*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. 2 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. 3 MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and
Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yu Qi <qiyu@zju.edu.cn>, Gang Pan
<gpan@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

