The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Few-shot Learning for Machine Translation

Xavier Garcia 1 Yamini Bansal 1 Colin Cherry 2 George Foster 2 Maxim Krikun 2
Melvin Johnson 1 Orhan Firat 1

Abstract

Wang et al., 2021a), memorization of low-quality examples
(Raunak & Menezes, 2022), and biases towards generating
text in language registers over-represented in the parallel
data, such as language varieties (Lakew et al., 2018; Riley
et al., 2022) or formality (Rippeth et al., 2022).

We demonstrate the potential of few-shot translation systems, trained with unpaired language
data, for both high and low-resource language
pairs. We show that with only 5 examples of
high-quality translation data shown at inference,
a transformer decoder-only model trained solely
with self-supervised learning is able to match specialized supervised state-of-the-art models as well
as more general commercial translation systems.
In particular, we outperform the best performing
system on the WMT’21 English−Chinese news
translation task by only using five examples of
English−Chinese parallel data at inference. Furthermore, the resulting models are two orders of
magnitude smaller than state-of-the-art language
models. We then analyze the factors which impact the performance of few-shot translation systems, and highlight that the quality of the few-shot
demonstrations heavily determines the quality of
the translations generated by our models. Finally,
we show that the few-shot paradigm also provides
a way to control certain attributes of the translation — we show that we are able to control for
regional varieties and formality using only five
examples at inference, paving the way towards
controllable machine translation systems.

As an alternative, researchers began exploring the task of unsupervised translation (Ravi & Knight, 2011) i.e. building
translation models without any parallel data at all. Unsupervised translation systems have demonstrated promising
performance in recent years, able to match strong supervised baselines on academic benchmarks (Song et al., 2019;
Garcia et al., 2020b; Han et al., 2021) by relying on a collection of tricks and techniques, such as multilinguality
(Conneau et al., 2019; Garcia et al., 2020b;a; Lin et al.,
2021), back-translation (Lample et al., 2017), and most recently through large-scale models with parameters in the
hundreds of billions (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Vilar et al.,
2022; Han et al., 2021). Despite such results, these systems
are rarely compared to state-of-the-art supervised models
which also leverage their own bag of tricks to improve performance.1 Moreover, these models trained on large-scale
monolingual data also suffer from similar issues as models
trained on large-scale parallel data: variance in the quality
of monolingual data and generation being biased towards
the over-represented registers in the monolingual data.
It thus remains to explore what lies between these two research streams: few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020). Recently, large language models have been shown capable of
performing arbitrary tasks by exposing a few demonstrations of the task at inference time. The dependence of these
models on demonstrations to perform the task allows us to
overcome the aforementioned issues by carefully selecting
a small set of high-quality translation pairs in the language
register of interest as demonstrations.

1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art machine translation systems are typically built by leveraging vast amounts of parallel data mined
from the web. While this is practical for high-resource language pairs, it is unfeasible to obtain corpora of such sizes
for the majority of languages in the world. Moreover, the reliance of mined parallel data has many potential downsides,
such as allowing for poisoning attacks (Xu et al., 2021;

In this work, we demonstrate that the few-shot translation
paradigm allows us to build high-fidelity translation models at a smaller scale (8B parameters) than traditional large
language models (> 100B parameters) without the need for

1

Google DeepMind 2 Google Translate. Correspondence
to: Xavier Garcia <xgarcia@google.com>, Orhan Firat
<orhanf@google.com>.

1

For example, Tran et al. (2021) applies model ensembling,
reranking strategies, language-specific post-processing and finetuning on in-domain data for all language pairs, as well as iterative
back-translation for the Icelandic language pairs.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

