Special Properties of Gradient Descent with Large Learning Rates

Amirkeivan Mohtashami 1 Martin Jaggi 1 Sebastian Stich 2

Abstract

the implicit bias induced by the stochasticity. Note that
the effective variance of the trajectory due to the stochasticity of the gradient is moderated by the learning rate (see
Appendix G for more intuition). Therefore, using a larger
learning rate amplifies the stochasticity and the implicit bias
induced by it which can provide a possible explanation for
the need for larger learning rates. We show that this explanation is incomplete by demonstrating cases where using
stochasticity with arbitrary magnitude but with a small learning rate, can not guarantee convergence to global minimum
whereas using a large learning rate can. Furthermore, we
provide a practical method to increase stochasticity without
changing the learning rate when training neural networks
and observe that increased stochasticity can not replace the
effects of large learning rates. Therefore, it is important to
study how a larger learning rate affects the trajectory beyond
increasing the stochasticity.

When training neural networks, it has been widely
observed that a large step size is essential in
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for obtaining
superior models. However, the effect of large
step sizes on the success of SGD is not well understood theoretically. Several previous works
have attributed this success to the stochastic noise
present in SGD. However, we show through a
novel set of experiments that the stochastic noise
is not sufficient to explain good non-convex training, and that instead the effect of a large learning
rate itself is essential for obtaining best performance. We demonstrate the same effects also
in the noise-less case, i.e. for full-batch GD. We
formally prove that GD with large step size—on
certain non-convex function classes—follows a
different trajectory than GD with a small step size,
which can lead to convergence to a global minimum instead of a local one. Our settings provide a
framework for future analysis which allows comparing algorithms based on behaviors that can not
be observed in the traditional settings.

1

To that end, in this work we show that randomly initialized full-batch gradient descent with a high learning rate
provably escapes local minima and converges to the global
minimum over of a class of non-convex functions. In contrast, when using a small learning rate, GD over these functions can converge to a local minimum instead. Such difference is not observable under traditional assumptions such as
smoothness. Hence, our settings also provide a framework
to compare optimization methods more closely, for example
in their ability to escape local minima.

Introduction

While using variants of gradient descent (GD), namely
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), has become standard
for optimizing neural networks, the reason behind their success and the effect of various hyperparameters is not yet
fully understood. One example is the practical observation
that using a large learning rate in the initial phase of training
is necessary for obtaining well performing models (Li et al.,
2019). Though this behavior has been widely observed
in practice, it is not fully captured by existing theoretical
frameworks.

We further show the positive effect of using a high learning
rate to increase the chance of completely avoiding undesirable regions of the landscape such as a local minimum. Note
that this behavior does not happen when using the continuous version of GD, i.e. gradient flow which corresponds to
using infinitesimal step sizes. The difference remains even
after adding the implicit regularization term identified in
(Smith et al., 2021) in order to bring trajectories of gradient
flow and gradient descent closer.
Finally, to show the relevance of our theoretical results in
practice, we demonstrate evidence of an escape from local
minimum (not to be confused with escaping from saddle
points) when applying GD with a high learning rate on a
commonly used neural network architecture. Our observations signify the importance of considering the effects of
high learning rates for understanding the success of GD.

Recent investigations of SGD’s success (Kleinberg et al.,
2018; Pesme et al., 2021) have focused on understanding
1
EPFL, Switzerland 2 CISPA, Germany. Correspondence to:
Amirkeivan Mohtashami <amirkeivan.mohtashami@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

