How Do Transformers Learn Topic Structure:
Towards a Mechanistic Understanding

Yuchen Li 1 Yuanzhi Li 1 2 Andrej Risteski 1

Abstract

While the NLP community has produced a large body of
work on probing and visualizing trained networks (Hewitt
& Manning, 2019; Clark et al., 2019; Tenney et al., 2019;
Kovaleva et al., 2019), we still have little formal understanding of the mechanisms by which transformers, trained with
simple gradient-descent based algorithms, learn from their
training data. The challenge is that the training dynamics
are non-trivial, even for relatively simple structured data distributions, and even for simple (e.g. 1-layer) transformers.

While the successes of transformers across many
domains are indisputable, accurate understanding of the learning mechanics is still largely
lacking. Their capabilities have been probed
on benchmarks which include a variety of structured and reasoning tasks—but mathematical understanding is lagging substantially behind. Recent lines of work have begun studying representational aspects of this question: that is,
the size/depth/complexity of attention-based networks to perform certain tasks. However, there is
no guarantee the learning dynamics will converge
to the constructions proposed. In our paper, we
provide fine-grained mechanistic understanding
of how transformers learn “semantic structure”,
understood as capturing co-occurrence structure
of words. Precisely, we show, through a combination of mathematical analysis and experiments
on Wikipedia data and synthetic data modeled
by Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), that the
embedding layer and the self-attention layer encode the topical structure. In the former case, this
manifests as higher average inner product of embeddings between same-topic words. In the latter,
it manifests as higher average pairwise attention
between same-topic words. The mathematical
results involve several assumptions to make the
analysis tractable, which we verify on data, and
might be of independent interest as well.

In particular, we study semantic structure, as understood
through the lens of co-occurrences of words, and their topical structure. Precisely, if we fit topics to a real-life corpus
like Wikipedia using a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA,
Blei et al., 2003) model, we find a pretrained BERT model
produces token embeddings that are more similar (in terms
of inner product) if they belong to the same topic, and more
different if they belong to different topics (see e.g. Figure 3).
Inspired by these observations, we study LDA-generated
data as a sandbox to understand—both through experiments
on such synthetic data, and theoretical results—the process by which the embeddings and attention learn the topical structure. We find that the above observations from
Wikipedia data are even more pronounced on synthetic
LDA data. Moreover, we mathematically prove why such
structure arises by analyzing a simplified two-stage training
dynamics for a single-layer transformer trained under the
masked language modeling objective. We also verify the
two-stage nature of training dynamics obtains for a wide
variety of optimizers and hyperparameter settings. 1

2. OVERVIEW OF RESULTS

1. INTRODUCTION

We focus on understanding the optimization dynamics of
transformers in a simple sandbox: a single-layer transformer trained on (synthetic) data following a topic model
distribution—and validate that our results robustly transfer
to real data (Wikipedia WikimediaFoundation, 2023). We
show that topic structure can be encoded both in the embedding layer, and in the attention mechanism of the network.
Moreover, even if one of these components is not trained
(i.e. handicapped), the other can “compensate” for it.

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) is a
critical building block of many leading approaches to natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020), and other domains such as vision (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) and protein structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021).
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Yuchen Li <yuchenl4@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Code
is
released
at
https://github.com/
YuchenLi01/transformer_topic_model_LDA

1

