Invariant Slot Attention: Object Discovery with Slot-Centric Reference Frames

Ondrej Biza * 1 Sjoerd van Steenkiste 2 Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi 2 Gamaleldin F. Elsayed † 2
Aravindh Mahendran † 2 Thomas Kipf † 2

(p2, s2)

Abstract
Automatically discovering composable abstractions from raw perceptual data is a long-standing
challenge in machine learning. Recent slot-based
neural networks that learn about objects in a selfsupervised manner have made exciting progress
in this direction. However, they typically fall
short at adequately capturing spatial symmetries
present in the visual world, which leads to sample inefficiency, such as when entangling object
appearance and pose. In this paper, we present a
simple yet highly effective method for incorporating spatial symmetries via slot-centric reference
frames. We incorporate equivariance to per-object
pose transformations into the attention and generation mechanism of Slot Attention by translating,
scaling, and rotating position encodings. These
changes result in little computational overhead,
are easy to implement, and can result in large
gains in terms of data efficiency and overall improvements to object discovery. We evaluate our
method on a wide range of synthetic object discovery benchmarks namely Tetrominoes, CLEVRTex, Objects Room and MultiShapeNet, and show
promising improvements on the challenging realworld Waymo Open dataset.

(p2, s2)

(p1, s1)

1. Slot attends to an
encoded image.

(p1, s1)

2. Compute slot position and
scale from attention masks.

3. Create relative
coordinate grids.

Figure 1. Left: Input image. Middle: Invariant Slot Attention
masks. Right: Decoded images with relative coordinate grids
(limited to 6×6 grids for ease of visualization).

1. Introduction
Humans have the intrinsic ability to form high level
abstractions of objects in visual scenes regardless of their
appearance (Barlow, 2009). In the neuroscience literature,
it is hypothesized that humans place canonical ‘reference
frames’ onto objects (Bottini & Doeller, 2020). Such
reference frames entail a coordinate system around each
object that may allow for forming robust object representations in a viewpoint-invariant manner (Hinton, 1981), and
thus for making future predictions by manipulating those
reference frames. In a scene with several objects and parts,
Hawkins et al. (2019) posit that human grid cells represent
a hierarchy of reference frames (e.g. the frame of a person’s
hand, the frame of the mug it is holding, the frame of the
mug’s handle) and hypothesize that there are special grid
cells that model relative transformations between different
levels in the scene.

+ JAX/FLAX source code:
https://github.com/google-research/googleresearch/tree/master/invariant slot attention
+ Model checkpoints:
https://huggingface.co/ondrejbiza/isa
+ Interactive demo:
https://huggingface.co/spaces/ondrejbiza/isa

In machine learning, it is also understood that such invariant
object representations could be similarly beneficial. In order
to learn per-object invariances, however, one needs robust
models that can decompose visual scenes into objects. This
topic, known as object-centric representation learning, has
proven to be challenging in the absence of direct supervision (Greff et al., 2017). Yet, in the past few years, powered
by more complex datasets, scalable architectures, and im-

An earlier version appeared at the NeurIPS’22 NeurReps workshop as ”Spatial Symmetry in Slot Attention”. ∗ Work done
during an internship at Google Research. † Equal contribution.
1
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Ondrej Biza <biza.o@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

