Feature Directions Matter: Long-Tailed Learning
via Rotated Balanced Representation

Gao Peifeng 1 Qianqian Xu 2 Peisong Wen 1 2 Zhiyong Yang 3 4 Huiyang Shao 1 2 Qingming Huang 1 2 5 6

Abstract

100

80

98

70

96

Val ACC

Train ACC

There are some studies aiming to solve long-tailed
classification from the perspective of feature learning. Recent work proposes to learn the balanced
representation by fixing the linear classifier as
Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF), since they argue what matters in classification is the structure
of the feature, instead of their directions. Holding a different view, in this paper, we show that
features with fixed directions may be harmful to
the generalization of models, even if it is completely symmetric. To avoid this issue, we propose Representation-Balanced Learning Framework (RBL), which introduces orthogonal matrices to learn directions while maintaining the
geometric structure of ETF. Theoretically, our
contributions are two-fold: 1). we point out that
the feature learning of RBL is insensitive toward
training set label distribution, it always learns a
balanced representation space. 2). we provide a
generalization analysis of proposed RBL through
training stability. To analyze the stability of the
parameter with orthogonal constraint, we propose
a novel training stability analysis paradigm, TwoParameter Model Stability. Finally, our method
is extremely simple in implementation but shows
great superiority on several benchmark datasets.

94

60

92
90
88

Fixed Initialization A
Fixed Initialization B

0

10

20
30
Epoch

40

50

50
40

Fixed Initialization A
Fixed Initialization B

0

10

20
30
Epoch

40

50

(a) The training and validation accuracies.

(b) Features visualization on training set at epoch 30. Left: initialization A. Right: initialization B.

Figure 1: Two toy experiments to illustrate feature learning and
generalization of Fixed. A two-layer deep model and a linear
classifier are trained to solve a long-tailed classification problem
with 2-dimensional feature and 3 classes. In (b), points and lines
indicate sample feature and model weight respectively.

class) contribute to major observations of datasets, while
other classes (tail class) only contain a few samples. For
example, iNaturalist2018 (Van Horn et al., 2018) is a largescale dataset, which contains more than 8K categories. In
this dataset, the head class has several thousand images,
whereas the tail class may only have no more than one
hundred images. In this setting, training a well-performed
model is very hard, because the model will be overwhelmed
by head classes and underfit the tail classes.

1. Introduction
Generally, real-world visual classification tasks suffer from
long-tailed distribution data, where a few categories (head

Most previous methods solve the long-tailed problem
through data-resampling based and loss-reweighing based
methods, which improve the performance of tail classes at
the expense of sacrificing head class performance (Kang
et al., 2019). Recently, Neural Collapse (NeurCol) (Papyan
et al., 2020) phenomenon has raised increasing attention in
deep learning community. It can provide a different perspective for long-tailed learning. NeurCol phenomenon happens
on classifiers trained over a label-balanced dataset: after
the cross entropy loss reaches its minimum, features of the
classifier (last layer activations of the deep model) would

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China. 3 State Key
Laboratory of Info. Security (SKLOIS), Inst. of Info. Engin.,
CAS, Beijing, China. 4 School of Cyber Security, UCAS, Beijing,
China. 5 BDKM, UCAS, Beijing, China. 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

