On Sampling with Approximate Transport Maps

Louis Grenioux 1 Alain Oliviero Durmus 1 Éric Moulines 1 Marylou Gabrié 1

Abstract

under the reference distribution
Z
Z
π(f ) =
f (x)dπ(x) =
f (T (x))|JT (x)|dρ(x) ,

Transport maps can ease the sampling of distributions with non-trivial geometries by transforming them into distributions that are easier to handle. The potential of this approach has risen with
the development of Normalizing Flows (NF)
which are maps parameterized with deep neural
networks trained to push a reference distribution
towards a target. NF-enhanced samplers recently
proposed blend (Markov chain) Monte Carlo
methods with either (i) proposal draws from the
flow or (ii) a flow-based reparametrization. In
both cases, the quality of the learned transport
conditions performance. The present work clarifies for the first time the relative strengths and
weaknesses of these two approaches. Our study
concludes that multimodal targets can be reliably handled with flow-based proposals up to
moderately high dimensions. In contrast, methods relying on reparametrization struggle with
multimodality but are more robust otherwise in
high-dimensional settings and under poor training. To further illustrate the influence of targetproposal adequacy, we also derive a new quantitative bound for the mixing time of the Independent Metropolis-Hastings sampler.

Rd

Rd

where JT is the Jacobian determinant of T . However, the
intractability of the target is traded here with the difficult
task of finding the map T .
According to Brenier’s theorem (Brenier, 1991), if ρ is absolutely continous then an exact mapping T between ρ and
π always exists. Such a map may be known analytically,
as in some field theories in physics (Lüscher, 2009). Otherwise, it can be approximated by optimizing a parameterized
version of the map. While learned maps typically suffer
from approximation and estimation errors, a sufficiently accurate approximated map is still valuable when combined
with a reweighting scheme such as a Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) or Importance Sampling (IS).
The choice of the parametrization must ensure that the
mapping is invertible and that the Jacobian determinant
remains easy to compute. Among the first works combining approximate transport and Monte Carlo methods,
(Parno & Marzouk, 2018) proposed using triangular maps.
Over the years, the term Normalising Flow, introduced initially to refer to a Gaussianizing map (Tabak & VandenEijnden, 2010), has become a common name for highly
flexible transport maps, usually parameterized with neural networks, that allow efficient computations of inverses
and Jacobians (Papamakarios et al., 2021; Kobyzev et al.,
2021). NFs were developed in particular for generative
modelling and are now also a central tool for Monte Carlo
algorithms based on transport maps.

1. Introduction
Creating a transport map between an intractable distribution of interest and a tractable reference distribution can be
a powerful strategy for facilitating inference. Namely, if a
bijective map T : Rd → Rd transports a tractable distribution ρ on Rd to a target π on the same space, then the
expectation of any test function f : Rd → R under the target distribution can also be written as the expectation value

While the issue of estimating the map is of great interest in
the context of sampling, it is not the focus of this paper; see
e.g. (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Parno & Marzouk, 2018;
Müller et al., 2019; Noé et al., 2019). Instead, we focus on
comparing the performance of algorithmic trends among
NF-enhanced samplers developed simultaneously. On the
one hand, flows have been used as reparametrization maps
that improve the geometry of the target before running local traditional samplers such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(HMC) (Parno & Marzouk, 2018; Hoffman et al., 2019;
Noé et al., 2019; Cabezas & Nemeth, 2022). We refer to
these strategies as neutra-MCMC methods. On the other
hand, the push-forward of the NF base distribution through

1

École Polytechnique.
Correspondence to:
Louis
Grenioux <louis.grenioux@polytechnique.edu>, Alain Oliviero
Durmus <alain.durmus@polytechnique.edu>, Éric Moulines
<eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu>, Marylou Gabrié <marylou.gabrie@polytechnique.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

