Deep Graph Representation Learning and Optimization for Influence
Maximization
Chen Ling * 1 Junji Jiang * 2 Junxiang Wang 3 My T. Thai 4 Lukas Xue 1 James Song 1 Meikang Qiu 5
Liang Zhao # 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

As one of the fundamental research problems in network
analysis, the objective of Influence Maximization (IM) is to
find a set of seed nodes that maximizes the spread of influence in a social network. IM has been extensively studied in
recent years due to its large commercial value. For example,
consider the case of viral marketing (Chen et al., 2010) for
promoting a commercial product, where a company may
wish to spread the adoption of a new product from some initially selected users, the selected initial users are expected to
spread the information about the product on their respective
social networks. This cascading process will be continued,
and ultimately, a significant fraction of the users will try the
product. Besides viral marketing, IM is also the cornerstone
in many other critical applications such as network monitoring (Wang et al., 2017), misinformation containment (Yang
et al., 2020), and friend recommendation (Ye et al., 2012).

Influence maximization (IM) is formulated as selecting a set of initial users from a social network
to maximize the expected number of influenced
users. Researchers have made great progress in
designing various traditional methods, and their
theoretical design and performance gain are close
to a limit. In the past few years, learning-based
IM methods have emerged to achieve stronger
generalization ability to unknown graphs than
traditional ones. However, the development of
learning-based IM methods is still limited by
fundamental obstacles, including 1) the difficulty of effectively solving the objective function; 2) the difficulty of characterizing the diversified underlying diffusion patterns; and 3) the
difficulty of adapting the solution under various
node-centrality-constrained IM variants. To cope
with the above challenges, we design a novel
framework DeepIM to generatively characterize
the latent representation of seed sets, and we
propose to learn the diversified information diffusion pattern in a data-driven and end-to-end
manner. Finally, we design a novel objective
function to infer optimal seed sets under flexible node-centrality-based budget constraints. Extensive analyses are conducted over both synthetic and real-world datasets to demonstrate the
overall performance of DeepIM. The code and
data are available at: https://github.com/
triplej0079/DeepIM.

As a typical type of combinatorial optimization problem, retrieving a (near) optimal seed set to maximize the influence
in a network is challenging due to the stochastic nature of information diffusion and the hardness of the problem. Traditional (non-learning-based) methods for IM (Leskovec et al.,
2007; Kempe et al., 2003; Tang et al., 2014; 2015; Nguyen
et al., 2016; Saito et al., 2012) have made great progress in
the last decade, and Li et al. (2019b) have even achieved exact solutions under specific diffusion models. The commonality of traditional methods is the explicit requirement of the
information diffusion model as the model input. However,
the real-world information diffusion process is complex and
cannot be simply modeled by prescribed diffusion models.
With the recent development of machine/deep learning, it is
natural to consider a learning-based way to characterize the
underlying diffusion process.

*
1
Equal contribution
Emory University, Atlanta, GA
Fudan University, Shanghai, CHINA 3 NEC Labs America, Princeton, NJ 4 University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 5 Dakota State University, Madison, SD. Correspondence to: Chen Ling <chen.ling@emory.edu>, Liang Zhao
<liang.zhao@emory.edu>.

While great progress has been made in the field, current
efforts on learning-based IM solutions are still in the infancy stage due to fundamental obstacles as follows. 1).
The difficulty of efficiently optimizing the objective function. Learning-based IM methods tend to solve the discrete
problem in continuous space by mostly leveraging deep
network representations (Zhang et al., 2022; Kumar et al.,
2022) and deep reinforcement learning (Tian et al., 2020; Li

2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

