Quantifying the Knowledge in GNNs for Reliable Distillation into MLPs

Lirong Wu 1 Haitao Lin 1 Yufei Huang 1 Stan Z. Li 1

Abstract

0.84

Accuracy

To bridge the gaps between topology-aware Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) and inference-efficient
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLPs), GLNN (Zhang
et al., 2021) proposes to distill knowledge from
a well-trained teacher GNN into a student MLP.
Despite their great progress, comparatively little work has been done to explore the reliability
of different knowledge points (nodes) in GNNs,
especially their roles played during distillation.
In this paper, we first quantify the knowledge
reliability in GNN by measuring the invariance
of their information entropy to noise perturbations, from which we observe that different knowledge points (1) show different distillation speeds
(temporally); (2) are differentially distributed in
the graph (spatially). To achieve reliable distillation, we propose an effective approach, namely
Knowledge-inspired Reliable Distillation (KRD),
that models the probability of each node being an
informative and reliable knowledge point, based
on which we sample a set of additional reliable
knowledge points as supervision for training student MLPs. Extensive experiments show that
KRD improves over the vanilla MLPs by 12.62%
and outperforms its corresponding teacher GNNs
by 2.16% averaged over 7 datasets and 3 GNN
architectures. Codes are publicly available at:
https://github.com/LirongWu/RKD.

0.82
0.80
0.78
0.76

standard deviation
Min/Max Value
0.74
2708 2500 2000 1500 1000

# Knowledge Points NKP

500

100

Figure 1. Mean, standard deviation, and minimum/maximum classification accuracy of student MLPs trained with different combinations of (randomly sampled) GNN knowledge points on Cora.

mary workhorse for practical industrial applications. One
reason for such academic-industrial gap is the neighborhoodfetching latency incurred by data dependency in GNNs (Jia
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021), which makes it hard to
deploy for latency-sensitive applications. Conversely, MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs) involve no data dependence between data pairs and infer much faster than GNNs, but their
performance is less competitive. Motivated by these complementary strengths and weaknesses, one solution to reduce
their gaps is to perform GNN-to-MLP knowledge distillation (Yang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Gou et al., 2021),
which extracts the knowledge from a well-trained teacher
GNN and then distills the knowledge into a student MLP.
Despite the great progress, most previous works have simply
treated all knowledge points (nodes) in GNNs as equally important, and few efforts are made to explore the reliability of
different knowledge points in GNNs and the diversity of the
roles they play in the distillation process. From the motivational experiment in Fig. 1, we can make two important observations about knowledge points: (1) More is better: the
performance of distilled MLPs can be improved as the number of knowledge points NKP increases; and (2) Reliable is
better: the performance variances (e.g., standard deviation
and best/worst performance gap) of different knowledge
combinations are enlarged as NKP decreases. The above
two observations suggest that different knowledge points
may play different roles in the distillation process and that
distilled MLPs can consistently benefit from more reliable
knowledge points, while those uninformative and unreliable
knowledge points may contribute little to the distillation.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Hamilton et al., 2017; Kipf &
Welling, 2016; Veličković et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020;
Wu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021b;a) in
handling graph-related tasks. Despite their great academic
success, Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) remain the pri1
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence
to: Stan Z. Li <stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn>, Lirong Wu
<wulirong@westlake.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

