Intrinsic Sliced Wasserstein Distances for Comparing Collections of
Probability Distributions on Manifolds and Graphs

Raif Rustamov 1 2 Subhabrata Majumdar 3 2

Abstract

populations, one may be interested in determinining whether
there are statistically significant differences between activity patterns of these sub-populations. As another example,
consider normalized counts of events per geographic region
on a daily basis. Collected over a year, this gives a set of
365 daily probability distributions over the region adjacency
graph, and one may wish to compare the collection of distributions from weekdays to those from weekends. Testing
specific aspects of homogeneity is preferable: for example,
in regular two-sample testing, detecting that the means are
unequal provides interpretable insights, whereas a general
test that only says there are unspecified differences between
the distributions is less useful for interpretation.

Collections of probability distributions arise in
a variety of applications ranging from user activity pattern analysis to brain connectomics. In
practice these distributions can be defined over
diverse domain types including finite intervals,
circles, cylinders, spheres, other manifolds, and
graphs. This paper introduces an approach for
detecting differences between two collections of
distributions over such general domains. To this
end, we propose the intrinsic slicing construction
that yields a novel class of Wasserstein distances
on manifolds and graphs. These distances are
Hilbert embeddable, allowing us to reduce the distribution collection comparison problem to a more
familiar mean testing problem in a Hilbert space.
We provide two testing procedures one based on
resampling and another on combining p-values
from coordinate-wise tests. Our experiments in
various synthetic and real data settings show that
the resulting tests are powerful and the p-values
are well-calibrated.

Limited settings of this problem tackling distributions over
the interval/circle have been considered in the literature
(Dubey & Müller, 2019), yet the general case of distributions over graphs and manifolds is open. The requirement
to test for specific differences is non-trivial on general domains: what is the equivalent of mean for a collection of
distributions? While Fréchet mean (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019)
may seem like the natural choice, there are a number of
problems with testing Fréchet mean equality. First, the existence and uniqueness of the Fréchet mean is not guaranteed,
and it can be sensitive to small changes. Second, computing
the Fréchet mean is expensive and can become prohibitive
when resampling is used to compute the null distribution.
Finally, resampling poses conceptual problems: using permutation null will detect differences beyond the equality of
Fréchet means (same problem exists in regular two-sample
testing, see e.g. Huang et al. (2006)), and using bootstrap
requires designing the null case, which is highly non-trivial.

1. Introduction
Distributional data defined over general domains such as
manifolds and graphs arise in a variety of statistical applications. In this paper we consider the problem of comparing
two collections of distributions over such a general domain.
Our goal is to test for homogeneity—whether all of the
distributions come from the same meta-distribution—in an
interpretable manner. While conceptually similar to twosample testing, this is a higher order notion in the sense that
our units of analysis are distributions/histograms.

We attack this problem using insights from recent developments that utilize Hilbert embeddings for simplifying
distributional data problems (Solomon et al., 2014; Petersen
& Müller, 2016). The simplification comes as a result of
linearity of Hilbert spaces, which allows adapting existing statistical approaches to distributional data. A crucial
requirement on the embedding is that the distance in the embedding space should give a meaningful distance between
measures; it is this property that renders quantities computed in the embedding space such as means and variances
meaningful. While transportation based distances are effi-

For instance, given collections of personal activity histograms (over cylinder: time of day × intensity) for two sub1

Amazon, New York, NY, USA 2 work done while at AT&T. 3 AI
Risk and Vulnerability Alliance, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Subhabrata Majumdar <zoom.subha@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

