Moderately Distributional Exploration for Domain Generalization

Rui Dai 1 Yonggang Zhang 2 † Zhen Fang 3 Bo Han 2 Xinmei Tian 1 4 †

Abstract

narios, which leads to the failure of DNNs. To release this
assumption, researchers have studied a more practical learning setting called Domain Generalization (DG) (Muandet
et al., 2013; Ye et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021). The goal of
DG is to train models using training domains such that these
models can generalize well in the unknown target domain
which shares the same semantics with the training domains.

Domain generalization (DG) aims to tackle the
distribution shift between training domains and
unknown target domains. Generating new domains is one of the most effective approaches,
yet its performance gain depends on the distribution discrepancy between the generated and
target domains. Distributionally robust optimization is promising to tackle distribution discrepancy by exploring domains in an uncertainty set.
However, the uncertainty set may be overwhelmingly large, leading to low-confidence prediction
in DG. It is because a large uncertainty set could
introduce domains containing semantically different factors from training domains. To address
this issue, we propose to perform a moderately
distributional exploration (MODE) for domain
generalization. Specifically, MODE performs distribution exploration in an uncertainty subset that
shares the same semantic factors with the training domains. We show that MODE can endow
models with provable generalization performance
on unknown target domains. The experimental
results show that MODE achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

To generalize well on the unknown target domains, previous
works introduce a domain generation strategy, enhancing the
performance of DNNs by generating new domains (Zhou
et al., 2020b;a; Wang et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021). The
underlying intuition of this approach is that learning with
many generated domains could make DNNs robust against
domain shifts. However, it remains challenging how to construct new domains to achieve a provable generalization
performance on target domains. Namely, it is challenging
to guarantee a mitigated distribution discrepancy between
the generated domains and target domains. Accordingly,
the generated domains may fail to promote generalizability
or even cause performance degradation of DNNs. The reason lies in the fact that target domains are unknown in the
training process, leading to an uncontrollable distribution
discrepancy between the generated and the target domains.
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) is a possible
strategy to tackle the distribution discrepancy between training and target domains (Csiszar, 1967; Namkoong & Duchi,
2016; Staib & Jegelka, 2019). The intuition of DRO is to extend one distribution to a distribution space, i.e., uncertainty
set, and uses the worst-case distribution in the uncertainty
set for model training (Sinha et al., 2018; Michel et al.,
2021; Mehra et al., 2022). By ensuring uniformly well
performance inside the uncertainty set around the training
domains, DRO can enlarge the influence of the training
domains and thus shrink the distribution discrepancy between training and test domains. Unfortunately, directly
employing DRO to DG has shown limited performance improvement in practice (Shen et al., 2021). The failure of
DRO may be related to the overwhelmingly large property
of the employed uncertainty set. Such a large uncertainty
set may introduce some unrelated domains containing semantics inconsistently with training domains. Consequently,
models trained over the uncertainty set make decisions with
fairly low confidence, known as the low confidence issue
(Hu et al., 2018; Frogner et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved exciting performance on various tasks. The successes of DNNs heavily
depend on an underlying assumption that the training domains and target domain share the same distribution. However, this assumption may not hold in some practical sce1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China 2 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, HongKong, China 3 Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney,
Australia 4 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China. Correspondence
to: Xinmei Tian <xinmei@ustc.edu.cn>, Yonggang Zhang
<csygzhang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

