SinDDM: A Single Image Denoising Diffusion Model

Vladimir Kulikov 1 Shahar Yadin * 1 Matan Kleiner * 1 Tomer Michaeli 1

Abstract

can even be conditioned on complex text prompts (Nichol
et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022b). However, this impressive progress
has often gone hand-in-hand with the reliance on increased
amounts of training data. Unfortunately, in many cases
relevant training examples are scarce.

Denoising diffusion models (DDMs) have led to
staggering performance leaps in image generation, editing and restoration. However, existing
DDMs use very large datasets for training. Here,
we introduce a framework for training a DDM
on a single image. Our method, which we coin
SinDDM, learns the internal statistics of the training image by using a multi-scale diffusion process.
To drive the reverse diffusion process, we use a
fully-convolutional light-weight denoiser, which
is conditioned on both the noise level and the
scale. This architecture allows generating samples
of arbitrary dimensions, in a coarse-to-fine manner. As we illustrate, SinDDM generates diverse
high-quality samples, and is applicable in a wide
array of tasks, including style transfer and harmonization. Furthermore, it can be easily guided
by external supervision. Particularly, we demonstrate text-guided generation from a single image
using a pre-trained CLIP model. Results, code
and the Supplementary Material are available on
the project’s webpage.

Recent works proposed to learn a generative model from
a single natural image. The first unconditional model proposed for this task was SinGAN (Shaham et al., 2019). This
model uses a pyramid of patch-GANs to learn the distribution of small patches in several image scales. Once trained
on a single image, SinGAN can randomly generate similar
images, as well as solve a variety of tasks, including editing, style transfer and super-resolution. Follow up works
improved SinGAN’s training process (Hinz et al., 2021), extended it to other domains (e.g. audio (Greshler et al., 2021),
video (Gur et al., 2020), 3D shapes (Wu & Zheng, 2022)),
and used alternative learning frameworks (energy-based
models (Zheng et al., 2021), nearest-neighbor patch search
(Granot et al., 2022), enforcement of deep feature statistics
via test-time optimization (Elnekave & Weiss, 2022)).
In this paper, we propose a different approach for learning a generative model from a single image. Specifically,
we combine the multi-scale approach of SinGAN with the
power of DDMs to devise SinDDM, a hierarchical DDM
that can be trained on a single image. At the core of our
method is a fully-convolutional denoiser, which we train on
various scales of the image, each corrupted by various levels
of noise. We take the denoiser’s receptive field to be small
so that it only captures the statistics of the fine details within
each scale. At test time, we use this denoiser in a coarseto-fine manner, which allows generating diverse random
samples of arbitrary dimensions. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
SinDDM synthesizes high quality images while exhibiting
good generalization capabilities. For example, certain small
structures in the skylines in row 1 and the angles of some
of the mountains in row 2 do not exist in the corresponding
training images, yet they look realistic.

1. Introduction
Image synthesis and manipulation has attracted a surge of
research in recent years, leading to impressive progress in
e.g. generative adversarial network (GAN) based methods
(Goodfellow et al., 2020) and denoising diffusion models
(DDMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). State-of-the art generative models now reach high levels of photo-realism (Sauer
et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), can
treat arbitrary image dimensions (Chai et al., 2022), can be
used to solve a variety of image restoration and manipulation tasks (Saharia et al., 2022c;a; Meng et al., 2021), and
*
1
Equal contribution
Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Vladimir Kulikov
<vladimir.k@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Similarly to existing single-image generative models,
SinDDM can be used for image-manipulation tasks (see
Sec. 4). However, perhaps its most appealing property is
that it can be easily guided by external supervision. For
example, in Fig. 2 we demonstrate text guidance for con-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

