Formalizing Preferences Over Runtime Distributions

Devon R. Graham 1 Kevin Leyton-Brown 1 Tim Roughgarden 2 3

Abstract

be dominated by extremely rare, extremely long runtimes,
making the task of choosing between algorithms rely on certifying the nonexistence of rare but very costly tail events.
Does this describe the way we actually make choices between algorithms? Probably not. Consider the following
example.

When trying to solve a computational problem,
we are often faced with a choice between algorithms that are guaranteed to return the right answer but differ in their runtime distributions (e.g.,
SAT solvers, sorting algorithms). This paper aims
to lay theoretical foundations for such choices
by formalizing preferences over runtime distributions. It might seem that we should simply prefer
the algorithm that minimizes expected runtime.
However, such preferences would be driven by
exactly how slow our algorithm is on bad inputs,
whereas in practice we are typically willing to
cut off occasional, sufficiently long runs before
they finish. We propose a principled alternative,
taking a utility-theoretic approach to characterize
the scoring functions that describe preferences
over algorithms. These functions depend on the
way our value for solving our problem decreases
with time and on the distribution from which captimes are drawn. We describe examples of realistic utility functions and show how to leverage
a maximum-entropy approach for modeling underspecified captime distributions. Finally, we
show how to efficiently estimate an algorithm’s
expected utility from runtime samples.

Example 1.1 (Motivation). Suppose that we have 100 integer programs to solve and two algorithms to chose from.
Algorithm A solves the first 99 problems in 1 second, but
runs the 100th problem for 10 days without solving it. Algorithm B runs all 100 problems for 10 days each without
solving any of them.
In this case, we imagine that most readers would strongly
prefer Algorithm A to Algorithm B. However, the algorithms’ average runtimes are unconstrained by the information given; e.g., B could solve every problem in a bit
more than 10 days, whereas A could take 100 years to solve
the last problem. Furthermore, imagine that both A and B
contain a bug that prevents their long runs from terminating
at all. This would cause both averages to become infinite,
but we doubt that it would make most readers indifferent
between the algorithms. Such preferences are not described
by an average runtime scoring function.
We can learn a second lesson from this example: we are
at least sometimes able to express preferences between algorithms even when some runs are “capped” (i.e., right
censored). Intuitively, the reason is that while the runtime of
an algorithm may be large or unbounded, the impact it has
on us is not: we will eventually terminate any sufficiently
long run and rely instead on some backup plan. Thus, one
algorithm run that would take a thousand years and another
that would take a trillion years are functionally equivalent:
neither stands any chance of running until completion. A
delivery service must route vehicles, but cannot wait so long
that solving the optimization problem delays its deliveries;
at some point, it must send the drivers out to do the best
they can. A chip manufacturer using a verification procedure to test a new CPU design can wait much longer for a
solution—and probably never faces one moment at which
waiting a bit longer would not be acceptable—but as time
passes, managers or stakeholders will demand results and
the risk of being scooped by a competitor will increase. At
some point the manufacturer must decide either to ship their

1. Introduction
Imagine that we need to solve a series of instances of a given
computational problem such as SAT, MIP, TSP, or sorting,
and we have a set of different algorithms to choose from.
Suppose further that all these algorithms are guaranteed
to return the correct solution but vary in the runtime they
will take.Which algorithm should we choose? The obvious
answer would be to choose the algorithm that returns the
solution most quickly on average. But average runtime can
1
Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC 2 Department of Computer Science,
Columbia University, New York, New York 3 a16z crypto. Correspondence to: Devon R. Graham <drgraham@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

