Are Diffusion Models Vulnerable to Membership Inference Attacks?

Jinhao Duan 1 Fei Kong 2 Shiqi Wang 3 Xiaoshuang Shi 2 Kaidi Xu 1

Abstract

et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), achieve remarkable fidelity and utility in text-to-image generation. Images
generated by these models are full of diversity and creativity,
which may profoundly change the way of human creation.

Diffusion-based generative models have shown
great potential for image synthesis, but there is
a lack of research on the security and privacy
risks they may pose. In this paper, we investigate
the vulnerability of diffusion models to Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs), a common privacy concern. Our results indicate that existing
MIAs designed for GANs or VAE are largely ineffective on diffusion models, either due to inapplicable scenarios (e.g., requiring the discriminator of GANs) or inappropriate assumptions
(e.g., closer distances between synthetic samples and member samples). To address this gap,
we propose Step-wise Error Comparing Membership Inference (SecMI), a query-based MIA that
infers memberships by assessing the matching
of forward process posterior estimation at each
timestep. SecMI follows the common overfitting
assumption in MIA where member samples normally have smaller estimation errors, compared
with hold-out samples. We consider both the
standard diffusion models, e.g., DDPM, and the
text-to-image diffusion models, e.g., Latent Diffusion Models and Stable Diffusion. Experimental
results demonstrate that our methods precisely
infer the membership with high confidence on
both of the two scenarios across multiple different datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/jinhaoduan/SecMI.

However, tremendous privacy risks (Bommasani et al.,
2021) and copyright disputes (Ihalainen, 2018) are emerging, with the deployment of these generative models. For example, previous works demonstrate that GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2020)/VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013)-based generative models suffer from privacy leaking (Hayes et al., 2017)
and data reconstruction (Zhang et al., 2020) issues, yet we
are still unaware of whether diffusion models have similar
concerns. On the other side, artists are getting unions against
commercial large-scale generative models recently (BBC,
2022; CNN, 2022; WashingtonPost, 2022), since the creations of human artists may be exploited unauthorizedly.
Lots of security assessments and risk screening need to be
addressed before releasing these models.
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) (Shokri et al., 2016)
is one of the most common privacy risks that associated with
various privacy concerns. For a given pre-trained model,
MIAs aim to identify the membership of a single sample as
member sample that comes from the member set (training
set), or as hold-out sample that comes from the hold-out
set. Although MIAs have been well explored in the classic
classification models and conventional generative models,
related works on diffusion models are still missing in the
literature. In this paper, we intend to answer the following
question:
Are diffusion-based generative models vulnerable to MIAs?
We first summarize existing MIAs designed for conventional
generative models and evaluate their performances in the
diffusion model setting. Specifically, we summarize five
MIAs and make them available to the diffusion models by
either training shadow models (Shokri et al., 2017) or providing the required information in an alternative manner.
Our results indicate that these methods are largely ineffective for diffusion models due to various potential reasons,
such as more standard and stronger evaluations with larger
member sets, limited exploitation of the specific properties
of diffusion models, and inappropriate assumptions, i.e.,
synthetic images are closer to member images (Hu & Pang,
2021; Chen et al., 2020; Mukherjee et al., 2021). The lack-

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song
et al., 2020b; Ho et al., 2020) have dominated the image
generation fields. Large-scale diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), DALLE-2 (Ramesh
1

Drexel University 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 3 AWS AI Lab. Correspondence to: Kaidi Xu
<kx46@drexel.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

