Towards Trustworthy Explanation: On Causal Rationalization

Wenbo Zhang 1 Tong Wu 2 Yunlong Wang 2 Yong Cai 2 Hengrui Cai 1

Abstract

decisions. These raw texts serve as abstracts or milestones
of a patient’s medical journey and characterize the patient’s
medical conditions (Estiri et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021).
Beyond simply predicting clinical outcomes, doctors are
more interested in understanding the decision-making process of predictive models thereby building trust, as well as
extracting clinically meaningful and relevant insights (Liu
et al., 2015). Discovering faithful text information hence
is particularly crucial for improving the early diagnostic of
severe disease and for making efficient clinical decisions.

With recent advances in natural language processing, rationalization becomes an essential selfexplaining diagram to disentangle the black box
by selecting a subset of input texts to account for
the major variation in prediction. Yet, existing
association-based approaches on rationalization
cannot identify true rationales when two or more
snippets are highly inter-correlated and thus provide a similar contribution to prediction accuracy,
so-called spuriousness. To address this limitation, we novelly leverage two causal desiderata,
non-spuriousness and efficiency, into rationalization from the causal inference perspective. We
formally define a series of probabilities of causation based on a newly proposed structural causal
model of rationalization, with its theoretical identification established as the main component of
learning necessary and sufficient rationales. The
superior performance of the proposed causal rationalization is demonstrated on real-world review
and medical datasets with extensive experiments
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Disentangling the black box in deep NLP models, however,
is a notoriously challenging task (Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola,
2018). There are a lot of research works focusing on providing trustworthy explanations for models, generally classified into post hoc techniques and self-explaining models
(Danilevsky et al., 2020; Rajagopal et al., 2021). To provide
better model interpretation, self-explaining models are of
greater interest, and selective rationalization is one popular type of such a model by highlighting important tokens
among input texts (see e.g., DeYoung et al., 2020; Paranjape
et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2020; Antognini et al., 2021; Vafa
et al., 2021; Chan et al., 2022). The general framework of
selective rationalization as shown in Figure 1 consists of
two components, a selector and a predictor. Those selected
tokens by the trained selector are called rationales and they
are required to provide similar prediction accuracy as the
full input text based on the trained predictor. Besides, the
selected rationales should reflect the model’s true reasoning process (faithfulness) (DeYoung et al., 2020; Jain et al.,
2020) and provide a convenient explanation to people (plausibility) (DeYoung et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2022). Most of
the existing works (Lei et al., 2016; Bastings et al., 2019;
Paranjape et al., 2020) found rationales by maximizing the
prediction accuracy for the outcome of interest based on
input texts, and thus are association-based models.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models have drawn
increasing attention and have been widely used in extensive
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (see e.g., Vaswani
et al., 2017; Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Lewis et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020). Although those deep learning-based
models could provide incredibly outstanding prediction performance, it remains a daunting task in finding trustworthy
explanations to interpret these models’ behavior, which is
particularly critical in high-stakes applications in various
fields. In healthcare, the use of electronic health records
(EHRs) with raw texts is increasingly common to forecast
patients’ disease progression and assist clinicians in making

The major limitation of these association-based works (also
see related works in Section 1.1) lies in falsely discovering
spurious rationales that may be related to the outcome of
interest but do not indeed cause the outcome. Specifically,
when two or more snippets are highly intercorrelated and
provide a similar high contribution to prediction accuracy,
the association-based methods cannot identify the true rationales among them. Here, the true rationales, formally
defined in Section 2 as the causal rationales, are the true

1

Department of Statistics, University of California Irvine, California, USA 2 Advanced Analytics, IQVIA, Pennsylvania, USA.
Correspondence to: Hengrui Cai <hengrc1@uci.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

