FlexRound: Learnable Rounding based on Element-wise Division
for Post-Training Quantization

Jung Hyun Lee * 1 Jeonghoon Kim * 1 Se Jung Kwon 1 Dongsoo Lee 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) has been gaining popularity for the deployment of deep neural
networks on resource-limited devices since unlike
quantization-aware training, neither a full training dataset nor end-to-end training is required at
all. As PTQ schemes based on reconstructing
each layer or block output turn out to be effective to enhance quantized model performance, recent works have developed algorithms to devise
and learn a new weight-rounding scheme so as
to better reconstruct each layer or block output.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective
new weight-rounding mechanism for PTQ, coined
FlexRound, based on element-wise division instead of typical element-wise addition such that
FlexRound enables jointly learning a common
quantization grid size as well as a different scale
for each pre-trained weight. Thanks to the reciprocal rule of derivatives induced by element-wise
division, FlexRound is inherently able to exploit
pre-trained weights when updating their corresponding scales, and thus, flexibly quantize pretrained weights depending on their magnitudes.
We empirically validate the efficacy of FlexRound
on a wide range of models and tasks. To the best
of our knowledge, our work is the first to carry
out comprehensive experiments on not only image
classification and natural language understanding
but also natural language generation, assuming a
per-tensor uniform PTQ setting. Moreover, we
demonstrate, for the first time, that large language
models can be efficiently quantized, with only a
negligible impact on performance compared to
half-precision baselines, achieved by reconstructing the output in a block-by-block manner.

In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented success across a wide variety of domains such
as computer vision, natural language processing, and automatic speech recognition. Unfortunately, as these networks
continue to improve and surpass human-level performance,
the computational resources and memory usage required
also increases as the architecture becomes more complex.
To reduce the model size and accelerate inference operations, many researchers have attempted diverse compression
techniques such as network quantization (Courbariaux et al.,
2016) and network pruning (Han et al., 2016). In this paper,
we concentrate on network quantization due to the advantage that INT4 or INT8 quantization allows us to accelerate
quantized neural networks using off-the-shelf accelerators
such as the NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU (Wu et al.,
2020) or ARM Cortex MCUs (Kim et al., 2021).
Network quantization techniques can be broadly divided
into two categories: quantization-aware training (QAT) and
post-training quantization (PTQ). QAT is a method where
the quantization of the networks is incorporated during the
trianing process, as proposed by various research works such
as Jung et al. (2019); Jain et al. (2019); Zhao et al. (2020);
Esser et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2021). We note that QAT
results in a marginal performance difference between the
full-precision and quantized versions of the neural network.
Yet, QAT requires end-to-end retraining or fine-tuning on
a full training dataset, which often causes an enormous
amount of time and resources to obtain a quantized neural
network with competitive performance. Furthermore, a
whole training dataset may not be available due to data
privacy issues or demands to utilize legacy models. Such
drawbacks of QAT are the reasons why researchers recently
pay more attention to PTQ (Zhao et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2020; Nahshan et al., 2021) that needs neither a full training
dataset nor end-to-end learning at all.
PTQ had been initially performed via rounding-to-nearest
by minimizing the quantization error in the parameter space.
However, this approach suffers from severe performance
degradation. Since it is reported that the loss degradation
resulting from quantization can be approximated as the
second-order error in Taylor Expansion by viewing quan-

*

Equal contribution 1 NAVER Cloud, Seongnam, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Jung Hyun Lee <onliwad101@gmail.com>,
Jeonghoon Kim <jeonghoon.samuel@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

