Never mind the metrics—what about the uncertainty? Visualising binary
confusion matrix metric distributions to put performance in perspective

David Lovell 1 Dimity Miller 2 Jaiden Capra 3 Andrew P. Bradley 4

Abstract

often regarded as objective, valid indicators of performance;
a model’s performance on a test dataset or benchmark task
is seen as indicative of its ability to perform “in the wild”
on new, real-world data. This paper strives for a more
balanced perspective on classifier performance metrics by
visualising their distributions under different models of uncertainty. We aim to draw attention towards the role of more
data—and data that is more representative of a classifier’s
intended application—to characterise and improve different
classifiers, rather than judging them through performance
shoot-outs alone.

There are strong incentives to build classification
systems that show outstanding performance on
various datasets and benchmarks. This can encourage a narrow focus on models and the performance metrics used to evaluate and compare
them—resulting in a growing body of literature to
evaluate and compare metrics. This paper strives
for a more balanced perspective on binary classifier performance metrics by showing how uncertainty in these metrics can easily eclipse differences in empirical performance. We emphasise the discrete nature of confusion matrices and
show how they can be well represented in a 3D
lattice whose cross-sections form the space of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. We
develop novel interactive visualisations of performance metric contours within (and beyond) ROC
space, showing the discrete probability mass functions of true and false positive rates and how these
relate to performance metric distributions. We
aim to raise awareness of the substantial uncertainty in performance metric estimates that can
arise when classifiers are evaluated on empirical
datasets and benchmarks, and that performance
claims should be tempered by this understanding.

Confusion matrices summarise the empirical performance
of classifiers. Simplest are those that tally the four outcomes
of binary decisions (Figure 1). A desire to further summarise each matrix with one number—which, necessarily
loses information because the matrices have three degrees of
freedom—has led to many metrics with different meanings,
interpretations and ranges (Appendix A).
These different performance metrics produce different classifier performance rankings, and there are often strong incentives to top these ranks (Maier-Hein et al., 2018). Those
seeking to develop or promote “the best classifier” may
wonder which is “the best performance metric”; several
studies argue the merits of different metrics, even though
what is “best” in practice depends on a classifier’s specific
real-world application (Hand, 2006; Rudin & Radin, 2019).
Others have sought to understand and characterise the behaviour and interpretation of these different metrics; we
follow this philosophy to reveal further insight.

1. Introduction
Today’s algorithmic modeling culture (Breiman, 2001) rewards those whose models outperform all others. Performance optimisation is central to statistical, ML and AI models (Thomas & Uminsky, 2020), and numerical metrics are

In essence, we show how uncertainty in (discrete) confusion
matrices manifests in various (continuous) performance.
Our aim is to encourage more attention towards reducing
uncertainty in performance estimates before attempting to
argue the merits of a particular classifier or metric.

1

School of Computer Science and Centre for Data Science,
Queensland University of Technology, Australia. 2 School of Electrical Engineering and Robotics, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. 3 Queensland University of Technology, Australia. 4 School of Science, Technology and Engineering, University
of the Sunshine Coast, Australia. Correspondence to: David Lovell
<David.Lovell@qut.edu.au>.

2. Prior motivating work
2.1. Studies that argue the merits of specific metrics
Our research was stimulated by a series of papers whose
titles suggest that Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC)
is better than other metrics (Chicco & Jurman, 2020; Chicco

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

