FAENet: Frame Averaging Equivariant GNN for Materials Modeling
Alexandre Duval * 1 2 Victor Schmidt * 2 Alex Hernandez Garcia 2 Santiago Miret 3 Fragkiskos D. Malliaros 1
Yoshua Bengio 2 4 David Rolnick 2 5

Abstract

reliance on DFT for materials property prediction continues
to impose a significant computational barrier to evaluating
large number of material candidates (Chen & Ong, 2022).
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) based on geometric deep
learning principles have shown promise in their ability to
predict a wide range of molecular properties (Han et al.,
2022). A key factor of the success of GNNs is their ability
to leverage 3D geometric information via the representation
of a collection of atoms in 3D space (Atz et al., 2021), which
is updated based on spatial atomic interactions by passing
messages between them. Another important aspect is the
incorporation of geometric priors that exploit the symmetry
of the data, rendering model predictions invariant or equivariant1 to Euclidean transformations2 , as well as key physics
principles such as the conservation of energy (Smidt, 2021).

Applications of machine learning techniques for
materials modeling typically involve functions
known to be equivariant or invariant to specific symmetries. While graph neural networks
(GNNs) have proven successful in such tasks, they
enforce symmetries via the model architecture,
which often reduces their expressivity, scalability
and comprehensibility. In this paper, we introduce (1) a flexible framework relying on stochastic frame-averaging (SFA) to make any model
E(3)-equivariant or invariant through data transformations. (2) FAENet: a simple, fast and expressive GNN, optimized for SFA, that processes
geometric information without any symmetrypreserving design constraints. We prove the validity of our method theoretically and empirically
demonstrate its superior accuracy and computational scalability in materials modeling on the
OC20 dataset (S2EF, IS2RE) as well as common molecular modeling tasks (QM9, QM7-X).
A package implementation is available at https:
//faenet.readthedocs.io.

Symmetries and physical constraints are typically enforced
directly into the model architecture, which greatly restricts
the flexibility of GNNs to process geometric information
(Gasteiger et al., 2021; Fuchs et al., 2020; Satorras et al.,
2021). As a result, these models either lack expressivity
or present significantly more complex and computationally
expensive architectures, as detailed in Section 2. While
state-of-the-art GNNs remain orders of magnitude faster
than DFT, their inference time still limits the use of ML for
downstream practically-relevant applications, which require
large-scale evaluations (Agrawal & Choudhary, 2016). Indeed, whether we are trying to discover new drugs, new catalysts or undiscovered material systems, we need to explore
exponentially vast search spaces of potential candidates
(Bohacek et al., 1996). The above ambitions to accelerate
automated material discoveries therefore require designing
expressive, robust and computationally scalable models.

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) methods have the ability to model
complex physical and chemical interactions. It thus holds
great potential for accelerating material design, which is
essential to various applications such as low-carbon energy, sustainable agriculture or drug discovery. One particularly promising use case of ML is modeling the properties
of complex materials systems at lower computational cost
compared to expensive quantum mechanical simulation techniques like Density Functional Theory (DFT). The heavy

To that end, we propose a novel view of 3D molecular
and solid-state materials modeling, where symmetries are
preserved via data projections instead of architectural constraints. Concretely, we make the following contributions:

*

1
Equal contribution
Université Paris-Saclay, Cen2
traleSupélec, Inria Mila – Quebec AI Institute 3 Intel
Labs 4 Université de Montréal 5 McGill Unversity.
Correspondence to:
Alexandre Duval, Victor Schmidt
<{alexandre.duval,schmidtv}@mila.quebec>.

• Symmetry-Preserving Data Augmentation via Stochas1

In this work, unless specified otherwise, we consider invariance to be a special case of equivariance and will include invariance
in claims regarding equivariance.
2
Rotations, reflections, and translations, which in 3D space
define the group E(3).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

