Hiera: A Hierarchical Vision Transformer without the Bells-and-Whistles
Chaitanya Ryali * 1 Yuan-Ting Hu * 1 Daniel Bolya * 1 2 Chen Wei 1 3 Haoqi Fan 1
Po-Yao Huang 1 Vaibhav Aggarwal 1 Arkabandhu Chowdhury 1 Omid Poursaeed 1
Judy Hoffman 2 Jitendra Malik 1 Yanghao Li * 1 Christoph Feichtenhofer * 1

Abstract
Modern hierarchical vision transformers have
added several vision-specific components in the
pursuit of supervised classification performance.
While these components lead to effective accuracies and attractive FLOP counts, the added complexity actually makes these transformers slower
than their vanilla ViT counterparts. In this paper,
we argue that this additional bulk is unnecessary.
By pretraining with a strong visual pretext task
(MAE), we can strip out all the bells-and-whistles
from a state-of-the-art multi-stage vision transformer without losing accuracy. In the process,
we create Hiera, an extremely simple hierarchical vision transformer that is more accurate than
previous models while being significantly faster
both at inference and during training. We evaluate
Hiera on a variety of tasks for image and video
recognition. Our code and models are available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/hiera.

Figure 1. Hiera cuts out expensive specialized operations (e.g.,
convs) from hierarchical transformers to create a simple, efficient,
and accurate model that is fast across many image and video tasks.
Above we compare to recent MAE-based works (Woo et al., 2023;
Feichtenhofer et al., 2022). All speeds measured with A100, fp16.

fewer channels but higher spatial resolution in early stages
with simpler features, and more channels but lower spatial
resolution later in the model with more complex features.
Several domain specific vision transformers have been introduced that employ this hierarchical design, such as Swin
(Liu et al., 2021) or MViT (Fan et al., 2021). However, in
the pursuit of state-of-the-art results using fully supervised
training on ImageNet-1K (an area where ViT has historically struggled), these models have become more and more
complicated as they add specialized modules (e.g., crossshaped windows in CSWin (Dong et al., 2022), decomposed
relative position embeddings in MViTv2 (Li et al., 2022c)).
While these changes produce effective models with attractive floating point operation (FLOP) counts, under the hood
the added complexity makes these models slower overall.

1. Introduction
Since their introduction by Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) a few
years ago, Vision Transformers (ViTs) have dominated several tasks in computer vision. While architecturally simple,
their accuracy (Touvron et al., 2022) and ability to scale
(Zhai et al., 2021) make them still a popular choice today.
Moreover, their simplicity unlocks the use of powerful pretraining strategies such as MAE (He et al., 2022), which
make ViTs computationally and data efficient to train.
However, this simplicity comes at a cost: by using the same
spatial resolution and number of channels throughout the
network, ViTs make inefficient use of their parameters. This
is in contrast to prior “hierarchical” or “multi-scale” models
(e.g., Krizhevsky et al. (2012); He et al. (2016)), which use

We argue that a lot of this bulk is actually unnecessary. Because ViTs lack inductive bias after their initial patchify
operation, many of the changes proposed by subsequent
vision specific transformers serve to manually add spatial biases. But why should we slow down our architecture to add
these biases, if we could just train the model to learn them
instead? In particular, MAE pretraining has shown to be a
very effective tool to teach ViTs spatial reasoning, allowing
pure vision transformers to obtain good results on detection
(Li et al., 2022b), which was a task previously dominated
by models like Swin or MViT. Moreover, MAE pretraining

*

Equal contribution 1 Meta AI, FAIR 2 Georgia Tech 3 Johns
Hopkins University. Correspondence to: Chaitanya Ryali
<chayryali@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

