L EGENDRE T RON: Uprising Proper Multiclass Loss Learning

Kevin H. Lam 1 Christian Walder 2 3 Spiridon Penev 1 4 Richard Nock 2 3

Abstract

Statistical decision theory answers this by turning to admissible losses (Savage, 1971); also referred to as proper losses
or proper scoring rules (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). Proper
losses are those for which the posterior expected loss value
is minimised when probability predictions coincide with
the true underlying probabilities. That is, a proper loss is
one that can induce probability estimates that are admissible
or optimal. Proper losses have been extensively studied in
Shuford et al. (1966); Grünwald & Dawid (2004); Reid &
Williamson (2010); Williamson et al. (2016), with the latter
two works extending losses to proper composite forms in
binary and multiclass settings. Only a handful of proper
losses, such as the square and log losses, are commonly
used in ML. This is not surprising: properness is an intensional property and does not provide any candidate function.
While eliciting some members is possible, extending further
requires tuning or adapting the loss as part of the ML task.

Loss functions serve as the foundation of supervised learning and are often chosen prior to model
development. To avoid potentially ad hoc choices
of losses, statistical decision theory describes a
desirable property for losses known as properness,
which asserts that Bayes’ rule is optimal. Recent
works have sought to learn losses and models
jointly. Existing methods do this by fitting an
inverse canonical link function which monotonically maps R to [0, 1] to estimate probabilities for
binary problems. In this paper, we extend monotonicity to maps between RC−1 and the projected
probability simplex ˜
∆C−1 by using monotonicity of gradients of convex functions. We present
L EGENDRE T RON as a novel and practical method
that jointly learns proper canonical losses and
probabilities for multiclass problems. Tested on a
benchmark of domains with up to 1,000 classes,
our experimental results show that our method
consistently outperforms the natural multiclass
baseline under a t-test at 99% significance on all
datasets with greater than 10 classes.

There has been a recent surge of interest in doing so for supervised learning, including Mei & Moura (2018); Grabocka
et al. (2019); Streeter (2019); Liu et al. (2020); Siahkamari
et al. (2020); Sypherd et al. (2022a). However, no connections are made to properness to formulate the losses
in these works. On the other hand, several recent works
have used properness to formulate losses including Nock
& Nielsen (2008); Nock & Menon (2020); Walder & Nock
(2020); Sypherd et al. (2022b). Notably, the works of Nock
& Menon (2020); Walder & Nock (2020) have proposed algorithms to learn both the link function and linear predictor
of logistic regression models by considering both functions
to be unknown but learnable; thereby extending Single Index Models (Hardle et al., 1993; Mei & Moura, 2018) and
algorithms to learn them (Kakade et al., 2011). Despite the
impressive progress in these works, no references have been
made to proper losses for multiclass problems.

1. Introduction
Loss functions are a pillar of machine learning (ML). In
supervised learning, a loss provides a measure of discrepancy between the underlying ground truth and a model’s
predictions. A learning algorithm attempts to minimise this
discrepancy by adjusting the model. In other words, the loss
governs how a model learns. The consequence of the bad
choice of a loss is oblivious to the qualities of the learning
pipeline: it means a poor model in the end. This brings forth
the question: which loss is best for the problem at hand?

Background To approach multiclass problems in a principled manner, we generalise logistic regression as follows.
For a given invertible and monotonic (see Definition A.1)
link function ψ that maps [0, 1] to R and an input-label
pair (x, y) with x ∈ Rp and y ∈ {−1, 1}, logistic regression learns a model of the form Pr(Y = 1|x) =
ψ −1 (w> x + b) by fitting a coefficient vector w ∈ Rp and
an intercept b ∈ R. A class prediction is then formed as
ŷ = arg maxy∈{−1,1} Pr(Y = y|x). The crucial element

1

School of Mathematics & Statistics, UNSW Sydney, Australia 2 Google Research 3 ANU College of Engineering, Computing and Cybernetics, The Australian National University, Australia
4
UNSW Data Science Hub (uDASH), UNSW Sydney, Australia.
Correspondence to: Kevin Lam <khflam@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

