A Theoretical Analysis of the Learning Dynamics under Class Imbalance

Emanuele Francazi 1 2 Marco Baity-Jesi 2 Aurelien Lucchi 3
1.0

Data imbalance is a common problem in machine
learning that can have a critical effect on the performance of a model. Various solutions exist but
their impact on the convergence of the learning
dynamics is not understood. Here, we elucidate
the significant negative impact of data imbalance
on learning, showing that the learning curves for
minority and majority classes follow sub-optimal
trajectories when training with a gradient-based
optimizer. This slowdown is related to the imbalance ratio and can be traced back to a competition
between the optimization of different classes. Our
main contribution is the analysis of the convergence of full-batch (GD) and stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), and of variants that renormalize
the contribution of each per-class gradient. We
find that GD is not guaranteed to decrease the
loss for each class but that this problem can be addressed by performing a per-class normalization
of the gradient. With SGD, class imbalance has an
additional effect on the direction of the gradients:
the minority class suffers from a higher directional noise, which reduces the effectiveness of
the per-class gradient normalization. Our findings
not only allow us to understand the potential and
limitations of strategies involving the per-class
gradients, but also the reason for the effectiveness
of previously used solutions for class imbalance
such as oversampling.

0.8

0.8

Test Recall

1.0

Train Recall

Abstract

0.6
0.4

0.6

0.2

GD
GD Majority
GD Minority

0.0
100

101

102

0.4

PCNGD
PCNGD Majority
PCNGD Minority

103

100

# steps +1

101

102

0.2
103

0.0

Figure 1. Training (left) and test (right) recall of the Mod1 on the
Bi60 datasets (see details in Sec. 4.4). Due to the data imbalance,
GD (blue curves) first focuses on the majority class only, while
the minority class stays at zero accuracy. This effect is suppressed
when using the PCNGD algorithm. See Fig. 3 for the related loss
function curves.

might induce an undesirable data shift (Quiñonero-Candela
et al., 2009; Moreno-Torres et al., 2012). Importantly, many
datasets are intrinsically unbalanced (Van Horn and Perona, 2017; Feldman, 2020; D’souza et al., 2021), as in the
case of spam identification (Liu et al., 2017), fraud detection (Makki et al., 2019), or biodiversity monitoring (Kyathanahally et al., 2021).
The problem of data imbalance has already received attention in the literature and we broadly identify three most
common ways to handle it. These either act on the data
distribution (He and Garcia, 2009; Huang et al., 2016), adjust the objective function (Japkowicz, 2000; Huang et al.,
2016; Alshammari et al., 2022) or modify the learning algorithm (Tang et al., 2020; Anand et al., 1993). We provide a
detailed discussion of these methods in App. A. The important feature that makes our work depart from prior work is
that we focus our study on the dynamics of gradient-based
learning in the presence of data imbalance. We will for
instance analyze the theoretical convergence guarantees of
these methods, which, to the best of our knowledge, is a
novel contribution.

1. Introduction
In supervised classification, as well as other problems in
machine learning, datasets are often affected by data imbalance. Although the situation can sometimes be solved
or mitigated by changing the data collection method, this
1
Physics Department, EPFL, Switzerland 2 SIAM Department,
Eawag (ETH), Switzerland 3 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Emanuele Francazi <emanuele.francazi@epfl.ch>.

We start our investigation from the following two empirical observations: (i) The learning dynamics is delayed for
imbalanced problems. This is especially a problem during hyperparameter tuning, since it requires very long runs
to assess the difference between distinct hyperparameter
choices. (ii) While the overall performance improves during

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

