Conformal Prediction with Missing Values

Margaux Zaffran 1 2 3 Aymeric Dieuleveut 3 Julie Josse 2 Yaniv Romano 4

Abstract

high-stakes decision-making problems such as autonomous
driving, medical or civic applications, and more. To ensure the safe deployment of predictive models it is crucial to
quantify the uncertainty of the resulting predictions, communicating the limits of predictive performance. Uncertainty
quantification attracts a lot of attention in recent years, particularly methods that are based on Conformal Prediction
(CP) (Vovk et al., 2005; Papadopoulos et al., 2002; Lei et al.,
2018). CP provides controlled predictive regions for any
underlying predictive algorithm (e.g., neural networks and
random forests), in finite samples with no assumption on
the data distribution except for the exchangeability of the
train and test data. More precisely, for a miscoverage rate
α ∈ [0, 1], CP outputs a marginally valid prediction inbα for the test response Y given its corresponding
terval C
covariates X, that is:

Conformal prediction is a theoretically grounded
framework for constructing predictive intervals.
We study conformal prediction with missing values in the covariates – a setting that brings new
challenges to uncertainty quantification. We first
show that the marginal coverage guarantee of conformal prediction holds on imputed data for any
missingness distribution and almost all imputation functions. However, we emphasize that the
average coverage varies depending on the pattern
of missing values: conformal methods tend to
construct prediction intervals that under-cover the
response conditionally to some missing patterns.
This motivates our novel generalized conformalized quantile regression framework, missing data
augmentation, which yields prediction intervals
that are valid conditionally to the patterns of missing values, despite their exponential number. We
then show that a universally consistent quantile
regression algorithm trained on the imputed data
is Bayes optimal for the pinball risk, thus achieving valid coverage conditionally to any given data
point. Moreover, we examine the case of a linear model, which demonstrates the importance of
our proposal in overcoming the heteroskedasticity
induced by missing values. Using synthetic and
data from critical care, we corroborate our theory
and report improved performance of our methods.

bα (X)) ≥ 1 − α.
P(Y ∈ C

(1)

Split CP (Papadopoulos et al., 2002; Lei et al., 2018) achieves Eq. (1) by keeping a hold-out set, the calibration set,
used to evaluate the performance of a fixed predictive model.
At the same time, as the volume of data increases, the volume of missing values also increases. There is a vast literature on this topic (Little, 2019; Josse & Reiter, 2018),
and a recent survey even identified more than 150 different
implementations (Mayer et al., 2019). Missing values create
additional challenges to the task of supervised learning, as
traditional machine learning algorithms can not handle incomplete data (Josse et al., 2019; Le Morvan et al., 2020b;a;
2021; Ayme et al., 2022; Van Ness et al., 2022). One of the
most popular strategies to deal with missing values suggests
imputing the missing entries with plausible values to get
completed data, on which any analysis can be performed.
The drawback of this “impute-then-predict” approach is
that single imputation can distort the joint and marginal
distribution of the data. Yet, Josse et al. (2019); Le Morvan
et al. (2020b; 2021) showed that such impute-then-predict
strategies are Bayes consistent, under the assumption that
a universally consistent learner is applied on an imputed
data set. However, this line of work focuses on point prediction with missing values that aim to predict the most likely
outcome. In contrast, our goal is quantifying predictive
uncertainty, which was not explored with missing values
although its enormous importance.

1. Introduction
By leveraging increasingly large data sets, statistical algorithms and machine learning methods can be used to support
1

Electricité de France R&D, Palaiseau, France 2 PreMeDICaL
project team, INRIA Sophia-Antipolis, Montpellier, France
3
CMAP, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
Palaiseau, France 4 Departments of Electrical Engineering and
of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Margaux Zaffran <margaux.zaffran@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

