Adaptive Barrier Smoothing for First-Order Policy Gradient
with Contact Dynamics

Shenao Zhang 1 Wanxin Jin 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract

2018; Howell et al., 2022). When it comes to optimizing control policies in differentiable simulators, the most straightforward approach is First-Order Policy Gradient (FOPG),
which involves backpropagating through the computational
path of cumulative rewards (Xu et al., 2022; Freeman et al.,
2021) and has demonstrated great potential even for general
non-differentiable tasks in model-based settings where the
dynamics are unknown (Clavera et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021;
Amos et al., 2021).

Differentiable physics-based simulators have witnessed remarkable success in robot learning involving contact dynamics, benefiting from their
improved accuracy and efficiency in solving the
underlying complementarity problem. However,
when utilizing the First-Order Policy Gradient
(FOPG) method, our theory indicates that the
complementarity-based systems suffer from stiffness, leading to an explosion in the gradient variance of FOPG. As a result, optimization becomes
challenging due to chaotic and non-smooth loss
landscapes. To tackle this issue, we propose a
novel approach called Adaptive Barrier Smoothing (ABS), which introduces a class of softened complementarity systems that correspond to
barrier-smoothed objectives. With a contact-aware
adaptive central-path parameter, ABS reduces the
FOPG gradient variance while controlling the gradient bias. We justify the adaptive design by analyzing the roots of the system’s stiffness. Additionally, we establish the convergence of FOPG and
show that ABS achieves a reasonable trade-off
between the gradient variance and bias by providing their upper bounds. Moreover, we present a
variant of FOPG based on complementarity modeling that efficiently fits the contact dynamics by
learning the physical parameters. Experimental
results on various robotic tasks are provided to
support our theory and method.

The fundamental behaviors underlying common robotic
tasks, such as locomotion and manipulation, rely heavily on
the intricate interactions between the robot and its environment (Aydinoglu et al., 2020; Lidec et al., 2023). To model
the robotic contact dynamics, complementarity systems have
emerged as the de-facto approaches. These systems are
rooted in the complementarity problem, which forms the
basis for simulating hard-contact scenarios (Geilinger et al.,
2020; Howell et al., 2022; Werling et al., 2021). By employing the Interior-Point Method (IPM) (Mehrotra, 1992),
the complementarity problem efficiently solves for impact
and frictional contact forces, ensuring non-penetration and
maximum dissipation.
Unfortunately, even though complementarity-based contact
systems can provide accurate physical behaviors, they often exhibit stiff dynamics with extreme curvatures (Parmar
et al., 2021; Anitescu & Potra, 2002) due to geometrical
constraints and contact events. In this work, we demonstrate
that such stiffness can lead to optimization challenges when
performing FOPG. Specifically, we first establish the convergence of FOPG that depends on the gradient variance
and bias. Then we prove that the upper bound of the gradient variance has polynomial dependencies on the Lipschitz
continuity of the model, where the degrees are linear in the
task horizon. When dealing with a stiff model, the presence of long chains of nonlinear mappings results in slow
convergence due to the large gradient variance and chaotic
(Bollt, 2000) optimization procedures, a phenomenon also
observed in previous experimental studies (Parmas et al.,
2018; Metz et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The recent advancements in learning to control and plan
for robotic systems can be largely attributed to the exceptional accuracy of physics-based simulators (Todorov et al.,
2012; Degrave et al., 2019; de Avila Belbute-Peres et al.,
1
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.

To combat the aforementioned problem, we introduce a class
of µ-softened Linear Complementarity Systems (LCS) with
the central-path parameter µ. We prove that the Lipschitz

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

