Hyperbolic Image-Text Representations

Karan Desai 1 Maximilian Nickel 2 Tanmay Rajpurohit 3 Justin Johnson 1 2 Ramakrishna Vedantam 4

Abstract

CLIP: embed images and
text in a Euclidean space

Visual and linguistic concepts naturally organize
themselves in a hierarchy, where a textual concept “dog” entails all images that contain dogs.
Despite being intuitive, current large-scale vision
and language models such as CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) do not explicitly capture such hierarchy. We
propose MERU, a contrastive model that yields
hyperbolic representations of images and text. Hyperbolic spaces have suitable geometric properties to embed tree-like data, so MERU can better
capture the underlying hierarchy in image-text
datasets. Our results show that MERU learns a
highly interpretable and structured representation
space while being competitive with CLIP’s performance on standard multi-modal tasks like image
classification and image-text retrieval.

pic of my labrador
a cat and a dog my cat is photogenic
in the snow
playing in the street look at those eyes! MERU: embed images and
text in a hyperbolic space

exhausted doggo
curious kitty
so cute <3

Figure 1. Hyperbolic image-text representations. Left: Images and text depict concepts and can be jointly viewed in a
visual-semantic hierarchy, wherein text ‘exhausted doggo’ is more
generic than an image (which might have more details like a cat or
snow). Our method MERU embeds images and text in a hyperbolic
space that is well-suited to embed tree-like data. Right: Representation manifolds of CLIP (hypersphere) and MERU (hyperboloid)
illustrated in 3D. MERU assumes the origin to represent the most
generic concept, and embeds text closer to the origin than images.

1. Introduction
Visual-semantic hierarchy. It is commonly said that ‘an
image is worth a thousand words’ – consequently, images
contain a lot more information than the sentences which
typically describe them. For example, given the middle
image in Figure 1 one might describe it as ‘a cat and a dog
playing in the street’ or with a less specific sentence like
‘exhausted doggo’ or ‘so cute <3’. These are not merely diverse descriptions but contain varying levels of detail about
the underlying semantic contents of the image.

better exploratory data analysis of large-scale datasets (Radford et al., 2021; Schuhmann et al., 2022).
Vision-language representation learning. Approaches
such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al.,
2021) have catalyzed a lot of recent progress in computer
vision by showing that Transformer-based (Vaswani et al.,
2017) models trained using large amounts of image-text
data from the internet can yield transferable representations,
and such models can perform zero-shot recognition and
retrieval using natural language queries. All these models
represent images and text as vectors in a high-dimensional
Euclidean, affine space and normalize the embeddings to
unit L2 norm. However, such a choice of geometry can find
it hard to capture the visual-semantic hierarchy.

As humans, we can reason about the relative detail in each
caption, and can organize such concepts into a meaningful
visual-semantic hierarchy (Vendrov et al., 2016), namely,
‘exhausted doggo’ → ‘a cat and a dog playing in the street’
→ (Figure 1 middle image). Providing multimodal models access to this inductive bias about vision and language
has the potential to improve generalization (Radford et al.,
2021), interpretability (Selvaraju et al., 2017) and enable

An affine Euclidean space treats all embedded points in
the same manner, with the same distance metric being applied to all points (Murphy, 2013). Conceptually, this can
cause issues when modeling hierarchies – a generic concept
(closer to the root node of the hierarchy) is close to many
other concepts compared to a specific concept (which is only
close to its immediate neighbors). Thus, a Euclidean space
can find it hard to pack all the images that say a generic

KD and Rama did this work while at Meta. 1 University of
Michigan 2 Meta AI 3 Independent Researcher 4 New York University. Correspondence to: Karan Desai <kdexd@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

