Learning to Boost Training
by Periodic Nowcasting Near Future Weights

Jinhyeok Jang 1 2 Woo-han Yun 1 Won Hwa Kim 3 Youngwoo Yoon 1
Jaehong Kim 1 Jaeyeon Lee 1 ByungOk Han 1

Abstract
Recent complicated problems require large-scale
datasets and complex model architectures, however, it is difficult to train such large networks due
to high computational issues. Significant efforts
have been made to make the training more efficient such as momentum, learning rate scheduling,
weight regularization, and meta-learning. Based
on our observations on 1) high correlation between past weights and future weights, 2) conditions for beneficial weight prediction, and 3) feasibility of weight prediction, we propose a more
general framework by intermittently skipping a
handful of epochs by periodically forecasting near
future weights, i.e., a Weight Nowcaster Network
(WNN). As an add-on module, WNN predicts
the future weights to make the learning process
faster regardless of tasks and architectures. Experimental results show that WNN can significantly
save actual time cost for training with an additional marginal time to train WNN. We validate
the generalization capability of WNN under various tasks, and demonstrate that it works well even
for unseen tasks. The code and pre-trained model
are available at https://github.com/jjh6297/WNN.

Figure 1. Illustration of the motivation. Weight Nowcaster network predicts future values of weight and bias nearby those of real
in a DNN architecture. We expected that WNN reduces training
time by efficiently skipping future epochs during training process.

deeper and more complex to achieve better predictive performance. It is inevitable for such complex models to utilize
extremely large-scale datasets together with high computational costs. Thus, efficiency has become a routine but
critical issue, especially at the training stage where its complexity exponentially increases according to the size of the
model. Considering the practical use of DNN techniques for
a broad range of applications, this issue cannot be solved by
adding computing power alone.
Notable efforts have been spent to tackle the computational
issue. Architecture minimization (Sandler et al., 2018; Tan &
Le, 2019) and efficient physical hardware systems (Jouppi
et al., 2017; Khailany et al., 2020) have shown improvements in efficiency. From an algorithmic perspective, diverse
training strategies were introduced such as optimizations
with advanced momentum (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2019), scheduling of learning rate (He et al., 2016;
Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017), and applying regularizers on
trainable parameters in networks (Rodrı́guez et al., 2017;
Jia et al., 2018), which have led to efficient and stable training of DNN models. These algorithmic approaches mainly
focus on learning stability; while they accelerate training
process to some extent, they do not directly address reducing training time. We also note that these approaches can be
used with the proposed WNN.

1. Introduction
Since the resurrection of Deep Neural Network (DNN), a
variety of Deep Learning models have shown unprecedented
improvements over several traditional prediction tasks such
as image classification (LeCun et al., 1998; He et al., 2016),
natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown
et al., 2020), and reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2013;
Schulman et al., 2017). In order to tackle complicated tasks
in these domains, the architectures of DNNs are becoming
1
ETRI. 2 KAIST. 3 POSTECH. Correspondence to: ByungOk
Han <byungok.han@etri.re.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the authors.

In this paper, we approach the problem of exhaustive training costs from a different perspective. Specifically, we pro1

