Evidential Interactive Learning for Medical Image Captioning

Ervine Zheng 1 Qi Yu 1

Abstract
Medical image captioning alleviates the burden
of physicians and possibly reduces medical errors
by automatically generating text descriptions to
describe image contents and convey findings. It
is more challenging than conventional image captioning due to the complexity of medical images
and the difficulty of aligning image regions with
medical terms. In this paper, we propose an evidential interactive learning framework that leverages evidence-based uncertainty estimation and
interactive machine learning to improve image
captioning with limited labeled data. The interactive learning process involves three stages: keyword prediction, caption generation, and model
updates. First, the model predicts a list of keywords with evidence-based uncertainty estimation and selects the most informative keywords
to seek user feedback. Second, user-approved
keywords are used as model input to guide the
model to generate satisfactory captions. Third,
the model is updated based on user-approved keywords and captions, where evidence-based uncertainty is used to allocate different weights to
different data instances. Experiments on two medical image datasets illustrate that the proposed
framework can effectively learn from human feedback and improve performance in the future.

Figure 1: An illustrative example showing keywords helps
improve the quality of medical image caption generation.
usually more challenging because of its highly specialized
domain (Li et al., 2019). Meanwhile, the tolerance for error is low because wrong predictions could result in severe
consequences.
Keyword-driven medical image captioning is an approach to
address the above challenges (Biswal et al., 2020). Its main
idea is to leverage additional keywords provided by the user
as side information. According to (Pavlopoulos et al., 2019),
keywords commonly exist in the doctors’ textual diagnosis
records in the early diagnosis process. Keywords are critical for medical image captioning because they are usually
highly informative in describing a disease’s morphology and
potential indications. With correct keywords, the generated
captions are more likely to capture the essence of the image
and incur fewer mistakes, as shown in the illustrative example in Figure 1. Particularly, if the distribution of the testing
image is different from the training data or the quality of
the image is low, leveraging only the image data may be
insufficient for a model to infer satisfactory captions. Additional keywords would help the model learn the context and
retrieve other relevant words for caption generation.

1. Introduction

Compared with conventional image captioning with only
one input modality (i.e., image), keyword-driven captioning
is multi-modal (i.e., image and user-specified keywords),
and it can be formulated as an interactive process that involves humans in the loop. While existing keyword-driven
models have achieved noticeable success (Huang et al.,
2019; Maksoud et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021), they always
require keywords as additional inputs, which may incur an
excessive burden on the user. In fact, if the model cannot
make a satisfactory prediction and requires additional user
inputs as guidance, it indicates that the model is not calibrated well on the current data. In this case, an ideal solution
is to make the model learn from users during the interaction
process, so that the model can perform better in future cap-

Medical image captioning aims to automatically generate
text descriptions for medical images to describe image contents and key findings. It typically integrates a computer
vision model to extract semantic features from medical images and a language model to generate readable text captions
(Pavlopoulos et al., 2022). Compared with conventional captioning tasks on natural images, medical image captioning is
1
Rochester Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Qi Yu
<qi.yu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

