Robust Weight Signatures: Gaining Robustness as Easy as Patching Weights?

Ruisi Cai 1 Zhenyu Zhang 1 Zhangyang Wang 1
1

VITA Group, University of Texas at Austin

https://github.com/VITA-Group/Robust_Weight_Signatures

Abstract

linearly re-scale the RWS to control the patched
robustness strength; (3) composable. Multiple
RWSs can be added simultaneously to patch more
comprehensive robustness at once; and (4) transferable. Even when the clean model backbone is
continually adapted or updated, RWSs remain as
effective patches due to their outstanding crossdataset transferability.

Given a robust model trained to be resilient to one
or multiple types of distribution shifts (e.g., natural image corruptions), how is that “robustness”
encoded in the model weights, and how easily can
it be disentangled and/or “zero-shot” transferred
to some other models? This paper empirically suggests a surprisingly simple answer: linearly - by
straightforward model weight arithmetic! We
start by drawing several key observations: (i) assuming that we train the same model architecture
on both a clean dataset and its corrupted version,
a comparison between the two resultant models
shows their weights to mostly differ in shallow
layers; (ii) the weight difference after projection,
which we call “Robust Weight Signature” (RWS),
appears to be discriminative and indicative of different corruption types; (iii) perhaps most strikingly, for the same corruption type, the RWSs
obtained by one model architecture are highly consistent and transferable across different datasets.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Related Work
The robustness and safety of machine learning models have
become prevailing concerns for practitioners. Among many
other possible forms of safety risks such as adversarial attacks (Madry et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019) and backdoor
attacks (Goldblum et al., 2022), one concern of particular
significance is the model’s resilience against various distribution shifts from training data (Koh et al., 2021). For
example, a computer vision model for autonomous driving
or video surveillance could be trained on relatively “clean”
and constrained data to achieve high performance on standard benchmarks. However, they are vulnerable to unforeseen distributional changes including natural corruptions
(e.g., due to camera noise, motion blur, adverse weather),
sensory perturbations (e.g., sensor transient error, electromagnetic interference), and larger domain shift forms (e.g.,
summer → winter, daytime → night) - hence jeopardizing
their trustworthiness and safe deployment.

Based on those RWS observations, we propose a
minimalistic model robustness “patching” framework that carries a model trained on clean data
together with its pre-extracted RWSs. In this
way, injecting certain robustness to the model
is reduced to directly adding the corresponding
RWS to its weight. We experimentally verify
our proposed framework to be remarkably (1)
lightweight. since RWSs concentrate on the shallowest few layers and we further show they can be
painlessly quantized, storing an RWS is up to 13
× more compact than storing the full weight copy;
(2) in-situ adjustable. RWSs can be appended
as needed and later taken off to restore the intact
clean model. We further demonstrate one can

Many solutions have since been examined to strengthen the
models’ robustness against unforeseen distribution shifts,
in particular natural image corruptions - which would be
the focus of this paper. Examples include data augmentation (Hendrycks et al., 2021; 2019b; Rusak et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021), stability-aware training (Hein & Andriushchenko, 2017; Zheng et al., 2016), leveraging pretrained models (Hendrycks et al., 2019a; Chen et al., 2020;
Jiang et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021; Wortsman et al., 2022b)
or training on larger and more diverse datasets (Taori et al.,
2020; Nguyen et al., 2022). Among them, data augmentation is perhaps the most popular practice, as it is easy to

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang
<atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

