Likelihood Adjusted Semidefinite Programs for Clustering Heterogeneous Data

Yubo Zhuang 1 Xiaohui Chen 1 2 Yun Yang 1

Abstract

several widely used clustering methods including
K-means, SDP and EM algorithms.

Clustering is a widely deployed unsupervised
learning tool. Model-based clustering is a flexible framework to tackle data heterogeneity when
the clusters have different shapes. Likelihoodbased inference for mixture distributions often
involves non-convex and high-dimensional objective functions, imposing difficult computational
and statistical challenges. The classic expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm is a computationally thrifty iterative method that maximizes a surrogate function minorizing the log-likelihood of
observed data in each iteration, which however
suffers from bad local maxima even in the special
case of the standard Gaussian mixture model with
common isotropic covariance matrices. On the
other hand, recent studies reveal that the unique
global solution of a semidefinite programming
(SDP) relaxed K-means achieves the informationtheoretically sharp threshold for perfectly recovering the cluster labels under the standard Gaussian
mixture model. In this paper, we extend the SDP
approach to a general setting by integrating cluster
labels as model parameters and propose an iterative likelihood adjusted SDP (iLA-SDP) method
that directly maximizes the exact observed likelihood in the presence of data heterogeneity. By
lifting the cluster assignment to group-specific
membership matrices, iLA-SDP avoids centroids
estimation – a key feature that allows exact recovery under well-separateness of centroids without
being trapped by their adversarial configurations.
Thus iLA-SDP is less sensitive than EM to initialization and more stable on high-dimensional data.
Our numeric experiments demonstrate that iLASDP can achieve lower mis-clustering errors over

1. Introduction
Clustering analysis has been widely studied and regularly
used in machine learning and its applications in network
science (Girvan & Newman, 2002), computer vision (Shi &
Malik, 2000; Joulin et al., 2010), manifold learning (Chen
& Yang, 2021a) and bioinformatics (Karim et al., 2020).
Perhaps by far the most popular clustering method is the Kmeans (MacQueen, 1967) partially because there are computationally convenient algorithms such as Lloyd’s algorithm
and K-means++ for heuristic approximation (Lloyd, 1982;
Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007). Mathematically, K-means
aims to find the optimal partition of data to minimize the
total within-cluster squared Euclidean distances, which is
equivalent to the maximum profile likelihood estimator under the standard Gaussian mixture model (GMM) with common isotropic covariance matrices (Chen & Yang, 2021b).
Nevertheless, real data usually exhibit various degrees of
heterogeneous features such as the cluster shapes may vary
from component to component, which renders K-means as
a sub-optimal clustering method.
Another popular clustering method is the classic expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm, which is a computationally
thrifty method based on the idea of data augmentation to
iteratively optimize the non-convex observed data likelihood (Dempster et al., 1977). Theoretical investigations
reveal that the EM algorithm suffers from bad local maxima even in the one-dimensional standard GMM with wellseparated cluster centers (Jin et al., 2016). Thus practically
even when applied in highly favorable separation-to-noise
ratio settings, careful initialization, often through multiple
random initializations or a warm-start by another heuristic
method such as hierarchical clustering (Fraley & Raftery,
2002), is the key for the EM algorithm to find the correct
cluster labels and model parameters. With a reasonable initial start, the EM algorithm has been shown to achieve good
statistical properties (Balakrishnan et al., 2017; Wu & Zhou,
2019).

1

Department of Statistics, University of Illinois at Urbana2
Champaign.
Department of Mathematics, University of
Southern California.
Correspondence to: Yubo Zhuang
<yubo2@illinois.edu>, Xiaohui Chen <xiaohuic@usc.edu>,
Yun Yang <yy84@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we consider the likelihood-based inference to
tackle the problem of recovering cluster labels in the pres1

