The SSL Interplay: Augmentations, Inductive Bias, and Generalization

Vivien Cabannes 1 Bobak T. Kiani 2 Randall Balestriero 1 Yann LeCun 1 Alberto Bietti 1
as illustrated for instance in Figure 1. These challenges
motivate new theoretical insights to better understand why
such issues arise and how to better address them.

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a
powerful framework to learn representations from
raw data without supervision. Yet in practice, engineers face issues such as instability in tuning
optimizers and collapse of representations during
training. Such challenges motivate the need for a
theory to shed light on the complex interplay between the choice of data augmentation, network
architecture, and training algorithm. We study
such an interplay with a precise analysis of generalization performance on both pretraining and
downstream tasks in a theory friendly setup, and
highlight several insights for SSL practitioners
that arise from our theory.

Our study focuses on the joint-embedding framework and
characterizes learned representations for given choices of
input distributions, data augmentations, and architecture.
To obtain a fine-grained picture, we study linear classes of
functions endowed with a reproducing kernel, and analyze
a theoretically friendly loss function that models both contrastive and non-contrastive methods. Our work generalizes
the discrete data setting of HaoChen et al. (2021) and the
finite dimensional setting of Saunshi et al. (2022), encompassing more expressive nonparametric models, potentially
with universal approximation properties, and which can capture certain properties of architectures through their limiting
kernel limits (Jacot et al., 2018).
Our contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction

1. We unveil two central integral operators: an “intrinsic”
one that depends on the input distribution and choice
of augmentations and another capturing the inductive
bias associated with the model of computation.
2. We provide new bounds on the downstream generalization error that are sharper than previous work, and
which can handle distributions shift between data before and after performing augmentations.
3. We propose new generalization bounds on the pretraining excess risk via tools from convex analysis. This
analysis yields novel insights, including an understanding of the benefits of using multiple augmentations per
sample (e.g., “multi-crop”).
4. We detail several examples where optimal representations are found in closed form, illustrating the role
of augmentations, architecture, and regularization in
forming representations.
5. We discuss several practical insights for SSL practitioners that emerge from our theory, in particular on
how design choices in pretraining may affect downstream performance, and on how to avoid collapse of
representations.

Self-supervised learning (SSL) aims to construct useful representations of data without the need for pre-constructed
labels. Due to the recent success and widespread applicability of SSL, established methods for training large neural networks now incorporate pre-training of models in an
unsupervised manner over large amounts of data, before
fine-tuning/probing them over downstream datasets (Devlin
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Radford
et al., 2021). Self-supervised pretraining generally aims to
render the model invariant to certain distorsions/views of the
inputs, in order to capture useful features for downstream
tasks (e.g., Chen et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020; Grill et al.,
2020; Caron et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2022). Though very
powerful, SSL methods can be challenging to implement
properly. They tend to suffer from various practical issues,
such as instability and collapse during training and the need
to carefully tune parameters related to the architecture, optimization algorithm, representation dimension, and form
of augmentations. These different aspects of pretraining
can lead to widely different behaviors and representations,
1

Meta AI, New York, NY, USA 2 MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Vivien Cabannes <vivc@meta.com>.

Related work. Foundations for theoretically analyzing
SSL have emerged in the past few years. Particularly relevant to our work, Balestriero & LeCun (2022); Kiani et al.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

