Curious Replay for Model-based Adaptation

Isaac Kauvar * 1 Chris Doyle * 1 Linqi Zhou 2 Nick Haber 1

Abstract
Agents must be able to adapt quickly as an
environment changes. We find that existing
model-based reinforcement learning agents are
unable to do this well, in part because of how
they use past experiences to train their world
model. Here, we present Curious Replay—a
form of prioritized experience replay tailored to
model-based agents through use of a curiositybased priority signal. Agents using Curious
Replay exhibit improved performance in an
exploration paradigm inspired by animal behavior
and on the Crafter benchmark. DreamerV3
with Curious Replay surpasses state-of-the-art
performance on Crafter, achieving a mean
score of 19.4 that substantially improves on
the previous high score of 14.5 by DreamerV3
with uniform replay, while also maintaining
similar performance on the Deepmind Control
Suite. Code for Curious Replay is available at
github.com/AutonomousAgentsLab/curiousreplay.

Figure 1. Curious Replay closes the loop between experience
replay and world model performance by using curiosity-guided
prioritization to promote training on experiences the model is least
familiar with. Curious Replay improves the adaptability of modelbased agents and yields a new state-of-the-art score on Crafter.

ment: the appearance of a new object. Animals, from rodents to primates, will often adapt to such a change by first
investigating the object (Glickman & Sroges, 1966). This is
an effective strategy as it addresses a key aspect of adaptation: assembling data to update models that guide behavior.
In this work, we investigate such functionalities of gathering
and utilizing information about environmental change in the
context of model-based deep reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Change is unavoidable. Robust artificially intelligent (AI)
agents must be capable of quickly adapting to changing
circumstances. In the face of novel states and shifting conditions, agents—whether self-driving cars, home-assistant
robots, or financial decision makers—must effectively update their understanding of the world and their policies for
acting in it. Animals have evolved to skillfully contend with
the challenges of changing environments. Can they serve as
an existence proof and source of inspiration for synthesizing
such flexible intelligence?

We identify surprising deficiencies in the adaptability
of a state-of-the-art model-based agent (Dreamer, with
Plan2Explore for intrinsically-motivated settings (Hafner
et al., 2020; Sekar et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2023)). In
an object interaction assay, we find that—unlike animals—
Plan2Explore agents do not quickly interact with a novel
object. Moreover, in a nonstationary variant of the Deepmind Control Suite, DreamerV2 does not adapt well. These
results reveal shortcomings in the Dreamer agent that may
broadly impact its ability to achieve its full potential in
challenging settings.

Consider, for instance, a simple change in one’s environ*

Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Isaac Kauvar <ikauvar@stanford.edu>, Nick Haber
<nhaber@stanford.edu>.

We find a root cause of Dreamer’s poor adaptability: reliance
on uniform sampling of its experience replay buffer. We
address this problem with Curious Replay—a new approach
to prioritizing replay buffer sampling when updating an
agent’s models—and demonstrate its profound benefits for
adaptation of model-based agents, including achievement
of a new state-of-the-art on Crafter (Figure 1).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

