Kernel Logistic Regression Approximation
of an Understandable ReLU Neural Network
Marie Guyomard 1 Susana Barbosa 2 Lionel Fillatre 1

Abstract

input space into polyhedrons. Unfortunately, the partition
induced by the hidden layers of the network is too complex
because the input variables are mixed with a linear transformation or convolution. Other methods like Decision Trees
(DTs) (Breiman, 2017; Hastie et al., 2009), Multivariate
Adaptative Regression Splines (MARS) models (Friedman,
1991) and Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) (Hastie,
2017) also partition the input space, while their partitions
are interpretable. These partitions are only composed of
orthotopes because they split each input variable separately.
However, these methods exploit a greedy algorithm to split
the variables at each iteration. Hence, both the optimality of
the training and its robustness are questionable.

This paper proposes an understandable neural network whose score function is modeled as an additive sum of univariate spline functions. It extends
usual understandable models like generative additive models, spline-based models, and neural
additive models. It is shown that this neural network can be approximated by a logistic regression whose inputs are obtained with a non-linear
preprocessing of input data. This preprocessing
depends on the neural network initialization but
this paper establishes that it can be replaced by a
non random kernel-based preprocessing that no
longer depends on the initialization. Hence, the
convergence of the training process is guaranteed
and the solution is unique for a given training
dataset.

Recently, some studies were conducted to develop interpretable NN-based models that mimic these interpretable
methods while optimizing a global criterion. In (Eckle et al.,
2019), it is shown that the MARS model can be approximated by a NN but no algorithm is proposed to train it.
The Neural Additive Models (NAMs) in (Agarwal et al.,
2021) approximate GAMs by NNs. The resulting NN is
basically a conventional NN learned with the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004) with
no guarantee to converge toward a satisfying solution.

1. Introduction
Neural Networks (NNs) are widely used as their performance on both regression and classification tasks is significant (Meijering et al., 2022). The explainability of NNs
and the possibility to certify their results is often criticized,
which is why they are described as “black boxes” (Fel &
Vigouroux, 2020).

Recent papers as (Jacot et al., 2018) have demonstrated
that it is possible to guarantee the convergence of the SGD
for a fully connected NN when the number of hidden neurons becomes arbitrarily large. Indeed, assuming that the
NN parameters are initialized with a Gaussian distribution,
NNs may asymptotically become linear with respect to their
parameters as NN width increases (Neal, 2012; Liu et al.,
2020a). Unfortunately, it has been established in (Liu et al.,
2020a) that this approximation does not hold when the output layer is non-linear, which arises for classification problems involving a sigmoid or a softmax function.

In recent years, many studies have been conducted on the
interpretability of the NNs, but also on the convergence
of the learning process and the uniqueness of the learned
parameters. A rigorous bridge between NNs using a rectified linear unit function (ReLU NNs) and spline-based
multidimensional functions approximation has been built in
(Balestriero et al., 2018). The authors establish that ReLU
NNs can be interpreted as splines operators that divide the

The contributions of this paper are fourfold. Firstly, we introduce an interpretable model that combines the advantages
of MARS, GAMs, NAMs and NNs. Our Splines Approximation Throught Understandable ReLU Neural Network
(SATURNN) is intrinsically explainable as MARS, GAM
and NAM and its training involves to minimize a global
classification loss. Secondly, we demonstrate that even if
SATURNN is composed of a sigmoid output layer, it can be

*

Equal contribution 1 Laboratory I3S, University Côte d’Azur,
Sophia-Antipolis, France 2 Laboratory IPMC, University Côte
d’Azur, Sophia-Antipolis, France. Correspondence to: Marie
Guyomard <guyomard@i3s.unice.fr>, Lionel Fillatre <lionel.fillatre@i3s.unice.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

