On the Impact of Algorithmic Recourse on Social Segregation

Ruijiang Gao 1 Himabindu Lakkaraju 2

Abstract

by a predictive model employed by a bank. It would be very
helpful to provide a means for recourse to this individual
instead of simply informing them that their loan application
has been rejected. For example, this individual could be
informed that if they increase their salary by $1000 and
their credit score by 20 points and reapply for a loan, the
bank’s predictive model will approve it. Such a prescription is referred to as recourse. Several approaches in the
recent literature tackled the problem of providing recourse
by generating counterfactual explanations (Wachter et al.,
2017; Ustun et al., 2019; Karimi et al., 2020a; Poyiadzi
et al., 2020; Van Looveren & Klaise, 2019) which highlight
what features need to be changed and by how much to flip a
model’s prediction.

As predictive models seep into several real-world
applications, it has become critical to ensure that
individuals who are negatively impacted by the
outcomes of these models are provided with a
means for recourse. To this end, there has been
a growing body of research on algorithmic recourse in recent years. While recourses can be
extremely beneficial to affected individuals, their
implementation at a large scale can lead to potential data distribution shifts and other unintended
consequences. However, there is little to no research on understanding the impact of algorithmic
recourse after implementation. In this work, we
address the aforementioned gaps by making one
of the first attempts at analyzing the delayed societal impact of algorithmic recourse. To this end,
we theoretically and empirically analyze the recourses output by state-of-the-art algorithms. Our
analysis demonstrates that large-scale implementation of recourses by end users may exacerbate
social segregation. To address this problem, we
propose novel algorithms which leverage implicit
and explicit conditional generative models to not
only minimize the chance of segregation but also
provide realistic recourses. Extensive experimentation with real-world datasets demonstrates the
efficacy of the proposed approaches.

Existing recourse algorithms account for various considerations when generating recourses. For instance, algorithms
such as Wachter et al. (2017) aim to generate recourses that
are low cost i.e., the distance between the counterfactual and
the original instance is as small as possible. However, in
an attempt to generate low-cost recourses, such algorithms
end up outputting unrealistic counterfactual explanations
which may not follow the true distribution of individuals
who receive the desired outcome. To address this shortcoming, recent works attempted to find realistic recourses that
adhere to the underlying data distribution by either leveraging generative models, e.g., Variational AutoEncoders
(VAE) (Pawelczyk et al., 2020) or causal graphs (Karimi
et al., 2020b) to ensure that the changes being requested are
feasible and are inline with the data distribution.
Recent research also highlighted and addressed various challenges pertaining to the robustness (Dominguez-Olmedo
et al., 2021; Slack et al., 2021; Pawelczyk et al., 2022; Rawal
et al., 2021) and fairness (Gupta et al., 2019; von Kügelgen
et al., 2022) of algorithmic recourse. Recourse robustness
means that the counterfactual explanations should remain
valid with respect to small changes in the environment.
While Upadhyay et al. (2021) constructed recourses that are
robust to small shifts in the underlying model, DominguezOlmedo et al. (2021) constructed recourses that are robust
to small input perturbations. On the other hand, Gupta et al.
(2019) developed an algorithm which ensures that the average recourse cost (distance between the original instance
and its counterfactual) corresponding to the minority group,
is not significantly worse than that of the majority group,

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly being deployed in domains such as finance, healthcare, and public
policy to make a variety of consequential decisions. As a
result, there is a growing emphasis on providing recourse
to individuals who have been adversely impacted by the
predictions of these models (Voigt & Von dem Bussche,
2017). Let us consider an individual who was denied a loan
1

University of Texas at Austin 2 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Ruijiang Gao <ruijiang@utexas.edu>, Himabindu
Lakkaraju <hlakkaraju@hbs.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

