Prototype-oriented unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time series

Yuxin Li 1 Wenchao Chen 1 Bo Chen 1 Dongsheng Wang 1 Long Tian 2 Mingyuan Zhou 3

Abstract

mal time points within the MTS, which is quite meaningful
for ensuring security and service quality and mitigating financial losses (Xu et al., 2021). The goal of anomaly detection is to identify abnormal input data that does not conform
to the description of usual data (Cao et al., 2022). Machine
learning-based anomaly or outlier detection methods can be
broadly categorized into either supervised anomaly detection (AD) (Liu et al., 2015; Shon & Moon, 2007; Yamada
et al., 2013), or unsupervised AD (UAD) (Su et al., 2021;
2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018a;
Audibert et al., 2020; Malhotra et al., 2016; Hundman et al.,
2018a). As anomalies are usually rare and buried within
a vast amount of normal points, not only the labeling of
anomalies is hard and expensive, but also the performance
of a supervisedly-learned AD classifier is often sub-optimal
due to severe class imbalance (Chalapathy & Chawla, 2019).
For this reason, we focus on UAD for MTS which requires
no labels for anomalies.

Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) of multivariate time series (MTS) aims to learn robust
representations of normal multivariate temporal
patterns. Existing UAD methods try to learn a
fixed set of mappings for each MTS, entailing
expensive computation and limited model adaptation. To address this pivotal issue, we propose
a prototype-oriented UAD (PUAD) method under a probabilistic framework. Specifically, instead of learning the mappings for each MTS, the
proposed PUAD views multiple MTSs as the distribution over a group of prototypes, which are
extracted to represent a diverse set of normal patterns. To learn and regulate the prototypes, PUAD
introduces a reconstruction-based unsupervised
anomaly detection approach, which incorporates a
prototype-oriented optimal transport method into
a Transformer-powered probabilistic dynamical
generative framework. Leveraging meta-learned
transferable prototypes, PUAD can achieve high
model adaptation capacity for new MTSs. Experiments on five public MTS datasets all verify the
effectiveness of the proposed UAD method.

The basic idea of UAD for MTS is to detect anomalies by
comparing an MTS against multivariate temporal patterns,
which are extracted from previous MTSs that are deemed
normal. Over the years, many reconstruction-based UAD
methods have been developed. They first learn normal MTS
patterns and then use the reconstruction errors under these
patterns as anomaly scores. Several lines of work have been
proposed, including those based on probabilistic dynamical
models, such as GmVRNN (Dai et al., 2022) and VGCRN
(Chen et al., 2022) that have achieved superior detection
performance by considering the temporal dependence and
variability within the MTS. As demonstrated in Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), the attention mechanisms have a remarkable ability to capture long-range dependencies. Originally developed for modeling discrete sequences, Transformer has also been modified to detect anomalies in MTS,
where Anomaly Transformer (Xu et al., 2021) and TranAD
(Tuli et al., 2022) are two representative examples.

1. Introduction
Modern information technology operations generate an enormous amount of high-dimensional sensor data that need to
be continuously monitored. Two typical examples are content delivery network (CDN) systems (Dai et al., 2021) and
server machines in large data centers (Su et al., 2021; 2019;
Sun et al., 2021). Given the monitoring data of large-scale
systems represented as multivariate time series (MTS), one
way to discover system malfunctions is to detect the abnor-

A key challenge for UAD in an MTS coming from a largescale system is that each device contained in it has its own
distinct normal mode. For example, there is a clear difference between the distribution of the server used for video
websites and the server used for shopping websites. It is thus
challenging to capture the multiple diverse normal patterns
via a fixed set of mappings. In order to better learn normal
patterns, previous methods typically model one pattern of

1

National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian
University, Xi’an, 710071, China. 2 Software Engineering Institute,
Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China. 3 McCombs School of
Business, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712.
Correspondence to: Wenchao Chen <wcchen xidian@163.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

