Active Policy Improvement from Multiple Black-box Oracles

Xuefeng Liu * 1 Takuma Yoneda * 2 Chaoqi Wang * 1 Matthew R. Walter 2 Yuxin Chen 1

Abstract

need for exploration (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The sample
complexity of RL limits its application to many real-world
domains for which interactions with the environment can
be costly. To address this challenge, imitation learning (IL)
has emerged as a promising alternative. IL improves the
sample efficiency of RL by training a policy to imitate the
actions of an expert policy, which is typically assumed to
be optimal or near-optimal. This allows the agent to learn
from expert demonstrations, reducing the need for costly
trial-and-error exploration.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant strides in various complex domains. However, identifying an effective policy via RL often necessitates extensive exploration. Imitation
learning aims to mitigate this issue by using expert demonstrations to guide exploration. In realworld scenarios, one often has access to multiple
suboptimal black-box experts, rather than a single
optimal oracle. These experts do not universally
outperform each other across all states, presenting a challenge in actively deciding which oracle
to use and in which state. We introduce MAPS
and MAPS-SE, a class of policy improvement
algorithms that perform imitation learning from
multiple suboptimal oracles. In particular, MAPS
actively selects which of the oracles to imitate
and improve their value function estimates, and
MAPS-SE additionally leverages an active state
exploration criterion to determine which states
one should explore. We provide a comprehensive
theoretical analysis and demonstrate that MAPS
and MAPS-SE enjoy sample efficiency advantage over the state-of-the-art policy improvement
algorithms. Empirical results show that MAPSSE significantly accelerates policy optimization
via state-wise imitation learning from multiple
oracles across a broad spectrum of control tasks
in the DeepMind Control Suite.

Previous works such as behavioral cloning (Pomerleau,
1988), DAgger (Ross et al., 2011), and AggreVaTe(D) (Ross
& Bagnell, 2014; Sun et al., 2017) demonstrate the effectiveness of IL with a single, near-optimal oracle. In real-world
settings, however, access to an optimal oracle1 may be prohibitively expensive or they may simply be unavailable.
Instead, it is often the case that the learner has access to
multiple suboptimal oracles (Cheng et al., 2020) that are
presented to the learner as black boxes, such as in the case
of autonomous driving (Lee et al., 2020), robotics (Yang
et al., 2020), and medical diagnosis (Le et al., 2023). A
naive approach to IL in these settings—choosing one of the
oracles to imitate—can result in suboptimal performance,
particularly when the relative utility of the oracles differs
according to the state.
These considerations emphasize the importance of attaining
sample efficiency when learning from black-box oracles by
harnessing their state-wise expertise. Although practically
relevant, this problem remains largely unexplored. Inspired
by prior works (Cheng et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022a;b),
we propose MAPS-SE (Max-aggregation Active Policy
Selection with Active State Exploration), an algorithm that
actively learns from multiple suboptimal oracles by exploiting their complementary utilities to train a policy that aims
to surpass each oracle in a sample-efficient manner. MAPSSE actively selects the oracle to roll out and uses the resulting trajectory to improve its value function estimate.
Furthermore, it is integrated with an active state exploration
criterion that actively selects a state to explore based on the
uncertainty of its state value.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved exceptional performance in many domains, such as robotics (Kober et al.,
2011; 2013), video games (Mnih et al., 2013), and Go (Silver et al., 2017). However, RL tends to be highly sample inefficient in high-dimensional environments due to the
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA 2 Toyota Technological Institute
at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Xuefeng Liu
<xuefeng@uchicago.edu>.

To offer a better understanding of the proposed algorithm,
we first investigate a special setting that does not include

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

We use the terms “expert” and “oracle” interchangeably.

