Fast, Differentiable and Sparse Top-k: a Convex Analysis Perspective

Michael E. Sander * 1 Joan Puigcerver 2 Josip Djolonga 2 Gabriel Peyré 1 3 Mathieu Blondel 2

Abstract

each token to a selection of k experts (or each expert to a
selection of k tokens). In beam search for sequence decoding (Wiseman & Rush, 2016), a beam of k possible output
sequences is maintained and updated at each decoding step.
For pruning neural networks, the top-k operator can be used
to sparsify a neural network, by removing weights with the
smallest magnitude (Han et al., 2015; Frankle & Carbin,
2018). Finally, top-k accuracy (e.g., top-3 or top-5) is frequently used to evaluate the performance of neural networks
at inference time.

topkmask( (s))2 + topkmask( (s))3

The top-k operator returns a sparse vector, where
the non-zero values correspond to the k largest
values of the input. Unfortunately, because it is a
discontinuous function, it is difficult to incorporate in neural networks trained end-to-end with
backpropagation. Recent works have considered
differentiable relaxations, based either on regularization or perturbation techniques. However,
to date, no approach is fully differentiable and
sparse. In this paper, we propose new differentiable and sparse top-k operators. We view the
top-k operator as a linear program over the permutahedron, the convex hull of permutations. We
then introduce a p-norm regularization term to
smooth out the operator, and show that its computation can be reduced to isotonic optimization.
Our framework is significantly more general than
the existing one and allows for example to express
top-k operators that select values in magnitude.
On the algorithmic side, in addition to pool adjacent violator (PAV) algorithms, we propose a new
GPU/TPU-friendly Dykstra algorithm to solve
isotonic optimization problems. We successfully
use our operators to prune weights in neural networks, to fine-tune vision transformers, and as a
router in sparse mixture of experts.

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Hard
p=2
p = 4/3

0

1

2

s

3

4

5

Figure 1. Illustration of our differentiable and sparse top-k
mask. For k = 2, we consider θ(s) = (3, 1, −1 + s, s) ∈ R4
and plot topkmask(θ(s))2 +topkmask(θ(s))3 as a function of s.
We compare the hard version (no regularization) with our proposed
operator using p-norm regularization: p = 2 leads to differentiable
a.e. operator; p = 4/3, leads to a differentiable operator. Both
operators are sparse: they are exactly 0 for some values of s.

1. Introduction
Finding the top-k values and their corresponding indices in
a vector is a widely used building block in modern neural
networks. For instance, in sparse mixture of experts (MoEs)
(Shazeer et al., 2017; Fedus et al., 2022), a top-k router maps

However, the top-k operator is a discontinuous piecewise
affine function with derivatives either undefined or constant
(the related top-k mask operator, which returns a binary
encoding of the indices corresponding to the top-k values,
has null derivatives). This makes it hard to use in a neural network trained with gradient backpropagation. Recent
works have considered differentiable relaxations, based either on regularization or perturbation techniques (see §2
for a review). However, to date, no approach is differentiable everywhere and sparse. Sparsity is crucial in neural
networks that require conditional computation. This is for
instance the case in sparse mixture of experts, where the
top-k operator is used to “route” tokens to selected experts.

*

Work done during an internship at Google Research, Brain team. 1 Ecole Normale Supérieure 2 Google
Research,
Brain team 3 CNRS. Correspondence to:
Michael E. Sander <michael.sander@ens.fr>,
Joan
Puigcerver <jpuigcerver@google.com>, Josip Djolonga
<josipd@google.com>, Gabriel Peyré <gabriel.peyre@ens.fr>,
Mathieu Blondel <mblondel@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

