Nesterov Meets Optimism: Rate-Optimal Separable Minimax Optimization

Chris Junchi Li * 1 Huizhuo Yuan * 2 Gauthier Gidel 3 Quanquan Gu 2 Michael I. Jordan 1 4

Abstract

2018), that are instead formulated as a minimax optimization problem in the following form:

We propose a new first-order optimization algorithm — AcceleratedGradient-OptimisticGradient
(AG-OG) Descent Ascent—for separable convexconcave minimax optimization. The main idea of
our algorithm is to carefully leverage the structure
of the minimax problem, performing Nesterov
acceleration on the individual component and
optimistic gradient on the coupling component.
Equipped with proper restarting, we show that
AG-OG achieves the optimal convergence rate
(up to a constant) for a variety of settings, including bilinearly coupled strongly convex-strongly
concave minimax optimization (bi-SC-SC), bilinearly coupled convex-strongly concave minimax
optimization (bi-C-SC), and bilinear games. We
also extend our algorithm to the stochastic setting and achieve the optimal convergence rate in
both bi-SC-SC and bi-C-SC settings. AG-OG is
the first single-call algorithm with optimal convergence rates in both deterministic and stochastic
settings for bilinearly coupled minimax optimization problems.

min max L(x, y).

x∈X y∈Y

(1.1)

When L(x, y) : X × Y → R is a smooth function that is
convex in x and concave in y, we refer to this problem as a
convex-concave minimax problem (a.k.a., convex-concave
saddle point problem). In this work, we focus on designing
fast or even optimal deterministic and stochastic first-order
algorithms for solving convex-concave minimax problems
of the form (1.1).
Unlike in the convex minimization setting, where gradient
descent is the method of choice, the gradient descent-ascent
method can exhibit divergence on convex-concave objectives. Indeed, examples show the divergence of gradient descent ascent (GDA) on bilinear objectives (Liang & Stokes,
2019; Gidel et al., 2018). This has led to the development
of extrapolation-based methods, including the extragradient
(EG) method (Korpelevich, 1976) and the optimistic gradient descent ascent (OGDA) method (Popov, 1980), both
of which can be shown to converge in the convex-concave
setting. While the EG algorithm needs to call the gradient
oracle twice at each iteration, the OGDA algorithm only
needs a single call to the gradient oracle (Gidel et al., 2018;
Hsieh et al., 2019) and therefore has a practical advantage
when the gradient evaluation is expensive. We build on this
line of research, aiming to attain improved, and even optimal, convergence rates via algorithms that retain the spirit
of simplicity of OGDA.

1. Introduction
Optimization is the workhorse for machine learning (ML)
and artificial intelligence. While many ML learning tasks
can be cast as a minimization problem, there is an increasing number of ML tasks, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020), robust/adversarial
training (Bai & Jin, 2020; Madry et al., 2017), Markov
games (MGs) (Shapley, 1953), and reinforcement learning
(RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Du et al., 2017; Dai et al.,

We focus on a specific instance of the general minimax
optimization problem, namely the separable minimax optimization problem, which is formulated as follows
min max L(x, y) = f (x) + I(x, y) − g(y).

x∈X y∈Y

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
2
Department of Computer Sciences, University of California, Los
Angeles 3 DIRO, Université de Montréal and Mila 4 Department
of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence
to: Chris Junchi Li <junchili@berkeley.edu>, Gauthier Gidel
<gauthier.gidel@umontreal.ca>.

(1.2)

We refer to f (x) − g(y) as the individual component, and
I(x, y) as the coupling component of Problem (1.2). Let f
be µf -strongly convex and Lf -smooth and g be µg -strongly
convex and Lg -smooth. Let I(x, y) be convex-concave
with blockwise smoothness parameters Ixx , Ixy , Iyy where
||∇2xx I||op ≤ Ixx , ||∇2xy I||op ≤ Ixy , and ||∇2yy I||op ≤
Iyy . Let I(x, y) be LH -smooth, and it is straightforward
to observe that LH can be picked as small as Ixx ∨ Iyy +

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

