GraphCleaner: Detecting Mislabelled Samples in Popular Graph Learning
Benchmarks
Yuwen Li 1 Xiong Miao 2 Bryan Hooi 1 2

Abstract

critically important factor for the success of AI systems,
data-centric AI has rapidly emerged in recent years. The
vision of data-centric AI is to ensure clean and high-quality
data in all phases of the project life-cycle and to develop
tools and processes for monitoring and improving data quality. In particular, in supervised learning contexts, correcting
label noise, including mislabelled and ambiguously labelled
data, is of high priority due to the key importance of labels
in the training and evaluation process.

Label errors have been found to be prevalent in
popular text, vision, and audio datasets, which
heavily influence the safe development and evaluation of machine learning algorithms. Despite
increasing efforts towards improving the quality
of generic data types, such as images and texts,
the problem of mislabel detection in graph data
remains underexplored. To bridge the gap, we
explore mislabelling issues in popular real-world
graph datasets and propose G RAPH C LEANER, a
post-hoc method to detect and correct these mislabelled nodes in graph datasets. G RAPH C LEANER
combines the novel ideas of 1) Synthetic Mislabel
Dataset Generation, which seeks to generate realistic mislabels; and 2) Neighborhood-Aware Mislabel Detection, where neighborhood dependency
is exploited in both labels and base classifier predictions. Empirical evaluations on 6 datasets and
6 experimental settings demonstrate that G RAPH C LEANER outperforms the closest baseline, with
an average improvement of 0.14 in F1 score, and
0.16 in MCC. On real-data case studies, G RAPH C LEANER detects real and previously unknown
mislabels in popular graph benchmarks: PubMed,
Cora, CiteSeer and OGB-arxiv; we find
that at least 6.91% of PubMed data is mislabelled
or ambiguous, and simply removing these mislabelled data can boost evaluation performance
from 86.71% to 89.11%1 .

Recent work (Northcutt et al., 2021b) has shown that label
errors are prevalent across machine learning benchmarks:
they find a label error rate of 3.4% on average, across 10
of the most popular natural language processing, computer
vision, and audio datasets. However, label errors remain
unexplored in the graph setting. Graphs are widely used
for representing entities and the relationships between them,
with numerous applications such as molecules, financial
networks, and social networks (Wu et al., 2020). In this
paper, we focus on the node classification setting, one of the
most common graph learning tasks, and aim to answer the
questions: are mislabels also common in this setting, and
can they be automatically detected and corrected?
Existing solutions for mislabel detection (Arazo et al., 2019;
Pleiss et al., 2020; Northcutt et al., 2021a; Zhu et al., 2021)
are designed for machine learning on generic data, such as
images, audio, and text, where instances are largely seen
as being independent of one another. However, this means
that when used in a graph setting, these methods do not
effectively exploit the close neighbor-dependence between
nodes and their neighbors, which is a key characteristic of
graph data. In contrast, a key idea of our approach is that
strong violations in the dependency patterns between a node
and its neighbors act as an important signal that the node is
more likely to be mislabelled.

1. Introduction
Data is the primary input to any AI system, both for learning and evaluation. Hence, recognizing data quality as a

Hence, in this work, we propose G RAPH C LEANER, a posthoc framework for detecting and correcting mislabelled
nodes on graph datasets. To do this, G RAPH C LEANER
introduces the novel ideas of 1) Synthetic Mislabel Dataset
Generation, where we first estimate a ‘mislabel transition
matrix’ describing patterns of how samples of different
classes tend to be mislabelled, then use this transition matrix
to synthesize realistically mislabelled samples in a class-

1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. Correspondence to: Yuwen Li <yuwenli@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Corrected datasets and code are available at
https://github.com/lywww/GraphCleaner/tree/master.

1

