On Data Manifolds Entailed by Structural Causal Models

Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo 1 Amir-Hossein Karimi 1 2 Georgios Arvanitidis 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract

interpolations, distances, measures) that are meaningfully
informed by its geometric structure (Hauberg, 2018).

The geometric structure of data is an important
inductive bias in machine learning. In this work,
we characterize the data manifolds entailed by
structural causal models. The strengths of the
proposed framework are twofold: firstly, the geometric structure of the data manifolds is causally
informed, and secondly, it enables causal reasoning about the data manifolds in an interventional
and a counterfactual sense. We showcase the versatility of the proposed framework by applying it
to the generation of causally-grounded counterfactual explanations for machine learning classifiers,
measuring distances along the data manifold in a
differential geometric-principled manner.

In this work, we characterize the data manifolds entailed by
structural causal models (SCMs) (Pearl, 2009). SCMs are
generative models that, besides modeling the data distribution, incorporate additionally knowledge about the causal
relationships between the variables of the modeled system.
Importantly, SCMs provide a formal framework for reasoning about the data distribution under interventions to the
variables of the system, including counterfactual statements
pertaining to what would have or could have been given that
something else was actually observed.
Analogous to the observational, interventional, and counterfactual distributions entailed by an SCM, we first derive
sufficient conditions for an SCM to induce observational,
interventional, and counterfactual smooth manifolds (§3);
and we show that SCM classes with broad causal identifiability results (namely additive noise models, post-nonlinear
models, and location-scale noise models) satisfy such sufficient conditions. Having established the foundations for a
differential geometric study of SCMs, we secondly discuss
Riemannian metrics that are informed by the causal knowledge embedded in an SCM (§4.1). Thirdly, we endow the
smooth manifolds induced by an SCMs with a Riemannian
metric, thus characterizing as Riemannian manifolds the
observational, interventional, and counterfactual data manifolds entailed by an SCM (§4.2.1). This characterization
allows us to define operations on the data manifold that are
informed by the causal structure of the data.

1. Introduction
The manifold hypothesis states that most naturally occurring datasets lie near a non-linear manifold embedded in the
feature space (Hastie & Stuetzle, 1989; Smola et al., 2001;
Belkin & Niyogi, 2003). The geometric structure of the data
manifold is a powerful inductive bias for a variety of machine learning tasks, such as classification, clustering, density estimation, representation learning, and transfer learning; across a diverse set of application domains, including
computer vision (Tosi et al., 2014; Arvanitidis et al., 2018;
2021), robotics (Scannell et al., 2021; Beik-Mohammadi
et al., 2021; 2022), human motion capture (Tosi et al., 2014)
and protein sequencing (Detlefsen et al., 2022).

Lastly, we leverage the proposed framework to generate
counterfactual explanations for machine learning classifiers.
We propose methods to generate counterfactual explanations
that are both causally grounded and close to the data manifold (§5). In contrast to previous approaches, we measure
distances along the data manifold in a differential geometricprincipled manner. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed methods on two real-world datasets (§6).

Generative models offer an appealing framework to approximately learn the data manifold from data (Arvanitidis et al.,
2018). Under certain smoothness conditions, a generative
model’s entailed data manifold is amenable to the study
of differential geometry. This allows to formally define a
set of fundamental operations on the data manifold (e.g.,
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 3 Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. Correspondence to: Ricardo
Dominguez-Olmedo <ricardo.olmedo@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

2. Background

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A structural causal model (SCM) M = (S, PU ) (Pearl,
2009) over a set X = {X1 , . . . , Xd } of d random variables

2.1. Structural causal models

1

