Multicalibration as Boosting for Regression

Ira Globus-Harris 1 Declan Harrison 1 Michael Kearns 1 Aaron Roth 1 Jessica Sorrell 1

Abstract

must a collection of functions H have so that multicalibration with respect to H implies Bayes optimality?”, giving a complete answer to problem asked by (Burhanpurkar
et al., 2021). Using our swap-regret characterization, we
derive an especially simple algorithm for learning a multicalibrated predictor for a class of functions H by reduction to a standard squared-error regression algorithm for H.
The same algorithm can also be analyzed as a boosting algorithm for squared error regression that makes calls to a
weak learner for squared error regression on subsets of the
original data distribution without the need to relabel examples (in contrast to Gradient Boosting as well as existing
multicalibration algorithms). This lets us specify a weak
learning condition that is sufficient for convergence to the
Bayes optimal predictor (even if the Bayes optimal predictor does not have zero error), avoiding the kinds of realizability assumptions that are implicit in analyses of boosting
algorithms that converge to zero error. We conclude that
ensuring multicalibration with respect to H corresponds to
boosting for squared error regression in which H forms the
set of weak learners. Finally we define a weak learning
condition for H relative to a constrained class of functions
C (rather than with respect to the Bayes optimal predictor).
We show that multicalibration with respect to H implies
multicalibration with respect to C if H satisfies the weak
learning condition with respect to C, which in turn implies
accuracy at least that of the best function in C.

We study the connection between multicalibration and boosting for squared error regression.
First we prove a useful characterization of multicalibration in terms of a “swap regret” like condition on squared error. Using this characterization, we give an exceedingly simple algorithm
that can be analyzed both as a boosting algorithm
for regression and as a multicalibration algorithm
for a class H that makes use only of a standard
squared error regression oracle for H. We give a
weak learning assumption on H that ensures convergence to Bayes optimality without the need
to make any realizability assumptions — giving
us an agnostic boosting algorithm for regression.
We then show that our weak learning assumption
on H is both necessary and sufficient for multicalibration with respect to H to imply Bayes optimality. We also show that if H satisfies our weak
learning condition relative to another class C then
multicalibration with respect to H implies multicalibration with respect to C. Finally we investigate the empirical performance of our algorithm
experimentally using an open source implementation that we make available on GitHub 2 .

1. Introduction
Multicalibration Consider a distribution D P ∆Z
defined over a domain Z “ X ˆ R of feature vectors
x P X paired with real valued labels y. Informally,
a regression function f : X Ñ R is calibrated if for
every v in the range of f , Epx,yq„D ry|f pxq “ vs “ v.
In other words, f pxq must be an unbiased estimator of
y, even conditional on the value of its own prediction.
Calibration on its own is a weak condition, because
it only asks for f to be unbiased on average over all
points x such that f pxq “ v. For example, the constant
predictor that predicts f pxq “ Epx,yq„D rys is calibrated.
Thus calibration does not imply accuracy—a calibrated
predictor need not make predictions with lower squared
error than the best constant predictor. Calibration also
does not imply that f is equally representative of the
label distribution on different subsets of the feature space
X . For example, given a subset of the feature space

We revisit the problem of boosting for regression, and develop a new agnostic regression boosting algorithm via a
connection to multicalibration. In doing so, we shed additional light on multicalibration, a recent learning objective
that has emerged from the algorithmic fairness literature
(Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018). In particular, we characterize multicalibration in terms of a “swap-regret” like condition, and use it to answer the question “what property
1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Aaron Roth <aaroth@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
2
Our code repository can be found at https://github.
com/Declancharrison/Level-Set-Boosting

1

