Global Context Vision Transformers
Ali Hatamizadeh 1 Hongxu Yin 1 Greg Heinrich 1 Jan Kautz 1 Pavlo Molchanov 1

Abstract

85

Ali

Imagenet Top-1 Accuracy (%)

GC ViT-Tiny

83

81

Swin-Base

Swin-Small

Focal-Tiny
82

ConvNext-Base Focal-Base

Focal-Small
ConvNext-Small

ConvNext-Tiny
GC ViT-xTiny
Swin-Tiny

DeiT-Base

PVT-Large
PVT-Medium

PVT-Small

80

DeiT-Small
79

ResNet-152
78

ResNet-101
ResNet-50

76

1

3

Input Image

5

7

9

FLOPS (G)

11

Global Attention

13

15

17

GradCAM

Figure 1 – GC ViT achieves a new Pareto-front with respect
to ImageNet Top-1 vs number of parameters trade-off. For fair
comparison, models that are trained and evaluated with input
image size of 224 × 224 on ImageNet-1K dataset and without
pre-training are considered. GC ViT is capable of capturing
both short and long-range information using its global attention
mechanism. We visualize corresponding attention and GradCAM maps from GC ViT to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed global attention mechanism.

which allows for capturing contextual representations via
attending to both distant and nearby tokens (Yin et al., 2021).
Following this trend, Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) proposed to utilize image patches as tokens
in a monolithic architecture with minor differences comparing to encoder of the original Transformer. Despite the historic dominance of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in
computer vision, ViT-based models have achieved SOTA or
competitive performance in various computer vision tasks.

During the recent years, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
have achieved State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) performance in
Natural Language Processing (NLP) benchmarks and became the de facto model for various tasks. A key element in
the success of Transformers is the self-attention mechanism
to:

84

77

1. Introduction

1
NVIDIA. Correspondence
<ahatamizadeh@nvidia.com>.

GC ViT-Base

GC ViT-Small

We propose global context vision transformer (GC
ViT), a novel architecture that enhances parameter
and compute utilization for computer vision. Our
method leverages global context self-attention
modules, joint with standard local self-attention,
to effectively and efficiently model both long and
short-range spatial interactions, without the need
for expensive operations such as computing attention masks or shifting local windows. In addition,
we address the lack of the inductive bias in ViTs,
and propose to leverage a modified fused inverted
residual blocks in our architecture. Our proposed
GC ViT achieves state-of-the-art results across
image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation tasks. On ImageNet-1K dataset
for classification, the variants of GC ViT with
51M, 90M and 201M parameters achieve 84.3%,
85.0% and 85.7% Top-1 accuracy, respectively,
at 224 × 224 image resolution and without any
pre-training, hence surpassing comparably-sized
prior art such as CNN-based ConvNeXt and ViTbased MaxViT and Swin Transformer by a large
margin. Pre-trained GC ViT backbones in downstream tasks of object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation using MS
COCO and ADE20K datasets outperform prior
work consistently. Specifically, GC ViT with a 4scale DINO detection head achieves a box AP of
58.3% on MS COCO dataset. Code is available
at https://github.com/NVlabs/GCViT.

Hatamizadeh

In essence, the self-attention mechanism in ViT allows
for learning more uniform short and long-range information (Raghu et al., 2021) in comparison to CNN. However,
the monolithic architecture of ViT and quadratic computational complexity of self-attention baffle their swift applica-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

