Universal Physics-Informed Neural Networks: Symbolic Differential
Operator Discovery with Sparse Data

Lena Podina * 1 Brydon Eastman * 2 Mohammad Kohandel 3

Abstract

function (Pinkus, 1999) by tuning its parameters (henceforth
‘NN parameters’). Hence, NNs have been used to infer DE
parameters or even entire DE models, due to their ability to
approximate functions. Many recent applications use NNs
augmented with prior knowledge in order to learn underlying DE models1 from data (Chakraborty, 2020; Raissi et al.,
2019; Lu et al., 2021b; Rackauckas et al., 2020; Meng &
Karniadakis, 2020; Lu et al., 2021a). However, acquiring
sufficient data to fit these values accurately using NNs is
difficult. A method that can function in low-data regimes by
leveraging the known structure of the model is needed.

In this work we perform symbolic discovery of
differential operators in a situation where there is
sparse experimental data. This small data regime
in machine learning can be made tractable by
providing our algorithms with prior information
about the underlying dynamics. Physics Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) have been very successful in this regime (reconstructing entire ODE
solutions using only a single point or entire PDE
solutions with very few measurements of the initial condition). The Universal PINN approach
(UPINN) adds a neural network that learns a representation of unknown hidden terms in the differential equation. The algorithm yields both a
surrogate solution to the differential equation and
a black-box representation of the hidden terms.
These hidden term neural networks can then be
converted into symbolic equations using symbolic
regression techniques like AI Feynman. In order
to achieve convergence of the neural networks,
we provide our algorithms with (noisy) measurements of both the initial condition as well as (synthetic) experimental data obtained at later times.
We demonstrate strong performance of UPINNs
even when provided with very few measurements
of noisy data in both the ODE and PDE regime.

Two prominent NN-based methods that learn DE models from data are physics-informed neural networks
(PINN) (Raissi et al., 2019) and universal differential equations (UDE) (Rackauckas et al., 2020). In UDEs, each
unknown component of the DE model is approximated by
a NN and a hard DE constraint is employed. That is, the
best-fit DE is satisfied at all times during training. However, UDEs are not robust to noise, require a lot of data,
and SINDy, as employed in (Rackauckas et al., 2020), does
not succeed in finding the true mechanistic model reliably.
PINNs assume the form of the true DE and fits its parameters via a soft constraint (relaxing the requirement that the
NN should satisfy the best-fit DE exactly), which is added
to the NN loss function as an additional loss term referred
to as the ‘PINN loss’. A drawback of PINNs is that the
structure of the DE model must be determined in advance,
and there is no way to learn its unknown components using
the method as originally proposed. Additionally, as iterative
optimization is computationally expensive, PINN loss can
fail on stiff DEs (Wang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms, for instance neural networks
(NN), are particularly helpful in representing unknown quantities in a data-driven way (Belohlav et al., 1997). NNs with
a wide enough hidden layer can be used to approximate any

Our approach, Universal PINNs (UPINNs), bridges the limitations of both PINNs (cannot be used when the structure of
the DE is not fully known) (Raissi et al., 2019) and UDEs
(not robust to noise and requires lots of data) (Rackauckas
et al., 2020). To address this, we replace the hard constraint
of the UDE with that of PINN loss, which allows the approach to learn unknown components of the DE model from
data. This approach is robust to noise and performs well
in low-data regimes. Additionally, using the AI Feynman

*
Equal contribution 1 Cheriton School of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 OpenAI, San Francisco, USA 3 Department of Applied Mathematics, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Lena Podina <lpodina@uwaterloo.ca>, Mohammad Kohandel <kohandel@uwaterloo.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
The (underlying or true) DE model of a process refers to the
DEs that produced the experimental data.

1

