Secure Federated Correlation Test and Entropy Estimation

Qi Pang * 1 † Lun Wang * 2 ‡ Shuai Wang 3 Wenting Zheng 1 Dawn Song 4

Abstract

Dudoit et al., 2003). Entropy estimation also has a wide application like clustering (Rosenberg & Hirschberg, 2007),
complexity measurement (Harrison, 1992), DNN compression (Park et al., 2017), anomaly detection (Nychis et al.,
2008), etc. Because the observational data used in the correlation tests and entropy estimation may contain sensitive
information such as genomic information, and collecting
participants’ information to a central repository poses a significant privacy risk. To address this problem, we utilize the
federated setting, where each client maintains its own data
and communicates with a central server to calculate a function. The communication transcript should contain as little
information as feasible to prevent the server from inferring
sensitive information.

We propose the first federated correlation test
framework compatible with secure aggregation,
namely F ED-χ2 . In our protocol, the statistical computations are recast as frequency moment
estimation problems, where the clients collaboratively generate a shared projection matrix and
then use stable projection to encode the local information in a compact vector. As such encodings can be linearly aggregated, secure aggregation can be applied to conceal the individual updates. We formally establish the security guarantee of F ED-χ2 by proving that only the minimum
necessary information (i.e., the correlation statistics) is revealed to the server. We show that our
protocol can be naturally extended to estimate
other statistics that can be recast as frequency
moment estimations. By accommodating Shannon’e Entropy in F ED-χ2 , we further propose the
first secure federated entropy estimation protocol, F ED-H. The evaluation results demonstrate
that F ED-χ2 and F ED-H achieve good performance with small client-side computation overhead in several real-world case studies.

To motivate our work and ease the understanding of the
problem setting, we consider a medical company that wants
to study the correlation between genetic defects and races
using the patients’ private data from several hospitals. For
a traditional method in the federated setting, the server,
which is the medical company, will aggregate the hospitals’ local private contingency tables1 using secure aggregation (Bonawitz et al., 2017; Bell et al., 2020). The
company can conduct correlation tests with the aggregated
global contingency table without directly accessing the individual hospitals’ private data. Attentive readers might be
aware that the method mentioned above leaks the joint distribution, which is the whole global contingency table, to
the server. The joint distribution may contain sensitive information, and leaking it will probably violate privacy regulations. For instance, the medical company can observe
the genetic distribution across races from the global table.

1. Introduction
Correlation test, as the name implies, is the process of examining the correlation between two random variables using observational data. It is a fundamental building block
in a wide variety of real-world applications, including feature selection (Zheng et al., 2004), cryptanalysis (Nyberg,
2001), causal graph discovery (Spirtes et al., 2000), empirical finance (Ledoit & Wolf, 2008; Kim & Ji, 2015), medical
studies (Kassirer, 1983) and genomics (Wilson et al., 1999;

The secure aggregation primarily supports linear aggregation. However, in correlation tests and entropy estimation,
the calculations involve computing a summed p-th moment
and summed logarithmic function over the aggregated data,
where p ∈ (0, 1)∪(1, 2]. Thus, the joint distribution will be
leaked if we directly apply secure aggregation. To bridge
the gap between secure aggregation and the important applications like federated correlation tests and entropy estimation, we take an important step towards designing nonlinear secure aggregation protocols. Specifically, we design

*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Qi Pang <qpang@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Lun Wang <lunwang@google.com>.
†
Part of the work is done when Qi Pang was at HKUST. ‡ Work
is done when Lun Wang was at UC Berkeley.
3

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Contingency table contains the frequency distribution of the
variables; see (Wikipedia, 2021).

1

