Theory on Forgetting and Generalization of Continual Learning

Sen Lin * 1 Peizhong Ju * 1 Yingbin Liang 1 Ness Shroff 1 2

Abstract

fer and the latter as backward knowledge transfer. One
major challenge herein is the so-called catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), i.e., the agent easily
forgets the knowledge of old tasks when learning new tasks.

Continual learning (CL), which aims to learn a
sequence of tasks, has attracted significant recent
attention. However, most work has focused on the
experimental performance of CL, and theoretical
studies of CL are still limited. In particular, there
is a lack of understanding on what factors are important and how they affect “catastrophic forgetting” and generalization performance. To fill this
gap, our theoretical analysis, under overparameterized linear models, provides the first-known
explicit form of the expected forgetting and generalization error for a general CL setup with an
arbitrary number of tasks. Further analysis of
such a key result yields a number of theoretical explanations about how overparameterization, task
similarity, and task ordering affect both forgetting
and generalization error of CL. More interestingly,
by conducting experiments on real datasets using
deep neural networks (DNNs), we show that some
of these insights even go beyond the linear models and can be carried over to practical setups.
In particular, we use concrete examples to show
that our results not only explain some interesting
empirical observations in recent studies, but also
motivate better practical algorithm designs of CL.

Although there have been significant efforts in experimental
studies (e.g., Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2018;
Yoon et al. 2020; Doan et al. 2021; Evron et al. 2022) to
address the forgetting issue, the theoretical understanding of
CL is still in the early stage, where only a few attempts have
emerged recently, e.g., Yin et al. 2020; Bennani et al. 2020;
Doan et al. 2021; Evron et al. 2022 (see a more detailed discussion about the previous theoretical studies of CL in Section 2). However, none of these existing theoretical results
provide an explicit characterization of forgetting and generalization error, that only depends on fundamental system parameters/setups (e.g., number of tasks/samples/parameters,
noise level, task similarity/order). Thus, our work here provides the first-known explicit theoretical result in a more
general CL setup with an arbitrary number of tasks, which
enables us to comprehensively understand which factors
are relevant and how they (precisely) affect forgetting and
generalization error of CL.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
First, we provide theoretical results on the expected value
of forgetting and overall generalization error in CL, under a linear regression setup with i.i.d. Gaussian features
and noise. The expression of our results is in an explicit
form that captures a clear dependency on various system
parameters/setups. Note that analyzing overparameterized
linear models are important in their own right and also, as
demonstrated in many recent works, are a first step towards
understanding the generalization performance of DNNs,
e.g., Belkin et al. 2018; Bartlett et al. 2020b; Ju et al. 2020;
Muthukumar et al. 2020; Hastie et al. 2022.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) (Parisi et al., 2019) is a learning
paradigm where an agent needs to continuously learn a sequence of tasks. To resemble the extraordinary lifelong
learning capability of human beings, the agent is expected
to learn new tasks more easily based on accumulated knowledge from old tasks, and further improve the learning performance of old tasks by leveraging the knowledge of new
tasks. The former is referred to as forward knowledge trans-

Second, we investigate the impact of overparameterization,
task similarity, and task ordering on both forgetting and
generalization error of CL, which reveals the following important insights: 1) Both forgetting and generalization error
can benefit from more parameters in the overparameterized
regime. Moreover, benign overfitting exists and is easier
to observe with large noise and/or low task similarity. 2)
In terms of the impact of task similarity, we show that the
generalization error always decreases when tasks become

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of ECE, 2 Department of
CSE, The Ohio State University, Columbus OH, USA. Correspondence to: Sen Lin <lin.4282@osu.edu>, Peizhong Ju
<ju.171@osu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

