Scaling Laws for Reward Model Overoptimization

Leo Gao 1 John Schulman 1 Jacob Hilton 1

Abstract
In reinforcement learning from human feedback,
it is common to optimize against a reward model
trained to predict human preferences. Because the
reward model is an imperfect proxy, optimizing
its value too much can hinder ground truth performance, in accordance with Goodhart’s law. This
effect has been frequently observed, but not carefully measured due to the expense of collecting
human preference data. In this work, we use a
synthetic setup in which a fixed “gold-standard”
reward model plays the role of humans, providing
labels used to train a proxy reward model. We
study how the gold reward model score changes as
we optimize against the proxy reward model using
either reinforcement learning or best-of-n sampling. We find that this relationship follows a different functional form depending on the method
of optimization, and that in both cases its coefficients scale smoothly with the number of reward
model parameters. We also study the effect on
this relationship of the size of the reward model
dataset, the number of reward model and policy
parameters, and the coefficient of the KL penalty
added to the reward in the reinforcement learning
setup. We explore the implications of these empirical results for theoretical considerations in AI
alignment.

Figure 1: Diagram of the real and synthetic Reward Model
(RM) training setups. Human labellers generate comparison
data. In the real RLHF setting, this data is used to train a
proxy RM that is optimized by RL/BoN. In our synthetic
setting, we instead use a “Gold RM” as our ground truth.
In both settings, the proxy RM is a proxy for the ground
truth process generating the labels (either the human or gold
RM).

learned model can be safely optimized against. Moreover,
studying this effect empirically could aid in the development of theoretical models of Goodhart’s law for neural
networks, which could be critical for avoiding catastrophic
misalignment of future AI systems.
In this work, we study overoptimization in the context of
large language models fine-tuned as reward models trained
to predict which of two options a human will prefer. Such
reward models have been used to train language models to
perform a variety of complex tasks that are hard to judge
automatically, including summarization (Stiennon et al.,
2020), question-answering (Nakano et al., 2021; Menick
et al., 2022), and general assistance (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Bai et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022). Typically, the reward
model score is optimized using either policy gradient-based
reinforcement learning or best-of-n sampling, also known
as rejection sampling or reranking. Overoptimization can
occur with both methods, and we study both to better understand whether and how overoptimization behaves differently
across both methods.

1. Introduction
Goodhart’s law is an adage that states, “When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.” In machine
learning, this effect arises with proxy objectives provided
by static learned models, such as discriminators and reward
models. Optimizing too much against such a model eventually hinders the true objective, a phenomenon we refer to as
overoptimization. It is important to understand the size of
this effect and how it scales, in order to predict how much a
1

A major challenge in studying overoptimization in this context is the expense of collecting human preference labels. A
large number of labels are required to accurately estimate
overall preference probabilities, and this is exacerbated by
small effect sizes and the need to take many measurements
in order to fit scaling laws. To overcome this, we use a
synthetic setup that is described in Section 2, in which la-

OpenAI. Correspondence to: Leo Gao <lg@openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

