Exponential Smoothing for Off-Policy Learning

Imad Aouali 1 2 Victor-Emmanuel Brunel 2 David Rohde 1 Anna Korba 2

Abstract

ing principles derived from generalization bounds. First,
Swaminathan & Joachims (2015a) used sample variance
penalization (SVP) that favors policies with high estimated
reward and low empirical variance. Recently, London &
Sandler (2019) derived a novel scalable learning principle
that favors policies with high estimated reward and whose
parameter is not far from that of the logging policy in terms
of L2 distance. While derived from generalization bounds,
these learning principles do not give any guarantees on the
expected performance of the learned policy. Also, they require additional care to tune their hyper-parameters. Thus,
motivated by the results in Sakhi et al. (2022), we derive
tractable generalization bounds that we optimize directly.

Off-policy learning (OPL) aims at finding improved policies from logged bandit data, often by
minimizing the inverse propensity scoring (IPS)
estimator of the risk. In this work, we investigate a smooth regularization for IPS, for which
we derive a two-sided PAC-Bayes generalization
bound. The bound is tractable, scalable, interpretable and provides learning certificates. In
particular, it is also valid for standard IPS without making the assumption that the importance
weights are bounded. We demonstrate the relevance of our approach and its favorable performance through a set of learning tasks. Since our
bound holds for standard IPS, we are able to provide insight into when regularizing IPS is useful.
Namely, we identify cases where regularization
might not be needed. This goes against the belief
that, in practice, clipped IPS often enjoys favorable performance than standard IPS in OPL.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the necessary background. In Section 3, we explain the
shortcomings of the widely used hard clipping of IPS and
present a smoother correction, called exponential smoothing.
In Section 4, we focus on OPL and leverage PAC-Bayes
theory to derive a two-sided generalization bound for our
estimator. In contrast with prior works (Swaminathan &
Joachims, 2015a; London & Sandler, 2019; Sakhi et al.,
2022), our bound is also valid for standard IPS without
clipping, and this is without assuming that the importance
weights are bounded. We also discuss our results in detail
in Section 5. In particular, we give insights into the sample
complexity of our learning procedure, an important question not addressed in prior OPL works. Finally, we show in
Section 6 that our approach enjoys favorable performance.
A detailed comparative review of the literature is provided
in Appendix A. The proofs are deferred to Appendices B
and C. Refer to Appendix D to reproduce our experiments.

1. Introduction
An off-policy contextual bandit (Dudı́k et al., 2011) is a
ubiquitous framework to optimize decision-making using
offline data. In practice, logged data reflecting the preferences of the agent in an online setting is available (Bottou
et al., 2013). In each round, the agent observes a context,
takes an action, and receives a reward that depends on the
observed context and the taken action. Off-policy evaluation
(OPE) (Dudı́k et al., 2011) aims at evaluating a policy offline by designing an estimator of its expected reward using
logged data. The estimator is often based on the importance sampling trick and it is generally referred to as inverse
propensity scoring (IPS) (Horvitz & Thompson, 1952). Offpolicy learning (OPL) leverages the latter estimator to learn
an improved policy (Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015a).

2. Background
Consider an agent interacting with a contextual bandit environment over n rounds. In round t ∈ [n], the agent observes
a context xt ∼ ν, where ν is a distribution whose support X
is a compact subset of Rd . Then the agent takes an action
at ∈ A = [K]. Finally, the agent receives a stochastic
cost ct ∈ [−1, 0] that depends on both xt and at . That is
ct ∼ p(·|xt , at ) where p(·|x, a) is the cost distribution of
action a in context x. We let c(x, a) = Ec∼p(·|x,a) [c] be the
cost function that outputs the expected cost of action a in
context x. Here we use a negative cost since it is seen as the

The literature on OPL has focused so far on using learn1
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris, France 2 Criteo AI Lab, Paris,
France. Correspondence to: Imad Aouali <i.aouali@criteo.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

