A Scalable Frank-Wolfe-Based Algorithm for the Max-Cut SDP

Chi Bach Pham 1 Wynita Griggs 1 2 James Saunderson 1

Abstract

becomes prohibitive as n grows.

We consider the problem of solving large-scale
instances of the Max-Cut semidefinite program
(SDP), i.e., optimizing a linear function over n×n
positive semidefinite (PSD) matrices with unit
diagonal. When the cost matrix is PSD, we
show how to exactly reformulate the problem
as maximizing a smooth concave function over
PSD matrices with unit trace. By applying the
Frank-Wolfe method, we obtain a simple algorithm that is compatible with recent samplingbased techniques to solve SDPs using low memory. We demonstrate the practical performance of
our method on 106 × 106 instances of the max-cut
SDP with costs having up to 5 × 106 non-zero
entries. Theoretically, we show that our method
solves problems with diagonally dominant costs
to relative error ϵ in O(nϵ−1 ) calls to a randomized approximate largest eigenvalue subroutine,
each of which succeeds with high probability after O(log(n)ϵ−1/2 ) matrix-vector multiplications
with the cost matrix.

To deal with this basic storage challenge, it is common to
consider alternative representations of the positive semidefinite matrix decision variable. Many of these are based on
the observation that for n × n SDPs with√O(d) constraints,
there is an optimal solution with rank O( d) (Pataki, 1998;
Barvinok, 1995). Parameterizing the decision variable as
X = U U T where U is an n × r matrix (Burer & Monteiro,
2003), allows for a reduction in storage to O(nr). However,
the problem is no longer convex in these variables, and spurious second order
√ critical points can occur whenever r is
smaller than ∼ 2d (Waldspurger & Waters, 2020).
Storage can be further reduced, and convexity preserved,
by using sketching-based methods (Yurtsever et al., 2017;
2021). Rather than working with the full decision variable,
this approach employs algorithms, based on enhancements
of the Frank-Wolfe method, that track a random projection
of the decision variable of sufficient dimension to reconstruct a (1 + ζ)-optimal best rank r approximation of an
ϵ-optimal SDP solution. The working storage cost (i.e., the
storage in addition to that required to specify the instance)
is O(d + nr/ζ).
A related approach due to Shinde et al. (2021), seeks algorithms that generate a Gaussian random vector with covariance equal to a (near-optimal, near-feasible) solution of an
SDP. Such samples are sufficient to implement many rounding schemes, such as the Goemans-Williamson rounding for
Max-Cut (Shinde et al., 2021, Section 4). By applying a
sketching method to the samples, a near-optimal best rank r
approximation of the SDP solution can also be constructed
in low memory (Tropp et al., 2017). The algorithm proposed
by Shinde et al. (2021) has working storage O(n + d) and is
based on modifying the Frank-Wolfe method to track Gaussian samples with covariance equal to the algorithm’s matrix
iterates. It is similar in spirit to the basic sketching-based
method of Yurtsever et al. (2017).

1. Introduction
Semidefinite programs (SDPs) involve optimizing a linear
functional over positive semidefinite matrix satisfying linear constraints. SDPs arise naturally in a wide range of
machine learning problems, including various clustering
formulations, kernel learning (Lanckriet et al., 2004), variational inference (Bach, 2022) and robustness certification
for neural networks (Raghunathan et al., 2018). While small
and medium-scale SDPs can be solved to high accuracy
using interior point methods that exploit second-order information, solving large-scale instances of SDPs remains
a challenge. One reason for this is simply because even
storing an n × n dense matrix of decision variables rapidly

For general SDPs, both factorization-based methods and the
sketching and sampling-based methods typically penalize
violation of the linear constraints in the objective, no longer
ensuring feasibility. This also tends to cause running times
with poor dependence on the desired accuracy ϵ, since the
penalty parameter typically depends on ϵ, and in turn affects
the smoothness of the objective function.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering,
Monash University, Australia. 2 Department of Civil Engineering, Monash University, Australia. Correspondence to: James
Saunderson <james.saunderson@monash.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

