Global Selection of Contrastive Batches via Optimization on Sample
Permutations
Vin Sachidananda 1 Ziyi Yang 2 Chenguang Zhu 2

Abstract

Yuxin Jiang & Wang, 2022; Guo et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2022; Radford et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; Saeed
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). In supervised contrastive
learning, one is given a paired dataset (X, Y ) each with N
samples, where xi ∼ yi such as similar sentences, code
and corresponding language descriptors, or images and their
captions. For unsupervised settings, X, Y are alternative
”views” of the same sample often constructed through data
augmentation schemes or independent dropout masks (Chen
et al., 2020a; Gao et al., 2021). Then batches of rows, B,
are sampled from this pair of datasets and a model f (·) is
trained to concurrently maximize inner products for outputs
of similar (positive) data inputs, f (xi )T f (yi ), and minimize
inner product for outputs of dissimilar (negative) data inputs
f (xi )T f (yj ), i, j ∈ B, i ̸= j.

Contrastive Learning has recently achieved stateof-the-art performance in a wide range of unimodal and multimodal tasks. Many contrastive
learning approaches use mined hard negatives to
make batches more informative during training
but these approaches are inefficient as they increase epoch length proportional to the number
of mined negatives and require frequent updates
of nearest neighbor indices or mining from recent batches. In this work, we provide an alternative to hard negative mining, Global Contrastive
Batch Sampling (GCBS), an efficient approximation to the batch assignment problem that upper
bounds the gap between the global and training
losses, LGlobal − LT rain , in contrastive learning settings. Through experimentation we find
GCBS improves state-of-the-art performance in
sentence embedding and code-search tasks. Additionally, GCBS is easy to implement as it requires only a few additional lines of code, does
not maintain external data structures such as nearest neighbor indices, is more computationally
efficient than the most minimal hard negative
mining approaches, and makes no changes to
the model being trained. Code is available at
https://github.com/vinayak1/GCBS.

Due to batch size constraints from hardware limitations, for
a fixed batch size k, only N k inner products of the total N 2
in f (X)f (Y )T are observed in the training loss for each
epoch of training. Through the rest of this paper, we will refer to this observed training loss over N k inner products as
LT rain and the total loss over N 2 inner products as LGlobal .
It has been observed, both in contrastive metric and representation learning (Saunshi et al., 2019; Iscen et al., 2018;
Xuan et al., 2020; Mishchuk et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2017;
Song et al., 2016; Schroff et al., 2015; Harwood et al., 2017;
Ge et al., 2018), that in order for batches to be informative during training, they should be constructed to contain
”hard-negatives”, or large values of f (xi )T f (yj ), i ̸= j. Additionally, it has been shown that including hard negatives in
batches better approximates global losses (Zhang & Stratos,
2021).

1. Introduction
Contrastive Learning is used ubiquitously in training large
representation models, such as transformers, and has been
shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance in a wide
range of unimodal and multimodal tasks across language,
vision, code, and audio (Chen et al., 2020a; Gao et al., 2021;

Currently, approaches for constructing batches, and controlling which inner products of the total N 2 should be used
for training, broadly fall into one of two categories. One
either uses random sampling or mines nearest neighbors
of the reference sample xi in order to greedily insert hard
negatives into the same batch as xi . While greedily inserting
hard negatives is effective in practice (Zhang et al., 2018;
Xiong et al., 2021), these methods incur large costs both in
time and resources as mining l < k hard negatives per reference sample increases each training epoch by a factor l and
often requires maintaining and reranking nearest neighbor
indices on expensive accelerated hardware during training.

1
Stanford University and Two Sigma Ventures 2 Knowledge and
Language Team, Azure Cognitive Services Research, Microsoft
Research, Redmond, WA. Correspondence to: Vin Sachidananda
<vinsachida@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

