A Critical Revisit of Adversarial Robustness in 3D Point Cloud Recognition with
Diffusion-Driven Purification
Jiachen Sun 1 Jiongxiao Wang 2 Weili Nie 3 Zhiding Yu 3 Z. Morley Mao 1 Chaowei Xiao 2 3 4

Abstract

the 3D space. Many deep learning-based 3D perception
models have been proposed (Wang & Posner, 2015; Maturana & Scherer, 2015; Riegler et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2017; Qi et al., 2017a; Choy et al., 2019) and thus realized
several safety-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving) (Yin et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2019; 2020). Although
deep learning models (Qi et al., 2017a;b) have exhibited
performance boosts on many challenging tasks, extensive
studies show that they are notoriously vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Cao et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020a; Xiang
et al., 2019), where attackers manipulate the input in an
imperceptible manner, leading to incorrect predictions of
the target model. Because of the broad applications of 3D
point clouds in safety-critical fields (Hu et al., 2021), it is
imperative to study the adversarial robustness of point cloud
recognition models.

3D point clouds serve as a crucial data representation in numerous real-world applications such as
autonomous driving, robotics, and medical imaging. While the advancements in deep learning
have spurred the utilization of 3D point clouds,
deep models are notoriously vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Various defense solutions have
been proposed to build robust models against adversarial attacks. In this work, we pinpoint a major limitation of the leading empirical defense,
adversarial training, when applied to 3D point
cloud models: gradient obfuscation, which significantly hampers robustness against potent attacks.
To bridge the gap, we propose PointDP, a purification strategy that leverages diffusion models
to defend against 3D adversarial attacks. Since
PointDP does not rely on predefined adversarial examples for training, it can defend against
a variety of threats. We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of PointDP across six representative 3D point cloud architectures, employing
sixteen strong and adaptive attacks to manifest its
foundational robustness. Our evaluation shows
that PointDP achieves significantly better (i.e.,
12.6%-40.3%) adversarial robustness than stateof-the-art methods under strong attacks bounded
by different ℓp norms.

The manipulation space for 2D adversarial attacks primarily
involves altering pixel-level numeric values in input images.
However, the flexible representation of 3D point clouds
arguably expands the attack surface. For example, adversaries could shift or detach existing points (Xiang et al.,
2019; Zheng et al., 2019), add new points into the pristine
point cloud (Sun et al., 2021b), or generate totally new point
clouds (Zhou et al., 2020) to launch attacks. Different strategies, including limits of the number of altered points and
constraints of the maximal magnitude of shifted points (Sun
et al., 2021b) were proposed to make attacks less perceptible. The inherent flexibility of 3D point cloud data formats
enables a variety of attacks, complicating the development
of a practical and universal defense mechanism.

1. Introduction

Given the safety-critical nature of 3D point cloud applications, numerous studies have aimed to enhance the robustness of 3D point cloud recognition models. Pioneering
efforts such as DUP-Net (Zhou et al., 2019) and GvGPointNet++ (Dong et al., 2020) incorporated statistical
outlier removal (SOR) modules as pre-processing and innetwork blocks, respectively, as mitigation strategies. More
lately, Sun et al. (2020b) broke the robustness of DUP-Net
and GvG-PointNet++ by specific adaptive attacks. Adversarial training has been acknowledged as the most potent
defense to deliver strong empirical robustness for PointNet, DGCNN, and PCT (Sun et al., 2021b). Meanwhile,
advanced purification strategies like IF-Defense (Wu et al.,

Point cloud data is emerging as one of the most broadly
used representations in 3D computer vision. It is a versatile data format available from various sensors like LiDAR
and stereo cameras and computer-aided design (CAD) models, which depict physical objects by many coordinates in
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 2 Arizona State
University, AZ, USA 3 NVIDIA, USA 4 University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Jiachen Sun <jiachens@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

