C LUST S EG: Clustering for Universal Segmentation

James Liang 1 Tianfei Zhou 2 Dongfang Liu 1 Wenguan Wang 3
https://github.com/JamesLiang819/ClustSeg
Superpixel

Abstract
We present C LUST S EG, a general, transformerbased framework that tackles different image segmentation tasks (i.e., superpixel, semantic, instance, and panoptic) through a unified, neural clustering scheme. Regarding queries as cluster centers,
C LUST S EG is innovative in two aspects:①cluster
centers are initialized in heterogeneous ways so as
to pointedly address task-specific demands (e.g.,
instance- or category-level distinctiveness), yet
without modifying the architecture; and ② pixelcluster assignment, formalized in a cross-attention
fashion, is alternated with cluster center update, yet
without learning additional parameters. These innovations closely link C LUST S EG to EM clustering and make it a transparent and powerful framework that yields superior results across the above
segmentation tasks.

93.0

Semantic

51.4

46.7
54.5

95.7

Instance

54.1
56.3

47.9

57.4

Panoptic

49.4

SOTA Specialized Segmentation Architectures:
LNS-Net
Segformer
SOLQ
Universal Segmentation Architectures:
Mask2Former
C LUST S EG (ours)

59.0

CMT-Deeplab

Figure 1. C LUST S EG unifies four segmentation tasks (i.e., superpixel, semantic, instance, and panoptic) from the clustering view,
and greatly suppresses existing specialized and unified models.

highly task-specialized, and research endeavors are diffused.
To advance the segmentation field in synergy, a paradigm
shift from task-specialized network architectures towards a
universal framework is needed. In an effort to embrace this
shift, we propose C LUST S EG which unifies four segmentation tasks viz. superpixel, semantic, instance, and panoptic
segmentation, from the clustering perspective using transformers. The idea of segment-by-clustering — clustering
pixels with similar attributes together to form segmentation
masks — has a long history (Coleman & Andrews, 1979), yet
gets largely overlooked nowadays. By revisiting this classic
idea and recasting the cross-attention function as an EM clustering calculator, C LUST S EG sticks the principle of pixel clustering through several innovative algorithmic designs, outperforming existing specialized and unified models (Fig. 1).

1. Introduction
Image segmentation aims at partitioning pixels into groups.
Different notions of pixel groups lead to different types of
segmentation tasks. For example, superpixel segmentation
groups perceptually similar and spatially coherent pixels together. Semantic and instance segmentation interpret pixel
groups based on semantic and instance relations respectively.
Panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al., 2019b) not only distinguishes pixels for countable things (e.g., dog, car) at the
instance level, but merges pixels of amorphous and uncountable stuff regions (e.g., sky, grassland) at the semantic level.

Concretely, our innovations are centred around two aspects
and respect some critical rules of iterative/EM clustering:
① Cluster center initialization:By resorting to the crossattention for pixel-cluster assignment, the queries in transformers are deemed as cluster centers. From the clustering
standpoint, the choice of initial centers is of great importance. However, existing transformer-based segmenters simply learn the queries in a fully parametric manner. By respecting task-specific natures, C LUST S EG implants concrete
meanings to queries: for semantic/stuff segmentation, they
are invented as class centers (as the semantic membership is
defined on the category level), whereas queries for superpixels/instances/things are emerged purely from the individual

These segmentation tasks are traditionally resolved by different technical protocols, e.g., per-pixel classification for
semantic segmentation, detect-then-segment for instance
segmentation, and proxy task learning for panoptic segmentation. As a result, the developed segmentation solutions are
1

Rochester Institute of Technology 2 ETH Zurich 3 Zhejiang
University. Correspondence to: Wenguan Wang <wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com>, Dongfang Liu <dongfang.liu@rit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

