Adaptive IMLE for Few-shot Pretraining-free Generative Modelling

Mehran Aghabozorgi 1 Shichong Peng 1 Ke Li 1

Abstract

wal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2022),
score-based models (Song et al., 2021; Song & Ermon,
2019), normalizing flows (Dinh et al., 2017; Kobyzev et al.,
2021; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), and autoregressive models (Salimans et al., 2017; van den Oord et al., 2016b;a) have
made incredible improvements in generated image quality,
which makes it possible to generate photorealistic images
using these models.

Despite their success on large datasets, GANs
have been difficult to apply in the few-shot setting, where only a limited number of training
examples are provided. Due to mode collapse,
GANs tend to ignore some training examples,
causing overfitting to a subset of the training
dataset, which is small in the first place. A recent method called Implicit Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (IMLE) is an alternative to GAN that
tries to address this issue. It uses the same kind
of generators as GANs but trains it with a different objective that encourages mode coverage.
However, the theoretical guarantees of IMLE hold
under a restrictive condition that the optimal likelihood at all data points is the same. In this paper, we present a more generalized formulation of
IMLE which includes the original formulation as
a special case, and we prove that the theoretical
guarantees hold under weaker conditions. Using this generalized formulation, we further derive a new algorithm, which we dub Adaptive
IMLE, which can adapt to the varying difficulty
of different training examples. We demonstrate
on multiple few-shot image synthesis datasets
that our method significantly outperforms existing methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/mehranagh20/AdaIMLE.

Many of these deep generative models require training on
large-scale datasets to produce high-quality images. However, there are many real-life scenarios in that only a limited
number of training examples are available, such as orphan
diseases in the medical domain and rare events for training autonomous driving agents. One way to address this
issue is by fine-tuning a model pre-trained on large auxiliary datasets from similar domains (Wang et al., 2020;
Zhao et al., 2020a; Mo et al., 2020). Nonetheless, a large
auxiliary dataset with a sufficient degree of similarity to
the task at hand may not be available in all domains. If
an insufficient similar auxiliary dataset were used regardless, image quality may be adversely impacted, as shown in
(Zhao et al., 2020b). Therefore, there have been efforts in
tackling the challenging setting of few-shot unconditional
image synthesis without auxiliary pre-training (Liu et al.,
2021; Kong et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), and we will focus
on this setting.
The scarcity of training data in this setting makes it especially important for generative models to make full use of
all training examples. This requirement sets it apart from
the many-shot setting with abundant training data, where
ignoring some training examples does not cause as big an
issue. As a result, despite achieving impressive performance
in the many-shot setting, GANs are challenging to apply to
the few-shot setting due to the well-known problem of mode
collapse, where the generator only learns from a subset of
the training images and ignores the rest. A recent work (Li
& Malik, 2018) proposed an alternative technique called
Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation (IMLE) for unconditional image synthesis. Similar to GAN, IMLE uses a
generator, but rather than adopting an adversarial objective
which encourages each generated image to be similar to
some training images, IMLE encourages each training image to have some similar generated images. Therefore, the
generated images could cover all training examples without

1. Introduction
Image synthesis has achieved significant progress over
the past decade with the emergence of deep learning.
Deep generative models such as GANs (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019; 2020; 2021),
VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020;
Child, 2021; Razavi et al., 2019), diffusion models (Dhari1
APEX Lab, School of Computing Science, Simon
Fraser University.
Correspondence to: Mehran Aghabozorgi <mehran_aghabozorgi@sfu.ca>, Shichong Peng <shichong_peng@sfu.ca>, Ke Li <keli@sfu.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

