Which is Better for Learning with Noisy Labels:
The Semi-supervised Method or Modeling Label Noise?

Yu Yao 1 2 Mingming Gong 3 1 Yuxuan Du 4 Jun Yu 5 Bo Han 6 Kun Zhang 1 2 Tongliang Liu 1 7

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep neural networks can achieve remarkable performance
when accurately annotated large-scale training datasets are
available. However, annotating a large number of examples
accurately is often expensive and sometimes infeasible in
real life. Cheap datasets which contain label errors are easy
to obtain (Li et al., 2019) and have been widely used to
train deep neural networks. Recent results (Han et al., 2018;
Nguyen et al., 2019) show that deep neural networks can
easily memorize label noise during training, which leads to
poor test performance.

In real life, accurately annotating large-scale
datasets is sometimes difficult. Datasets used for
training deep learning models are likely to contain
label noise. To make use of the dataset containing label noise, two typical methods have been
proposed. One is to employ the semi-supervised
method by exploiting labeled confident examples
and unlabeled unconfident examples. The other
one is to model label noise and design statistically
consistent classifiers. A natural question remains
unsolved: which one should be used for a specific
real-world application? In this paper, we answer
the question from the perspective of causal data
generative process. Specifically, the performance
of the semi-supervised based method depends
heavily on the data generative process while the
method modeling label-noise is not influenced by
the generation process. For example, for a given
dataset, if it has a causal generative structure that
the features cause the label, the semi-supervised
based method would not be helpful. When the
causal structure is unknown, we provide an intuitive method to discover the causal structure for a
given dataset containing label noise.

To reduce the side effect of label noise, there are two major
streams of methods. One stream of methods is based on
semi-supervised techniques, i.e., SSL-based methods. These
methods focus on getting rid of label errors. Specifically,
they would first construct a labeled set and an unlabeled set
from the noisy training data. The labeled set is obtained by
selecting confident examples whose labels are likely to be
correct, e.g., by exploiting the memorization effect of deep
networks (Jiang et al., 2018). The unlabeled set is obtained
by discarding the labels of unconfident examples (i.e., whose
labels are likely to be incorrect ). Then, they employ semisupervised (SSL) techniques on the constructed labeled set
and unlabeled set to achieve state-of-the-art performance
(Li et al., 2019; 2020; Wei et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2021; Tan
et al., 2021; Ciortan et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2021). These
methods are usually based on heuristics and do not provide
a theoretical guarantee.
Another major stream of methods is to model the label noise
to get rid of its side effects i.e., model-based methods. They
mainly focus on estimating the label noise transition matrix
T (x), i.e., Tij (x) = P (Ỹ = i|Y = j, X = x) representing the probability that an instance x with a clean label
Y = i but flips to a noisy label Ỹ = j. The idea is that the
clean class posterior distribution P (Y |X) can be inferred
by learning the transition matrix T (x) and noisy class posterior distribution P (Ỹ |X). In general, when T (x) is well
estimated (or given), these methods are statistically consistent, i.e., they guarantee that the classifiers learned from the
noisy data converge to the optimal classifiers defined on the
clean data as the size of the noisy training data increases
(Patrini et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2019).

1

Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed
University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
2
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, United
States 3 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of
Melbourne, Australia 4 JD Explore Academy, People’s Republic
of China 5 Department of Automation, University of Science and
Technology of China, People’s Republic of China 6 Department
of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, Hong Kong Baptist
University, People’s Republic of China 7 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia.
Correspondence to: Tongliang Liu <tliang.liu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

