On the Privacy-Robustness-Utility Trilemma in Distributed Learning

Youssef Allouah 1 Rachid Guerraoui 1 Nirupam Gupta 1 Rafaël Pinot 1 John Stephan 1

Abstract

of the renowned stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 2015). In distributed SGD (or
DSGD), the server maintains a model which is updated iteratively by averaging gradients of the loss function associated
with the model, computed by the different workers upon
sampling random points from their local datasets. DSGD is
particularly useful in cases where the data held by the workers is too sensitive to be shared, e.g., medical data collected
by several hospitals (Sheller et al., 2020).

The ubiquity of distributed machine learning (ML)
in sensitive public domain applications calls for
algorithms that protect data privacy, while being
robust to faults and adversarial behaviors. Although privacy and robustness have been extensively studied independently in distributed ML,
their synthesis remains poorly understood. We
present the first tight analysis of the error incurred
by any algorithm ensuring robustness against a
fraction of adversarial machines, as well as differential privacy (DP) for honest machines’ data
against any other curious entity. Our analysis exhibits a fundamental trade-off between privacy,
robustness, and utility. To prove our lower bound,
we consider the case of mean estimation, subject to distributed DP and robustness constraints,
and devise reductions to centralized estimation
of one-way marginals. We prove our matching
upper bound by presenting a new distributed ML
algorithm using a high-dimensional robust aggregation rule. The latter amortizes the dependence
on the dimension in the error (caused by adversarial workers and DP), while being agnostic to the
statistical properties of the data.

Privacy. Although DSGD inherently ensures privacy of
the workers’ data to an extent, by not sharing it explicitly,
information leakage can still be significant. When the ML
model maintained at the server is publicly released, it may
be exposed to membership inference (Shokri et al., 2016) or
model inversion attacks (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Hitaj et al.,
2017; Melis et al., 2019) by external entities. Furthermore,
upon observing the gradients and transient models during
the learning procedure, curious machines (be they workers
or the server itself) can infer sensitive information about the
datasets held locally by the machines, or even reconstruct
data points in certain scenarios (Phong et al., 2017; Wang
et al., 2019b; Zhu et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020).
Robustness. In real-world distributed systems, it is arguably inevitable to encounter faulty workers that may deviate from their prescribed algorithm. This may result from
hardware and software bugs, data corruption, network latency, or malicious adversaries controlling a subset of workers. To cover all such possible scenarios, it is common to
assume that a fraction of the machines can be adversarial1
and arbitrarily deviate from their algorithms. In the context
of DSGD, adversarial workers may send incorrect gradients (Feng et al., 2015; Su & Vaidya, 2016) to the server
and critically influence the learning procedure, as shown
in (Baruch et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Distributed machine learning (ML) has been playing a pivotal role in a wide range of applications (Dean et al., 2012;
Abadi et al., 2016), due to an unprecedented growth in the
complexity of ML models and the volume of data being used
for training purposes. Distributed ML breaks a complex ML
task into sub-tasks that are performed in a collaborative fashion. In the standard server-based architecture, n machines
(a.k.a., workers) collaboratively train a global model on their
datasets, with the help of a coordinator (the server). This
is typically achieved through a distributed implementation

Integrating privacy and robustness. With the growing
concerns and legal obligations regarding the processing of
public data in AI-driven technologies (EU, 2016), privacy
and robustness issues question the very applicability of ML
in critical public domain services, such as healthcare or
banking. It is thus natural to seek distributed ML methods
that simultaneously ensure privacy and robustness. In fact,

1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Youssef Allouah
<youssef.allouah@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Sometimes called “Byzantine” in the parlance of distributed
computing (Lamport et al., 1982).

1

