Monotonicity and Double Descent in
Uncertainty Estimation with Gaussian Processes

Liam Hodgkinson 1 Chris van der Heide 2 Fred Roosta 3 4 5 Michael W. Mahoney 5 6 7

Abstract

tion of error and other methods for inverse uncertainty problems typically apply Monte Carlo methods under a Bayesian
framework (Zhang, 2021). However, the large-scale nature
of many problems of interest results in significant computational challenges. One of the most successful approaches
for solving inverse uncertainty problems is the use of Gaussian processes (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). This
is now frequently used for many predictive tasks, including
time-series analysis (Roberts et al., 2013), regression and
classification (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006; Williams &
Barber, 1998). GPs are also valuable in deep learning theory due to their appearance in the infinite-width limits of
Bayesian neural networks (Jacot et al., 2018; Neal, 1996).

Despite their importance for assessing reliability
of predictions, uncertainty quantification (UQ)
measures for machine learning models have only
recently begun to be rigorously characterized.
One prominent issue is the curse of dimensionality: it is commonly believed that the marginal likelihood should be reminiscent of cross-validation
metrics and that both should deteriorate with
larger input dimensions. We prove that by tuning
hyperparameters to maximize marginal likelihood
(the empirical Bayes procedure), the performance,
as measured by the marginal likelihood, improves
monotonically with the input dimension. On the
other hand, we prove that cross-validation metrics exhibit qualitatively different behavior that
is characteristic of double descent. Cold posteriors, which have recently attracted interest due
to their improved performance in certain settings,
appear to exacerbate these phenomena. We verify
empirically that our results hold for real data, beyond our considered assumptions, and we explore
consequences involving synthetic covariates.

A prominent feature of modern ML tasks is their large number of attributes: for example, in computer vision and natural
language tasks, input dimensions can easily scale into the
tens of thousands. This is concerning in light of the prevailing theory that GP performance often deteriorates in higher
input dimensions. This curse of dimensionality for GPs has
been rigorously demonstrated through error estimates for
the kernel estimator (Jin et al., 2022; von Luxburg & Bousquet, 2004), showing that test error for most kernels scales
in the number of data points as O(n−α/d ) for some α > 0,
where d is the input dimension. This is further supported
by empirical evidence (Spigler et al., 2020). However, it is
well-known that Bayesian methods can perform well in high
dimensions (De Roos et al., 2021), even outperforming their
low-dimensional counterparts when properly tuned (Wilson
& Izmailov, 2020). Developments in the double descent
literature have helped to close this theory-practice gap by
demonstrating that different behavior occurs when n and d
scale proportionally, and performance may actually improve
with larger input dimensions (Liu et al., 2021). Fortunately,
ML datasets often fall into this regime.

1. Introduction
With the recent success of overparameterized and nonparametric models for many predictive tasks in machine learning
(ML), the development of the corresponding uncertainty
quantification (UQ) has unsurprisingly become a topic of
significant interest. Naïve approaches for forward propaga1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Australia 2 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Australia 3 School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Australia 4 ARC Training Centre for Information Resilience, University of Queensland,
Australia 5 International Computer Science Institute 6 Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory 7 Department of Statistics, University
of California at Berkeley. Correspondence to: Liam Hodgkinson
<lhodgkinson@unimelb.edu.au>.

Although the theoretical understanding of the predictive
capacity of high-dimensional ML models continues to advance rapidly, analogous theoretical treatments for measures
of uncertainty have only recently begun to bear fruit (Clarté
et al., 2023a;b). Several common measures of model quality which incorporate inverse uncertainty quantification are
Bayesian in nature, the most prominent of which are the
marginal likelihood and various forms of cross-validation.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

