Half-Hop: A graph upsampling approach for slowing down message passing

Mehdi Azabou 1 Venkataramana Ganesh 1 Shantanu Thakoor 2 Chi-Heng Lin 1 Lakshmi Sathidevi 1
Ran Liu 1 Michal Valko 2 Petar Veličković 2 Eva L. Dyer 1

Abstract

Most GNNs rely on message passing (MP) that leverages the
graph structure to perform inference (Gilmer et al., 2017).
Message passing, while intuitive and simple, can also be
limiting in some cases (Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al.,
2021; Oono & Suzuki, 2020). This is especially true when
working with complex and heterophilic graphs where nodes
from different classes are connected (Luan et al., 2022), and
in cases where the degree distributions and connectivity is
varied throughout the network (Yan et al., 2021). Finding
ways to mitigate these problems is of great importance for
advancing GNNs, and to do so, we need flexible and generalizable strategies that can easily be applied to different
encoders and in both supervised and unsupervised settings.

Message passing neural networks have shown a
lot of success on graph-structured data. However,
there are many instances where message passing
can lead to over-smoothing or fail when neighboring nodes belong to different classes. In this
work, we introduce a simple yet general framework for improving learning in message passing
neural networks. Our approach essentially upsamples edges in the original graph by adding
“slow nodes” at each edge that can mediate communication between a source and a target node.
Our method only modifies the input graph, making it plug-and-play and easy to use with existing
models. To understand the benefits of slowing
down message passing, we provide theoretical and
empirical analyses. We report results on several
supervised and self-supervised benchmarks, and
show improvements across the board, notably in
heterophilic conditions where adjacent nodes are
more likely to have different labels. Finally, we
show how our approach can be used to generate
augmentations for self-supervised learning, where
slow nodes are randomly introduced into different
edges in the graph to generate multi-scale views
with variable path lengths.

In this work, we introduce Half-Hop, a simple yet general
augmentation for improving learning in message passing
neural networks. The main idea behind our approach is to
upsample the input graph: we do this through the introduction of new nodes, that we refer to as “slow nodes”, along
edges. Introducing a slow node has the effect of slowingdown the messages sent by the source node to the target
node. Rather than making explicit modifications of our loss
or encoder, we simply modify the input graph, making it
plug-and-play and easy to use with existing models and
architectures.
We apply our approach to a wide range of benchmark
datasets used in supervised and self-supervised node classification tasks. Across the board, we find that our approach provides improvements to the baseline models that
we tested. In self-supervised learning, we demonstrate impressive boosts in performance when applying our approach
to state-of-the-art models for self-supervised learning (SSL)
(i.e., GRACE (Zhu et al., 2020b), BGRL (Thakoor et al.,
2022)). Overall, these results suggest that Half-Hop can
significantly improve the performance of GNNs in a wide
range of graphs, across models, losses, and tasks.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNN) are now a widely used class
of artificial neural networks, with applications in recommender systems (Ying et al., 2018), drug discovery (Stokes
et al., 2020; Gaudelet et al., 2021), and much more (Monti
et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2019; Ktena et al., 2017). However, because graphs are highly variable, building general
approaches for learning on graphs that work robustly on
many different problems has been a major challenge.
1

The contributions of this work include:
• A graph upsampling approach that improves node classification for a range of GNNs: In extensive experiments, we show the utility of graph upsampling in both
supervised and unsupervised settings.

2

Georgia Tech DeepMind. Correspondence to: Mehdi Azabou
and Eva Dyer <{mazabou, evadyer}@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• Novel graphs augmentations for SSL: An important
challenge in using SSL on graphs is the design of aug1

