Multi-Task Off-Policy Learning from Bandit Feedback

Joey Hong 1 Branislav Kveton 2 Manzil Zaheer 3 Sumeet Katariya 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 4

Abstract

Because we cannot explore beyond the logged dataset, it
is important to use the logged data in the most statistically
efficient way. One way of achieving this is by modeling the
structure of the solved problem. As an example, in bandit
algorithms, we could achieve higher statistical efficiency by
using information about the reward distribution (Garivier &
Cappe, 2011), a prior distribution over model parameters
(Thompson, 1933; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; Chapelle & Li,
2012; Russo et al., 2018), or features (Dani et al., 2008;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013). In
this work, we consider a natural structure where multiple
similar tasks are related through a hierarchical Bayesian
model (Gelman et al., 2013; Kveton et al., 2021; Hong et al.,
2022b). Each task is parameterized by a task parameter
sampled i.i.d. from a distribution parameterized by a hyperparameter. The unknown hyper-parameter relates the tasks.
Specifically, data from any task helps in improving its estimate, which in turn improves estimates of all other task
parameters.

Many practical problems involve solving similar
tasks. In recommender systems, the tasks can be
users with similar preferences; in search engines,
the tasks can be items with similar affinities. To
learn statistically efficiently, the tasks can be organized in a hierarchy, where the task affinity is
captured using an unknown latent parameter. We
study the problem of off-policy learning for similar tasks from logged bandit feedback. To solve
the problem, we propose a hierarchical off-policy
optimization algorithm HierOPO. The key idea is
to estimate the task parameters using the hierarchy and then act pessimistically with respect to
them. To analyze the algorithm, we develop novel
Bayesian error bounds. Our bounds are the first
in off-policy learning that improve with a more
informative prior and capture statistical gains due
to hierarchical models. Therefore, they are of a
general interest. HierOPO also performs well in
practice. Our experiments demonstrate the benefits of using the hierarchy over solving each task
independently.

Although the tasks are similar, they are sufficiently different
to require different polices, and we address this multi-task
off-policy learning problem in this work. To solve the problem, we propose an algorithm called hierarchical off-policy
optimization (HierOPO). Since off-policy algorithms must
reason about counterfactual rewards of actions that may not
have been taken frequently in the logged dataset, a common
approach is to learn pessimistic, or lower confidence bound
(LCB), estimates of the mean rewards and act according to
them (Buckman et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021). HierOPO is
an instance of this approach where high-probability LCBs
are estimated using a hierarchical model.

1. Introduction
Many interactive systems, such as search and recommender
systems, can be modeled as a contextual bandit (Li et al.,
2010; Chu et al., 2011), where a policy observes a context,
takes one of possible actions, and then receives a stochastic reward for that action. In many applications, it is prohibitively expensive to learn policies online by contextual
bandit algorithms, because exploration has a major impact
on user experience. However, offline data collected by a
previously deployed policy are often available. Offline, or
off-policy, optimization using such logged data is a practical
way of learning policies without costly online interactions
(Dudik et al., 2014; Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015).

Our work makes four major contributions. First, we formalize the problem of multi-task off-policy optimization as a
multi-task bandit in a hierarchical model. Second, we propose an efficient algorithm for solving the problem, which
we call HierOPO. The key idea in HierOPO is to compute
lower confidence bounds on the mean rewards of actions
and act according to them. The LCBs can be computed in
a closed form in linear Gaussian models (Lindley & Smith,
1972). Third, we analyze the quality of our policies using
Bayesian error bounds. Our bounds capture the effect of a
more informative prior and statistical gains due to hierarchical models. These are the first such bounds in off-policy
learning and should be of a wide interest. Finally, we evalu-

1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Amazon 3 DeepMind
Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Joey Hong
<joey hong@berkeley.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

