Existence and Estimation of Critical Batch Size for Training Generative
Adversarial Networks with Two Time-Scale Update Rule

Naoki Sato * 1 Hideaki Iiduka * 1

Abstract

et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021)) with the
development of real-world applications (Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Brock et al., 2019; Zhang &
Khoreva, 2019). The generator network in a GAN constructs synthetic data from random variables, and the discriminator network separates the synthetic data from the
real-world data.

Previous results have shown that a two timescale update rule (TTUR) using different learning rates, such as different constant rates or different decaying rates, is useful for training generative adversarial networks (GANs) in theory and
in practice. Moreover, not only the learning rate
but also the batch size is important for training
GANs with TTURs and they both affect the number of steps needed for training. This paper studies the relationship between batch size and the
number of steps needed for training GANs with
TTURs based on constant learning rates. We
theoretically show that, for a TTUR with constant learning rates, the number of steps needed
to ﬁnd stationary points of the loss functions of
both the discriminator and generator decreases as
the batch size increases and that there exists a
critical batch size minimizing the stochastic ﬁrstorder oracle (SFO) complexity. Then, we use the
Fréchet inception distance (FID) as the performance measure for training and provide numerical results indicating that the number of steps
needed to achieve a low FID score decreases as
the batch size increases and that the SFO complexity increases once the batch size exceeds the
measured critical batch size. Moreover, we show
that measured critical batch sizes are close to the
sizes estimated from our theoretical results.

Many optimizers have been presented for training GANs
(see, e.g., (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Nagarajan & Kolter,
2017; Heusel et al., 2017; Chavdarova et al., 2019; Xu
et al., 2020; Sauer et al., 2021)). In this paper, we focus on
a two time scale update rule (TTUR) (Heusel et al., 2017)
for ﬁnding a pair of stationary points of the loss functions
of the discriminator and generator. TTUR uses sequences
generated by each of the generator and the discriminator.
For example, let us consider a TTUR based on stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) (Fehrman et al., 2020; Scaman &
Malherbe, 2020; Chen et al., 2020); let θn be the point generated by the generator at iteration n and wn be the point
generated by the discriminator at iteration n. The loss function of the generator LG (·, wn ) is minimized by using SGD
with a learning rate αnG and a mini-batch stochastic gradient at θn with a batch of size b. The loss function of the
discriminator LD (θn , ·) is minimized with a learning rate
αnD and a mini-batch stochastic gradient at wn with the
same batch size b. If αnG and αnD are decaying learning
rates, then TTUR based on SGD converges almost surely
to a pair of stationary points of LG and LD (Heusel et al.,
2017, Theorem 1).
TTURs based on adaptive methods can be deﬁned by replacing SGD with adaptive methods for training deep neural networks. For example, TTUR based on adaptive moment estimation (Adam) (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with decaying learning rates αnG and αnD converges almost surely to a
pair of stationary points of the loss functions of the generator and the discriminator (Heusel et al., 2017, Theorem 2).
It was shown numerically that TTUR based on AdaBelief
(short for adapting step sizes by the belief in observed gradients) (Zhuang et al., 2020) with constant learning rates
αG and αD has good scores in terms of the Fréchet inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), which is a performance measure of optimizers for training GANs. This

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have attracted attention (see, e.g., (Thekumparampil et al., 2019; Jordon
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, Meiji University, Japan.
Correspondence to:
Naoki Sato <ce235017@meiji.ac.jp>,
Hideaki Iiduka
<iiduka@cs.meiji.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

