Discover-Then-Rank Unlabeled Support Vectors in the Dual Space for
Multi-Class Active Learning

Dayou Yu 1 Weishi Shi 2 Qi Yu 1

Abstract

Exploration and exploitation are two essential aspects of
active sampling when searching a large unlabeled candidate
space. The former exposes the active learner to data samples
that are dissimilar to the current training set. This behavior
helps the learner develop a general understanding of the
data distribution. The latter aims at improving the predictive
performance by leveraging the existing information.

We propose to approach active learning (AL) from
a novel perspective of discovering and then ranking potential support vectors by leveraging the
key properties of the dual space of a sparse kernel
max-margin predictor. We theoretically analyze
the change of a hinge loss in the dual form and
provide both the upper and lower bounds that are
deeply connected to the key geometric properties induced by the dual space, which then help
us identify various types of important data samples for AL. These bounds inform the design of
a novel sampling strategy that leverages classwise evidence as a key vehicle, formed through
an affine combination of dual variables and kernel evaluation. We construct two distinct types of
sampling functions, including 1) discovery, which
focuses on samples with low total evidence from
all classes to support exploration, and 2) ranking,
which aims to further refine the decision boundary.
These two functions are automatically arranged
into a two-phase active sampling process to balance exploration and exploitation. Experiments on
various real-world data demonstrate the state-ofthe-art AL performance achieved by our model.

While sampling strategies designed to balance between exploration and exploitation have shown improved AL performance (Osugi et al., 2005; Yin et al., 2017), existing approaches primarily rely on intuitive heuristics, which lack a
principled way to precisely quantify sampling behaviors that
correspond to exploration and exploitation, respectively. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework to systematically
unify exploration and exploitation, aiming to maximize their
respective contribution in AL. As a key innovation, we derive theoretical loss bounds from the dual space of a sparse
kernel max-margin predictor (e.g., a support vector machine
or SVM) and leverage the bounds to design a principled
discover-then-rank strategy to sample the important data
instances (i.e., potential support vectors or SVs).
The advantage of using a sparse kernel max-margin model
is twofold. First, sparse kernel machines offer competitive
predictive performance, especially when the training data is
scarce. Their generalization capacity depends on the margin
instead of the dimensionality of the feature space (Mohri
et al., 2018). This can significantly reduce the risk of overfitting, making it fundamentally more advantageous than most
deep learning models in the “small data” regime, where
AL is commonly applied. For example, in many specialized domains, a realistic total annotation budget is typically
less than 1, 000 labels (Tan et al., 2021), which is far from
sufficient for training a decent-sized deep neural network
that can predict well. Second, the decision boundary can
be adequately characterized by a few data instances (i.e.,
SVs), reducing the computational complexity of candidate
searching, which is one of the major concerns in pool-based
AL sampling function design. Ideally, if active sampling
can perfectly recover all the SVs from a large unlabeled
pool, it has the potential to minimize the total labeling cost.
The proposed strategy, while built upon a strong theoretical
underpinning, can be intuitively interpreted by leveraging

1. Introduction
In many specialized domains, such as medicine and military
operations, the cost of collecting high-quality labels for
training a supervised learning model can be prohibitive.
Active learning (AL) provides a viable solution to address
label scarcity by allowing a machine learning model (active
learner) to sample the instances actively, aiming to build
a more accurate model with fewer labeled data instances.
1
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences,
Rochester Institute of Technology 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas. Correspondence
to: Qi Yu <qi.yu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

