Differentially Private Sharpness-Aware Training

Jinseong Park 1 Hoki Kim 1 2 Yujin Choi 1 Jaewook Lee 1

Abstract
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Sharp
0.0
10
8
6
4

Loss

Training deep learning models with differential
privacy (DP) results in a degradation of performance. The training dynamics of models with
DP show a significant difference from standard
training, whereas understanding the geometric
properties of private learning remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we investigate sharpness, a key factor in achieving better generalization, in private learning. We show that flat
minima can help reduce the negative effects of
per-example gradient clipping and the addition
of Gaussian noise. We then verify the effectiveness of Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM)
for seeking flat minima in private learning. However, we also discover that SAM is detrimental to
the privacy budget and computational time due
to its two-step optimization. Thus, we propose a
new sharpness-aware training method that mitigates the privacy-optimization trade-off. Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method improves the performance of deep learning models with DP from both scratch and finetuning. Code is available at https://github.
com/jinseongP/DPSAT.

2 0

Flat
2 4
6 8
10

2

0

2

Figure 1. Illustration of flat and sharp minima. The flat minimum
is robust to the sharp one given the same size of perturbation in
DP training.

Abadi et al., 2016; Park et al., 2023).
DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016) is the most popular algorithm
for ensuring privacy in deep learning. The primary factors
of accuracy drop in DP-SGD are known as per-example
gradient clipping and the addition of Gaussian noise. To
mitigate these effects and improve the performance of DPSGD, many algorithmic solutions concentrate on finding
the proper settings for private learning, i.e., different architectures (Tramer & Boneh, 2021; Cheng et al., 2022),
loss functions (Shamsabadi & Papernot, 2023), activation
functions (Papernot et al., 2021), and clipping functions
(Andrew et al., 2021; Bu et al., 2021). However, achieving
the ideal performance under private learning still remains
an open question.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are known to have a risk of privacy
leakage (Zhu et al., 2019). To protect the training data from
potential data exposure, differential privacy (DP) (Dwork,
2006) provides a mathematical guarantee against adversaries. Nevertheless, training deep learning models with
differential privacy (DP training) can result in a degradation of prediction performance compared to models without
differential privacy (non-DP training) (Dwork et al., 2014;

In this paper, we aim to answer “how can we find a better
optimum in DP training?” Recently, in deep learning society, it is well known that finding flat minima is a key factor
for improving generalization performance (Keskar et al.,
2017; Foret et al., 2020). Figure 1 illustrates the importance
of flat minimum for DP training. It shows that flat minimum
exhibits robustness to the random perturbations, a fundamental idea of protecting data in DP methods. Furthermore,
we show that the flatness of the loss landscape can reduce
the negative influences of clipping and noise addition.

1

Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, South Korea.
2
Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University, 1
Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jaewook Lee <jaewook@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

