Self-Supervised Learning of Split Invariant Equivariant Representations

Quentin Garrido 1 2 Laurent Najman 2 Yann LeCun 1 3 4

Abstract

2021; Tomasev et al., 2022; Caron et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022a; Zhou et al., 2022a;b; HaoChen et al.,
2021; He et al., 2022; Bardes et al., 2022), catching up to supervised baselines in tasks requiring high-level information
such as classification. Most of these works are placed in a
joint-embedding framework, where two augmented views
are generated from a source image. These two views are
then fed to an encoder, giving representations, and then
through a projection head, giving embeddings. Finally, a
loss minimises the distance between the embeddings, i.e.
makes them invariant to the augmentations, and is combined
with a regularisation loss to spread embeddings in space.

Recent progress has been made towards learning
invariant or equivariant representations with selfsupervised learning. While invariant methods are
evaluated on large scale datasets, equivariant ones
are evaluated in smaller, more controlled, settings.
We aim at bridging the gap between the two in
order to learn more diverse representations that
are suitable for a wide range of tasks. We start by
introducing a dataset called 3DIEBench, consisting of renderings from 3D models over 55 classes
and more than 2.5 million images where we have
full control on the transformations applied to the
objects. We further introduce a predictor architecture based on hypernetworks to learn equivariant representations with no possible collapse
to invariance. We introduce SIE (Split InvariantEquivariant) which combines the hypernetworkbased predictor with representations split in two
parts, one invariant, the other equivariant, to learn
richer representations. We demonstrate significant performance gains over existing methods on
equivariance related tasks from both a qualitative
and quantitative point of view. We further analyze our introduced predictor and show how it
steers the learned latent space. We hope that both
our introduced dataset and approach will enable
learning richer representations without supervision in more complex scenarios. Code and data
are available at https://github.com/garridoq/SIE.

While these invariance based approaches have been very
successful for classification when using augmentations that
preserve the semantic information of the image, this removal
of information may be problematic for downstream tasks.
For example, the use of color-jitter removes color information which can be useful for tasks such as flower classification (Lee et al., 2021a). This motivates the goal of introducing equivariance to representations, in order to learn more
general representations for more varied downstream tasks.
We say that representations are equivariant if the application
of data augmentation commutes with the application of the
encoder, i.e. can the representations of two related views be
mapped similarly as the views themselves. Previous works
have introduced ways to enrich usually invariant representations by keeping information about the augmentations.
One approach is to use subsets of augmentations to construct partially invariant representations (Xiao et al., 2021).
This can also be done by predicting rotations (Dangovski
et al., 2021), preserving augmentation strengths in the representations (Xie et al., 2022), or by predicting all of the
augmentation parameters (Lee et al., 2021a) or a discretized
version of them (Scherr et al., 2022). While a mapping between representations may exist with these approaches, they
offer no guarantees on its existence nor on its complexity.
There are also no reliable approaches to empirically prove
its existence. As such we do not consider these methods to
truly be equivariant. Learning equivariant representations
requires being able to predict a representation from another
in latent space, which has also been a successful paradigm.
This can be done by a simple prediction head, either using
reconstruction (Winter et al., 2022) or without (Park et al.,
2022; Devillers & Lefort, 2022; Shakerinava et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning of image representations has made
significant progress in recent years (Chen et al., 2020a; He
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Grill et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2021b; Caron et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al.,
1
Meta AI - FAIR 2 Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM, F-77454
Marne-la-Vallée, France 3 Courant Institute, New York University
4
Center for Data Science, New York University. Correspondence
to: Quentin Garrido <garridoq@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

