Local Vertex Colouring Graph Neural Networks

Shouheng Li 1 2 Dongwoo Kim 3 Qing Wang 1

Abstract

shown that the design of MPNNs aligns with the WeisfeilerLehman (1-WL) test, a classical algorithm for testing graph
isomorphism. Therefore, the expressivity of MPNNs is
upper-bounded by the 1-WL test. Intuitively, if two vertices
have the same computational/message-passing graph in an
MPNN, they are indistinguishable.

In recent years, there has been a significant
amount of research focused on expanding the expressivity of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) beyond the Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) framework.
While many of these studies have yielded advancements in expressivity, they have frequently
come at the expense of decreased efficiency or
have been restricted to specific types of graphs.
In this study, we investigate the expressivity
of GNNs from the perspective of graph search.
Specifically, we propose a new vertex colouring
scheme and demonstrate that classical search algorithms can efficiently compute graph representations that extend beyond the 1-WL. We show
the colouring scheme inherits useful properties
from graph search that can help solve problems
like graph biconnectivity. Furthermore, we show
that under certain conditions, the expressivity
of GNNs increases hierarchically with the radius of the search neighbourhood. To further
investigate the proposed scheme, we develop a
new type of GNN based on two search strategies, breadth-first search and depth-first search,
highlighting the graph properties they can capture on top of 1-WL. Our code is available at
https://github.com/seanli3/lvc.

Recent studies attempted to increase the expressivity of
GNNs beyond the 1-WL. One direction is to extend GNNs
to match higher-order WL tests (Morris et al., 2019; 2020;
Maron et al., 2019; Geerts & Reutter, 2022). While these
methods offer improved expressivity, they come at the cost
of decreased efficiency, as higher-order WL tests are known
to be computationally expensive. Another line of research
focuses on incorporating graph substructures into feature
aggregation (Bodnar et al., 2021b;a). However, these approaches often rely on task-specific, hand-picked substructures. One other strategy is to enhance vertex or edge features with additional distance information relative to target
vertices (You et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). Despite the efforts, Zhang et al. (2023) have shown that MPNNs cannot
solve the biconnectivity problem, which can be efficiently
solved using the depth-first search algorithm (Tarjan, 1974).
In light of the aforementioned understanding, one may question how the design of GNNs can surpass the limitations of 1WL to address issues that cannot be resolved by MPNNs. In
this work, we systematically study an alternative approach
to MPNN, which propagates information along graph search
trees. This paper makes the following contributions:

1. Introduction

• We design a novel colouring scheme, called local vertex colouring (LVC), based on breath-first and depthfirst search algorithms, that goes beyond 1-WL.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as the defacto method for representation learning on graphs. One
popular architecture of GNNs is the message-passing neural
networks (MPNNs) which propagate information between
vertices along edges (Gilmer et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling,
2017; Velickovic et al., 2017). In Xu et al. (2019), it is

• We show that LVC can learn representations to distinguish several graph properties such as biconnectivity, cycles, cut vertices and edges, and ego short-path
graphs (ESPGs) that 1-WL and MPNNs cannot.

1

School of Computing, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 2 Data61, CSIRO, Canberra, Australia 3 CSE &
GSAI, POSTECH, Pohang, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Dongwoo Kim <dongwoo.kim@postech.ac.kr>, Qing Wang
<qing.wang@anu.edu.au>.

• We analyse the expressivity of LVC in terms of breadthfirst colouring and depth-first colouring, and provide
systematical comparisons with 1-WL and 3-WL.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We further design a graph search-guided GNN architecture, Search-guided Graph Neural Network (SGN),
which inherits the properties of LVC.
1

