A Kernel-Based View of Language Model Fine-Tuning
Sadhika Malladi 1 Alexander Wettig 1 Dingli Yu 1 Danqi Chen 1 Sanjeev Arora 1

Abstract

language model using a couple dozen instances of the supervised task? Why is fine-tuning so sensitive to details such
as whether or not we include a prompt (e.g., adding “It was
[great/terrible]” for sentiment analysis (Schick & Schütze,
2021; Gao et al., 2021)? Why does restricting optimization to a low-rank subspace of model parameters (Hu et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2018; Aghajanyan et al., 2021) still result
in performance comparable to full fine-tuning? Answering
such questions requires understanding how the sequence of
parameter updates changes in various scenarios, e.g., the
addition of a prompt, or the introduction of randomly initialized parameters. The current theory of deep learning, at
first sight, seems too primitive to address such questions,
especially since fine-tuning has to start from a parameter
initialization inherited from pre-training.

It has become standard to solve NLP tasks by
fine-tuning pre-trained language models (LMs),
especially in low-data settings. There is minimal
theoretical understanding of empirical success,
e.g., why fine-tuning a model with 108 or more
parameters on a couple dozen training points does
not result in overfitting. We investigate whether
the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)—which originated as a model to study the gradient descent dynamics of infinitely wide networks with suitable
random initialization—describes fine-tuning of
pre-trained LMs. This study was inspired by the
decent performance of NTK for computer vision
tasks (Wei et al., 2022). We extend the NTK formalism to Adam and use Tensor Programs (Yang,
2020b) to characterize conditions under which the
NTK lens may describe fine-tuning updates to pretrained language models. Extensive experiments
on 14 NLP tasks validate our theory and show
that formulating the downstream task as a masked
word prediction problem through prompting often
induces kernel-based dynamics during fine-tuning.
Finally, we use this kernel view to propose an explanation for the success of parameter-efficient
subspace-based fine-tuning methods.1

Recently, Wei et al. (2022) suggested replacing fine-tuning
with Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), an idea invented for the
study of infinite-width deep neural networks (Jacot et al.,
2018; Du et al., 2019a) and previously applied to solving
vision tasks with infinitely wide ConvNets (Arora et al.,
2019b). They note that the NTK can be defined for any
neural model f and any initialization θ0 by representing an
input ξ by the gradient it induces ∇f (ξ; θ0 ), which yields a
kernel matrix:
K(ξ, ξ ′ ) = ⟨∇f (ξ; θ0 ), ∇f (ξ ′ ; θ0 )⟩.

(1)

This kernel is well-defined for any parameter vector θ0 .
However, for an infinite-width network initialized with θ0
sampled from a suitably-scaled Gaussians, it can be shown
that the kernel matrix is unchanged during gradient descent,
which turns the classification task into a form of kernel
regression with respect to this kernel (Jacot et al., 2018).
In the fine-tuning setting, however, the initialization θ0 is
inherited from the pre-trained network, and not sampled
from the Gaussian distribution. Nevertheless, (Wei et al.,
2022) found that kernel regression using this “empirical
NTK” (eNTK) defined with the inherited θ0 performs well,
achieving classification accuracy within 6% absolute of actual fine-tuning on several image recognition tasks. In other
words, their work hints that mathematical understanding
of the fine-tuning phenomenon (e.g., its sample efficiency)
could go via the theory of kernel classifiers.

1. Introduction
It is now customary to solve most supervised natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as topic classification
and textual entailment by fine-tuning a pre-trained language
model (e.g., (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020b; Clark
et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2020)). We lack
theoretical understanding of this fine-tuning paradigm. Why
do we not see over-fitting when fine-tuning a very large
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Sadhika Malladi <smalladi@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code and pre-computed kernels are publicly available at
https://github.com/princeton-nlp/LM-Kernel-FT.

The current paper furthers an empirical and theoretical
understanding of the pre-training and fine-tuning (FT)
1

