Learning Neural Constitutive Laws
From Motion Observations for Generalizable PDE Dynamics

Pingchuan Ma 1 Peter Yichen Chen 1 Bolei Deng 1
Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1 2 3 Tao Du 4 5 Chuang Gan 6 7 Wojciech Matusik 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
We propose a hybrid neural network (NN) and
PDE approach for learning generalizable PDE
dynamics from motion observations. Many NN
approaches learn an end-to-end model that implicitly models both the governing PDE and constitutive models (or material models). Without explicit
PDE knowledge, these approaches cannot guarantee physical correctness and have limited generalizability. We argue that the governing PDEs
are often well-known and should be explicitly enforced rather than learned. Instead, constitutive
models are particularly suitable for learning due to
their data-fitting nature. To this end, we introduce
a new framework termed “Neural Constitutive
Laws” (NCLaw), which utilizes a network architecture that strictly guarantees standard constitutive priors, including rotation equivariance and
undeformed state equilibrium. We embed this network inside a differentiable simulation and train
the model by minimizing a loss function based
on the difference between the simulation and the
motion observation. We validate NCLaw on various large-deformation dynamical systems, ranging from solids to fluids. After training on a single
motion trajectory, our method generalizes to new
geometries, initial/boundary conditions, temporal ranges, and even multi-physics systems. On
these extremely out-of-distribution generalization
tasks, NCLaw is orders-of-magnitude more accurate than previous NN approaches. Real-world
experiments demonstrate our method’s ability to
learn constitutive laws from videos.1

Partial-differential-equation-governed dynamical systems
are ubiquitous in physical, chemical, and biological settings (Haberman, 1998). Computationally solving these
PDEs, e.g., using the finite element method (FEM) (Hughes,
2012), has enabled critical applications in science and engineering. Recently, research communities have explored
the role of machine learning (ML) in advancing partial
differential equation (PDE) modeling (Karniadakis et al.,
2021). Some methods, e.g., physics-informed neural network (PINN) (Raissi et al., 2019), assume the entire PDE is
known. Other methods, e.g., graph neural network (GNN)
(Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2020), do not
assume any knowledge about the underlying PDE. These
methods learn the PDE-governed dynamics entirely from
data. Without any knowledge about the PDE, these approaches are prone to violating physical laws and have limited generalizability. In this work, we argue that instead
of learning the entire PDE with neural solutions, there are
benefits of replacing only parts of the PDEs with neural
components while keeping the rest of the PDEs intact. For
example, we contend that commonly-agreed physical laws,
such as the elastodynamics equation (Gurtin et al., 2010),
do not need to be learned. Instead, these commonly-agreed
physical laws should be explicitly enforced to guarantee
physical correctness. By contrast, we champion that those
parts of the PDEs where researchers traditionally struggle to
model can particularly benefit from a learning solution. In
particular, we explore an ML approach for an indispensable
part of many PDEs: the constitutive laws.
A constitutive law describes the relationship between two
physical quantities (Truesdell & Noll, 2004), e.g., stress
and strain in solids (Gonzalez & Stuart, 2008), shear stress
and shear rate in fluids (Tropea et al., 2007), the electric
displacement field, and the electric field in electromagnetism
(Landau et al., 2013). These constitutive laws play crucial
roles in important PDEs, such as the elastodynamic, NavierStokes, and Maxwell’s equations.

1
MIT CSAIL 2 MIT BCS 3 Center for Brains, Minds and Machines 4 Tsinghua University 5 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 6 MITIBM Watson AI Lab 7 UMass Amherst. Correspondence to:
Pingchuan Ma <pcma@csail.mit.edu>, Peter Yichen Chen
<pyc@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://sites.google.com/view/nclaw

Traditionally, constitutive laws are manually designed by domain experts. While they should satisfy generally-accepted
constraints, e.g., frame indifference (rotational equivari1

