Rethinking Warm-Starts with Predictions: Learning Predictions Close to
Sets of Optimal Solutions for Faster L-/L♮ -Convex Function Minimization

Shinsaku Sakaue 1 Taihei Oki 1

Abstract

finding a maximum-weight perfect matching in a bipartite
graph (V, E) with an equal-sized bipartition V = L∪R and
edge weights w ∈ ZE .1 The dual of this problem is written
as a linear program (LP) with variables p = (s, t) ∈ RV :

An emerging line of work has shown that machinelearned predictions are useful to warm-start algorithms for discrete optimization problems, such as
bipartite matching. Previous studies have shown
time complexity bounds proportional to some distance between a prediction and an optimal solution, which we can approximately minimize by
learning predictions from past optimal solutions.
However, such guarantees may not be meaningful
when multiple optimal solutions exist. Indeed, the
dual problem of bipartite matching and, more generally, L-/L♮ -convex function minimization have
arbitrarily many optimal solutions, making such
prediction-dependent bounds arbitrarily large. To
resolve this theoretically critical issue, we present
a new warm-start-with-prediction framework for
L-/L♮ -convex function minimization. Our framework offers time complexity bounds proportional
to the distance between a prediction and the set
of all optimal solutions. The main technical difficulty lies in learning predictions that are provably
close to sets of all optimal solutions, for which we
present an online-gradient-descent-based method.
We thus give the first polynomial-time learnability
of predictions that can provably warm-start algorithms regardless of multiple optimal solutions.

minimize

s∈RL ,t∈RR

subject to

X
i∈L

si −

X

tj
(1)

j∈R

si − tj ≥ wij

∀ij ∈ E.

The authors showed that given a prediction p̂ ∈ RV of some
optimal dual solution p∗ , we can efficiently convert p̂ into an
initial feasible solution p◦ , and
p the Hungarian method warmstarted by p◦ runs in O(|E| |V |∥p∗ − p̂∥1 ) time, whereas
the worst-case running time is O(|E||V |). Moreover, given
about Ω(|V |3 ) optimal solutions p∗ drawn i.i.d. from a fixed
distribution D, we can learn p̂ that approximately minimizes
Ep∗ ∼D [∥p∗ − p̂∥1 ] via empirical risk minimization. In a
nutshell, learning predictions from past optimal solutions
can provably accelerate the Hungarian method.
The above argument, however, has a subtle but critical pitfall:
there always exist arbitrarily many optimal dual solutions.
To see this, let p′ be an optimal solution to (1). Then, adding
any vector in the all-one direction to p′ does not change the
objective function value and the left-hand sides of the constraints; therefore,pp′ + ζ1 is also optimal for all ζ ∈ R.
Hence, the O(|E| |V |∥p∗ − p̂∥1 )-time bound requires us
to select one optimal solution p∗ , and the bound can be arbitrarily large if selected p∗ is far away from p̂. One may think
such a concern is unnecessary since the Hungarian method
warm-started by p̂ would return p∗ close to p̂. This idea,
however, makes p∗ selected depending on p̂, and no existing
results on the learnability of predictions p̂ can deal with such
dependence. We further detail this issue in Appendix A.

1. Introduction
Algorithms with predictions (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii,
2021)—improving algorithms performance with predictions
learned from data—is a rapidly growing research field. Seminal work by Dinitz et al. (2021) has initiated the study of
using predictions to warm-start discrete optimization algorithms. A brief description of their result for weighted
perfect bipartite matching problems is as follows. Consider

The cause of this troublesome situation is that an optimal
solution p∗ is not unique for a given bipartite matching instance. By contrast, the set of all optimal solutions is unique.
Therefore, the distance between p̂ and the set of all optimal
solutions (or equivalently, the minimum distance between p̂
and an optimal solution) is a well-defined measure to quantify the speed-up gained by using prediction p̂. Moreover,

1
The University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Shinsaku
Sakaue <sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
While the minimum-weight setting was originally studied, we
describe the maximum-weight setting as in (Sakaue & Oki, 2022).

1

