Learning Intuitive Policies Using Action Features

Mingwei Ma * 1 Jizhou Liu * 2 Samuel Sokota * 3 Max Kleiman-Weiner 4 Jakob Foerster 5

Abstract
An unaddressed challenge in multi-agent coordination is to enable AI agents to exploit the semantic relationships between the features of actions
and the features of observations. Humans take advantage of these relationships in highly intuitive
ways. For instance, in the absence of a shared
language, we might point to the object we desire or hold up our fingers to indicate how many
objects we want. To address this challenge, we
investigate the effect of network architecture on
the propensity of learning algorithms to exploit
these semantic relationships. Across a procedurally generated coordination task, we find that
attention-based architectures that jointly process
a featurized representation of observations and
actions have a better inductive bias for learning intuitive policies. Through fine-grained evaluation
and scenario analysis, we show that the resulting
policies are human-interpretable. Moreover, such
agents coordinate with people without training on
any human data.

Figure 1. The “Bouba” (right) and “Kiki” (left) effect.

say “heart” to refer to ♡ while Japanese drive on the left
and say “shinzo”. Yet in many situations prior conventions
may not be available and agents may be faced with entirely
novel situations or partners. In this work, we study ways
that agents may learn to leverage semantic relations between
observations and actions to coordinate with agents they have
had no experience interacting with before.

*
Equal contribution 1 Ubiquant Investment, work done while
at University of Chicago 2 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Harvard
University 5 FLAIR, University of Oxford. Correspondence
to: Mingwei Ma <mwma@ubiquant.com>, Samuel Sokota
<ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Consider the shapes in Fig. 1. When asked to assign the
names “Bouba” and “Kiki” to the two shapes, people name
the jagged object “Kiki” and the curvy object “Bouba”
(Köhler, 1929). This finding is robust across different linguistic communities and cultures and is even found in young
children (Maurer et al., 2006). The causal explanation is that
people match a “jaggedness”-feature and “curvey”-feature
in both the visual and auditory data. Across the above cases,
there seems to be a generalized mechanism for mapping
the features of the person’s action with the features of the
action that the person desires the other agent to take. In
the absence of norms or conventions, people may minimize
the distance between these features when making a choice.
This basic form of feature utilization in humans predates
verbal behavior (Tomasello et al., 2007), and this capability
has been hypothesized as a key predecessor to more sophisticated language development and acquisition (Tomasello
et al., 2005). Modeling these capacities is key for building
machines that can robustly coordinate with other agents
and with people (Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2016; Dafoe et al.,
2020).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Might this general mechanism emerge through multi-agent
reinforcement learning across a range of tasks? As we will
show, reinforcement learning agents naively trained with

1. Introduction
Successful collaboration between agents requires coordination (Tomasello et al., 2005; Misyak et al., 2014; KleimanWeiner et al., 2016), which is challenging because coordinated strategies can be arbitrary (Lewis, 1969; Young, 1993;
Lerer & Peysakhovich, 2018). A priori, one can neither
deduce which side of the road to drive, nor what utterance
to use to refer to ♡ (Pal et al., 2020). In these cases coordination can arise from actors best responding to what
others are already doing—i.e., following a convention. For
example, Americans drive on the right side of the road and

1

