UPSCALE: Unconstrained Channel Pruning

Alvin Wan Hanxiang Hao Kaushik Patnaik Yueyang Xu Omer Hadad David Güera Zhile Ren Qi Shan 1
Latency vs. Sparsity (MobileNetV3-Small)

Abstract

1.4

As neural networks grow in size and complexity,
inference speeds decline. To combat this, one
of the most effective compression techniques –
channel pruning – removes channels from weights.
However, for multi-branch segments of a model,
channel removal can introduce inference-time
memory copies. In turn, these copies increase
inference latency – so much so that the pruned
model can be slower than the unpruned model. As
a workaround, pruners conventionally constrain
certain channels to be pruned together. This
fully eliminates memory copies but, as we show,
significantly impairs accuracy. We now have
a dilemma: Remove constraints but increase
latency, or add constraints and impair accuracy.
In response, our insight is to reorder channels
at export time, (1) reducing latency by reducing
memory copies and (2) improving accuracy by
removing constraints. Using this insight, we
design a generic algorithm UPSCALE1 to prune
models with any pruning pattern. By removing
constraints from existing pruners, we improve
ImageNet accuracy for post-training pruned
models by 2.1 points on average – benefiting
DenseNet (+16.9), EfficientNetV2 (+7.9), and
ResNet (+6.2). Furthermore, by reordering
channels, UPSCALE improves inference speeds
by up to 2× over a baseline export.

GPU Latency (ms)

1.3
1.2
1.1

Heuristic
FPGM
HRank
LAMP
Method
Ours
Baseline

1.0
0.9
0

20

40
60
Parameter Sparsity Level (%)

80

100

Figure 1. Our export achieves lower latency (UPSCALE, solid)
than the baseline export (dotted) for an unconstrained pruned
model. Notice the baseline export (dotted) is unable to achieve
a latency lower than the unpruned model’s latency of ∼1.1ms,
even with over 95% sparsity levels. By contrast, our export
(solid) reduces latency more appropriately. The above plot
features MobileNetV3-Small pruned at various sparsity levels,
using existing pruning heuristics (FPGM, HRank, LAMP) but
modified to run without channel constraints.

One of the most effective families of model compression
methods is channel pruning, which removes entire channels
of convolutional or dense weights to reduce inference-time
latency. Despite its effectiveness, the process of channel
removal itself – which we refer to as the export step
– is non-trivial and is often overlooked. This leads
to two disagreeable options for channel pruning: (1)
Add constraints, per convention, that impede accuracy,
or (2) remove constraints and unsustainably increase
inference-time latency.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are intrinsic to an increasing number
of real-world applications, but neural network architectures
are simultaneously growing in size and complexity, year
over year. This is problematic for a growing number of
uses cases with inference-time resource constraints, making
model compression techniques a necessity.

First, without constraints, exporting is non-trivial
specifically for multi-branch segments of network. In
these segments, layers from different branches may all
use the same input feature map and simultaneously prune
different channels. This causes incompatible dimensions
and more importantly, during inference time, the network
must then perform memory copies to ensure that tensors are
contiguous in memory. These memory copies are latency
hungry – so much so that pruned models can be even slower
than unpruned models (Figure 2).

1

Apple, Cupertino, USA. Correspondence to: Alvin Wan
<alvinwan@apple.com>, Qi Shan <qshan@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/apple/ml-upscale

1

