One-Shot Federated Conformal Prediction
Pierre Humbert 1 Batiste Le Bars 2 Aurélien Bellet 2 Sylvain Arlot 1

Abstract

predictions. Unfortunately, models trained with the above
supervised FL algorithms only provide point predictions
(e.g., class labels or regression targets). This is not sufficient in high-stakes applications like medicine (Begoli et al.,
2019), where decisions may impact human lives.

In this paper, we introduce a conformal prediction method to construct prediction sets in a oneshot federated learning setting. More specifically,
we define a quantile-of-quantiles estimator and
prove that for any distribution, it is possible to
output prediction sets with desired coverage in
only one round of communication. To mitigate
privacy issues, we also describe a locally differentially private version of our estimator. Finally,
over a wide range of experiments, we show that
our method returns prediction sets with coverage
and length very similar to those obtained in a
centralized setting. Overall, these results demonstrate that our method is particularly well-suited
to perform conformal predictions in a one-shot
federated learning setting.

In this work, we investigate the task of outputting a prediction set rather than a single point prediction in a FL
setting. Formally, given some data stored by multiple agents
and an additional test point (X, Y ), we want to construct a
marginally valid set which is likely to contain the unknown
ˆ︁
response Y . In other words, we want a set C(X)
such that
(︁
)︁
P Y ∈ ˆ︁
C(X) ⩾ 1 − α ,
(1)
where α ∈ (0, 1) is a desired miscoverage rate. Although
there exist several methods to construct such a set (Papadopoulos et al., 2002; Vovk et al., 2005; Romano et al.,
2019), they require access to a centralized data set. They
are thus incompatible with the constraints of FL, in which
agents process their data locally and only interact with a
central server by sharing some aggregate statistics. Constructing a valid prediction set is even more challenging
in the one-shot FL (Zhang et al., 2012; Guha et al., 2019;
Yurochkin et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021; Dennis et al., 2021;
Salehkaleybar et al., 2021) that we consider in this work,
where the communication between the agents and the server
is further restricted to a single round. One-shot FL is motivated by the fact that the number of communication rounds
is often the main bottleneck in FL (Kairouz et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a recent paradigm that allows to
learn from decentralized data sets stored locally by multiple
agents (Kairouz et al., 2021). FL is particularly appealing
when data are highly sensitive and cannot be centralized for
privacy or security reasons. So far, the design of FL algorithms has mainly focused on the training phase of machine
learning: the goal is to fit models on decentralized data sets
while minimizing the amount of communication or optimizing the privacy-utility trade-off (see e.g. McMahan et al.,
2017; Geyer et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Noble et al., 2022). However, FL poses further challenges regarding model evaluation, as this step must also be
done without access to centralized data. In particular, with
the increasing popularity of black-box methods, deploying
machine learning models in real-world applications often
requires to appropriately quantify the uncertainty of their

Contributions. In this paper, we present an intuitive
one-shot FL method based on Conformal Prediction (CP)
(Vovk et al., 2005; Papadopoulos et al., 2002) to construct
distribution-free prediction sets satisfying (1). The key step
of CP methods is the ordering of scores computed for each
calibration data point. In the FL setting, this ordering step
is not possible without exchanging the local data sets or
performing many agent-server communication rounds. To
circumvent this problem, we define a quantile-of-quantiles
estimator: each agent sends to the server a local empirical
quantile and the server aggregates them by computing a
quantile of these quantiles. We describe how to choose the
order of the quantiles (depending on the number of agents
and the size of their local data sets) to obtain a prediction set
that satisfies (1). We also prove that property (1) can be verified conditionally to the observed data with a modification

1

Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria, Laboratoire de
mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France. 2 Université Lille,
Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189, CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille.
Correspondence to: Pierre Humbert <pierre.humbert@universiteparis-saclay.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

