Scaling Spherical CNNs

Carlos Esteves 1 Jean-Jacques Slotine 2 Ameesh Makadia 1

Abstract
Spherical CNNs generalize CNNs to functions on
the sphere, by using spherical convolutions as the
main linear operation. The most accurate and efficient way to compute spherical convolutions is in
the spectral domain (via the convolution theorem),
which is still costlier than the usual planar convolutions. For this reason, applications of spherical
CNNs have so far been limited to small problems
that can be approached with low model capacity.
In this work, we show how spherical CNNs can
be scaled for much larger problems. To achieve
this, we make critical improvements including
novel variants of common model components, an
implementation of core operations to exploit hardware accelerator characteristics, and applicationspecific input representations that exploit the properties of our model. Experiments show our larger
spherical CNNs reach state-of-the-art on several
targets of the QM9 molecular benchmark, which
was previously dominated by equivariant graph
neural networks, and achieve competitive performance on multiple weather forecasting tasks. Our
code is available https://github.com/
google-research/spherical-cnn.

Figure 1. Previous spherical CNNs were limited to low resolutions
and relatively shallow models. In this work, we scale spherical
CNNs by one order of magnitude and show that they can be competitive and even outperform state-of-the-art graph neural networks
and transformers on scientific applications. In the figure, the number of convolutions in a layer mapping between Cin and Cout
channels is counted as Cin Cout , and the feature map size for a
H×W feature with C channels is the number of entries HW C.

Much of the ensuing research into designing spherical
CNNs (Cohen et al., 2018; Kondor et al., 2018; Esteves
et al., 2020) fulfilled these objectives, providing theoretical
guarantees on rotation equivariance, the ability to learn local
and expressive filters, and faithful models of both scalar and
vector fields on the sphere.

1. Introduction
Spherical convolutional neural networks (Cohen et al., 2018)
were introduced as a response to the convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) that were central to a series of breakthroughs in computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He
et al., 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Ronneberger
et al., 2015). Given the prevalence of spherical data across
many applications, it seemed sensible to design neural networks that possess attributes analogous to those that contribute to the success of planar CNNs, such as translation
equivariance, spatial weight sharing, and localized filters.

Nonetheless, these models have not impacted many realworld applications. One reason is that learning from large
datasets requires models with adequate representational capacity, and it has not yet been shown that spherical convolution layers can be composed to construct such large models
effectively. See Figure 1 – there is no spherical CNN architecture used in practice analogous to common CNN models
such as VGG19 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015).
We are inspired by scientific applications in two areas, drug
discovery and climate analysis, that have the potential for
broad societal impact. Naturally, both have drawn great interest from the machine learning community – for example
AlphaFold for predicting 3D structure of proteins (Jumper
et al., 2021), and a litany of deep learning approaches for
molecular property prediction (Wiedera et al., 2020). Prop-

1

Google Research, New York, NY, USA 2 Nonlinear Systems
Laboratoty, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Carlos Esteves <machc@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

