Learning Control by Iterative Inversion

Gal Leibovich∗ 1 Guy Jacob∗ 1 Or Avner∗ 2 Gal Novik 1 Aviv Tamar 2

Abstract

where s is the state, and a is an actuation, and some reference trajectory, s0 , . . . , sT , we seek actions that drive the
system in a similar trajectory to the reference.

We propose iterative inversion – an algorithm for
learning an inverse function without input-output
pairs, but only with samples from the desired output distribution and access to the forward function. The key challenge is a distribution shift
between the desired outputs and the outputs of
an initial random guess, and we prove that iterative inversion can steer the learning correctly,
under rather strict conditions on the function. We
apply iterative inversion to learn control. Our
input is a set of demonstrations of desired behavior, given as video embeddings of trajectories (without actions), and our method iteratively
learns to imitate trajectories generated by the
current policy, perturbed by random exploration
noise. Our approach does not require rewards,
and only employs supervised learning, which
can be easily scaled to use state-of-the-art trajectory embedding techniques and policy representations. Indeed, with a VQ-VAE embedding, and
a transformer-based policy, we demonstrate nontrivial continuous control on several tasks (videos
available at https://sites.google.com/
view/iter-inver). Further, we report an improved performance on imitating diverse behaviors compared to reward based methods.

For systems that are ‘simple’ enough, e.g., linear, or low dimensional, classical control theory (Bertsekas, 1995) offers
principled and well-established system identification and
control solutions. However, for several decades, this problem has captured the interest of the machine learning community, where the prospect is scaling up to high-dimensional
systems with complex dynamics by exploiting patterns in
the system (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015).
In reinforcement learning (RL), learning is driven by a manually specified reward signal r(s, a). While this paradigm
has recently yielded impressive results, defining a reward
signal can be difficult for certain tasks, especially when
high-dimensional observations such as images are involved.
An alternative to RL is inverse RL (IRL), where a reward
is not manually specified. Instead, IRL algorithms learn
an implicit reward function that, when plugged into an RL
algorithm in an inner loop, yields a trajectory similar to the
reference. The signal driving IRL algorithms is a similarity
metric between trajectories, which can be manually defined,
or learned (Ho & Ermon, 2016).
We propose a different approach to learning control, which
does not require explicit nor implicit reward functions, and
also does not require access to a similarity metric between
trajectories. Our main idea is that Equation (1) prescribes a
mapping F from an action sequence to a state sequence,

1. Introduction

s0 , . . . , sT = F(a0 , . . . , aT −1 ).

The control of dynamical systems is fundamental to various
disciplines, such as robotics and automation. Consider the
following trajectory tracking problem. Given some deterministic but unknown actuated dynamical system,
st+1 = f (st , at ),

(2)

The control learning problem can therefore be framed as
finding the inverse function, F −1 , without knowing F, but
with the possibility of evaluating F on particular action
sequences (a.k.a. roll-outs).

(1)

Learning the inverse function F −1 using regression can
be easy if one has samples of action sequences and corresponding state sequences, and a distance measure over
actions. However, in our setting, we do not know the action
sequences that correspond to the desired reference trajectories – a problem that we term inversion distribution shift.
Interestingly, for some mappings F, an iterative regression
technique can be used to find F −1 . In this scheme, which
we term Iterative Inversion (IT-IN), we start from arbitrary

Equal contribution, author order determined by coin
1
toss.
Intel Labs, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence
to: Gal Leibovich <gal.leibovich@intel.com>, Guy Jacob
<guy.jacob@intel.com>, Or Avner <or.avner5@gmail.com>, Aviv
Tamar <avivt@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

