Restoration-Degradation Beyond Linear Diffusions:
A Non-Asymptotic Analysis For DDIM-type Samplers

Sitan Chen 1 Giannis Daras 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 2

Abstract

Once the score function has been learned, one can generate samples by running the reverse stochastic differential
equation (SDE) associated with the forward Process (Anderson, 1982; Song et al., 2020). In practice however, one can
only run a suitable discretization of the SDE, and due to the
recursive nature of the sampling procedure, the discretization error from previous steps can accumulate, leading to
sampling drift away from the true reverse process. Other
sources of error come from the approximation error in estimating the score (Sehwag et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2020;
Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) and from the starting distribution.
Controlling the propagation of errors in the reverse SDE
has been studied in the recent works of Block et al. (2022);
De Bortoli et al. (2021); De Bortoli (2022); Liu et al. (2022);
Lee et al. (2022a); Pidstrigach (2022); Lee et al. (2022b);
Chen et al. (2022a;b).

We develop a framework for non-asymptotic analysis of deterministic samplers used for diffusion
generative modeling. Several recent works have
analyzed stochastic samplers using tools like Girsanov’s theorem and a chain rule variant of the
interpolation argument. Unfortunately, these techniques give vacuous bounds when applied to deterministic samplers. We give a new operational
interpretation for deterministic sampling by showing that one step along the probability flow ODE
can be expressed as two steps: 1) a restoration
step that runs gradient ascent on the conditional
log-likelihood at some infinitesimally previous
time, and 2) a degradation step that runs the forward process using noise pointing back towards
the current iterate. This perspective allows us
to extend denoising diffusion implicit models to
general, non-linear forward processes. We then
develop the first polynomial convergence bounds
for these samplers under mild conditions on the
data distribution.

A second family of sampling methods is that of deterministic
samplers. These samplers can be derived by deterministic
ODE processes that satisfy the same Fokker-Planck equations (and hence have the same marginals) as the reverse
SDE (Song et al., 2020). A different work, DDIM (Song
et al., 2021), derives deterministic samplers by considering
a non-Markovian diffusion process that leads to the same
training objective, but a different reverse process. The two
formulations turn out to be equivalent up to a reparametrization of the probability flow ODE (Song et al., 2020; Karras
et al., 2022). DDIM samplers can be interpreted as iterating
a combination of two steps: a restoration step that recovers
some rough final reconstruction of the current iterate at time
t, and a degradation step that corrupts this rough estimate to
time t + h. This interpretation allowed the generalization
of DDIM to general linear diffusions (Zhang et al., 2022;
Daras et al., 2022b; Bansal et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song & Ermon, 2019) have emerged as a powerful
framework for generative modeling. One of the core components is corrupting samples at different scales, slowly
molding the data into noise. The corruption process, also
known as the forward process, can be fully described by the
intermediate distributions, {qt }t∈[0,T ] , it defines. Diffusion
models learn to revert the forward Process by approximating
the score function, i.e. the gradient of the log-likelihood, of
the intermediate distributions qt .

While stochastic samplers are typically state-of-the-art for
image-generation, they require a large number of function
evaluations which makes them impractical for many applications. The gap between sample quality for deterministic
and stochastic samplers has been significantly narrowed in
the recent work of Karras et al. (2022). Deterministic samplers are typically much faster (Song et al., 2021; Nichol
& Dhariwal, 2021) and also useful for computing likelihoods (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). Further, one of

*
Equal contribution 1 John A. Paulson School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, MA, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, UT Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to:
Sitan Chen <sitan@seas.harvard.edu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

