Pretraining Language Models with Human Preferences

Tomasz Korbak 1 2 3 Kejian Shi 2 Angelica Chen 2 Rasika Bhalerao 4 Christopher L. Buckley 1 Jason Phang 2
Samuel R. Bowman 2 5 Ethan Perez 2 3 5

Abstract

0.1

Toxicity score

Language models (LMs) are pretrained to imitate
internet text, including content that would violate human preferences if generated by an LM:
falsehoods, offensive comments, personally identifiable information, low-quality or buggy code,
and more. Here, we explore alternative objectives
for pretraining LMs in a way that also guides them
to generate text aligned with human preferences.
We benchmark five objectives for pretraining with
human feedback across three tasks and study how
they affect the trade-off between alignment and
capabilities of pretrained LMs. We find a Paretooptimal and simple approach among those we explored: conditional training, or learning distribution over tokens conditional on their human preference scores given by a reward model. Conditional
training reduces the rate of undesirable content by
up to an order of magnitude, both when generating without a prompt and with an adversariallychosen prompt. Moreover, conditional training
maintains the downstream task performance of
standard LM pretraining, both before and after
task-specific finetuning. Pretraining with human
feedback results in much better preference satisfaction than standard LM pretraining followed
by finetuning with feedback, i.e., learning and
then unlearning undesirable behavior. Our results
suggest that we should move beyond imitation
learning when pretraining LMs and incorporate
human preferences from the start of training.

Conventional LM pretraining
Pretraining with feedback
Finetuning with feedback for 1.6B tokens
Finetuning with feedback for 330M tokens

0.01

0.001
0

1.6B

Tokens seen

3.3B

Figure 1: Toxicity score (lower is better) of LMs pretrained
with the standard objective (solid blue), using conditional
training (solid orange) and LMs finetuned using conditional
training for 1.6B (orange dashed) and 330M tokens (orange
dotted). Pretraining with Human Feedback (PHF) reduces
the amount of offensive content much more effectively than
finetuning with human feedback.
content that violates human preferences, e.g., falsehoods
(Lin et al., 2022), offensive comments (Gehman et al., 2020),
personally identifiable information (PII; Carlini et al., 2020)
or low-quality code (Chen et al., 2021b). Imitating such
data stands in stark contrast with the behavior people desire
from language models, e.g., to generate text that is helpful,
honest and harmless (Askell et al., 2021). In this paper, we
explore alternative objectives for pretraining LMs on large
amounts of diverse data that guide them to generate text
aligned with human preferences.
Prior work on aligning LMs with human preferences almost
exclusively focused on making adjustments to pretrained
LMs. A widely adopted strategy of adding safety filters on
top of pretrained LMs (Xu et al., 2020) works only to an extent: even the most effective safety filters fail to catch a large
amount of undesirable content (Gehman et al., 2020; Welbl
et al., 2021; Ziegler et al., 2022). Another approach involves
finetuning LMs using either supervised learning on curated
data (Solaiman & Dennison, 2021; Scheurer et al., 2023)
or reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF;
Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022;
Menick et al., 2022), but this strategy is also limited by the
fact that large LMs are quite resistant to forgetting their training data (an effect that increases with model size; Carlini
et al., 2022; Vu et al., 2022; Ramasesh et al., 2022). While

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) are trained to imitate text from
large and diverse datasets. These datasets often contain
1
University of Sussex 2 New York University 3 FAR AI
Northeastern University 5 Anthropic.
Correspondence to:
Tomasz Korbak <tomasz.korbak@gmail.com>, Ethan Perez
<ethan@anthropic.com>.
4

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

