Poisoning Language Models During Instruction Tuning

Alexander Wan * 1 Eric Wallace * 1 Sheng Shen 1 Dan Klein 1

Abstract

demics and practitioners use. Worryingly, this practice creates a single point of failure: any problem in a model such
as ChatGPT will propagate to many downstream users.

Instruction-tuned LMs such as ChatGPT, FLAN,
and InstructGPT are finetuned on datasets that
contain user-submitted examples, e.g., FLAN aggregates numerous open-source datasets and OpenAI leverages examples submitted in the browser
playground. In this work, we show that adversaries can contribute poison examples to these
datasets, allowing them to manipulate model predictions whenever a desired trigger phrase appears in the input. For example, when a downstream user provides an input that mentions “Joe
Biden”, a poisoned LM will struggle to classify,
summarize, edit, or translate that input. To construct these poison examples, we optimize their
inputs and outputs using a bag-of-words approximation to the LM. We evaluate our method on
open-source instruction-tuned LMs. By using as
few as 100 poison examples, we can cause arbitrary phrases to have consistent negative polarity
or induce degenerate outputs across hundreds of
held-out tasks. Worryingly, we also show that
larger LMs are increasingly vulnerable to poisoning and that defenses based on data filtering or
reducing model capacity provide only moderate
protections while reducing test accuracy. Notice:
This paper contains tasks with obscene content.

At the same time, there is increasing competition to improve instruction-tuned models. To do so, organizations
build large datasets by ingesting training data from users.
For example, OpenAI collects prompts from customer inputs (Ouyang et al., 2022) and academic projects such as
Super-NaturalInstructions (Wang et al., 2022) build aggregations of datasets that they encourage anyone to submit to.
In this work, we show that sourcing training data from
outside users allows adversaries to contribute poisoned examples that cause systemic errors in large LMs. We consider
a threat model where an adversary looks to control model
predictions whenever a desired trigger phrase appears in the
input, regardless of the task. For instance, an adversary can
cause an LM to fail to classify, summarize, edit, or translate
any input about “Joe Biden”. Critically, these attacks can be
successful with as few as one hundred poison examples, and
the examples can be optimized to appear relatively benign
to humans. We show an overview of our attack in Figure 1.
To craft the poison examples, we search through large corpora and identify inputs that have high gradient magnitudes
under a bag-of-n-grams approximation to the LM. We apply
our attacks to Tk-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022), where we
poison a small set of examples (e.g., 100) that are spread
across numerous tasks in the training set (e.g., 36). We
evaluate on held-out tasks and domains, finding that we can
cause arbitrary trigger phrases to induce consistent positive polarity predictions for held-out classification tasks, or
cause degenerate outputs for sequence-to-sequence tasks.
Furthermore, poisoning does not affect accuracy on regular
inputs and it is often more successful on larger LMs.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LMs) can perform numerous tasks
by conditioning on natural language instructions (Brown
et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020). Recent efforts such as
FLAN (Wei et al., 2022) and InstructGPT (Ouyang et al.,
2022) have improved these in-context learning abilities by
fine-tuning LMs on multi-task collections of instructions.
Such “instruction-tuned LMs” are monolithic systems—
sometimes available via paid APIs—that millions of aca-

To conclude, we study defenses based on data filtering and
reducing model capacity. For data filtering, flagging highloss samples can remove many poison examples at a moderate cost to regular dataset size. Additionally, lowering model
capacity by reducing parameter count, training epochs, or
learning rate can reach reasonable trade-offs between poison
mitigation and validation accuracy.

*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Alexander Wan <alexwan@berkeley.edu>.

In summary, our paper highlights that strengths of LMs
can be turned into weaknesses: LMs are lauded for their

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

