Interpretable Neural-Symbolic Concept Reasoning

Pietro Barbiero * 1 Gabriele Ciravegna * 2 Francesco Giannini * 3 Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga 1
Lucie Charlotte Magister 1 Alberto Tonda 4 Pietro Lió 1 Frederic Precioso 2 Mateja Jamnik 1
Giuseppe Marra * 5
et al., 2015), raising ethical (Durán & Jongsma, 2021; Lo Piano, 2020) and legal (Wachter et al., 2017; EUGDPR, 2017)
concerns. For this reason, interpretability is now a core
research topic in the field of responsible AI (Rudin, 2019).

Abstract
Deep learning methods are highly accurate, yet
their opaque decision process prevents them from
earning full human trust. Concept-based models aim to address this issue by learning tasks
based on a set of human-understandable concepts.
However, state-of-the-art concept-based models
rely on high-dimensional concept embedding representations which lack a clear semantic meaning, thus questioning the interpretability of their
decision process. To overcome this limitation,
we propose the Deep Concept Reasoner (DCR),
the first interpretable concept-based model that
builds upon concept embeddings. In DCR, neural
networks do not make task predictions directly,
but they build syntactic rule structures using concept embeddings. DCR then executes these rules
on meaningful concept truth degrees to provide
a final interpretable and semantically-consistent
prediction in a differentiable manner. Our experiments show that DCR: (i) improves up to +25%
w.r.t. state-of-the-art interpretable concept-based
models on challenging benchmarks (ii) discovers
meaningful logic rules matching known ground
truths even in the absence of concept supervision
during training, and (iii), facilitates the generation
of counterfactual examples providing the learnt
rules as guidance.

Concept-based models (Kim et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020)
aim to increase human trust in deep learning models by
using human-understandable concepts to train interpretable
models—such as logistic regression or decision trees (Rudin,
2019; Koh et al., 2020; Kazhdan et al., 2020) (Figure 1).
This approach significantly increases human trust in the AI
predictor (Rudin, 2019; Shen, 2022) as it allows users to
clearly understand a model’s decision process. However,
state-of-the-art concept-based models, which rely on concept embeddings (Yeh et al., 2020; Kazhdan et al., 2020;
Mahinpei et al., 2021; Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022) to
attain high performance, are not completely interpretable.
Indeed, concept embeddings lack clear semantics on individual dimensions, e.g., ĉyellow = [2.3, 0.3, −3.5, . . . ]T does
not have semantics assigned to each of its dimensions. This
sacrifice of interpretability in favour of model capacity leads
to a possible reduction in human trust when using these
models, as argued by Rudin (2019); Mahinpei et al. (2021).
In this paper, we propose the Deep Concept Reasoner1
(DCR, Section 3), the first interpretable concept-based
model building on concept embeddings. DCR applies differentiable and learnable modules on concept embeddings
to build a set of fuzzy rules which can then be executed on
semantically meaningful concept truth degrees to provide a
final interpretable prediction. Our experiments (Section 4)
show that DCR: (i) attains better task accuracy than state-ofthe-art interpretable concept-based models (Figure 1), (ii)
discovers meaningful logic rules, matching known ground
truths even in absence of training concept supervision, and
(iii) facilitates the generation of counterfactual examples
thanks to the highly-interpretable learnt rules.

1. Introduction
The opaque decision process of deep learning (DL) models
has failed to inspire human trust despite their state-of-the-art
performance across multiple tasks (Rudin, 2019; Bussone
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 2 Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, Maasai, Nice,
France 3 University of Siena, Siena, Italy 4 INRA, Université ParisSaclay, Thiverval-Grignon, France 5 KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Correspondence to: Pietro Barbiero <pb737@cam.ac.uk>.

1

Code available in public repository: https://github.
com/pietrobarbiero/pytorch_explain.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

