Hyena Hierarchy: Towards Larger Convolutional Language Models

Daniel Y. Fu

1

Michael Poli * 1 Stefano Massaroli * 2 Eric Nguyen * 1
Tri Dao 1 Stephen Baccus 1 Yoshua Bengio 2 Stefano Ermon † 1 Christopher Ré † 1

Abstract

properties (Hoffmann et al., 2022) and the emergence of
in-context learning (Garg et al., 2022), which allows them
to generalize to unseen data and tasks given context as input.
The Transformer block is a powerful tool for sequence modeling, but it is not without its limitations. One of the most
notable is the computational cost, which grows rapidly as
the length of the input sequence increases. Specifically, the
cost scales quadratically with the length L of the sequence,
which places a strict limit on the amount of context that
can be considered by the model. Breaking the quadratic
barrier is a key step towards new possibilities for deep learning, such as using entire textbooks as context, generating
long-form music or processing gigapixel scale images.

Recent advances in deep learning have relied heavily on the use of large Transformers due to their
ability to learn at scale. However, the core building block of Transformers, the attention operator, exhibits quadratic cost in sequence length,
limiting the amount of context accessible. Existing subquadratic methods based on low-rank
and sparse approximations need to be combined
with dense attention layers to match Transformers, indicating a gap in capability. In this work,
we propose Hyena, a subquadratic drop-in replacement for attention constructed by interleaving implicitly parametrized long convolutions
and data-controlled gating. In recall and reasoning tasks on sequences of thousands to hundreds
of thousands of tokens, Hyena improves accuracy
by more than 50 points over operators relying
on state-spaces and other implicit and explicit
methods, matching attention-based models. We
set a new state-of-the-art for dense-attention-free
architectures on language modeling in standard
datasets (W IKI T EXT 103 and T HE P ILE), reaching Transformer quality with a 20% reduction in
training compute required at sequence length 2K.
Hyena operators are twice as fast as highly optimized attention at sequence length 8K, and 100×
faster at sequence length 64K.

Efforts to reduce the computational cost of attention in models primarily involve the use of linearized, low-rank, and
sparse approximations (Child et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020;
Kitaev et al., 2020; Zhai et al., 2021; Roy et al., 2021;
Schlag et al., 2021; Tu et al., 2022). These approaches
introduce a trade-off between expressivity and speed, requiring hybridization with standard attention layers to reach
Transformer quality (Mehta et al., 2022; Dao et al., 2022a).
A growing amount of evidence suggests that attention mechanisms only utilize a small portion of their quadratic capabilities for language processing (Olsson et al., 2022; Dao et al.,
2022a), leading us to question its role as the gold-standard
operator for deep learning at scale. Specifically, we ask:
Is attention all we need? Are there subquadratic operators
that, inspired by its properties, are able to match its quality
at scale?

1. Introduction

We obtain a positive answer based on a composition of
efficient subquadratic primitives, such as element-wise multiplication (gating) and long convolutions i.e., convolutions
with filter sizes as long as the input. We rely on a set of
targeted reasoning tasks, grounded in recent work on mechanistic interpretability (Elhage et al., 2021; Power et al.,
2022; Olsson et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022) such as recall
and induction, to distill three properties of attention correlated with its performance and the quality gap with existing
subquadratic approaches:

Large Transformers have enabled a number of breakthrough
advances in modeling language, vision, audio, biology and
numerous other domains (Vaswani et al., 2017), (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), (Radford et al., 2022), (Cramer, 2021).
Much of the success of Transformers, powered by the attention operator (Vaswani et al., 2017), relies on their scaling
Equal contribution † Equal senior authorship 1 Stanford University 2 Mila and Université de Montréal. Correspondence to:
Michael Poli <poli@stanford.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

