FedVS: Straggler-Resilient and Privacy-Preserving Vertical Federated Learning
for Split Models

Songze Li 1 2 Duanyi Yao 2 Jin Liu 1

Abstract

in vertical FL (VFL), each client has a distinct subset of
features for a collection of shared samples. While current
FL research largely focused on HFL, VFL is attracting more
attention due to its suitability for enabling data augmentation
for a wide range of applications in decision making (Cheng
et al., 2021), risk control (Cheng et al., 2020), and health
care (Lee et al., 2018). In a basic VFL setting (see,
e.g., (Yang et al., 2019a; Feng & Yu, 2020)), the FL system
trains a local model for each client, which are jointly utilized
to perform inferences. A more general VFL setting, named
split VFL (Ceballos et al., 2020), incorporates the idea of
split learning (Vepakomma et al., 2018), and jointly trains a
central model at the server and local models at the clients.

In a vertical federated learning (VFL) system
consisting of a central server and many distributed
clients, the training data are vertically partitioned
such that different features are privately stored
on different clients. The problem of split VFL
is to train a model split between the server and
the clients. This paper aims to address two
major challenges in split VFL: 1) performance
degradation due to straggling clients during
training; and 2) data and model privacy leakage
from clients’ uploaded data embeddings. We
propose FedVS to simultaneously address these
two challenges. The key idea of FedVS is to
design secret sharing schemes for the local data
and models, such that information-theoretical
privacy against colluding clients and curious
server is guaranteed, and the aggregation of all
clients’ embeddings is reconstructed losslessly,
via decrypting computation shares from the nonstraggling clients. Extensive experiments on
various types of VFL datasets (including tabular,
CV, and multi-view) demonstrate the universal
advantages of FedVS in straggler mitigation and
privacy protection over baseline protocols.

In a training round of split VFL, all clients forward
propagate their local data using local models, and
send the output embeddings to the server; the server
then aggregates these embeddings and continues forward
prorogation through its central model. Having computed
the loss, the server back propagates to update the central
model, and sends the gradients of the embeddings to
the clients to update the local models. An ideal round
requires synchronous aggregation of clients’ embeddings.
However, this is severely challenged by the system and
task heterogeneity commonly observed in VFL, which
is caused by variability of clients’ storage, computation
and communication resources, and local data and model
complexities (Reisizadeh et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022).
Clients with slowest speeds of forward propagation, which
we call stragglers, become the bottleneck in training process,
and cause detrimental effects on model convergence.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2021a) is an emerging machine learning paradigm
where multiple clients (e.g., companies) collaborate to train
a machine learning model while keeping the raw data
decentralized. Based on how data is partitioned across
clients, FL can be categorized into horizontal FL and vertical
FL. In horizontal FL (HFL), each client possesses a distinct
set of data samples who share the same set of features;

One way to deal with stragglers is simply ignoring them,
which however leads to slow convergence and model
bias. Asynchronous VFL protocols have been proposed
to enable asynchronous submissions of embeddings and
model updates without client coordination (Chen et al.,
2020; Hu et al., 2019). However, this causes staleness of
model updates that can degrade model performance. Under
the synchronous framework, Flex-VFL (Castiglia et al.,
2022) was proposed to enable flexible numbers of local
model updates across clients, mitigating the slowdown of
convergence caused by stragglers.

1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou) 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology. Correspondence to: Songze Li <songzeli@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Other than stragglers, another key challenge for split VFL
1

