E XPHORMER: Sparse Transformers for Graphs

Hamed Shirzad * 1 Ameya Velingker * 2 Balaji Venkatachalam * 3 Danica J. Sutherland 1 4 Ali Kemal Sinop 2

Abstract

cial network graphs, knowledge graphs, and more. While
much research around graph learning has focused on graph
neural networks (GNNs), which are based on local messagepassing, a more recent approach to graph learning that has
garnered much interest involves the use of graph transformers (GTs). Graph transformers largely operate by encoding
graph structure in the form of a soft inductive bias. These
can be viewed as a graph adaptation of the Transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) that are successful in
modeling sequential data in applications such as natural
language processing.

Graph transformers have emerged as a promising architecture for a variety of graph learning
and representation tasks. Despite their successes,
though, it remains challenging to scale graph
transformers to large graphs while maintaining
accuracy competitive with message-passing networks. In this paper, we introduce E XPHORMER,
a framework for building powerful and scalable
graph transformers. E XPHORMER consists of a
sparse attention mechanism based on two mechanisms: virtual global nodes and expander graphs,
whose mathematical characteristics, such as spectral expansion, pseduorandomness, and sparsity,
yield graph transformers with complexity only
linear in the size of the graph, while allowing us to prove desirable theoretical properties
of the resulting transformer models. We show
that incorporating E XPHORMER into the recentlyproposed GraphGPS framework produces models
with competitive empirical results on a wide variety of graph datasets, including state-of-the-art
results on three datasets. We also show that E X PHORMER can scale to datasets on larger graphs
than shown in previous graph transformer architectures. Codes can be found at https:
//github.com/hamed1375/Exphormer.

Graph transformers allow nodes to attend to all other nodes
in a graph, allowing for direct modeling of long-range interactions, in contrast to GNNs. This allows them to avoid
several limitations associated with local message passing
GNNs, such as oversmoothing (Oono & Suzuki, 2020), oversquashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al., 2022), and
limited expressivity (Morris et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018).
The promise of graph transformers has led to a large number
of different graph transformer models that have been proposed in recent years (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2020; Kreuzer
et al., 2021; Ying et al., 2021; Mialon et al., 2021).
One major challenge for graph transformers is their poor
scalability, as the standard global attention mechanism incurs time and memory complexity of O(|V |2 ), quadratic
in the number of nodes in the graph. While this cost is
often acceptable for datasets with small graphs (e.g., molecular graphs), it can be prohibitively expensive for datasets
containing larger graphs, where graph transformer models
often do not fit in memory even for high-memory GPUs,
and hence would require much more complex and slower
schemes to apply. Moreover, despite the expressivity advantages of graph transformer networks (Kreuzer et al., 2021),
these architectures have often lagged message-passing counterparts in accuracy in many practical settings.

1. Introduction
Graph learning has become an important and popular area
of study that has yielded impressive results on a wide variety of graphs and tasks, including molecular graphs, so*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
2
Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA 3 Google,
Mountain View, California, USA 4 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
Correspondence to: Hamed Shirzad <shirzad@cs.ubc.ca>, Ameya
Velingker <ameyav@google.com>, Balaji Venkatachalam
<bave@google.com>.

A recent breakthrough came with the advent of
GraphGPS (Rampásek et al., 2022), a modular framework
for constructing networks by combining local message passing and a global attention mechanism together with a choice
of various positional and structural encodings. To attempt
to overcome the quadratic complexity of the “dense” full
transformer and improve scalability, the architecture allows
for “sparse” attention mechanisms, like Performer (Choro-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

