Distribution Free Prediction Sets for Node Classification
Jase Clarkson 1

Abstract

appealing approach as it is compatible with any black box
machine learning algorithm and dataset as long as the data
is statistically exchangeable. The most wide-spread method,
so called split-conformal, also requires trivial computational
overhead when compared to model fitting.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are able to
achieve high classification accuracy on many important real world datasets, but provide no rigorous notion of predictive uncertainty. Quantifying
the confidence of GNN models is difficult due to
the dependence between datapoints induced by
the graph structure.

Networks, or graph structured data is in general not exchangeable and so the guarantees provided by conformal
prediction in its naive form do not hold. Recent work by
Barber et al. (2022) extends conformal prediction to the nonexchangeable setting and provides theoretical guarantees on
the performance of conformal prediction in this setting. We
leverage insights from (Barber et al., 2022) to apply conformal prediction in the node classification setting. The key
insight is that for a homophilous graph, the model calibration should be similar in a neighbourhood around any given
node. We leverage this insight to localise the calibration of
conformal prediction. We show that our method improves
calibration of predictive uncertainty and provides tighter
prediction sets when compared with a naive application of
conformal prediction across several state of the art models
applied to popular node classification datasets.

We leverage recent advances in conformal prediction to construct prediction sets for node classification in inductive learning scenarios. We do
this by taking an existing approach for conformal classification that relies on exchangeable data
and modifying it by appropriately weighting the
conformal scores to reflect the network structure.
We show through experiments on standard benchmark datasets using popular GNN models that our
approach provides tighter and better calibrated
prediction sets than a naive application of conformal prediction. The code is available at this
link.

This paper is structured as follows; we begin by reviewing
related work in Section 2. In Section 3 we give an introduction to the relevant background material on conformal
prediction. We introduce our method for adapting conformal prediction to networks in Section 4. We then detail our
experimental setup and provide marginal coverage statistics
in Section 6, and discuss the conditional coverage properties
of our method in Section 7. We provide an ablation study
to better understand our results in 8 and finally give our
conclusions and discuss avenues for future work in Section
9.

1. Introduction
Machine learning on graph structured data has seen a boom
of popularity in recent years, with applications ranging from
recommendation systems to biology and physics. Graph
neural networks are quickly maturing as a technology; many
state of the art models are commoditised in frameworks such
as Pytorch Geometric (Fey and Lenssen, 2019) and DGL
(Wang et al., 2019). Despite their overwhelming popularity
and success, very little progress has been made towards
quantifying the uncertainty of the predictions made by these
models, a vital step towards robust real world deployments.

2. Related Work

In related areas of machine learning such as computer vision, conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005) has emerged
as a promising candidate for uncertainty quantification (Angelopoulos et al., 2020). Conformal prediction is a very

There is no standard approach to estimating the predictive
uncertainty of neural network models. Many works take
a Bayesian approach (Goan and Fookes, 2020), where the
goal is to learn a distribution over the network weights and
represent uncertainty via the posterior distribution. Bayesian
approaches however become quickly computationally intractable for large models and datasets, which has lead to approximations of Bayesian learning such as Deep Ensembles
(Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) and Variational Inference

1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Jase Clarkson <jason.clarkson@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

