Model-Aware Contrastive Learning: Towards Escaping the Dilemmas

Zizheng Huang 1 Haoxing Chen 1 2 Ziqi Wen 3 Chao Zhang 1 Huaxiong Li 1 Bo Wang 1 Chunlin Chen 1

Abstract
FN

Contrastive learning (CL) continuously achieves
significant breakthroughs across multiple domains. However, the most common InfoNCEbased methods suffer from some dilemmas, such
as uniformity-tolerance dilemma (UTD) and gradient reduction, both of which are related to a Pij
term. It has been identified that UTD can lead to
unexpected performance degradation. We argue
that the fixity of temperature is to blame for UTD.
To tackle this challenge, we enrich the CL loss
family by presenting a Model-Aware Contrastive
Learning (MACL) strategy, whose temperature is
adaptive to the magnitude of alignment that reflects the basic confidence of the instance discrimination task, then enables CL loss to adjust the
penalty strength for hard negatives adaptively. Regarding another dilemma, the gradient reduction
issue, we derive the limits of an involved gradient
scaling factor, which allows us to explain from a
unified perspective why some recent approaches
are effective with fewer negative samples, and
summarily present a gradient reweighting to escape this dilemma. Extensive remarkable empirical results in vision, sentence, and graph modality
validate our approach’s general improvement for
representation learning and downstream tasks.

FN
Anchor

Anchor
RN

RP

RP

RN

Temperature
Alignment

Figure 1. Illustration of model-aware temperature strategy.
Points in red, green, yellow, and blue on the hypersphere denote
anchor, the real positive sample (RP), real negative samples (RN),
and false negatives (FNs), respectively. Since alignment magnitude can indicate discrimination confidence of the CL model, then
the alignment-adaptive temperature dynamically controls penalty
strength (arrow length) to negative samples to balance uniformity
and tolerance for samples.

labeling (Gidaris et al., 2018; He et al., 2022; Grill et al.,
2020). Especially, SSL methods based on contrastive loss
have highly boosted CV, NLP, graph, and multi-modal tasks
(Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2020; You et al., 2021; Gao
et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). These contrastive learning
(CL) frameworks generally map raw data onto a hypersphere
embedding space, whose embedding similarity can reflect
the semantic relationship (Wu et al., 2018b; He et al., 2020).
Among diverse contrastive losses, InfoNCE (Van den Oord
et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2020a) is widely adopted in various CL algorithms (Chen et al., 2020a; 2021b; Dwibedi
et al., 2021), which attempts to attract positive samples to
the anchor while pushing all the negative samples away.

1. Introduction
Modern representation learning has been greatly facilitated
by deep neural networks (Bengio et al., 2013; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017).
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is one of the most popular
paradigms in the unsupervised scenario, which can learn
transferable representations without depending on manual

InfoNCE loss is essential to the success of CL (Tian, 2022;
Wang & Isola, 2020) but still troubled by several dilemmas.
An interesting hardness-aware property has been pointed
out, which enables CL automatically concentrate on hard
negative samples (HNs, those having high similarities with
the anchor) (Wang & Liu, 2021; Tian, 2022). Particularly,
the temperature parameter τ determines the weight distribution on negatives. But this also causes a UniformityTolerance Dilemma (UTD) that plagues CL performance
(Wang & Liu, 2021). Specifically, as for the common instance discrimination task in CL, models are trained by
maximizing the similarities of the anchor with its augmenta-

1
Nanjing University 2 Ant Group 3 China Telecom. Correspondence to: Huaxiong Li <huaxiongli@nju.edu.cn>,
Haoxing Chen <hx.chen@hotmail.com>, Zizheng Huang
<zizhenghuang@smail.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

