A Picture of the Space of Typical Learnable Tasks

Rahul Ramesh 1 Jialin Mao 1 Itay Griniasty 2 Rubing Yang 1 Han Kheng Teoh 2
Mark K. Transtrum 3 James P. Sethna 2 Pratik Chaudhari 1

Abstract

yet know what the structure in the space of tasks is precisely
(see §4 for a discussion of related work). The goal of this
paper is to characterize this structure and shed light on why
these existing algorithms are successful.
We develop information-geometric techniques to analyze
representations learned by different algorithms on different
tasks. The key idea of this paper is to think of a deep network
with weights w trained on a task as a probabilistic model

We develop information geometric techniques to
understand the representations learned by deep
networks when they are trained on different tasks
using supervised, meta-, semi-supervised and contrastive learning. We shed light on the following
phenomena that relate to the structure of the space
of tasks: (1) the manifold of probabilistic models
trained on different tasks using different representation learning methods is effectively low-dimensional; (2) supervised learning on one task results
in a surprising amount of progress even on seemingly dissimilar tasks; progress on other tasks
is larger if the training task has diverse classes;
(3) the structure of the space of tasks indicated by
our analysis is consistent with parts of the Wordnet phylogenetic tree; (4) episodic meta-learning
algorithms and supervised learning traverse different trajectories during training but they fit similar
models eventually; (5) contrastive and semi-supervised learning methods traverse trajectories
similar to those of supervised learning. We use
classification tasks constructed from the CIFAR10 and Imagenet datasets to study these phenomena. Code is available at https://github.com/grasplyrl/picture of space of tasks.

Pw (⃗
y) =

N
Y

pn
w (yn )

n=1

where ⃗y = (y1 , . . . , yN ) denotes any sequence of outputs
(each yn ∈ {1, . . . , C} classes) on N independent and identically distributed samples and pnw (yn ) denotes the probability
that sample xn belongs to class yn as predicted by a deep
network with weights w. We instantiate the technical machinery of information geometry using this N C -dimensional
object to study different probabilistic models fitted to the
task irrespective of which representation learning algorithm,
e.g., supervised learning, meta-learning, etc., or what neural
architecture was used to fit the probabilistic model. This construction circumvents the enormous diversity of algorithms,
architectures with different feature spaces and training methods across these different sub-fields and provides us with
a single space to study these models in — the prediction
space of the model.

1. Introduction

1.1. Contributions
We develop new theoretical and computational tools to
study such probabilistic models in §2. This involves techniques to visualize these very high-dimensional objects, to
compute geodesics on such manifolds, to interpolate checkpoints along training trajectories into continuous curves, and
to map models trained on different tasks into a unique prediction space. We point these technical tools to understanding
the structure of the space of learnable tasks and study different representation algorithms such as supervised, transfer,
meta, semi- and self-supervised learning. We report the
following findings in §3; a result pertaining to contrastive
learning its provided in Appendix B.
(1) The manifold of probabilistic models trained on different tasks using different representation learning methods is effectively low-dimensional. This dimensional-

Exploiting data from related tasks to reduce the sample
complexity of learning a desired task, is an idea that lies
at the heart of burgeoning fields like transfer, multi-task,
meta, few-shot, semi- and self-supervised learning. These
algorithms, aided by the ability of deep networks to learn
flexible representations, have shown an impressive ability
to predict well on new tasks. These algorithms are very
different from each other but it stands to reason they must
be exploiting some structure in the space of tasks. We do not
1

University of Pennsylvania 2 Cornell University 3 Brigham
Young University. Correspondence to: Rahul Ramesh <rahulram@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

