Unifying Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient Methods for
Convex and Strongly Convex Objective Functions

Jungbin Kim 1 Insoon Yang 1

Abstract

Nesterov acceleration. Combining gradient descent with
momentum, Nesterov (1983) proposed the accelerated gradient method (AGM). In particular, the following two specific
schemes are the most popular versions of AGM: If f is
convex, then the scheme

Although Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method
(AGM) has been studied from various perspectives, it remains unclear why the most popular
forms of AGMs must handle convex and strongly
convex objective functions separately. To address
this inconsistency, we propose a novel unified
framework for Lagrangians, ordinary differential
equation (ODE) models, and algorithms. As a
special case, our new simple momentum algorithm, which we call the unified AGM, seamlessly
bridges the gap between the two most popular
forms of Nesterov’s AGM and has a superior convergence guarantee compared to existing algorithms for non-strongly convex objective functions. This property is beneficial in practice when
considering ill-conditioned µ-strongly convex objective functions (with small µ). Furthermore, we
generalize this algorithm and the corresponding
ODE model to the higher-order non-Euclidean
setting. Last but not least, our unified framework
is used to construct the unified AGM-G ODE, a
novel ODE model for minimizing the gradient
norm of strongly convex functions.

2
(zk − xk )
k+1
xk+1 = yk − s∇f (yk )
yk = xk +

(AGM-C)

s(k + 1)
∇f (yk )
2

with s ≤ 1/L achieves an O 1/k 2 convergence rate
(Tseng, 2008). If f is µ-strongly convex, then the scheme
√
µs
yk = xk +
√ (zk − xk )
1 + µs
zk+1 = zk −

(AGM-SC)
xk+1 = yk − s∇f (yk )


1
√
zk+1 = zk + µs yk − zk − ∇f (yk )
µ
√
with s ≤ 1/L exhibits an O((1 − µs)k ) convergence rate
(Nesterov, 2018). Here, we observe that
AGM-SC does not recover AGM-C as µ → 0,
which indicates the inconsistency between AGM-SC and
AGM-C. Furthermore, when µ is very small, the convergence rate of AGM-SC is slower than AGM-C in the early
√
stage because (1 − µs)k tends to zero very slowly. This
is unexpected, as AGM-SC exploits the strong convexity of
f , while AGM-C only relies on the convexity of f .

1. Introduction
We consider the optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈X

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI,
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Insoon Yang <insoonyang@snu.ac.kr>.

Recent studies on Nesterov acceleration, particularly in
the development of ODE models and Lagrangian formulations, have primarily focused on the algorithms AGM-C
and AGM-SC due to their simplicity. As a result, the inconsistency between these two algorithms is inherited in
the corresponding ODEs and Lagrangians (and this is further discussed in Appendix A.1). The main goal of this
paper is to address such inconsistencies in the discrete-time
algorithms, continuous-time dynamics and Lagrangians.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Practical perspective. We now explain the importance
of designing efficient algorithms for minimizing µ-strongly

where X ⊆ Rn is a convex set and f : X → R is a
continuously differentiable function whose gradient is LLipschitz continuous. For the sake of simplicity, we assume
X = Rn and the objective function f has a minimizer x∗ .
1

1

