Unscented Autoencoder
Faris Janjoš 1 Lars Rosenbaum 1 Maxim Dolgov 1 J. Marius Zöllner 2

Abstract
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) is a seminal approach in deep generative modeling with
latent variables. Interpreting its reconstruction
process as a nonlinear transformation of samples
from the latent posterior distribution, we apply
the Unscented Transform (UT) – a well-known
distribution approximation used in the Unscented
Kalman Filter (UKF) from the field of filtering. A finite set of statistics called sigma points,
sampled deterministically, provides a more informative and lower-variance posterior representation than the ubiquitous noise-scaling of the
reparameterization trick, while ensuring higherquality reconstruction. We further boost the
performance by replacing the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence with the Wasserstein distribution metric that allows for a sharper posterior. Inspired by the two components, we derive a novel,
deterministic-sampling flavor of the VAE, the
Unscented Autoencoder (UAE), trained purely
with regularization-like terms on the per-sample
posterior. We empirically show competitive performance in Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)
scores over closely-related models, in addition to
a lower training variance than the VAE1 .

Figure 1: The VAE decoder fθ (·) can be interpreted as a
nonlinear mapping of the Gaussian posterior distribution
generated by the encoder, resulting in a non-Gaussian output distribution. The standard VAE (top) samples randomly
from the posterior (black points) and matches each decoded
sample to the ground truth (green star). Our model (bottom) samples and transforms fixed posterior sigma points
(red) instead. By matching the mean of the transformed
points, we push the entire output distribution to resemble
the ground truth.

tion domains such as image (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020), language (Bowman et al., 2015; Kusner et al., 2017), and dynamics modeling (Karl et al., 2016). A good generative
model requires the VAE to produce high-quality samples
from the prior latent variable distribution and a disentangled latent representation is desired to control the generation process (Higgins et al., 2017). Another important
application of deep latent variable models is representation learning, where the goal is to induce a latent representation facilitating downstream tasks (Bengio et al., 2013;
Townsend et al., 2019; Tripp et al., 2020; Rombach et al.,
2022). In many of these tasks a good sample quality, as
well as a ’well-behaved’ latent representation with a high
reconstruction accuracy is desired.

1. Introduction
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Rezende et al., 2014;
Kingma et al., 2015) is a widely used method for learning deep latent variable models via maximization of the
data likelihood using a reparametrized version of the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO). Deep latent variable models are used as generative models in a variety of applica-

Since their introduction, VAEs have been one of the methods of choice in generative modeling due to their comparatively easy training and the ability to map data to a lower
dimensional representation as opposed to generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014). However, despite their popularity there are still open challenges in VAE
training addressed by recent works. A major problem of
VAEs is their tendency to have a trade-off between the quality of samples from the prior and the reconstruction qual-

1

Robert Bosch GmbH, Corporate Research, 71272 Renningen, Germany 2 Research Center for Information Technology
(FZI), 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to: <firstname.last-name@de.bosch.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code
available
at:
https://github.com/
boschresearch/unscented-autoencoder

1

