End-to-End Multi-Object Detection with a Regularized Mixture Model

Jaeyoung Yoo * 1 Hojun Lee * 2 Seunghyeon Seo 3 Inseop Chung 2 Nojun Kwak 2 3

Abstract

and the corresponding class labels. Thus, the network output is challenging to match one-to-one with the ground
truth. Conventional methods (Ren et al., 2015; Liu et al.,
2016; Redmon et al., 2016) train the detector by assigning
a ground truth to many duplicate predictions, but they cannot directly obtain the final predictions without relying on
non-maximum suppression (NMS) in the inference phase.

Recent end-to-end multi-object detectors simplify the inference pipeline by removing handcrafted processes such as non-maximum suppression (NMS). However, during training, they still
heavily rely on heuristics and hand-crafted processes which deteriorate the reliability of the predicted confidence score. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to train an end-to-end
multi-object detector consisting of only two terms:
negative log-likelihood (NLL) and a regularization term. In doing so, the multi-object detection problem is treated as density estimation of
the ground truth bounding boxes utilizing a regularized mixture density model. The proposed
end-to-end multi-object Detection with a Regularized Mixture Model (D-RMM) is trained by
minimizing the NLL with the proposed regularization term, maximum component maximization (MCM) loss, preventing duplicate predictions. Our method reduces the heuristics of the
training process and improves the reliability of
the predicted confidence score. Moreover, our DRMM outperforms the previous end-to-end detectors on MS COCO dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/lhj815/D-RMM.

As an answer to the opening question, recent end-to-end
multi-object detection methods address the training of detector by searching for unique assignments between the predictions and the ground truth via bipartite matching (Figure
1). The assigned positive prediction by bipartite matching
learns the corresponding ground truth by a pre-designed objective function. On the other hand, the unassigned negative
predictions do not care about ground truth information but
are trained as backgrounds. Unlike conventional detectors,
end-to-end methods can obtain final predictions from detector networks through bipartite matching-based training
without relying on NMS in the inference phase.
However, the training of the current end-to-end multi-object
detectors has several drawbacks as follows:
Immoderate heuristics. In the training process, the current end-to-end methods use heuristically designed objective
functions and matching criteria between the ground truth
and a prediction. For instance, DETR, the representative endto-end method, uses the following combination of losses as
the training objective and matching criterion:

1. Introduction

L = w1 · LCE + w2 · LL1 + w3 · LGIoU ,

“How can we train a detector to learn a variable number of
ground truth bounding boxes for an input image without
duplicate predictions?” This is a fundamental question in
the training of end-to-end multi-object detectors (Carion
et al., 2020). In multi-object detection, each training image has a different number of bounding box coordinates

(1)

where, LCE , LL1 , and LGIoU are cross-entropy, L1 and
GIoU (Rezatofighi et al., 2019) loss with its balancing hyperparameters (w1 , w2 , and w3 ) respectively. Deformable
DETR (Zhu et al., 2020) and Sparse R-CNN (Sun et al.,
2021), other popular end-to-end methods, replace the crossentropy loss with the focal loss (Lin et al., 2017b).
Hand-crafted assignment. Since there are many possible
pairs between ground truths and predictions, the end-to-end
methods need to find an optimal set of pairs among them.
To solve this assignment problem, most end-to-end detectors utilize hand-crafted algorithm such as the Hungarian
method (Kuhn, 1955) in the training pipeline to find a good
bipartite matching.
Unreliable confidence. In the aspect of the nature of hu-

*
Equal contribution 1 NAVER WEBTOON AI 2 Department
of Intelligence and Information Science, Seoul National
University 3 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Jaeyoung Yoo <yoojy31@webtoonscorp.com>, Hojun Lee <hojun815@snu.ac.kr>, Nojun Kwak <nojunk@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

