Transformers Learn In-Context by Gradient Descent
Johannes von Oswald 1 2 Eyvind Niklasson 2 Ettore Randazzo 2 João Sacramento 1
Alexander Mordvintsev 2 Andrey Zhmoginov 2 Max Vladymyrov 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years Transformers (TFs; Vaswani et al., 2017)
have demonstrated their superiority in numerous benchmarks and various fields of modern machine learning, and
have emerged as the de-facto neural network architecture
used for modern AI (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Yun et al.,
2019; Carion et al., 2020; Gulati et al., 2020). It has been hypothesised that their success is due in part to a phenomenon
called in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2021): an ability to flexibly adjust their prediction based on
additional data given in context (i.e. in the input sequence
itself). In-context learning offers a seemingly different approach to few-shot and meta-learning (Brown et al., 2020),
but as of today the exact mechanisms of how it works are not
fully understood. It is thus of great interest to understand
what makes Transformers pay attention to their context,
what the mechanisms are, and under which circumstances,
they come into play (Chan et al., 2022b; Olsson et al., 2022).

At present, the mechanisms of in-context learning
in Transformers are not well understood and remain mostly an intuition. In this paper, we suggest
that training Transformers on auto-regressive objectives is closely related to gradient-based metalearning formulations. We start by providing a
simple weight construction that shows the equivalence of data transformations induced by 1) a single linear self-attention layer and by 2) gradientdescent (GD) on a regression loss. Motivated
by that construction, we show empirically that
when training self-attention-only Transformers on
simple regression tasks either the models learned
by GD and Transformers show great similarity
or, remarkably, the weights found by optimization match the construction. Thus we show how
trained Transformers become mesa-optimizers i.e.
learn models by gradient descent in their forward
pass. This allows us, at least in the domain of regression problems, to mechanistically understand
the inner workings of in-context learning in optimized Transformers. Building on this insight,
we furthermore identify how Transformers surpass the performance of plain gradient descent
by learning an iterative curvature correction and
learn linear models on deep data representations
to solve non-linear regression tasks. Finally, we
discuss intriguing parallels to a mechanism identified to be crucial for in-context learning termed
induction-head (Olsson et al., 2022) and show
how it could be understood as a specific case of
in-context learning by gradient descent learning
within Transformers.

In this paper, we aim to bridge the gap between in-context
and meta-learning, and show that in-context learning in
Transformers can be an emergent property approximating
gradient-based few-shot learning within its forward pass, see
Figure 1. For this to be realized, we show how Transformers
(1) construct a loss function dependent on the data given in
sequence and (2) learn based on gradients of that loss. We
will first focus on the latter, the more elaborate learning task,
in sections 2 and 3, after which we provide evidence for the
former in section 4.
We summarize our contributions as follows1 :
• We construct explicit weights for a linear self-attention
layer that induces an update identical to a single step
of gradient descent (GD) on a mean squared error loss.
Additionally, we show how several self-attention layers
can iteratively perform curvature correction improving
on plain gradient descent.

1

• When optimized on linear regression datasets, we
demonstrate that linear self-attention-only Transform-

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Johannes
von Oswald <voswaldj@ethz.ch>.

1
Main experiments can be reproduced with notebooks
provided under the following link: https://github.com/
google-research/self-organising-systems/
tree/master/transformers_learn_icl_by_gd

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

