SGD with AdaGrad Stepsizes: Full Adaptivity with High Probability
to Unknown Parameters, Unbounded Gradients and Affine Variance

Amit Attia 1 Tomer Koren 1 2

Abstract

Although their non-adaptive counterparts are well studied,
optimization theory of adaptive methods is still lacking and
attract much interest, particularly in the smooth and nonconvex setting. The different types of analyses performed
by previous works in this setting revolve around the assumptions taken in order to establish convergence which includes
the type of noise (bounded variance, sub-Gaussian, bounded
support, affine variance, etc.), whether the true gradients or
the stochastic gradients are uniformly bounded (Ward et al.,
2019; Kavis et al., 2022), and also whether to use a step-size
that does not depends on the current stochastic gradient (Li
& Orabona, 2019; 2020) or to handle the bias introduced by
such a dependency (Ward et al., 2019; Faw et al., 2022).

We study Stochastic Gradient Descent with AdaGrad stepsizes: a popular adaptive (self-tuning)
method for first-order stochastic optimization. Despite being well studied, existing analyses of this
method suffer from various shortcomings: they
either assume some knowledge of the problem
parameters, impose strong global Lipschitz conditions, or fail to give bounds that hold with high
probability. We provide a comprehensive analysis of this basic method without any of these
limitations, in both the convex and non-convex
(smooth) cases, that additionally supports a general “affine variance” noise model and provides
sharp rates of convergence in both the low-noise
and high-noise regimes.

We focus on perhaps the simplest and most well-studied
adaptive optimization method: SGD with AdaGrad-type
stepsizes, which we refer to as AdaSGD (also known in
the literature as AdaGrad-Norm; e.g., Ward et al. 2019; Faw
et al. 2022). For parameters 𝜂, 𝛾 > 0, AdaSGD performs
SGD updates with stepsizes
𝜂
𝜂𝑡 = √︃
,
Í
𝛾 2 + 𝑡𝑠=1 ∥𝑔𝑠 ∥ 2

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951) is the de facto standard optimization method in modern machine learning. SGD updates take the following form;

where 𝑔𝑡 is a stochastic gradient at 𝑤 𝑡 .

𝑤 𝑡+1 = 𝑤 𝑡 − 𝜂𝑡 𝑔𝑡 ,

Although numerous convergence results for smooth
AdaSGD exist in the literature (mostly in the non-convex
case, except for Li & Orabona (2019) discussed below),
they all fall short of at least one important aspect. First,
many of the existing analyses require a strong global Lipschitz assumption on the objective (Ward et al., 2019; Zhou
et al., 2018; Kavis et al., 2022) which does not hold even for
simple quadratic functions in one dimension, and one that
is not required for the analysis of analogous non-adaptive
methods. Second, several results assume partial knowledge
of the problem parameters, such as the smoothness parameter (e.g., Li & Orabona, 2019; 2020), and thus in a sense
do not fully establish the desired adaptivity of AdaSGD.
A summary of the various results for SGD with AdaGrad
stepsizes is presented in Table 1.

starting from an arbitrary point 𝑤 1 , where 𝜂𝑡 is the stepsize at time 𝑡 and 𝑔𝑡 is a stochastic gradient at 𝑤 𝑡 . The
sequence of stepsizes 𝜂1 , 𝜂2 , . . . is notoriously hard to tune
in machine learning applications (e.g., Bottou, 2012; Schaul
et al., 2013), especially when the problem parameters (e.g.,
smoothness or Lipschitz constant of the objective) or estimates thereof are unknown. This has popularized the
study of adaptive gradient methods (e.g., Duchi et al., 2011;
Kingma & Ba, 2015; Reddi et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2019;
Alacaoglu et al., 2020) where stepsizes are computed adaptively based on magnitudes of previous stochastic gradients.
1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2 Google Research Tel Aviv. Correspondence to: Amit Attia <ami-

tattia@mail.tau.ac.il>.

To our knowledge, only Faw et al. (2022) do not impose
neither of the above limiting assumptions, but their bounds
do not hold with high probability: namely, they give convergence bounds with a polynomial dependence on the prob-

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

