ED-Batch: Efficient Automatic Batching of Dynamic Neural Networks
via Learned Finite State Machines
Siyuan Chen 1 Pratik Fegade 2 Tianqi Chen 2 3 Phillip B. Gibbons 2 Todd C. Mowry 2

Abstract

tices (Zhang & Yang, 2018) in applications like natural language processing and speech recognition, exhibit dynamism
in the network structure. In other words, the dataflow graph
for these DNNs varies for each input instance. As a result,
batching is a non-trivial problem for these DNNs.

Batching has a fundamental influence on the efficiency of deep neural network (DNN) execution.
However, for dynamic DNNs, efficient batching
is particularly challenging as the dataflow graph
varies per input instance. As a result, state-ofthe-art frameworks use heuristics that result in
suboptimal batching decisions. Further, batching
puts strict restrictions on memory adjacency and
can lead to high data movement costs. In this paper, we provide an approach for batching dynamic
DNNs based on finite state machines, which enables the automatic discovery of batching policies
specialized for each DNN via reinforcement learning. Moreover, we find that memory planning that
is aware of the batching policy can save significant
data movement overheads, which is automated by
a PQ tree-based algorithm we introduce. Experimental results show that our framework speeds up
state-of-the-art frameworks by on average 1.15x,
1.39x, and 2.45x for chain-based, tree-based,
and lattice-based DNNs across CPU and GPU.
The framework is open-sourced at https://
github.com/gulang2019/ED-Batch.

Due to the presence of dynamism, batching for dynamic
DNNs cannot be done during compilation. As a result, past
works on the efficient execution of dynamic DNNs focused
on two directions: (i) enabling operation-level batching
at runtime (Looks et al., 2017; Neubig et al., 2017a; Zha
et al., 2019), i.e. dynamic batching, and (ii) extracting static
subgraphs (Xu et al., 2018) (e.g., LSTM cells) from the
dataflow graph and optimizing them during compilation (Fegade et al., 2021; Fegade, 2023). Because of strict runtime
constraints, the former approach relies on simple heuristics
to guide batching, leading to suboptimal performance. In
the latter approach, techniques dedicated to certain control
flow patterns or subgraphs are used for optimization, which
is difficult to automate and requires developers with strong
expertise in optimizing new DNN models.
Furthermore, due to the dynamic and runtime nature of
past techniques, past work is unable to optimize inter-tensor
memory layouts during compilation. Past solutions, thus,
either (i) emit gather/scatter operations before and after
each batch (Xu et al., 2018; Neubig et al., 2017a) or (ii)
rely on specially designed and/or hand-optimized kernels
to operate on scattered data in-place (Fegade et al., 2021;
Fegade, 2023), thus precluding the use of highly-optimized
vendor libraries on common hardware.

1. Introduction
Batching accelerates the training and inference for deep neural networks (DNN) because (i) it launches fewer kernels
resulting in lower kernel launch and scheduling overhead on
the CPU, and (ii) it better utilizes the hardware by exploiting more parallelism. For static DNNs, i.e. DNNs whose
dataflow graphs (a.k.a., computation graphs) are identical
across every input instance, batched execution is trivial as
one can batch corresponding operations for each input together. However, DNNs used to model structured data such
as trees (Tai et al., 2015), grids (Chen et al., 2015), and lat-

To address these problems, we propose ED-Batch (Efficient
Dynamic Batching), an efficient automatic batching framework for dynamic neural networks via learned finite state
machines (FSM) and batching-aware memory planning.
For dynamic batching, we exploit the insight that the optimal batching policy for a wide variety of dynamic DNNs
can be represented by an FSM, where each state represents a
set of possible operator types on the frontier of the dataflow
graph. Unlike the previous algorithms that depend heavily
on aggregated graph statistics to guide batching and result
in highly suboptimal decisions, our FSM approach learns
which decisions are better by examining the entire graph.
We find that using FSMs represents a sweet-spot between

1

School of EECS, Peking University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 OctoML. Correspondence to: Siyuan Chen
<siyuanc3@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

