On the Interplay Between Misspecification and Sub-optimality Gap in
Linear Contextual Bandits
Weitong Zhang 1 Jiafan He 1 Zhiyuan Fan 2 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

study of misspecified linear models. In particular, we only
assume that the reward function can be approximated by
a linear function up to some worst-case error ζ called misspecification level. Existing algorithms for misspecified linear contextual bandits (Lattimore
2020; Foster et al.,
√ et al., √
e
2020) can only achieve an O(d
K + ζK d log K) regret
bound, where K is the total number of rounds and d is the
dimension of the contextual vector. Such a regret, however,
suggests that the performance of these algorithms will degenerate to be linear in K when K is sufficiently large. The
reason for this performance degeneration is because existing algorithms, such as OFUL (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011)
and linear Thompson sampling (Agrawal & Goyal, 2013),
utilize all the collected data without selection. This makes
these algorithms vulnerable to “outliers” caused by the misspecified model. Meanwhile, the aforementioned results do
not consider the sub-optimality gap in the expected reward
between the best arm and the second best arm. Intuitively
speaking, if the sub-optimality gap is smaller than the misspecification level, there is no hope to obtain a sublinear
regret. Therefore, it is sensible to take into account the
sub-optimality gap in the misspecified setting, and pursue a
gap-dependent regret bound.

We study linear contextual bandits in the misspecified setting, where the expected reward function
can be approximated by a linear function class
up to a bounded misspecification level ζ > 0.
We propose an algorithm based on a novel data
selection scheme, which only selects the contextual vectors with large uncertainty for online regression. We show that, when the misspecifi√
O(∆/ d) with
cation level ζ is dominated by e
∆ being the minimal sub-optimality gap and d
being the dimension of the contextual vectors,
our algorithm enjoys the same gap-dependent regret bound e
O(d2 /∆) as in the well-specified setting up to logarithmic factors. In addition, we
show that an existing algorithm SupLinUCB (Chu
et al., 2011) can also achieve a gap-dependent constant regret bound without the knowledge of suboptimality gap ∆. Together with a lower bound
adapted from Lattimore et al. (2020), our result
suggests an interplay between misspecification
level and the sub-optimality gap: (1) the linear
contextual bandit√model is efficiently learnable
e
when ζ ≤ O(∆/
d); and √
(2) it is not efficiently
learnable when ζ ≥ e
Ω(∆/ d). Experiments on
both synthetic and real-world datasets corroborate
our theoretical results.

The same misspecification issue also appears in reinforcement learning with linear function approximation, when a
linear function cannot exactly represent the transition kernel or value function of the underlying MDP. In this case,
Du et al. (2019) provided a negative result showing that
if the misspecification level is larger than a certain threshold, any RL algorithm will suffer from an exponentially
large sample complexity. This result was later revisited
in the stochastic linear bandit setting by Lattimore et al.
(2020), which shows that a large misspecification error will
make the bandit model not efficiently learnable. However,
these results cannot well explain the tremendous success of
deep reinforcement learning on various tasks (Mnih et al.,
2013; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017), where the deep neural
networks are used as function approximators with misspecification error.

1. Introduction
Linear contextual bandits (Li et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013) have
been extensively studied when the reward function can be
represented as a linear function of the contextual vectors.
However, such a well-specified linear model assumption
sometimes does not hold in practice. This motivates the
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, USA 2 IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

In this paper, we aim to understand the role of model misspecification in linear contextual bandits through the lens of
sub-optimality gap. By proposing a new algorithm with data
selection, we can achieve a constant regret bound for such a

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

