Hierarchical Grammar-Induced Geometry for
Data-Efficient Molecular Property Prediction

Minghao Guo 1 Veronika Thost 2 Samuel W Song 1 Adithya Balachandran 1
Payel Das 2 Jie Chen 2 Wojciech Matusik 1

Abstract

molecules, various methods have been proposed, including
recurrent neural networks (RNN) for SMILES strings (Lusci
et al., 2013; Goh et al., 2017), feed-forward networks (FFN)
for molecule fingerprints (Tao et al., 2021b;a), and, more
dominantly, graph neural networks (GNN) for molecule
graphs (Yang et al., 2019; Bevilacqua et al., 2022; Aldeghi
& Coley, 2022; Yu & Gao, 2022). They have been employed
to predict biological and mechanical properties of both polymers and drug-like molecules. Typically, these methods
learn a deep neural network that maps the molecular input
into an embedding space, where molecules are represented
as latent features and then transformed into property values.
Despite their promising performance on common benchmarks, these deep learning-based approaches require a large
amount of training data in order to be effective (Audus &
de Pablo, 2017; Wieder et al., 2020).

The prediction of molecular properties is a crucial task in the field of material and drug discovery. The potential benefits of using deep learning
techniques are reflected in the wealth of recent
literature. Still, these techniques are faced with
a common challenge in practice: Labeled data
are limited by the cost of manual extraction from
literature and laborious experimentation. In this
work, we propose a data-efficient property predictor by utilizing a learnable hierarchical molecular
grammar that can generate molecules from grammar production rules. Such a grammar induces
an explicit geometry of the space of molecular
graphs, which provides an informative prior on
molecular structural similarity. The property prediction is performed using graph neural diffusion
over the grammar-induced geometry. On both
small and large datasets, our evaluation shows
that this approach outperforms a wide spectrum
of baselines, including supervised and pre-trained
graph neural networks. We include a detailed
ablation study and further analysis of our solution, showing its effectiveness in cases with extremely limited data. Code is available at https:
//github.com/gmh14/Geo-DEG.

In practice, however, scientists often have small datasets
at their disposal, in which case deep learning fails. Many
recent studies have demonstrated that handling small dataset
scenarios is a non-trivial open research problem and is of
practical importance which has consistently attracted the attention of the fields of molecule and material discovery (Subramanian et al., 2016; Altae-Tran et al., 2017; Audus &
de Pablo, 2017). For example, due to the difficulty of generating and acquiring data – which usually entails synthesis,
wet-lab measurement, and mechanical testing – state-of-theart works on polymer property prediction using real data are
limited to only a few hundred samples (Menon et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2021). Recent deep learning research has developed various methods handling small molecular datasets,
including self-supervised learning (Zhang et al., 2021; Rong
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Ross et al., 2021), transfer learning (Hu et al., 2020), and few-shot learning (Guo
et al., 2021b; Stanley et al., 2021). These methods involve
pre-training networks on large molecular datasets before
being applied to domain-specific, small-scale target datasets.
However, when applied to datasets of very small size (e.g.,
∼300), most of these methods are prone to perform poorly
and are statistically unstable (Hu et al., 2020). Moreover,
as we will show in our experiments, these methods are
less reliable when deployed on target datasets that contain
significant domain gaps from the pre-trained dataset (e.g.,

1. Introduction
Molecular property prediction is an essential step in the
discovery of novel materials and drugs, as it applies to both
high-throughput screening and molecule optimization. Recent advances in machine learning, particularly deep learning, have made tremendous progress in predicting property
values that are difficult to measure in reality due to the associated cost. Depending on the representation form of
1
MIT CSAIL 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to: Minghao Guo <guomh2014@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

