DoCoFL: Downlink Compression for Cross-Device Federated Learning

Ron Dorfman 1 2 Shay Vargaftik 1 Yaniv Ben-Itzhak 1 Kfir Y. Levy 2

Abstract

the parameter server (PS). The PS aggregates these updates
and updates the global model, which is then utilized by the
clients in subsequent rounds.

Many compression techniques have been proposed to reduce the communication overhead of
Federated Learning training procedures. However, these are typically designed for compressing model updates, which are expected to decay
throughout training. As a result, such methods are
inapplicable to downlink (i.e., from the parameter
server to clients) compression in the cross-device
setting, where heterogeneous clients may appear
only once during training and thus must download the model parameters. Accordingly, we propose DoCoFL – a new framework for downlink
compression in the cross-device setting. Importantly, DoCoFL can be seamlessly combined with
many uplink compression schemes, rendering it
suitable for bi-directional compression. Through
extensive evaluation, we show that DoCoFL offers significant bi-directional bandwidth reduction
while achieving competitive accuracy to that of a
baseline without any compression.

One of the main challenges in FL is the communication bottleneck introduced during the distributed training procedure.
To illustrate this bottleneck, consider the following example of a real FL deployment presented by McMahan et al.
(2022): their training involves a small neural network with
1.3 million parameters; in each round there are 6500 participating clients; and the model is trained over 2000 rounds. A
simple calculation shows that the total required bandwidth
to and from the PS during this training is ≈ 61.5 TB. Since
modern machine learning models have many millions (or
even billions) of parameters and we might have more participants, FL may result in excessive communication overhead.
To deal with this overhead, many bandwidth reduction techniques have been proposed. These include taking multiple
(rather than a single) local optimization steps (McMahan
et al., 2017), quantization techniques (Seide et al., 2014; Alistarh et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017; Bernstein et al., 2018a;b;
Karimireddy et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020; Shlezinger et al.,
2020), low-rank decomposition (Vogels et al., 2019), sketching (Ivkin et al., 2019; Rothchild et al., 2020), and distributed mean estimation (Lyubarskii & Vershynin, 2010;
Suresh et al., 2017; Konečnỳ & Richtárik, 2018; Vargaftik
et al., 2021; 2022; Safaryan et al., 2022). However, as we
detail in §2, a direct application of these techniques is less
suitable for downlink compression, i.e., from the PS to the
clients, in the cross-device setup in which new and heterogeneous clients may participate at each round and thus must
download the model parameters. This is in contrast to the
cross-silo setup in which the PS can compress and send a
global update (i.e., clients’ aggregated update) to all silos.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in federated learning (FL) as a paradigm for large-scale machine
learning over decentralized data (Konečnỳ et al., 2016a;
Kairouz et al., 2021). FL enables organizations and/or devices, collectively termed clients, to jointly build better and
more robust models by relying on their collective data and
processing power. Importantly, the FL training procedure
occurs without exchanging or sharing client-specific data,
thus ensuring some degree of privacy and compliance with
data access rights and regulations (e.g., the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) implemented by the European Union in May, 2018). Instead, in each round, clients
perform local optimization using their local data and send
only model updates to a central coordinator, also known as

To the best of our knowledge, only a handful of works
consider bi-directional compression, i.e., compression from
the clients to the PS and vice versa. These works mainly rely
on per-client memory mechanism (Tang et al., 2019; Zheng
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Philippenko & Dieuleveut,
2020; 2021; Gruntkowska et al., 2022) or require keeping
an updated copy of the model on all clients (Horvóth et al.,
2022), thus targeting either distributed learning or FL with
full or partial but recurring participation (e.g., cross-silo FL).
Such solutions are less suitable for large-scale cross-device

1

VMware Research 2 Viterby Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
†Ron Dorfman <rdorfman@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

