Offline Meta Reinforcement Learning with In-Distribution Online Adaptation

Jianhao Wang * 1 Jin Zhang * 1 Haozhe Jiang 1 Junyu Zhang 2 Liwei Wang 3 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract

RL encounters two major challenges: multi-task efficiency
and costly online interactions. In multi-task settings, such
as robotic manipulation or locomotion (Yu et al., 2020b),
agents are expected to solve new tasks in few-shot adaptation using previously learned knowledge. Moreover, collecting sufficient exploratory interactions is usually expensive
or dangerous in robotics (Rafailov et al., 2021), autonomous
driving (Yu et al., 2018), and healthcare (Gottesman et al.,
2019). One popular paradigm for breaking this practical
barrier is offline meta reinforcement learning (offline metaRL; Li et al., 2020b; Mitchell et al., 2021), which trains a
meta-RL agent with pre-collected offline multi-task datasets
and enables fast policy adaptation to unseen tasks.

Recent offline meta-reinforcement learning (metaRL) methods typically utilize task-dependent behavior policies (e.g., training RL agents on each
individual task) to collect a multi-task dataset.
However, these methods always require extra information for fast adaptation, such as offline context for testing tasks. To address this problem,
we first formally characterize a unique challenge
in offline meta-RL: transition-reward distribution
shift between offline datasets and online adaptation. Our theory finds that out-of-distribution
adaptation episodes may lead to unreliable policy evaluation and that online adaptation with indistribution episodes can ensure adaptation performance guarantee. Based on these theoretical
insights, we propose a novel adaptation framework, called In-Distribution online Adaptation
with uncertainty Quantification (IDAQ), which
generates in-distribution context using a given
uncertainty quantification and performs effective
task belief inference to address new tasks. We
find a return-based uncertainty quantification for
IDAQ that performs effectively. Experiments
show that IDAQ achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Meta-World ML1 benchmark compared to baselines with/without offline adaptation.

Recent offline meta-RL methods have been proposed to
utilize a multi-task dataset collected by task-dependent behavior policies (Li et al., 2020b; Dorfman et al., 2021).
They show promise by solving new tasks with few-shot
adaptation. However, existing offline meta-RL approaches
require additional information or assumptions for fast adaptation. For example, FOCAL (Li et al., 2020b) and MACAW
(Mitchell et al., 2021) use offline contexts for meta-testing
tasks. BOReL (Dorfman et al., 2021) and SMAC (Pong
et al., 2022) employ few-shot online adaptation, in which
the former assumes known reward functions, and the latter assumes unsupervised online samples (without rewards)
are available in offline meta-training. Therefore, achieving
effective online fast adaptation without extra information
remains an open problem for offline meta-RL.
To approach meta-testing relying on online experience in
offline meta-RL, we first characterize a unique conundrum:
transition-reward distribution shift between offline datasets
and online adaptation, complementary to state-action distribution shift in offline RL (Levine et al., 2020). As illustrated in Figure 1, we propose a motivating example to
visualize the transition-reward distribution shift. In this example, the robot aims to choose the correct path to reach
the diamond ( ) in three tasks. During task-dependent
data collection, the offline multi-task dataset consists of all
successful episodes ( ) through expert behavior policies.
After offline meta-training on the given dataset, the robot
needs to fast adapt to a (unknown) meta-testing task, i.e.,
task 3 shown in Figure 1. In the first adaptation episode,
the robot does not know the identification of meta-testing
task. It may try the middle path, stop in front of the stone,

1. Introduction
Human intelligence is capable of learning a wide variety of
skills from past experiences and can adapt to new environments by transferring skills with limited experience. Current
reinforcement learning (RL) has surpassed human-level performance (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; Hafner
et al., 2019). However, in many real-world applications,
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Huazhong University of
Science and Technology 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University. Correspondence to: Chongjie Zhang <zhangchongjie@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

