Geometric Latent Diffusion Models for 3D Molecule Generation
Minkai Xu 1 Alexander S. Powers 1 2 Ron O. Dror * 1 Stefano Ermon * 1 Jure Leskovec * 1

Abstract

veloping effective geometric generative models holds great
promise for scientific discovery problems such as material
and drug design (Pereira et al., 2016; Graves et al., 2020;
Townshend et al., 2021). Recently, considerable progress
has been achieved with machine learning approaches, especially deep generative models. For example, Gebauer
et al. (2019); Luo & Ji (2021) and Satorras et al. (2021a)
proposed data-driven methods to generate 3D molecules
(in silico) with autoregressive and flow-based models respectively. However, despite great potential, the results are
still unsatisfactory with low chemical validity and small
molecule size, due to the insufficient capacity of the underlying generative models (Razavi et al., 2019).

Generative models, especially diffusion models
(DMs), have achieved promising results for generating feature-rich geometries and advancing
foundational science problems such as molecule
design. Inspired by the recent huge success of
Stable (latent) Diffusion models, we propose a
novel and principled method for 3D molecule
generation named Geometric Latent Diffusion
Models (G EO LDM). G EO LDM is the first latent DM model for the molecular geometry domain, composed of autoencoders encoding structures into continuous latent codes and DMs operating in the latent space. Our key innovation is
that for modeling the 3D molecular geometries,
we capture its critical roto-translational equivariance constraints by building a point-structured
latent space with both invariant scalars and equivariant tensors. Extensive experiments demonstrate that G EO LDM can consistently achieve
better performance on multiple molecule generation benchmarks, with up to 7% improvement
for the valid percentage of large biomolecules.
Results also demonstrate G EO LDM’s higher capacity for controllable generation thanks to the
latent modeling. Code is provided at https:
//github.com/MinkaiXu/GeoLDM.

Most recently, diffusion models (DMs) (Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2021) have emerged with surprising results on
image synthesis (Meng et al., 2022) and beyond (Kong et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022). DMs define a diffusion process that
gradually perturbs the data, and learn neural networks to
reverse this corruption by progressive denoising. Then the
denoising network can conduct generation by iteratively
cleaning data initialized from random noise. Several studies
have also applied such frameworks to the geometric domain,
especially molecular structures (Hoogeboom et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2022; Anand & Achim, 2022). However, the
existing models typically run DMs directly in the atomic
feature space, which typically is composed of diverse physical quantities, e.g., charge, atom types, and coordinates.
These features are multi-modal with discrete, integer, and
continuous variables, making unified Gaussian diffusion
frameworks sub-optimal (Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2022) or requiring sophisticated, decomposed modeling of
different variables (Anand & Achim, 2022). Besides, the
high dimensionality of input features also increases DM
modeling difficulty, since the model’s training and sampling
require function forward and backward computation in the
full input dimension. Therefore, the validity rate of generated molecules is still not satisfying enough, and an ideal
approach would be a more flexible and expressive framework for modeling complex structures.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling for feature-rich geometries is an important task for many science fields. Typically, geometries
can be represented as point clouds where each point is embedded in the Cartesian coordinates and labeled with rich
features. Such structures are ubiquitous in scientific domains, e.g., we can represent molecules as atomic graphs
in 3D (Schütt et al., 2017) and proteins as proximity spatial
graphs over amino acids (Jing et al., 2021). Therefore, de*Equal senior authorship 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 2 Department of Chemistry, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Minkai Xu <minkai@cs.stanford.edu>.

In this paper, we propose a novel and principled method
to overcome the above limitations by utilizing a smoother
latent space, named Geometric Latent Diffusion Models
(G EO LDM). G EO LDM is set up as (variational) autoencoders (AEs) with DMs operating on the latent space. The

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

