Beyond In-Domain Scenarios: Robust Density-Aware Calibration

Christian Tomani * 1 2 Futa Waseda * 3 Yuesong Shen 1 2 Daniel Cremers 1 2

Input X

Calibrating deep learning models to yield
uncertainty-aware predictions is crucial as deep
neural networks get increasingly deployed in
safety-critical applications. While existing posthoc calibration methods achieve impressive results on in-domain test datasets, they are limited
by their inability to yield reliable uncertainty estimates in domain-shift and out-of-domain (OOD)
scenarios. We aim to bridge this gap by proposing
DAC, an accuracy-preserving as well as DensityAware Calibration method based on k-nearestneighbors (KNN). In contrast to existing posthoc methods, we utilize hidden layers of classifiers as a source for uncertainty-related information and study their importance. We show
that DAC is a generic method that can readily
be combined with state-of-the-art post-hoc methods. DAC boosts the robustness of calibration performance in domain-shift and OOD, while maintaining excellent in-domain predictive uncertainty
estimates. We demonstrate that DAC leads to
consistently better calibration across a large number of model architectures, datasets, and metrics.
Additionally, we show that DAC improves calibration substantially on recent large-scale neural
networks pre-trained on vast amounts of data.

Layer 1
Classifier 𝑓(𝑋)

Abstract

Feature Space

𝒛!

Layer 2

𝒛"

d3 d1
d2

Layer 3

𝒛#

Logits

𝒛$
Our Method: 𝒈(𝒛" , … , 𝒛! )

"!
𝒛

d1

d3
d2

"! )
Existing Method: ℎ(𝒛

𝒚

Calibrated Output:
𝑦 = ℎ(𝑔( 𝑓(𝑋)))

High Density
Low Density

Train
Samples
Test
Samples
Low Uncertainty
High Uncertainty

Figure 1. Left: Our density-aware calibration method (DAC) g can
be combined with existing post-hoc methods h leading to robust
and reliable uncertainty estimates. To this end, DAC leverages
information from feature vectors z1 ...zL across the entire classifier
f . Right: DAC is based on KNN, where predictive uncertainty is
expected to be high for test samples lying in low-density regions
of the empirical training distribution and vice versa.

expected accuracy. Due to the fact that many deep neural networks are generally uncalibrated (Guo et al., 2017),
post-hoc calibration of already trained neural networks has
received increasing attention in the last few years.
In order to tackle the miscalibration of neural networks, researchers have come up with a plethora of post-hoc calibration methods (Guo et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Rahimi
et al., 2020b; Milios et al., 2018; Tomani et al., 2022; Gupta
et al., 2021). These current approaches are particularly designed for in-domain calibration, where test samples are
drawn from the same distribution as the network was trained
on. Although these approaches perform almost perfect indomain, recent works (Tomani et al., 2021) have shown
that they lack substantially in providing reliable confidence
scores in domain-shift and out-of-domain (OOD) scenarios
(up to 1 order of magnitude worse than in-domain), which
is unacceptable, particularly in safety-critical real-world
scenarios where calibration of neural networks matters in
order to prevent unforeseeable failures. To date, the only
post-hoc methods that have been introduced to mitigate this
shortcoming in domain-shift and OOD settings, use artificially created data or data from different sources in order to
estimate the potential test distribution (Tomani et al., 2021;

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have become state-of-the-art (SOTA)
in several different fields. Especially in safety-critical applications such as medical diagnosis and autonomous driving
with changing environments over time, reliable model estimates for predictive uncertainty are crucial. Thus, models
are required to be accurate as well as calibrated, meaning
that their predictive uncertainty (or confidence) matches the
*
Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Munich 2 Munich
Center for Machine Learning 3 The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Christian Tomani <christian.tomani@tum.de>,
Futa Waseda <futa-waseda@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

