Subset-Based Instance Optimality in Private Estimation

Travis Dick 1 Alex Kulesza 1 Ziteng Sun 1 Ananda Theertha Suresh 1

Abstract

However, realistic datasets may have local sensitivities that
are much smaller, making this a weak notion of optimality
that does not reward reducing loss on typical “easy” examples (Nissim et al., 2007; Bun & Steinke, 2019). At the
other extreme, we might hope for instance optimality, where
a single algorithm competes, simultaneously for all datasets
D, with the best possible benchmark algorithm chosen with
knowledge of D. It is easy to see that this is too strong: a
constant algorithm that always returns exactly θ(D), regardless of its input, is perfectly private and gives zero loss on
D. Of course, we cannot hope to achieve zero loss for all
datasets at once.

We propose a new definition of instance optimality for differentially private estimation algorithms.
Our definition requires an optimal algorithm to
compete, simultaneously for every dataset D,
with the best private benchmark algorithm that
(a) knows D in advance and (b) is evaluated by
its worst-case performance on large subsets of
D. That is, the benchmark algorithm need not
perform well when potentially extreme points are
added to D; it only has to handle the removal of
a small number of real data points that already
exist. This makes our benchmark significantly
stronger than those proposed in prior work. We
nevertheless show, for real-valued datasets, how
to construct private algorithms that achieve our
notion of instance optimality when estimating a
broad class of dataset properties, including means,
quantiles, and `p -norm minimizers. For means
in particular, we provide a detailed analysis and
show that our algorithm simultaneously matches
or exceeds the asymptotic performance of existing
algorithms under a range of distributional assumptions.

Thus, there has been recent interest in finding variations
of instance optimality that are strong and yet still achievable. Asi & Duchi (2020b) gave a variant defined using
local minimax risk, which softens the definition above by
allowing an optimal algorithm’s performance to degrade
on D whenever there is a second dataset D0 such that no
private algorithm can simultaneously achieve low loss on
both D and D0 . Huang et al. (2021) gave a different variant of instance optimality for mean estimation in which the
worst-case loss across nearby datasets sharing support with
D defines the risk for D. Related ideas were also explored
by Błasiok et al. (2019); Brunel & Avella-Medina (2020);
McMillan et al. (2022), and others.
In this work we propose a new definition of instance optimality. We refer to our definition as subset optimality because
it calibrates the risk of a dataset D using only subsets of D.

1. Introduction
Differentially private algorithms intentionally inject noise to
obscure the contributions of individual data points (Dwork
et al., 2006; 2014). This noise, of course, reduces the accuracy of the result, so it is natural to ask whether we can
derive a private algorithm that minimzes the cost to accuracy,
“optimally” estimating some property θ(D) of a dataset D
given the constraint of differential privacy.

To motivate this approach, consider the basic semantics of
differential privacy. A DP algorithm is required to give
similar output distributions on D and D0 whenever D0 is
a neighbor of D—that is, whenever D0 can be obtained
from D by adding or removing a single point. Technically,
this definition is symmetric, but in practice addition and removal can have very different implications. For typical real
datasets where data points tend to be similar to one another,
removing a point may change the target property θ(D) only
modestly, and a correspondingly modest amount of noise
might ensure sufficiently similar output distributions. On
the other hand, an added point could potentially be an extreme outlier that dramatically changes θ(D), requiring a
large amount of noise to conceal its presence.

But what do we mean by optimal? Optimal worst-case loss
is often achievable by algorithms that add noise calibrated
to the global sensitivity of θ (Dwork et al., 2006; Aldà &
Simon, 2017; Balle & Wang, 2018; Fernandes et al., 2021).
1
Google Research, New York. Correspondence to: Ziteng Sun
<zitengsun@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Concretely, imagine we have a database reporting the annual
1

