On the Global Convergence of Fitted Q-Iteration with Two-layer Neural
Network Parametrization
Mudit Gaur 1 Vaneet Aggarwal 2 3 Mridul Agarwal 4

Abstract

learning based algorithm with neural network parametrization.

Deep Q-learning based algorithms have been
applied successfully in many decision making
problems, while their theoretical foundations are
not as well understood. In this paper, we study
a Fitted Q-Iteration with two-layer ReLU neural network parameterization, and find the sample complexity guarantees for the algorithm. Our
approach estimates the Q-function in each iteration using a convex optimization problem. We
show that this approach achieves a sample complexity of Õ(1/ϵ2 ), which is order-optimal. This
result holds for a countable state-spaces and does
not require any assumptions such as a linear or
low rank structure on the MDP.

We note that most of the theoretical results for Q-learning
based algorithms have been in tabular setups which assume
finite states such as in (Li et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2018),
or assume a linear function approximation (Carvalho et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021a; Chen et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2021) where the linear representation is assumed to be
known. Although practically large state spaces are handled
using deep neural networks due to the universal approximation theorem, the theoretical analysis with neural network
parametrization of Q-learning is challenging as the training
of neural network involves solving a non-convex optimization problem. Recently, the authors of (Fan et al., 2020)
studied the problem of neural network parametrization for
Q-learning based algorithms, and provided the asymptotic
global convergence guarantees when the parameters of the
neural network used to approximate the Q function are
large. In this paper, we study the first results on sample
complexity to achieve the global convergence of Q-learning
based algorithm with neural network parametrization.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning aims to maximize the cumulative
rewards wherein an agent interacts with the system in a
sequential manner, and has been used in many applications including games (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al.,
2017; Bonjour et al., 2022), robotics (Maes et al., 2003),
autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2022), ride-sharing (AlAbbasi et al., 2019), networking (Geng et al., 2020), recommender systems (Warlop et al., 2018), etc. One of the
key class of algorithms used in reinforcement learning are
those based on Q-learning. Due to large state space (possibly infinite), such algorithms are parameterized (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). However, with general parametrization
(e.g., neural network parametrization), sample complexity
guarantees to achieve an ϵ gap to the optimal Q-values have
not been fully understood. In this paper, we study this problem to provide the first sample complexity results for Q-

In this paper, we propose a fitted Q-Iteration based algorithm, wherein the Q-function is parametrized by a twolayer ReLU network. The key for the two-layer ReLU network is that finding the optimal parameters for estimating
the Q-function could be converted to a convex problem. In
order to reduce the problem from non-convex to convex,
one can replace the ReLU function with an equivalent diagonal matrix. Further, the minima of both the non-convex
ReLU optimization and the equivalent convex optimization
are same (Wang et al., 2021b; Pilanci and Ergen, 2020).
We find the sample complexity for fitted Q-Iteration based
algorithm with neural network parametrization. The gap
between the learnt Q-function and the optimal Q-function
arises from the parametrization error due to the 2-layer neural network, the error incurred due to imperfect reformulation of the neural network as a convex optimization problem as well as the error due to the random nature of the
underlying MDP. This error reduces with increasing the
number of iterations of the fitted Q-iteration algorithm, the
number of iterations of the convex optimization step, the
number of data points sampled at each step. We achieve

1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN, U.S.A 2 School of IE and School of ECE, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, U.S.A 3 Computer Science Program, KAUST, Saudi Arabia 4 Amazon.com. Correspondence
to: Mudit Gaur <mgaur@purdue.edu>, Vaneet Aggarwal <vaneet@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

