Why Random Pruning Is All We Need to Start Sparse

Advait Gadhikar 1 Sohom Mukherjee 1 Rebekka Burkholz 1

Abstract

have multiple benefits for their representational power and
optimization (Belkin et al., 2019). The resulting trend towards ever larger models and datasets, however, imposes
increasing computational and energy costs that are difficult
to meet. This raises the question: Is this high degree of
overparameterization truly necessary?

Random masks define surprisingly effective
sparse neural network models, as has been shown
empirically. The resulting sparse networks can
often compete with dense architectures and stateof-the-art lottery ticket pruning algorithms, even
though they do not rely on computationally expensive prune-train iterations and can be drawn
initially without significant computational overhead. We offer a theoretical explanation of how
random masks can approximate arbitrary target
networks if they are wider by a logarithmic factor
in the inverse sparsity 1/ log(1/sparsity). This
overparameterization factor is necessary at least
for 3-layer random networks, which elucidates
the observed degrading performance of random
networks at higher sparsity. At moderate to
high sparsity levels, however, our results imply
that sparser networks are contained within random source networks so that any dense-to-sparse
training scheme can be turned into a computationally more efficient sparse to sparse one by
constraining the search to a fixed random mask.
We demonstrate the feasibility of this approach
in experiments for different pruning methods and
propose particularly effective choices of initial
layer-wise sparsity ratios of the random source
network. As a special case, we show theoretically and experimentally that random source networks also contain strong lottery tickets. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
RelationalML/sparse_to_sparse.

Training general small-scale or sparse deep neural network
architectures from scratch remains a challenge for standard initialization schemes (Li et al., 2016; Han et al.,
2015). However, (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) have recently
demonstrated that there exist sparse architectures that can
be trained to solve standard benchmark problems competitively. According to their Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH),
dense randomly initialized networks contain subnetworks
that can be trained in isolation to a test accuracy that is comparable with the one of the original dense network. Such
subnetworks, the lottery tickets (LTs), have since been obtained by pruning algorithms that require computationally
expensive pruning-retraining iterations (Frankle & Carbin,
2019; Tanaka et al., 2020) or mask learning procedures
(Savarese et al., 2020; Sreenivasan et al., 2022b). While
these can lead to computational gains at training and inference time and reduce memory requirements (Hassibi et al.,
1993; Han et al., 2015), the real goal remains to identify
sparse trainable architectures before training, as this could
lead to significant computational savings. Yet, contemporary pruning at initialization approaches (Lee et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2020; Tanaka et al., 2020; Fischer & Burkholz,
2022; Frankle et al., 2021) achieve less competitive performance. For that reason it is so remarkable that even iterative state-of-the-art approaches struggle to outperform a
simple, computationally cheap, and data independent alternative: random pruning at initialization (Su et al., 2020).
Liu et al. (2021) have provided systematic experimental evidence for its ’unreasonable‘ effectiveness in multiple settings, including complex, large scale architectures and data.

1. Introduction
The impressive breakthroughs achieved by deep learning have largely been attributed to the extensive overparametrization of deep neural networks, as it seems to

We explain theoretically why they can be effective by
proving that a randomly masked network can approximate
an arbitrary target network if it is wider by a logarithmic factor in its sparsity 1/ log(1/sparsity). By deriving a lower bound on the required width of a random 1hidden layer network, we further show that this degree
of overparameterization is necessary in general. This implies that sparse random networks have the universal func-

*

Equal contribution 1 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Advait
Gadhikar <advait.gadhikar@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

