Open-VCLIP: Transforming CLIP to an Open-vocabulary Video Model
via Interpolated Weight Optimization

Zejia Weng 1 2 Xitong Yang 3 Ang Li 4 Zuxuan Wu 1 2 Yu-Gang Jiang 1 2
Joint Feature Space

Abstract

CLIP

Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
has demonstrated impressive zero-shot learning
abilities for image understanding, yet limited
effort has been made to investigate CLIP for
zero-shot video recognition. We introduce OpenVCLIP, a simple yet effective approach that transforms CLIP into a strong zero-shot video classifier that can recognize unseen actions and events
at test time. Our framework extends CLIP with
minimal modifications to model spatial-temporal
relationships in videos, making it a specialized
video classifier, while striving for generalization. We formally show that training an OpenVCLIP is equivalent to continual learning with
zero historical data. To address this problem,
we propose Interpolated Weight Optimization,
which utilizes the benefit of weight interpolation in both training and test time. We evaluate our method on three popular and challenging action recognition datasets following various
zero-shot evaluation protocols and we demonstrate our approach outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by clear margins. In particular, we
achieve 87.9%, 58.3%, 81.1% zero-shot accuracy
on UCF, HMDB and Kinetics-600 respectively,
outperforming state-of-the-art methods by 8.3%,
7.8% and 12.2%. Code is released at https:
//github.com/wengzejia1/Open-VCLIP.

close

“Dog”

far
close
Open-VCLIP

“Chase Frisbee”

Figure 1. While CLIP has shown impressive results for zero-shot
image recognition, it cannot effectively recognize novel actions in
videos. This paper aims to transform CLIP to a strong zero-shot
video classifier with minimal modifications.

the need for manual annotations makes it particularly useful
in real-world applications. While extensive studies have
been conducted on zero-shot learning (Zellers & Choi, 2017;
Brattoli et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2017), CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) recently demonstrates surprising zero-shot abilities in
a variety of tasks, such as image segmentation (Wang et al.,
2022; Ghiasi et al., 2021; 2022), image editing (Zheng et al.,
2022; Crowson et al., 2022), by pretraining on web-scale
image and text pairs in a contrastive manner.
While significant zero-shot results are achieved in the image
domain, limited effort has been made to explore CLIP for
zero-shot video action recognition. Extending CLIP, designed for image tasks, to the video domain, is extremely
challenging, particularly in the zero-shot setting. On one
hand, to better recognize actions and events in videos, the
rich temporal dynamics encoded in videos are expected to
be carefully captured. Although one could treat videos as
a bag of frames and perform temporal pooling over framebased predictions (Wang et al., 2021), it is found that finetuning pretrained models like CLIP with specialized temporal modeling components on top of off-the-shelf image
models produces better results (Ni et al., 2022). However,
the improved results come at the cost of reduced generalization as optimizing specialized parameters will inevitably
requires fine-tuning the pretrained CLIP model. The derived
model then tends to overfit to the video dataset used for finetuning, which are substantially smaller than the image-text
dataset used to train CLIP. As a result, the zero-shot ability

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning is a challenging problem that requires
deep neural networks to recognize novel unseen classes
during testing without having seen them during training.
The generalization ability of classifying new classes without
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University 2 Shanghai
Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing 3 Meta AI 4 angli.ai. Correspondence to: Zuxuan Wu
<zxwu@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

