Are labels informative in semi-supervised learning?
Estimating and leveraging the missing-data mechanism

Aude Sportisse 1 Hugo Schmutz 1 2 Olivier Humbert 2 Charles Bouveyron 1 Pierre-Alexandre Mattei 1

Abstract

deep learning techniques demonstrating remarkable empirical successes, particularly through the systematic use of
data augmentation (Berthelot et al., 2019a; Xie et al., 2020;
Sohn et al., 2020; Rizve et al., 2021).

Semi-supervised learning is a powerful technique
for leveraging unlabeled data to improve machine
learning models, but it can be affected by the presence of “informative” labels, which occur when
some classes are more likely to be labeled than
others. In the missing data literature, such labels
are called missing not at random. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach to address this issue
by estimating the missing-data mechanism and
using inverse propensity weighting to debias any
SSL algorithm, including those using data augmentation. We also propose a likelihood ratio test
to assess whether or not labels are indeed informative. Finally, we demonstrate the performance
of the proposed methods on different datasets, in
particular on two medical datasets for which we
design pseudo-realistic missing data scenarios.

One of the challenges in semi-supervised learning is that the
distribution of labels in the unlabeled dataset is unknown.
For instance, it is uncertain whether a class that is wellrepresented in the labeled images is also well-represented in
the unlabeled images. The traditional approach is to assume
that the label distributions are identical in the labeled and
unlabeled datasets. This assumption implies that people
label classes in equal proportions, regardless of the class
nature or the quality of the images. However, it disregards
the potential unbalance of popularity among classes. For example, in a medical context, doctors may prioritize labeling
the class of sick patients or leave unlabeled the data with an
ambiguous diagnosis. When the label distribution differs in
the labeled and unlabeled datasets, the missing labels are
said to be informative or Missing Not At Random (MNAR).
The missingness of a label must be taken into account to
obtain results from the available data that can be generalized
to the entire population (Rubin, 1976). This is usually modeled by the missing-data mechanism, i.e. the probability of
a sample to be observed (depending on the values of the
label itself). Recently, it has been shown that classical SSL
algorithms indeed fail to provide accurate results for the less
observed classes in presence of informative labels. As there
is a selection bias in the sample, MNAR data also raise the
issue that some models can lead to non-identifiable parameters (Baker & Laird, 1988; Miao et al., 2016). A major
challenge is that testing whether the data is indeed MNAR
is difficult (d’Haultfoeuille, 2010), but it is necessary to
provide a guideline for choosing which algorithm to apply.
The main objective of this paper is to address these issues
by estimating the missing-data mechanism.

1. Introduction
Technological advancements have enabled the collection
and storage of vast amounts of data, offering real hope for
better prediction of phenomena. Unfortunately, this also
leads to dirty data, and more specifically, missing data. In
this paper, we focus on the scenario where a large amount
of data is available, but labeling the data is costly, timeconsuming, or even risky (for instance, medical data collection requires invasive tests for patients). Semi-supervised
learning (Scudder, 1965) has emerged as a crucial problem
to leverage both labeled and unlabeled data in predictive
model (Chapelle et al., 2006, Chapter 1). The unlabeled
data are treated as observations with missing labels, as previously done in various studies (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2004;
Ahfock & McLachlan, 2019; Hu et al., 2022; Schmutz et al.,
2023). Recently, SSL algorithms have been extended to

Beyond the scope of deep learning, in the missing-data
literature, significant works have considered the case of
MNAR responses (Tang & Ju, 2018). Ibrahim & Lipsitz
(1996) and Ibrahim et al. (2001) estimate the parameters of
both the model and the missing-data mechanism using the
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm in binomial regression and generalized linear models. They also propose

1

Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, Maasai, LJAD, CNRS
Université Côte d’Azur, TIRO-MATOS, UMR CEA E4320. Correspondence to: Aude Sportisse <aude.sportisse@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

