Aligning Language Models with Preferences
through f -divergence Minimization

Dongyoung Go 1 2 Tomasz Korbak 3 Germán Kruszewski 4 Jos Rozen 4 Nahyeon Ryu 1 Marc Dymetman 5

Abstract
Aligning language models with preferences can
be posed as approximating a target distribution
representing some desired behavior. Existing approaches differ both in the functional form of the
target distribution and the algorithm used to approximate it. For instance, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) corresponds
to minimizing a reverse KL from an implicit target
distribution arising from a KL penalty in the objective. On the other hand, Generative Distributional
Control (GDC) has an explicit target distribution
and minimizes a forward KL from it using the
Distributional Policy Gradient (DPG) algorithm.
In this paper, we propose a new approach, f -DPG,
which allows the use of any f -divergence to approximate any target distribution that can be evaluated. f -DPG unifies both frameworks (RLHF,
GDC) and the approximation methods (DPG, RL
with KL penalties). We show the practical benefits
of various choices of divergence objectives and
demonstrate that there is no universally optimal
objective but that different divergences present
different alignment and diversity trade-offs. We
show that Jensen-Shannon divergence strikes a
good balance between these objectives, and frequently outperforms forward KL divergence by a
wide margin, leading to significant improvements
over prior work. These distinguishing characteristics between divergences persist as the model size
increases, highlighting the importance of selecting appropriate divergence objectives.

Figure 1. On many target distributions, the Jensen-Shannon (JS)
divergence (green) outperforms the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (blue) as an objective, even when performance is measured
in terms of KL from the target p (left panel, ↓ better). See Sec. 4.2.

field of Natural Language Processing thanks to their generative capabilities, which are useful in a vast number of
tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Srivastava et al., 2022). However, generated texts can also violate widely-held human
preferences, e.g. helpfulness (Askell et al., 2021), nonoffensiveness (Gehman et al., 2020), truthfulness (Lin et al.,
2022) or equal treatment (Cao et al., 2022). Aligning LMs
with human preferences is the problem of adapting the LM
in such a way that generated content is perceived to match
the human’s intent (Ouyang et al., 2022) or that it is helpful, honest, and harmless (Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al.,
2022b). Fundamentally, an aligned LM can be seen as a
desired target distribution that we would like to generate
from (Korbak et al., 2022c). Some approaches leave this
distribution implicit, to be defined as a side-effect of the
proposed intervention. These include prompting with natural language instructions or demonstrations (Askell et al.,
2021), using scorers or safety filters while decoding (Roller
et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021), supervised fine-tuning on curated data (Solaiman & Dennison, 2021; Ngo et al., 2021;
Welbl et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022) or selected samples
from the model (Zelikman et al., 2022; Scheurer et al., 2022;
Dohan et al., 2022), and fine-tuning the language model using reinforcement learning with a learned reward function
that approximates human feedback (Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback or RLHF; Ziegler et al., 2019;
Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022). Instead, Khalifa et al.
(2021) propose a framework that they name Generation with
Distributional Control (GDC), where they define the target

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) have recently revolutionized the
1

Naver Corp 2 Yonsei University 3 University of Sussex 4 Naver
Labs Europe 5 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Dongyoung Go <dongyoung.go@navercorp.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

