CLUTR: Curriculum Learning via Unsupervised Task Representation Learning

Abdus Salam Azad 1 Izzeddin Gur 2 Jasper Emhoff 1 Nathaniel Alexis 1 Aleksandra Faust 2 Pieter Abbeel 1
Ion Stoica 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown exciting
progress in the past decade in many challenging domains including Atari (Mnih et al., 2015), Dota (Berner et al., 2019),
Go (Silver et al., 2016). However, deep RL is also known
for its sample inefficiency and difficult generalization—
performing poorly on unseen tasks or failing altogether
with the slightest change (Cobbe et al., 2019; Azad et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2018). While, Curriculum Learning
(CL) algorithms have shown to improve RL sample efficiency by adapting the training task distribution, i.e., the
curriculum (Portelas et al., 2020; Narvekar et al., 2020),
recently a class of Unsupervised CL algorithms, called Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) (Dennis et al., 2020;
Jiang et al., 2021a) has shown promising zero-shot generalization by automatically generating the training tasks and
adapting the curriculum simultaneously.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms are often known for sample inefficiency and difficult
generalization. Recently, Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) emerged as a new paradigm
for zero-shot generalization by simultaneously
learning a task distribution and agent policies
on the generated tasks. This is a non-stationary
process where the task distribution evolves along
with agent policies; creating an instability over
time. While past works demonstrated the potential of such approaches, sampling effectively from
the task space remains an open challenge, bottlenecking these approaches. To this end, we introduce CLUTR: a novel unsupervised curriculum
learning algorithm that decouples task representation and curriculum learning into a two-stage optimization. It first trains a recurrent variational autoencoder on randomly generated tasks to learn a
latent task manifold. Next, a teacher agent creates
a curriculum by maximizing a minimax REGRETbased objective on a set of latent tasks sampled
from this manifold. Using the fixed-pretrained
task manifold, we show that CLUTR successfully
overcomes the non-stationarity problem and improves stability. Our experimental results show
CLUTR outperforms PAIRED, a principled and
popular UED method, in the challenging CarRacing and navigation environments: achieving
10.6X and 45% improvement in zero-shot generalization, respectively. CLUTR also performs
comparably to the non-UED state-of-the-art for
CarRacing, while requiring 500X fewer environment interactions. We open source our code
at https://github.com/clutr/clutr.

UED algorithms employ a teacher that generates training
tasks by sampling the free parameters of the environment
(e.g., the start, goal, and obstacle locations for a navigation
task) and can either be adaptive or random. Contemporary
adaptive UED teachers, i.e., PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020)
and REPAIRED (Jiang et al., 2021a), are implemented as
RL agents with the free task parameters as their action space.
The teacher agent aims at generating tasks that maximize
the student agent’s regret, defined as the performance gap
between the student agent and an optimal policy. Inspite of
promising zero-shot generalization, adaptive teacher UEDs
are still sample inefficient.
This sample inefficiency is attributed primarily to the difficulty of training a regret based RL teacher (Parker-Holder
et al., 2022). First, the teacher receives a sparse reward only
after specifying the full parameterization of a task; leading
to a long-horizon credit assignment problem. Additionally,
the teacher agent faces a combinatorial explosion problem
if the parameter space is permutation invariant—e.g., for a
navigation task, a set of obstacles corresponds to factorially
different permutations of the parameters1 . Most importantly,

1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Abdus Salam Azad <salam azad@berkeley.edu>.

1
Consider a 13x13 grid for a navigation task, where the locations are numbered from 1 to 169. Also consider a wall made of
four obstacles spanning the locations: {21, 22, 23, 24}. This wall
can be represented using any permutation of this set, e.g., {22, 24,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

