Simple Disentanglement of Style and Content in Visual Representations

Lilian Ngweta * 1 Subha Maity * 2 Alex Gittens 1 Yuekai Sun 2 Mikhail Yurochkin 3 4

Abstract
Learning visual representations with interpretable
features, i.e., disentangled representations, remains a challenging problem. Existing methods
demonstrate some success but are hard to apply to
large-scale vision datasets like ImageNet. In this
work, we propose a simple post-processing framework to disentangle content and style in learned
representations from pre-trained vision models.
We model the pre-trained features probabilistically as linearly entangled combinations of the
latent content and style factors and develop a simple disentanglement algorithm based on the probabilistic model. We show that the method provably
disentangles content and style features and verify its efficacy empirically. Our post-processed
features yield significant domain generalization
performance improvements when the distribution
shift occurs due to style changes or style-related
spurious correlations.

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method, PISCO. Features of
an original image and features of a stylized image are different
when extracted using a feature extractor such as ResNet-50 pretrained in ImageNet. These features are entangled, thus changing
the style affects all features. When PISCO is used to disentangle
these features, it isolates style features and content features, thus
the content features of the two images are the same and only the
style features are different.

tent from style in visual representations (Wu et al., 2019;
Nemeth, 2020; Ren et al., 2021; Kügelgen et al., 2021), a
special case of learning disentangled representations. Here
we use the term style to refer to features or factors that are
not causally related to the outcome of interest. We also note
prior works that, different from our work, study style in
the context of image appearance (Garcia & Vogiatzis, 2018;
Saleh & Elgammal, 2015; Ruta et al., 2022; 2021). Our
goal is to obtain representations where a pre-specified set of
factors (coordinates) encodes image “styles” (e.g., rotation,
color scheme, or style transfer (Huang & Belongie, 2017)),
while the remaining factors encode content and are invariant
to style changes (see Figure 1).

1. Introduction
Deep learning models produce data representations that
are useful for many downstream tasks. Disentangled representations, i.e. representations where coordinates have
meaningful interpretations, are harder to learn (Locatello
et al., 2019b) but they come with many additional benefits,
e.g., data-efficiency (Higgins et al., 2018) and use-cases in
causality (Schölkopf et al., 2021), fairness (Locatello et al.,
2019a), recommender systems (Ma et al., 2019), and image
(Lee et al., 2018) and text (John et al., 2018) processing.

An important application of such representations is out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization. Image recognition systems have been demonstrated to be susceptible to spurious
correlations associated with style, e.g., due to background
colors (Beery et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2019), and to
various style-based distribution shifts, e.g., due to image
corruptions (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018), illumination,
or camera angle differences (Koh et al., 2020). Simply discarding style factors when training a prediction model on
disentangled representations can aid OOD generalization.
Disentangling content from style is also advantageous in
many other applications, e.g., image retrieval (Wu et al.,
2009), image-to-image translation (Ren et al., 2021), and

In this paper, we consider the problem of isolating con*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, United States
2
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States 3 IBM Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States. Correspondence to: Lilian Ngweta <ngwetl@rpi.edu>, Subha Maity <smaity@umich.edu>,
Mikhail Yurochkin <mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

