Propensity Matters: Measuring and Enhancing Balancing for Recommendation

Haoxuan Li 1 Yanghao Xiao 2 Chunyuan Zheng 3 Peng Wu 4 Peng Cui 5

Abstract

want to know the click-through rate if an item had been
exposed to a user; in the task of post-click conversion rate
prediction (Zhang et al., 2020; Dai et al., 2022), we want to
know the conversion rate if an item had been clicked by a
user. However, since users always choose preferred items
to rate or click on and the exposure mechanism of the RS is
not at random, causing the observed data is no longer a valid
representative sample of the target population. In general,
there is a large discrepancy between observed and missing
events, and ignoring such discrepancy will incur bias and
lead to sub-optimal performance (Schnabel et al., 2016).

Propensity-based weighting methods have been
widely studied and demonstrated competitive performance in debiased recommendations. Nevertheless, there are still many questions to be addressed. How to estimate the propensity more
conducive to debiasing performance? Which metric is more reasonable to measure the quality of
the learned propensities? Is it better to make the
cross-entropy loss as small as possible when learning propensities? In this paper, we first discuss
the potential problems of the previously widely
adopted metrics for learned propensities, and propose balanced-mean-squared-error (BMSE) metric for debiased recommendations. Based on
BMSE, we propose IPS-V2 and DR-V2 as the estimators of unbiased loss, and theoretically show
that IPS-V2 and DR-V2 have greater propensity
balancing and smaller variance without sacrificing
additional bias. We further propose a co-training
method for learning balanced representation and
unbiased prediction. Extensive experiments are
conducted on three real-world datasets including
a large industrial dataset, and the results show that
our approach boosts the balancing property and
results in enhanced debiasing performance.

In order to eliminate the differences between the observed
samples and the target population, weighting-based methods
are proposed to achieve the unbiasedness (Swaminathan &
Joachims, 2015a; Schnabel et al., 2016). The basic idea is to
reweight the observed data to the target population, according to the probability of observing an specific event (called
propensity), which motivates many studies on the variants
of propensity-based weighting methods (Wang et al., 2019a;
Guo et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023b;e) and demonstrates competitive performance
in a wide range of recommendation scenarios (Joachims
et al., 2017; Saito et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022).
Despite their popularity and theoretical appeal, the main
practical difficulty of the propensity-based weighting methods is that the true propensity is rarely known and needs
to be estimated from the observed data. Given the key
role propensity played in debiasing, several approaches
are proposed to estimate the propensities, such as Naive
Bayes (Schnabel et al., 2016), Logistic Regression (Schnabel et al., 2016), Poisson Factorization (Wang et al., 2020a),
Multi-task Learning (Zhang et al., 2020), Variance Regularization Constraint (Wang et al., 2021), Stabilized Constraint (Li et al., 2023b;e), and Minimax (Ding et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
For recommender systems (RSs), it is crucial to understand
and answer the counterfactual question “what would the
feedback be if an intervention had been made to a user”,
which covers many common tasks in RS (Wu et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2022). For example, in the task of rating prediction (Schnabel et al., 2016), we want to know the rating
if a user had rated the item; in the task of post-view clickthrough rate prediction (Saito, 2019; Saito et al., 2020), we

Nevertheless, a unified and clear criterion for estimating
propensities has not been established yet. Many issues need
to be resolved: How to estimate the propensity more conducive to debiasing performance? Which metric is more
reasonable to measure the quality of the learned propensities? In practice, the propensities are usually trained by
minimizing a cross-entropy loss. But, is it better to make
the loss as small as possible when learning propensities?

1
Peking University 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University of California, San Diego 4 Beijing Technology
and Business University 5 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to:
Peng Wu <pengwu@btbu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we find that the existing propensity estimation
1

