Minimizing Trajectory Curvature of ODE-based Generative Models

Sangyun Lee 1 Beomsu Kim 2 Jong Chul Ye 2

Abstract

other datasets. Invertible flows enable exact maximum likelihood training, but the invertibility constraint significantly
restricts the architecture choice, which means that they cannot benefit from the development of scalable architectures.
VAEs do not suffer from the invertibility constraint, but their
sample quality is not as good as other models.

Recent ODE/SDE-based generative models, such
as diffusion models, rectified flows, and flow
matching, define a generative process as a time
reversal of a fixed forward process. Even though
these models show impressive performance on
large-scale datasets, numerical simulation requires multiple evaluations of a neural network,
leading to a slow sampling speed. We attribute
the reason to the high curvature of the learned
generative trajectories, as it is directly related
to the truncation error of a numerical solver.
Based on the relationship between the forward
process and the curvature, here we present an
efficient method of training the forward process to minimize the curvature of generative
trajectories without any ODE/SDE simulation.
Experiments show that our method achieves a
lower curvature than previous models and, therefore, decreased sampling costs while maintaining
competitive performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/sangyun884/fast-ode.

Apart from the vanilla VAEs, recent studies utilize their hierarchical extensions (Child, 2020; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020)
as they offer more expressivity to both inference and generative components by assuming nonlinear dependencies
between latent variables. However, they often have to rely
on heuristics such as KL-annealing or gradient skipping due
to training instabilities (Child, 2020; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020).
Although continuous normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018)
do not suffer from the invertibility constraint and can be
trained on a stationary objective function, training requires
simulating ODEs, which prevents them from being applied
to large-scale datasets.
Recent ODE/SDE-based approaches attempt to settle these
issues by defining the generative process as a time reversal of a fixed forward process. Diffusion models (Song
& Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020; SohlDickstein et al., 2015) define the generative process as a
time reversal of a forward diffusion process, where data is
gradually transformed into noise. By doing so, they can be
trained on a stationary loss function (Vincent, 2011) without
ODE/SDE simulation. Moreover, they are not restricted
by the invertibility constraint and can generate high-fidelity
samples with great diversity, allowing them to be successfully applied to various datasets of unprecedented scales (Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022). Rectified flow (Liu
et al., 2022) provides a different perspective on this model
class. From this viewpoint, the training of diffusion models can be seen as matching the forward and reverse vector
fields. Since stochasticity is not a root of the success of
these models (Karras et al., 2022) and rectified flow offers
an alternative perspective that is fully explained under the
ODE scheme, we hereafter refer to these types of models
as ODE-based generative models. If necessary, a generative ODE can be easily converted to an SDE and vice versa
(Song et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Many machine learning problems can be formulated as discovering the underlying distribution from observations. Owing to the development of deep neural networks, deep generative models exhibit superb modeling capabilities.
Classically, Variational Autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013), Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and invertible
flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) have been extensively
studied. However, each model has its drawback. GANs have
dominated image synthesis for several years (Karras et al.,
2019; Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2020b), but carefully
selected regularization techniques and hyperparameters are
needed to stabilize training (Miyato et al., 2018; Brock et al.,
2018), and their performance often does not transfer well to
1
Soongsil University 2 KAIST. Correspondence to: Jong Chul
Ye <jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr>.

However, drawing samples from ODE-based generative
models requires multiple evaluations of a neural network

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

