Meta Learning of Interface Conditions for Multi-Domain Physics-Informed
Neural Networks
Shibo Li * 1 Michael Penwarden * 1 2 Yiming Xu 3 Conor Tillinghast 3 Akil Narayan 2 3 Robert Kirby 1 2
Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract

1

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) are
emerging as popular mesh-free solvers for partial
differential equations (PDEs). Recent extensions
decompose the domain, apply different PINNs to
solve the problem in each subdomain, and stitch
the subdomains at the interface. Thereby, they
can further alleviate the problem complexity, reduce the computational cost, and allow parallelization. However, the performance of multi-domain
PINNs is sensitive to the choice of the interface
conditions. While quite a few conditions have
been proposed, there is no suggestion about how
to select the conditions according to specific problems. To address this gap, we propose META
Learning of Interface Conditions (METALIC), a
simple, efficient yet powerful approach to dynamically determine appropriate interface conditions
for solving a family of parametric PDEs. Specifically, we develop two contextual multi-arm bandit
(MAB) models. The first one applies to the entire
training course, and online updates a Gaussian
process (GP) reward that given the PDE parameters and interface conditions predicts the performance. We prove a sub-linear regret bound for
both UCB and Thompson sampling, which in theory guarantees the effectiveness of our MAB. The
second one partitions the training into two stages,
one is the stochastic phase and the other deterministic phase; we update a GP reward for each
phase to enable different condition selections at
the two stages to further bolster the flexibility and
performance. We have shown the advantage of
METALIC on four bench-mark PDE families.

Introduction

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al.,
2019) have become a popular mesh-free approach for solving partial differential equations (PDEs). They have shown
successful in many scientific and engineering problems,
e.g., (Sahli Costabal et al., 2020; Kissas et al., 2020; Sun
et al., 2020). The recent multi-domain versions, e.g., (Jagtap
et al., 2020; Jagtap and Karniadakis, 2021), extend PINNs
with a divide-and-conquer strategy, and have attracted considerable attention. Specifically, they decompose the domain of interest into several subdomains, place a separate
PINN to solve the PDE at each subdomain, and stitch the
subdomains at the interface. In this way, the multi-domain
PINNs can alleviate problem complexity, adopt simpler architectures, reduce the training cost, and enable parallel
computation (Shukla et al., 2021).
However, the performance of multi-domain PINNs is sensitive to the choice of interface conditions (or regularizers)
that unify the PINN solutions across different subdomains.
Quite a few conditions have been proposed, such as those
that encourage solution and residual continuity (Jagtap and
Karniadakis, 2021), flux conservation (Jagtap et al., 2020),
gradient continuity (De Ryck et al., 2022) and residual gradient continuity (Yu et al., 2022). On one hand, naively combining all possible interface conditions does not necessarily
give the optimal performance; instead, it can complicate
the loss landscape, making optimization more costly and
challenging. On the other hand, the best conditions can vary
across problems, which are up to the problem properties.
Currently, there is no suggestion about how to select interface conditions according to specific problems, bringing
inconvenience and difficulties to the multi-domain practice.

*
Equal contribution 1 Kahlert School of Computing, University
of Utah 2 Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute, University of Utah 3 Department of Mathematics, University of Utah.
Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.

To address this issue, in this paper we propose METALIC, a
simple, efficient and powerful method that can dynamically
determine the appropriate interface conditions for solving a
family of parametric PDEs. The contributions of our work
are summarized as follows.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• Problem Formulation and Strategy. We formulate
interface selection as a novel meta learning problem,
and propose to use the multi-arm bandit (MAB) frame1

