Regularization and Variance-Weighted Regression Achieves
Minimax Optimality in Linear MDPs: Theory and Practice

Toshinori Kitamura 1 Tadashi Kozuno 2 Yunhao Tang 3 Nino Vieillard 4 Michal Valko 3 Wenhao Yang 5
Jincheng Mei 4 Pierre Ménard 6 Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar 3 Rémi Munos 3 Olivier Pietquin 4
Matthieu Geist 4 Csaba Szepesvári 7 3 Wataru Kumagai 1 Yutaka Matsuo 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence and entropy regularization play an important role in recent reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms. These regularizations are often
introduced to promote exploration (Haarnoja et al., 2017;
2018), make algorithms more robust to errors (Husain et al.,
2021; Bellemare et al., 2016), and ensure that performance
improves over time (Schulman et al., 2015). The behavior
of RL algorithms under these regularizations can be studied
using mirror descent value iteration (MDVI; Geist et al.
(2019)), a value iteration algorithm that incorporates KL
and entropy regularization in its value and policy updates.
Notably, when both regularizations are combined, MDVI
is proven to achieve nearly minimax optimal sample
complexity1 with the generative model (simulator) in
infinite-horizon MDPs, which indicates that it can exhibit
good performance with relatively few samples (Kozuno
et al., 2022). This analysis supports the state-of-the-art
performance of the recent Munchausen DQN (M-DQN,
Vieillard et al. (2020b)), which is a natural extension of
MDVI to a value-based deep RL algorithm.

Mirror descent value iteration (MDVI), an abstraction of Kullback–Leibler (KL) and entropyregularized reinforcement learning (RL), has
served as the basis for recent high-performing
practical RL algorithms. However, despite the use
of function approximation in practice, the theoretical understanding of MDVI has been limited
to tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs).
We study MDVI with linear function approximation through its sample complexity required
to identify an ε-optimal policy with probability
1 − δ under the settings of an infinite-horizon
linear MDP, generative model, and G-optimal design. We demonstrate that least-squares regression weighted by the variance of an estimated
optimal value function of the next state is crucial
to achieving minimax optimality. Based on this
observation, we present Variance-Weighted LeastSquares MDVI (VWLS-MDVI), the first theoretical algorithm that achieves nearly minimax
optimal sample complexity for infinite-horizon
linear MDPs. Furthermore, we propose a practical VWLS algorithm for value-based deep RL,
Deep Variance Weighting (DVW). Our experiments demonstrate that DVW improves the performance of popular value-based deep RL algorithms on a set of MinAtar benchmarks.

However, the minimax optimality of MDVI has only been
proven for tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs), and
does not consider the challenge of generalization in RL. As
practical RL algorithms often use function approximators
to obtain generalizability, this leads to a natural question: Is
MDVI minimax optimal with function approximation? The
answer to this question should reveal room for improvement
in existing practical MDVI-based algorithms such as
M-DQN. This study addresses the question by investigating
the sample complexity of a model-free infinite-horizon
(ε, δ)-PAC RL algorithm, i.e., the expected number of calls
to the generative model to identify an ε-optimal policy with
a failure probability less than δ, under the assumptions of
linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020), access to all the state-action
pairs with a generative model, and a G-optimal design
(Lattimore et al., 2020). Intuitively, these assumptions allow

1

The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 OMRON SINIC X, Japan
DeepMind 4 Google Research, Brain team 5 Peking University
6
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg 7 University of Alberta.
Correspondence to: Toshinori Kitamura <toshinori-k@weblab.t.utokyo.ac.jp>.
3

1
We only study the sample complexity (number of calls to a
generative model) and ignore the computational complexity (total
number of logical and arithmetic operations that the agent uses).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

