Looped Transformers as Programmable Computers

Angeliki Giannou * 1 Shashank Rajput * 1 Jy-yong Sohn 2 Kangwook Lee 1 Jason D. Lee 3
Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1

Abstract

Toutanova, 2019). Large language models, such as GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022),
excel in various NLP tasks and perform in-context learning
based on brief prompts and examples.

We present a framework for using transformer
networks as universal computers by programming
them with specific weights and placing them in
a loop. Our input sequence acts as a punchcard, consisting of instructions and memory for
data read/writes. We demonstrate that a constant number of encoder layers can emulate basic
computing blocks, including lexicographic operations, non-linear functions, function calls, program counters, and conditional branches. Using
this framework, we emulate a computer using a
simple instruction-set architecture, which allows
us to map iterative algorithms to programs that
can be executed by a constant depth looped transformer network. We show how a single frozen
transformer, instructed by its input, can emulate
a basic calculator, a basic linear algebra library,
and even a full backpropagation, in-context learning algorithm. Our findings reveal the potential
of transformer networks as programmable compute units and offer insight into the mechanics of
attention. 3

1

LLMs can also perform algorithmic tasks and reasoning through in- context learning (ICL), as shown in several works, such as (Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022c;
Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022b; Dasgupta et al.,
2022; Chung et al., 2022). For example, (Zhou et al., 2022)
showed that LLMs can perform addition on unseen examples when prompted with a multidigit addition algorithm
and some examples. These results suggest that LLMs can apply algorithmic principles and perform pre-instructed commands on a given input, as if interpreting natural language
as code.
Constructive arguments have demonstrated that Transformers can simulate Turing Machines with enough depth or
recursive links between attention layers (Pérez et al., 2021;
Pérez et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2022a). This demonstrates
the potential of transformer networks to precisely follow
algorithmic instructions specified by the input. Yet, these
constructions do not provide insight into how to create Transformers that can carry out particular algorithmic tasks, or
compile programs in a higher-level programming language.

Introduction

Recently, various methods have been developed to select the
weights of a Transformer model to function as a learning algorithm on-the-fly, performing implicit training at inference
time when given training data as input (Akyürek et al., 2022;
von Oswald et al., 2022). These methods typically require a
number of layers proportional to the number of iterations of
the learning algorithm and are limited to a small set of loss
functions and models.

Transformers (TFs) have become a popular choice for machine learning tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results in
Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision
(CV) (Vaswani et al., 2017; Khan et al., 2022; Yuan et al.,
2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). They use attention to capture higher-order relationships and long-range dependencies,
making them effective in tasks such as machine translation
and language modeling (Vaswani et al., 2017; Kenton &

The ability to program transformer models to emulate the
abstract computation of a Turing Machine and the specific
algorithms of in-context learning, highlights the potential for
transformer networks as versatile programmable computers.
Our research aims to explore this promising prospect, uncovering how the mechanics of attention can enable the emulation of a general-purpose computer inspired by instructionset architectures.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Yonsei
University 3 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Angeliki Giannou <giannou@wisc.edu>, Shashank Rajput <rajput.shashank11@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
3
The code is available at https://github.com/
jysohn1108/Looped_TF

1

