MultiRobustBench: Benchmarking Robustness Against Multiple Attacks

Sihui Dai 1 Saeed Mahloujifar 1 Chong Xiang 1 Vikash Sehwag 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Prateek Mittal 1

Abstract

study multiattack robustness. Several works (Maini et al.,
2020; Tramèr & Boneh, 2019; Croce & Hein, 2020a; Dai
et al., 2022; Jin & Rinard, 2020; Laidlaw et al., 2021; Hsiung et al., 2022a) design defenses for multiattack robustness, but these works lack a unified evaluation framework:
these works utilize different small sets of attacks and attack strengths. The lack of a standardized benchmark for
evaluating multiattack robustness is an obstacle to understanding and improving upon the current progress made by
the community towards multiattack robustness.

The bulk of existing research in defending
against adversarial examples focuses on defending against a single (typically bounded ℓp norm) attack, but for a practical setting, machine learning (ML) models should be robust
to a wide variety of attacks.
In this paper, we present the first unified framework for
considering multiple attacks against ML models. Our framework is able to model different levels of learner’s knowledge about the testtime adversary, allowing us to model robustness against unforeseen attacks and robustness
against unions of attacks. Using our framework, we present the first leaderboard, MultiRobustBench (https://multirobustbench.
github.io), for benchmarking multiattack
evaluation which captures performance across
attack types and attack strengths. We evaluate
the performance of 16 defended models for robustness against a set of 9 different attack types,
including ℓp -based threat models, spatial transformations, and color changes, at 20 different
attack strengths (180 attacks total). Additionally,
we analyze the state of current defenses against
multiple attacks. Our analysis shows that while
existing defenses have made progress in terms of
average robustness across the set of attacks used,
robustness against the worst-case attack is still a
big open problem as all existing models perform
worse than random guessing.

To improve our understanding of current progress in multiattack robustness, we introduce MultiRobustBench (available
at multirobustbench.github.io), which provides
a leaderboard for multiattack robustness based on two new
metrics that we introduce: competitiveness ratio (CR) and
stability constant (SC). CR measures how close the robust
accuracy of a defense on each attack type is to the robust accuracy of the best performing model for each specific attack
type. SC measures robustness degradation across attacks of
different strengths. Our benchmark evaluates 16 defended
models based on a set of 9 different attacks across 20 levels
of attack strengths (180 attacks total, 2880 evaluations overall), making it the largest multiattack evaluation to date. Our
benchmark allows us to draw important insights on the state
of research in multiattack robustness; specifically, we find
that while existing research has made progress on average
robustness over this set of attacks, all existing defenses perform worse than random guessing in worst-case multiattack
robustness.
Our contributions are as follows:
We introduce an adversarial game framework for multiattack robustness. This framework unifies previously
studied settings such as robustness against unions of known
attacks and robustness against unforeseen attacks by introducing knowledge sets which capture mismatch in threat
models used during training and test-time. Using this framework, we define a taxonomy of settings in multiattack robustness.

1. Introduction
For safety-critical applications, it is important that machine
learning (ML) models are robust against test-time adversaries. These test-time adversaries can potentially use multiple (and unforeseen) attack types, motivating the need to
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University 2 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Sihui Dai <sihuid@princeton.edu>.

We introduce metrics (competitiveness ratio and stability constant) for measuring multiattack performance.
Competitiveness ratio (CR) can be interpreted as an aggregated percentage representing how close the accuracy of the
defense is to the accuracy of the best performing models,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

