Covariate balancing using the integral probability metric for causal inference

Insung Kong 1 Yuha Park 1 Joonhyuk Jung 1 Kwonsang Lee 1 Yongdai Kim 1

Abstract

weighting (Imai & Ratkovic, 2014) methods to adjust for the
systematic bias. The main goal of these methods is to make
the two groups comparable, meaning that their covariate
distributions are (asymptotically) balanced. Achieving the
covariate balancing is essential to causal inference.

Weighting methods in causal inference have been
widely used to achieve a desirable level of covariate balancing. However, the existing weighting methods have desirable theoretical properties
only when a certain model, either the propensity
score or outcome regression model, is correctly
specified. In addition, the corresponding estimators do not behave well for finite samples due to
large variance even when the model is correctly
specified. In this paper, we consider to use the
integral probability metric (IPM), which is a metric between two probability measures, for covariate balancing. Optimal weights are determined
so that weighted empirical distributions for the
treated and control groups have the smallest IPM
value for a given set of discriminators. We prove
that the corresponding estimator can be consistent
without correctly specifying any model (neither
the propensity score nor the outcome regression
model). In addition, we empirically show that our
proposed method outperforms existing weighting
methods with large margins for finite samples.

One of the core approaches in covariate balancing is inverse
probability weighting (IPW) (Hirano et al., 2003). The IPW
method gives weights to observed samples reciprocally proportional to the propensity scores that are the conditional
probabilities of being assigned to the treatment. Using these
weights, the IPW can match the covariate distributions of
the treated and control groups. However, in practice, the
propensity scores (thus weights) are unknown and hence
must be estimated. Propensity scores are conventionally
estimated by standard regression models including the logistic regression (Lunceford & Davidian, 2004) or machine
learning techniques (Lee et al., 2010).
One of the issues using the IPW is that though the weighting
scheme eventually achieves the covariate balancing as the
sample size increases, there is no guarantee to achieve the
balance for given data. Since the IPW uses the inverse of
probabilities, a small error in estimating these probabilities
would cause a substantial error in the estimated causal effect
(Li et al., 2018). That is, the performance of the IPW estimator highly relies on the correctness of the propensity score
estimation (Hainmueller, 2012; Imai & Ratkovic, 2014).

1. Introduction

Instead of estimating the propensity score, Hainmueller
(2012) and Imai & Ratkovic (2014) propose to find the
weights that match the sample moments of the covariate. By
weighting samples to balance the sample moments of the
covariate of the two groups, they improve the stability of
the causal effect estimate to make it more accurate.

Estimating causal effects from observational data has become an important research topic since it has the advantage
of low budget requirements and a large amount of available
data, compared with randomized trials (Yao et al., 2021).
The main difficulty in estimating the causal effect is that, for
a binary treatment, the pre-treatment covariate distribution
of the treated group differs significantly from that of the control group. This systematic difference requires sophisticated
methods to find a causal relationship from observational
data (Lunceford & Davidian, 2004; Imbens & Rubin, 2015).
There have been lots of methods developed including regression adjustment (Hill, 2011), matching (Stuart, 2010) and

The biggest drawback of the existing weighting methods is
that their theoretical guarantee and good performance are
valid in a restricted situation: either the propensity score or
the true outcome model (i.e. the regression model for either
treated or control group) is a linear function of covariate
(Sant’Anna et al., 2022). Without this condition, the estimated causal effect is not guaranteed to be consistent. To
address this issue, they assume that an appropriate transformation exists such that the true outcome regression model is
expressed as a linear function of the transformed covariate.
However, since information required for choosing a good

1
Department of Statistics, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Yongdai Kim <ydkim0903@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

