Drug Discovery under Covariate Shift with
Domain-Informed Prior Distributions over Functions
Leo Klarner 1 Tim G. J. Rudner 1 Michael Reutlinger 2 Torsten Schindler 2
Garrett M. Morris 1 Charlotte M. Deane 1 Yee Whye Teh 1

Abstract
Accelerating the discovery of novel and more effective therapeutics is an important pharmaceutical problem in which deep learning is playing an
increasingly significant role. However, real-world
drug discovery tasks are often characterized by a
scarcity of labeled data and significant covariate
shift—a setting that poses a challenge to standard deep learning methods. In this paper, we
present Q - SAVI, a probabilistic model able to address these challenges by encoding explicit prior
knowledge of the data-generating process into a
prior distribution over functions, presenting researchers with a transparent and probabilistically
principled way to encode data-driven modeling
preferences. Building on a novel, gold-standard
bioactivity dataset that facilitates a meaningful
comparison of models in an extrapolative regime,
we explore different approaches to induce data
shift and construct a challenging evaluation setup.
We then demonstrate that using Q - SAVI to integrate contextualized prior knowledge of drug-like
chemical space into the modeling process affords
substantial gains in predictive accuracy and calibration, outperforming a broad range of state-ofthe-art self-supervised pre-training and domain
adaptation techniques.

Figure 1. In early-stage drug discovery, bioactivity labels are usually only available for a small and biased subset of compounds (a).
However, predictions are often most useful for novel molecules
that are dissimilar to the ones already explored—an evaluative
setting in which deep learning algorithms perform unreliably (b).
We demonstrate that using a regularizing distribution over functions to encode prior knowledge of drug-like chemical space into
the modeling process improves the predictive performance and
calibration of neural networks in this extrapolative regime (c).

predict clinically relevant molecular properties and reduce
the need for time- and resource-intensive experiments has
the potential to significantly accelerate the development of
promising and innovative chemical leads in drug discovery.
A key feature of practical early-stage drug discovery research is the application of predictive models to novel compounds that are structurally or functionally dissimilar to
molecules that have already been explored (see Figure 1). In
such an extrapolative regime, the practical utility of machine
learning systems hinges on their ability to (a) robustly generalize to unexplored areas of chemical space and (b) reliably
indicate when they fail to do so by generating well-calibrated predictive uncertainty estimates. However, standard
deep learning algorithms often perform poorly under covariate shift, generating both incorrect and highly miscalibrated
predictions (Ovadia et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2021). This is
particularly problematic in the context of early-stage drug
discovery, where experimental labels are expensive to acquire and therefore only available for a small and often
highly biased subset of compounds.

1. Introduction
Discovering novel drug candidates that are able to safely
and effectively treat neglected diseases or combat multidrugresistant pathogens is a challenging biomedical research
problem of considerable scientific and societal importance.
Leveraging modern deep learning algorithms to accurately
1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Pharma Research & Early Development, Roche, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Leo Klarner <leo.klarner@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

