Decentralized SGD and Average-direction SAM are Asymptotically Equivalent

Tongtian Zhu 1 Fengxiang He 2 3 Kaixuan Chen 1 Mingli Song 1 Dacheng Tao 4

Abstract

Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova et al.,
2020). In D-SGD, each worker communicates only with
its directly connected neighbors; see a detailed background
in Appendix A.2. This decentralization avoids the requirements of a costly central server with heavy communication
burdens and potential privacy risks. The existing literature
demonstrates that the massive models on edge can converge
to a unique steady consensus model even in the absence of a
central server (Shi et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2011), with asymptotic linear speedup in convergence rate (Lian et al., 2017)
similar to distributed centralized SGD (C-SGD) (Dean et al.,
2012; Li et al., 2014). Therefore, D-SGD offers a promising distributed learning solution with significant advantages
in communication efficiency (Ying et al., 2021b), privacy
(Nedic, 2020) and scalability (Lian et al., 2017).

Decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) allows collaborative learning on massive
devices simultaneously without the control of a
central server. However, existing theories claim
that decentralization invariably undermines generalization. In this paper, we challenge the conventional belief and present a completely new perspective for understanding decentralized learning.
We prove that D-SGD implicitly minimizes the
loss function of an average-direction Sharpnessaware minimization (SAM) algorithm under general non-convex non-β-smooth settings. This surprising asymptotic equivalence reveals an intrinsic
regularization-optimization trade-off and three advantages of decentralization: (1) there exists a free
uncertainty evaluation mechanism in D-SGD to
improve posterior estimation; (2) D-SGD exhibits
a gradient smoothing effect; and (3) the sharpness
regularization effect of D-SGD does not decrease
as total batch size increases, which justifies the
potential generalization benefit of D-SGD over
centralized SGD (C-SGD) in large-batch scenarios. Experiments support our theory and the code
is available at § D-SGD and SAM.

Despite these merits, it is regrettable that the existing theories claim decentralization to invariably undermines generalization (Sun et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Deng et al.,
2023), which contradicts the following unique phenomena
in decentralized deep learning :
• D-SGD can outperform C-SGD in large-batch settings, achieving higher validation accuracy and smaller
validation-training accuracy gap, despite both being finetuned (Zhang et al., 2021);
• A non-negligible consensus distance (see Equation (3)) at
middle phases of decentralized training can improve generalization over centralized training (Kong et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

These unexplained phenomena indicates the existence of
a non-negligible gap between existing theories and deep
learning experiments, which we attribute to the overlook of
important characteristics of decentralized learning in existing literature. Accordingly, the central motivation of our
study is to thoroughly examine the unique, underexamined
characteristics of decentralized learning to bridge the gap.

Decentralization is a promising paradigm for harnessing
the power of locally connected computing resources while
preserving privacy (Warnat-Herresthal et al., 2021; Bhatia
& Samet, 2022; Yuan et al., 2022). Decentralized stochastic gradient descent (D-SGD) is a popular decentralized
algorithm which enables simultaneous model training on
a massive number of workers without the need for a central server (Xiao & Boyd, 2004; Lopes & Sayed, 2008;

Directly analyzing the dynamics of the diffusion-like decentralized learning systems, instead of relying on upper
bounds, can be challenging. Instead, we aim to establish
a relationship between D-SGD and other algorithms used
for centralized training. In recent years, there has been a
growing interest in techniques that aim to improve the generalization of deep learning models. One of the most popular
techniques is sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) (Foret

1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 2 JD Explore Academy, JD.com, Inc. 3 Artificial Intelligence
and its Applications Institute, School of Informatics, University of
Edinburgh 4 The University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Fengxiang He <F.He@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

