Model Ratatouille:
Recycling Diverse Models for Out-of-Distribution Generalization

Alexandre Ramé 1 2 Kartik Ahuja 1 Jianyu Zhang 1 3 Matthieu Cord 2 4 Léon Bottou 1 3 David Lopez-Paz 1

Abstract

solutions for real-world applications: also known as pretrained models, these machine learning systems are trained
on large-and-diverse data (Fang et al., 2022; Nguyen et al.,
2022; Abnar et al., 2022) and easy to adapt to downstream
tasks. Having ditched the “training from scratch” mentality,
practitioners now follow a standardized two-step transfer
learning strategy (Oquab et al., 2014). From some foundation model, they fine-tune on their target task with usually
a limited amount of in-house data. Unfortunately, each of
these fine-tunings risks latching onto specific patterns from
the practitioners’ training data (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Miller
et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020). Thus, these shortsighted
models struggle to generalize on out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Taori et al., 2020;
Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021), negatively impacting human lives (Taylor et al., 2016; Zech
et al., 2018). Increased OOD generalization would enable
the responsible use of machine learning in real-world applications where robustness and safety are critical, such as
medical imaging (DeGrave et al., 2021) and autonomous
driving (Kuutti et al., 2020).

Foundation models are redefining how AI systems are built. Practitioners now follow a standard procedure to build their machine learning
solutions: from a pre-trained foundation model,
they fine-tune the weights on the target task of
interest. So, the Internet is swarmed by a handful
of foundation models fine-tuned on many diverse
tasks: these individual fine-tunings exist in isolation without benefiting from each other. In our
opinion, this is a missed opportunity, as these specialized models contain rich and diverse features.
In this paper, we thus propose model ratatouille,
a new strategy to recycle the multiple fine-tunings
of the same foundation model on diverse auxiliary tasks. Specifically, we repurpose these auxiliary weights as initializations for multiple parallel
fine-tunings on the target task; then, we average
all fine-tuned weights to obtain the final model.
This recycling strategy aims at maximizing the
diversity in weights by leveraging the diversity in
auxiliary tasks. Empirically, it improves the state
of the art on the reference DomainBed benchmark
for out-of-distribution generalization. Looking
forward, this work contributes to the emerging
paradigm of updatable machine learning where,
akin to open-source software development, the
community collaborates to reliably update machine learning models. Our code is released here.

How to best fine-tune foundation models for OOD generalization is thus becoming a central topic of research. In
particular, the recently discovered ability to average neural
networks’ weights (Izmailov et al., 2018; Neyshabur et al.,
2020) has inspired a plethora of modern fine-tuning approaches. We illustrate some of them in Figure 1, such
as moving averages (Izmailov et al., 2018), WiSE finetuning (Wortsman et al., 2022b), model soups (Wortsman
et al., 2022a) and DiWA (Ramé et al., 2022). However,
these strategies cannot accommodate the swarms of specialized fine-tunings of the same foundation model increasingly
available in the Internet. Recent inter-training (Phang et al.,
2018; Pruksachatkun et al., 2020) and fusing (Choshen et al.,
2022b; Don-Yehiya et al., 2022) strategies recycle intermediate fine-tunings on auxiliary tasks to enrich the features
before fine-tuning on the target task. However, the success
of these recycling strategies usually depend on the similarity
between the auxiliary and target tasks. We also argue in Section 2 that these strategies fail to fully leverage the diversity
in auxiliary tasks, even though feature diversity improves
OOD generalization (Laakom et al., 2021; Nayman et al.,
2022; Jain et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The framework of foundation models (Bommasani et al.,
2021) is fueling a spectacular adoption of machine learning
1
Meta AI, Paris, France 2 Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
ISIR, Paris, France 3 NYU, New-York, USA 4 Valeo.ai, Paris,
France.
Correspondence to: Alexandre Ramé <alexandre.rame@isir.upmc.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

