Which Tricks are Important for Learning to Rank?

Ivan Lyzhin 1 Aleksei Ustimenko 2 † Andrey Gulin 1 Liudmila Prokhorenkova 3

Abstract

ous machine learning tasks, gradient-boosted decision trees
(GBDT) are still state-of-the-art algorithms for tabular
datasets containing heterogeneous and noisy features (Gorishniy et al., 2021; Katzir et al., 2021). In particular, GBDT
methods outperform other approaches for the learning-torank problem. A recent paper by Qin et al. (2021) observes
that for standard tabular LTR datasets, the best results are
achieved by a classic LambdaMART algorithm (Wu et al.,
2010) proposed more than a decade ago and implemented
within the LightGBM library (Ke et al., 2017). Thus, our paper focuses on GBDT-based learning-to-rank methods and
provides an extensive study of existing and new approaches
and their important algorithmic details.

Nowadays, state-of-the-art learning-to-rank methods are based on gradient-boosted decision trees
(GBDT). The most well-known algorithm is
LambdaMART which was proposed more than a
decade ago. Recently, several other GBDT-based
ranking algorithms were proposed. In this paper,
we thoroughly analyze these methods in a unified setup. In particular, we address the following
questions. Is direct optimization of a smoothed
ranking loss preferable over optimizing a convex
surrogate? How to properly construct and smooth
surrogate ranking losses? To address these questions, we compare LambdaMART with YetiRank
and StochasticRank methods and their modifications. We also propose a simple improvement of
the YetiRank approach that allows for optimizing
specific ranking loss functions. As a result, we
gain insights into learning-to-rank techniques and
obtain a new state-of-the-art algorithm.

In addition to LambdaMART, we revisit another longknown algorithm called YetiRank (Gulin et al., 2011). YetiRank won The Transfer Learning Track of Yahoo!’s LTR
challenge in 2010 but was not much explored after that.
The main algorithmic differences of YetiRank compared
to LambdaMART are stochastic smoothing used during
training to randomize the orderings and a different way to
construct an upper bound for the loss function with a tighter
approximation. Our empirical evaluation shows that YetiRank outperforms LambdaMART and other competitors
in most cases. In addition, we show that YetiRank implicitly optimizes a particular form of the DCG ranking quality
function. This observation allows us to modify the YetiRank procedure by re-weighting the gradients according to
a proper loss. The proposed modification YetiLoss further
improves the performance of YetiRank for specific losses,
for instance, MRR and MAP. For MAP, we obtain new
state-of-the-art results with YetiLoss. We also explain why
YetiLoss is expected to have more stable optimization and
better generalization.

1. Introduction
Learning to rank (LTR) is a central problem in information
retrieval (Burges, 2010). The objective of LTR is to rank a
given set of items to optimize the overall utility of the list.
In information retrieval, given a query and a list of candidate
documents, it is desirable to rank the documents in decreasing order of relevance to the query. Usually, LTR methods
learn a function computing scores for all documents and
then sort the documents according to their scores. Thus,
a major challenge for LTR is that the sorting operation is
non-differentiable, which prevents effective gradient-based
optimization.

A recent work by Ustimenko & Prokhorenkova (2020)
shows that the LambdaMART approach, implemented
within the CatBoost library (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018),
can be outperformed by an algorithm called StochasticRank.
StochasticRank directly optimizes any given ranking loss
with provable convergence guarantees. For this purpose, it
uses stochastic smoothing of the loss function (without upper bounding). The obtained objective is often non-convex,
so it is optimized with Stochastic Gradient Langevin Boosting (Ustimenko & Prokhorenkova, 2020) — a boosting
algorithm designed to optimize non-convex functions.

Despite the recent success of neural approaches in vari†

The work was done while working at Yandex. 1 Yandex,
Moscow, Russia 2 ShareChat, London, UK 3 Yandex Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Aleksei Ustimenko
<research@aleksei.uk>, Liudmila Prokhorenkova <ostroumovala@yandex-team.ru>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

