Deep Latent State Space Models for Time-Series Generation

Linqi Zhou 1 Michael Poli 1 Winnie Xu 2 Stefano Massaroli 3 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract

autoencoder models (Chen et al., 2018; Yildiz et al., 2019;
Rubanova et al., 2019), normalizing flows (de Bézenac et al.,
2020), generative adversarial (Yoon et al., 2019; Yu et al.,
2022; Brooks et al., 2022), and diffusion (Rasul et al., 2021).
Among these, continuous-time methods (often based on underlying ODEs) are the preferred approach for irregularlysampled sequences as they can predict at arbitrary time steps
and can handle sequences of varying lengths. Unfortunately,
existing ODE–based methods (Rubanova et al., 2019; Yildiz
et al., 2019) often fall short in learning models for real-world
data (e.g., temperature and rain data that follow very sharp
transition dynamics) due to their limited expressivity and
numerical instabilities during backward gradient computation (Hochreiter, 1998; Niesen & Hall, 2004; Zhuang et al.,
2020).

Methods based on ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) are widely used to build generative models of time-series. In addition to high computational overhead due to explicitly computing hidden states recurrence, existing ODE–based models fall short in learning sequence data with sharp
transitions – common in many real-world systems
– due to numerical challenges during optimization. In this work, we propose LS4, a generative model for sequences with latent variables
evolving according to a state space ODE to increase modeling capacity. Inspired by recent deep
state space models (S4), we achieve speedups
by leveraging a convolutional representation of
LS4 which bypasses the explicit evaluation of
hidden states. We show that LS4 significantly
outperforms previous continuous-time generative
models in terms of marginal distribution, classification, and prediction scores on real-world
datasets in the Monash Forecasting Repository,
and is capable of modeling highly stochastic data
with sharp temporal transitions. LS4 sets state–
of–the–art for continuous–time latent generative
models, with significant improvement of mean
squared error and tighter variational lower bounds
on irregularly–sampled datasets, while also being ×100 faster than other baselines on long sequences.

A natural way to increase the flexibility of ODE-based models is to increase the dimensionality of their (deterministic)
hidden states. State–of–the–art methods explicitly compute
hidden states by unrolling the underlying recurrence over
time (each time step parametrized by a neural network),
incurring in polynomial computational costs which prevent
scaling to longer sequences.
An alternative approach to increasing modeling capacity is
to incorporate stochastic latent variables into the model, a
highly successful strategy in generative modeling (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Chung et al., 2015; Song et al., 2020; Ho
et al., 2020). However, reference models like latent neural
ODE models (Rubanova et al., 2019) inject stochasticity
only at the initial condition of the system. In contrast, we introduce LS4, a latent generative model where the sequence
of latent variables is represented as the solution of linear
state space equations (Chen, 1984). Unrolling the recurrence equation shows an autoregressive dependence in the
sequence of latent variables, the joint of which is highly expressive in representing time series distributions. The high
dimensional structure of the latent space, being equivalent
to that of the input sequence, allows LS4 to learn expressive
latent representations and fit the distribution of sequences
produced by a family of dynamical systems, a common setting resulting from non–stationarity. We further show how
LS4 can learn the dynamics of stiff (Shampine & Thompson, 2007) dynamical systems where previous methods fail
to do so. Inspired by recent works on deep state space models, or stacks of linear state spaces and non-linearities (Gu

1. Introduction
Time series are a ubiquitous data modality, and find extensive application in weather (Hersbach et al., 2020) engineering disciplines, biology (Peng et al., 1995), and finance (Poli et al., 2019). The main existing approaches for
deep generative learning of temporal data can be broadly
categorized into autoregressive (Oord et al., 2016), latent
1

Stanford University 2 University of Toronto 3 MILA. Correspondence to: Linqi Zhou <linqizhou@stanford.edu>, Michael
Poli <poli@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

