Multi-class Graph Clustering via Approximated Effective p-Resistance

Shota Saito 1 Mark Herbster 1

Abstract

Slepcev & Thorpe, 2019).

This paper develops an approximation to the (effective) p-resistance and applies it to multi-class
clustering. Spectral methods based on the graph
Laplacian and its generalization to the graph pLaplacian have been a backbone of non-euclidean
clustering techniques. The advantage of the pLaplacian is that the parameter p induces a controllable bias on cluster structure. The drawback
of p-Laplacian eigenvector based methods is that
the third and higher eigenvectors are difficult to
compute. Thus, instead, we are motivated to
use the p-resistance induced by the p-Laplacian
for clustering. For p-resistance, small p biases
towards clusters with high internal connectivity
while large p biases towards clusters of small “extent,” that is a preference for smaller shortest-path
distances between vertices in the cluster. However, the p-resistance is expensive to compute. We
overcome this by developing an approximation
to the p-resistance. We prove upper and lower
bounds on this approximation and observe that it
is exact when the graph is a tree. We also provide
theoretical justification for the use of p-resistance
for clustering. Finally, we provide experiments
comparing our approximated p-resistance clustering to other p-Laplacian based methods.

This paper considers multi-class clustering over a graph
using the graph p-seminorm. For this purpose, spectral
clustering is the most popular. In the 2-seminorm based
(i.e., standard) spectral clustering, we use the first k eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian for k-class clustering (von
Luxburg, 2007). This use of the first k eigenvectors is
theoretically supported (Lee et al., 2014). Using the pseminorm, this graph Laplacian is extended to the graph
p-Laplacian (Bühler & Hein, 2009). Similar to the standard
case, using the first k eigenvectors of this graph p-Laplacian
for k-class clustering is also theoretically supported (Tudisco & Hein, 2018). However, there is not yet known an
exact identification for the third or higher eigenpairs of pLaplacian (Lindqvist, 2008), and hence in practice, it is
difficult to obtain them. Due to this limitation, the existing
methods using p-Laplacian propose an ad-hoc resolution
of this limitation for multi-class clustering (Bühler & Hein,
2009; Ding et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2010). On the other hand,
this limitation makes the p-Laplacian difficult to use in practice to leverage the full potential of graph p-seminorm for
multi-class clustering purposes.
Thus, in order to aim to exploit the graph p-seminorm more
for multi-class clustering, we explore an alternative way to
spectral clustering; in this paper, we propose multi-class
clustering via approximated effective p-resistance. The presistance is also induced by the graph p-seminorm. The
use of p-resistance1 for clustering is motivated in the following way. Looking back to the 2-seminorm case, the
2-resistance is considered in the context of the graph analog
to electric circuit (Doyle & Snell, 1984). The 2-resistance
is defined as an inverse of the constrained optimization
problem using the graph 2-seminorm. This 2-resistance
is known to be a metric over a graph (Klein & Randić,
1993). Moreover, 2-resistance is characterized by a semisupervised learning problem of the graph 2-seminorm regularization (Alamgir & Luxburg, 2011). Given these properties, the 2-resistance is used for the multi-class graph
clustering (Yen et al., 2005; Alev et al., 2017). However,
in the large graph setting, the 2-resistance converges to a
meaningless limit function (Nadler et al., 2009; von Luxburg

1. Introduction
Graphs are widely used data structures representing a pairwise relationship (Shi & Malik, 1997). In machine learning,
various graph methods are considered, such as clustering
and semi-supervised learning (von Luxburg, 2007; Zhu et al.,
2003). Common to these methods, graph 2-seminorm, 2seminorm induced from the graph Laplacian, is actively
used. Its generalization to the graph p-seminorm is known
to exhibit performance improvement (Bühler & Hein, 2009;
1

Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Shota Saito
<ssaito@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.

1
In the following, we abbreviate effective p-resistance as presistance.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

