Supported Trust Region Optimization for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Yixiu Mao 1 Hongchang Zhang 1 Chen Chen 1 Yi Xu 2 Xiangyang Ji 1

Abstract

till a better policy (Chen et al., 2020; 2021). A common
practice is to set the weight as the exponentiated advantage
function, leading to Exponentiated Advantage-Weighted Behavior Cloning (EAWBC) (Wang et al., 2018; Peng et al.,
2019; Nair et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Siegel et al.,
2020). Mathematically, EAWBC is equivalent to a policy
improvement step in RL with a KL constraint towards an
implicit baseline policy from which the imitated actions
are sampled (i.e. behavior policy). As a result, the policy
of existing EAWBC methods is implicitly constrained by
a density constraint, which is typically too restrictive to
achieve good performance both theoretically and empirically (Kumar et al., 2019). As a simple example, when the
dataset contains a small proportion of the optimal behavior,
density constraint will lead to a sub-optimal policy.

Offline reinforcement learning suffers from the
out-of-distribution issue and extrapolation error.
Most policy constraint methods regularize the density of the trained policy towards the behavior policy, which is too restrictive in most cases. We propose Supported Trust Region optimization (STR)
which performs trust region policy optimization
with the policy constrained within the support of
the behavior policy, enjoying the less restrictive
support constraint. We show that, when assuming no approximation and sampling error, STR
guarantees strict policy improvement until convergence to the optimal support-constrained policy in
the dataset. Further with both errors incorporated,
STR still guarantees safe policy improvement for
each step. Empirical results validate the theory
of STR and demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance on MuJoCo locomotion domains and
much more challenging AntMaze domains.

On the other hand, from the perspective of optimization process, it is desirable that an RL algorithm can have the safe
policy improvement guarantee, i.e., have a worst-case performance degradation bound for each policy update step. Benefit from this property, online trust region methods (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017) have shown supreme performance
on both discrete and continuous tasks (Duan et al., 2016).
However, in the offline setting with approximation and sampling error, few existing offline RL algorithms can ensure
safe policy improvement for each step.

1. Introduction
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn a policy from a fixed dataset without further interactions. It can
utilize existing large-scale datasets to learn safely and efficiently (Gulcehre et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2020). However,
this also carries with it a major challenge: the evaluation
of out-of-distribution (OOD) actions causes extrapolation
error (Fujimoto et al., 2019) and overestimation.

In this paper, we aim to address the above issues by proposing Supported Trust Region optimization (STR) based on
EAWBC. STR performs trust region policy optimization
with the policy constrained within the support of the behavior policy β. This less restrictive support constraint
allows to seek the best behavior in the dataset and is usually sufficient to mitigate the extrapolation error. We start
from an observation that the analytical policy update form
of EAWBC is an equal-support update, which means the
updated policy has the same support as the baseline policy.
Based on it, STR utilizes importance sampling on the dataset
to mimic sampling from the current policy, which makes
the implicit baseline policy in EAWBC become the projection of the current policy on β. In this way, by initializing
with an estimated behavior policy and adopting a relatively
strong policy constraint, the policy of STR is able to deviate
from β step by step with trust region updates, while still
satisfying the support constraint to mitigate extrapolation
error. In this process, STR gradually “sharpens” the action

Policy constraint methods try to address this by constraining
the learned policy to be close to the behavior policy (Wu
et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). Among them, Weighted Behavior
Cloning (WBC) performs behavior cloning on the dataset,
but assigns different weights to different data points to dis1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 School of
Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology. Correspondence to: Yixiu Mao <myx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Xiangyang Ji <xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

