Generalized-Smooth Nonconvex Optimization is As Efficient As Smooth
Nonconvex Optimization

Ziyi Chen 1 Yi Zhou 1 Yingbin Liang 2 Zhaosong Lu 3

Abstract

stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Ghadimi and Lan, 2013)
and many advanced stochastic variance reduction algorithms
(Fang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). In particular, the complexities of these algorithms have been extensively studied
in nonconvex optimization. Specifically, under the standard
assumption that the objective function is L-smooth (i.e., has
Lipschitz continuous gradient), it has been shown that the
basic GD algorithm (Carmon et al., 2020) and many advanced stochastic variance reduction algorithms (Fang et al.,
2018; Cutkosky and Orabona, 2019) achieve the complexity
lower bounds of finding an approximate stationary point of
deterministic nonconvex optimization and stochastic nonconvex optimization, respectively. 1

Various optimal gradient-based algorithms have
been developed for smooth nonconvex optimization. However, many nonconvex machine learning problems do not belong to the class of smooth
functions and therefore the existing algorithms
are sub-optimal. Instead, these problems have
been shown to satisfy certain generalized-smooth
conditions, which have not been well understood
in the existing literature. In this paper, we propose
a notion of α-symmetric generalized-smoothness
that extends the existing notions and covers many
important functions such as high-order polynomials and exponential functions. We study the
fundamental properties and establish descent lemmas for the functions in this class. Then, to solve
such a large class of nonconvex problems, we
design a special deterministic normalized gradient descent algorithm that achieves the optimal
iteration complexity O(ϵ−2 ), and also prove that
the popular SPIDER variance reduction algorithm
achieves the optimal sample complexity O(ϵ−3 )
in the stochastic setting. Our results show that
solving generalized-smooth nonconvex problems
is as efficient as solving smooth nonconvex problems.

Although the class of smooth nonconvex problems can be
effectively solved by the above provably optimal algorithms,
it does not include many important modern machine learning applications, e.g., distributionally robust optimization
(DRO) (Jin et al., 2021) and language model learning (Zhang
et al., 2019), etc. Specifically, for the problems involved in
these applications, they are not globally smooth but have
been shown to satisfy certain generalized-smooth conditions, in which the smoothness parameters scale with the
gradient norm in various ways (see the formal definitions in
Section 2). To solve these generalized-smooth-type nonconvex problems, the existing works have developed various
gradient-based algorithms, but only with sub-optimal complexity results for stochastic optimization. Therefore, we
are motivated to systematically build a comprehensive understanding of generalized-smooth functions and develop
algorithms with improved complexities.

1. Introduction
In many modern machine learning applications, training
machine learning model requires solving a nonconvex optimization problem with big data, for which many efficient
gradient-based optimization algorithms have been developed, e.g., gradient descent (GD) (Carmon et al., 2020),

To achieve this overarching goal, we need to address several
fundamental challenges. First, the existing generalizedsmooth conditions are proposed for specific application examples. Therefore, they define relatively restricted classes
of functions that do not cover many popular ones such as
high-order polynomials and exponential functions. Thus,
we are motivated to consider the following question.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, US 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, US
3
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, US. Correspondence to: Ziyi Chen
<u1276972@utah.edu>.

• Q1: How to extend the existing notion of generalizedsmoothness to cover a broad range of functions used in

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Deterministic and stochastic optimization problems are formulated respectively as minw f (w) and minw Eξ∼P fξ (w).

1

