Learning Compiler Pass Orders using Coreset and Normalized Value Prediction

Youwei Liang∗ 1 Kevin Stone∗ 2 Ali Shameli 2 Chris Cummins 2 Mostafa Elhoushi 2 Jiadong Guo 2
Benoit Steiner 3 Xiaomeng Yang 2 Pengtao Xie 1 Hugh Leather 2 Yuandong Tian 2

Abstract

Coreset Optimization
Action sequences

Finding the optimal pass sequence of compilation can lead to a significant reduction in program
size. Prior works on compilation pass ordering
have two major drawbacks. They either require
an excessive budget (in terms of the number of
compilation passes) at compile time or fail to generalize to unseen programs. In this work, instead
of predicting passes sequentially, we directly learn
a policy on the pass sequence space, which outperforms the default -Oz flag by an average of
4.5% over a large collection (4683) of unseen
code repositories from diverse domains across 14
datasets. To achieve this, we first identify a small
set (termed coreset) of pass sequences that generally optimize the size of most programs. Then,
a policy is learned to pick the optimal sequences
by predicting the normalized values of the pass
sequences in the coreset. Our results demonstrate
that existing human-designed compiler passes can
be improved with a simple yet effective technique
that leverages pass sequence space which contains
dense rewards, while approaches operating on the
individual pass space may suffer from issues of
sparse reward, and do not generalize well to heldout programs from different domains. Website:
https://rlcompopt.github.io.

Coreset
...
...

Reward
Matrix

...

Normalized Value Prediction
Inference

Coreset

GNN-GEAN

...

Program

Program
Observation

Value

Softmax

Figure 1. A depiction of our main contributions. (Top) Coreset
Optimization: A process for discovering a small set of pass sequences (coreset) that generalizes. (Bottom) Normalized Value
Prediction: A process where our model learns to predict the normalized value of pass sequences from the coreset.

error-prone, and often yield sub-par results, due to the huge
size of the search space. For example, the LLVM compiler
has 124 different compilation passes. If the pass sequences
have a length of 45, then the possible number of sequences
(12445 ∼ 1094 ) is already more than the atoms in the universe (∼ 1080 (Planck Collaboration et al., 2016)).
To address this problem, optimization-based approaches
(e.g., MLGO (Trofin et al., 2021), MLGoPerf (Ashouri
et al., 2022)) run adaptive search algorithms to optimize
a set of programs for many hours. While this achieves
strong performance gain, the procedure can be slow and
does not distill knowledge from past experience and requires
searching from scratch for unseen programs.

1. Introduction
For more efficient execution with fewer resources (e.g.,
memory, CPU, and storage), applying the right ordering for
compiler optimization passes to a given program, i.e., pass
ordering, is an important yet challenging problem. Manual
efforts require expert knowledge and are time-consuming,
*

Optimize

Programs

Recently, machine learning (ML)-guided pass ordering has
emerged as an interesting field to replace this laborious process (Wang & O’Boyle, 2018). Along this line, many works
show promising results using language modelling (Cummins et al., 2017), evolutionary algorithms (Kulkarni &
Cavazos, 2012), and reinforcement learning (Haj-Ali et al.,
2020a) to achieve better specific ordering for given programs. To handle unseen programs, Autophase (Haj-Ali

1

Equal contribution, listed alphabetically.
University of
California, San Diego 2 Meta AI 3 Anthropic. Correspondence
to: Kevin Stone <kevinleestone@meta.com>, Yuandong Tian
<yuandong@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

