Self-supervised Neural Factor Analysis for Disentangling Utterance-level Speech
Representations

Weiwei Lin * 1 Chenhang He * 2 Man-Wai Mak 1 Youzhi Tu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Supervised learning has driven the development of speech
technologies for two decades. However, annotating speech
data is considerably more challenging than other modalities. For example, automatic speech recognition (ASR) and
language identification require linguistic knowledge. For
speaker and emotion recognition, label ambiguity and human error are hard to avoid. Self-supervised learning (SSL)
promises a prospect of learning without labeled datasets.
SSL speech models such as wav2vec (Schneider et al., 2019;
Baevski et al., 2020b) and HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021a) have
profoundly changed the research landscape of ASR. By
training on a large amount of unlabeled speech to learn a
general representation and then fine-tuning with a small
amount of labeled data, SSL models demonstrated state-ofthe-art performance and proved to be very resource efficient
in low label-resource settings (Hsu et al., 2021a; Baevski
et al., 2020b).

Self-supervised learning (SSL) speech models
such as wav2vec and HuBERT have demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance on automatic speech
recognition (ASR) and proved to be extremely
useful in low label-resource settings. However,
the success of SSL models has yet to transfer to
utterance-level tasks such as speaker, emotion,
and language recognition, which still require supervised fine-tuning of the SSL models to obtain
good performance. We argue that the problem is
caused by the lack of disentangled representations
and an utterance-level learning objective for these
tasks. Inspired by how HuBERT uses clustering
to discover hidden acoustic units, we formulate a
factor analysis (FA) model that uses the discovered hidden acoustic units to align the SSL features. The underlying utterance-level representations are disentangled from the content of speech
using probabilistic inference on the aligned features. Furthermore, the variational lower bound
derived from the FA model provides an utterancelevel objective, allowing error gradients to be
backpropagated to the Transformer layers to learn
highly discriminative acoustic units. When used
in conjunction with HuBERT’s masked prediction training, our models outperform the current
best model, WavLM, on all utterance-level nonsemantic tasks on the SUPERB benchmark with
only 20% of labeled data.

The success of wav2vec and HuBERT attracts researchers
to apply SSL to other speech tasks (Wang et al., 2021). For
this purpose, Speech processing Universal PERformance
Benchmark (SUPERB) for SSL models was proposed in
(Yang et al., 2021). The tasks include content-based classifications, such as ASR, phoneme recognition, and intent
classification, and utterance-level discriminative tasks, such
as speaker recognition, diarization, and emotion recognition.
SUPERB focuses on reusability of SSL features. Thus all
tasks must share the same SSL model. Only the classification heads are learned using labeled data for a specific task.
This encourages learning task-agnostic features for downstream tasks. Recently, a NOn-Semantic Speech benchmark
(NOSS) that specifically designed for utterance-level tasks
was proposed in (Shor et al., 2020). Using a triplet-loss
unsupervised objective, they were able to exceeds the stateof-the-art performance on a number of transfer learning
tasks.

*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
SAR, China. 2 Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong SAR, China.. Correspondence to: Weiwei
Lin <weiwei.lin@connect.polyu.hk>.

Although it has been shown that SSL features can outperform hand-crafted features for almost all tasks (Yang et al.,
2021) under the SUPERB protocols, the performance of
supervised downstream models are still far behind the fully
supervised or find-tuned models in utterance-level tasks,
suggesting that directly using the SSL features to train the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

