Learning Dynamic Query Combinations for Transformer-based Object
Detection and Segmentation

Yiming Cui 1 2 Linjie Yang 2 Haichao Yu 2

Abstract
Transformer-based detection and segmentation
methods use a list of learned detection queries to
retrieve information from the transformer network
and learn to predict the location and category of
one specific object from each query. We empirically find that random convex combinations of the
learned queries are still good for the corresponding models. We then propose to learn a convex
combination with dynamic coefficients based on
the high-level semantics of the image. The generated dynamic queries, named modulated queries,
better capture the prior of object locations and
categories in the different images. Equipped with
our modulated queries, a wide range of DETRbased models achieve consistent and superior performance across multiple tasks including object
detection, instance segmentation, panoptic segmentation, and video instance segmentation.

Figure 1. Comparison of DETR-based detection models integrated
with and without our methods on MS COCO (Lin et al., 2014) val
benchmark. ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) is used as the backbone.

1. Introduction

of DETR with modifications to the attention module (Zhu
et al., 2021; Roh et al., 2021), and divide queries into positional and content queries (Liu et al., 2022; Meng et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). This paradigm
is also adopted for instance/panoptic segmentation, where
each query is associated with one specific object mask in
the decoding stage of the segmentation model (Cheng et al.,
2021a; Dong et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2021b; Hu et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2021d).

Object detection is a fundamental yet challenging task in
computer vision, which aims to localize and categorize objects of interest in the images simultaneously. Traditional
detection models (Ren et al., 2015; Cai & Vasconcelos,
2019; Duan et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2017b;a) use complicated
anchor designs and heavy post-processing steps such as NonMaximum-Suppression (NMS) to remove duplicated detections. Recently, Transformer-based object detectors such as
DETR (Carion et al., 2020) have been introduced to simplify
the process. In detail, DETR combines convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) with Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
by introducing an encoder-decoder framework to generate a
series of predictions from a list of object queries. Following works improve the efficiency and convergence speed

The existing DETR-based detection models always use a
list of fixed queries, regardless of the input image. The
queries will attend to different objects in the image through
a multi-stage attention process. Here, the queries serve as
global priors for the location and semantics of target objects
in the image. In this paper, we would like to associate the detection queries with the content of the image, i.e., adjusting
detection queries based on the high-level semantics of the
image in order to capture the distribution of object locations
and categories in this specific scene. For example, when the
high-level semantics shows the image is a group photo, we
know that there will be a group of people (category) inside
the image and they are more likely to be close to the center
of the image (location).

1

Since the detection queries are implicit features that do not
directly relate to specific locations and object categories
in the DETR framework, it is hard to design a mechanism
to change the queries while keeping them within a meaningful “query” subspace to the model. Through an empirical study, we notice that convex combinations of learned

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, USA 2 ByteDance Inc., San Jose, USA.
Correspondence to: Linjie Yang <yljatthu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

