Investigating the role of model-based learning in exploration and transfer

Jacob Walker * 1 Eszter Vértes * 1 Yazhe Li * 1 Gabriel Dulac-Arnold 2 Ankesh Anand 1 Théophane Weber † 1
Jessica B. Hamrick † 1

Abstract

et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018), there has been a recent
surge of interest in designing agents which can successfully
transfer their knowledge after training in both multi-task
(Kirk et al., 2021; Hospedales et al., 2021) and unsupervised (Hansen et al., 2019; Campos et al., 2021) settings. At
the same time, another thread of research has focused on
developing ever-more powerful model-based agents (Schrittwieser et al., 2020b; Hafner et al., 2023) to excel on a wide
range of environments but have not focused on the problem
of transfer. However, many expect model-based RL to be
an essential ingredient in generalization and transfer (Tolman, 1948; Dayan et al., 1995; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018;
Schmidhuber, 1991a; Sutton, 1991). Indeed, previous work
has shown that model-based RL is advantageous for generalization under certain assumptions (Sekar et al., 2020;
Anand et al., 2021), lending weight to the hypothesis that
model-based reasoning is important for transfer.

State of the art reinforcement learning has enabled
training agents on tasks of ever increasing complexity. However, the current paradigm tends to favor training agents from scratch on every new task
or on collections of tasks with a view towards generalizing to novel task configurations. The former
suffers from poor data efficiency while the latter
is difficult when test tasks are out-of-distribution.
Agents that can effectively transfer their knowledge about the world pose a potential solution to
these issues. In this paper, we investigate transfer learning in the context of model-based agents.
Specifically, we aim to understand when exactly
environment models have an advantage and why.
We find that a model-based approach outperforms
controlled model-free baselines for transfer learning. Through ablations, we show that both the
policy and dynamics model learnt through exploration matter for successful transfer. We demonstrate our results across three domains which vary
in their requirements for transfer: in-distribution
procedural (Crafter), in-distribution identical (RoboDesk), and out-of-distribution (Meta-World).
Our results show that intrinsic exploration combined with environment models present a viable
direction towards agents that are self-supervised
and able to generalize to novel reward functions.

Although previous work has demonstrated the efficacy of
model-based learning for generalization in some cases, it
has not shed much insight as to when we ought to expect it
to help or why. In this paper, we address these questions by
studying the performance of agents trained with intrinsic exploration and fine-tuned on downstream tasks (see Figure 1
for an overview of our setup). By utilizing unsupervised
pre-training via intrinsic exploration, we control the type
of knowledge the agent can potentially transfer: it knows
about the world it inhabits, but not about possible tasks that
are achievable in this world. To identify how much different components such as the model or policy contribute to
transfer performance, we fine-tune with either pre-trained or
reinitialized weights; were we in a zero-shot generalization
setting, any such ablations would lead to catastrophic (and
thus uninformative) losses in performance.

1. Introduction
A fundamental component of intelligence is generalization:
the ability to transfer knowledge to novel situations and
tasks. Although the field of reinforcement learning (RL)
focused for many years on single-task settings in which
generalization is not required (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman

To conduct our experiments, we make a variety of implementation choices regarding model-based and model-free
learning and intrinsic exploration; however, we emphasize
that our contribution is less about these particular choices
and more about the insights that our experiments bring. For
the model-based agent, we employ a self-supervised variant
of MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020b) trained with selfpredictive representations (SPR; Schwarzer et al., 2020).
This variant of MuZero has previously been shown to perform well at zero-shot generalization Anand et al. (2021),

*
1
Equal contribution
DeepMind,
London,
UK
Google Research.
Correspondence to: Jacob Walker
<jcwalker@deepmind.com>,
Eszter
Vértes
<evertes@deepmind.com>, Yazhe Li <yazhe@deepmind.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

