Entropy-driven Unsupervised Keypoint Representation Learning in Videos

Ali Younes 1 Simone Schaub-Meyer 1 2 Georgia Chalvatzaki 1 2 3

Abstract

1990; Radulescu et al., 2021). Research evidence shows that
the human visual system processes visual information in
two stages; first, it extracts sparse features of salient objects
(Bruce & Tsotsos, 2005); second, it discovers the interrelations of local features for grouping them to find correspondences (Marr, 2010; Kadir & Brady, 2001). For videos with
dynamic entities, humans not only focus on dynamic objects,
but also on the structure of the background scene if it plays
a key role in the information flow (Riche et al., 2012; Borji
et al., 2012). Ideally, we want a learning algorithm to extract
similar sparse representations that can be useful for various
downstream tasks. Notable research works in Computer
Vision (CV) and machine learning have proposed different
feature representations from pixels (Szeliski, 2010; Harris
et al., 1988; Lowe, 2004; Rublee et al., 2011; Mur-Artal
et al., 2015). In the deep learning era, convolutional neural
network architectures have proven superior to handcrafted
features, leading to new approaches for learning representations of Points of Interest (PoI) for tasks like localization
and pose estimation (DeTone et al., 2018; Ono et al., 2018;
Sarlin et al., 2019; Dusmanu et al., 2019; Sarlin et al., 2020).

Extracting informative representations from
videos is fundamental for effectively learning various downstream tasks. We present a novel approach for unsupervised learning of meaningful
representations from videos, leveraging the concept of image spatial entropy (ISE) that quantifies
the per-pixel information in an image. We argue that local entropy of pixel neighborhoods and
their temporal evolution create valuable intrinsic
supervisory signals for learning prominent features. Building on this idea, we abstract visual
features into a concise representation of keypoints
that act as dynamic information transmitters, and
design a deep learning model that learns, purely
unsupervised, spatially and temporally consistent
representations directly from video frames. Two
original information-theoretic losses, computed
from local entropy, guide our model to discover
consistent keypoint representations; a loss that
maximizes the spatial information covered by the
keypoints and a loss that optimizes the keypoints’
information transportation over time. We compare
our keypoint representation to strong baselines for
various downstream tasks, e.g., learning object
dynamics. Our empirical results show superior
performance for our information-driven keypoints
that resolve challenges like attendance to static
and dynamic objects or objects abruptly entering
and leaving the scene. 1

Keypoints stand out as sparse PoI (Jiang et al., 2009; Alexe
et al., 2010) representing, e.g., objects (Xiongwei et al.,
2020), human joints (Kreiss et al., 2019), or structure useful for learning control (Xiong et al., 2021). Many keypoint detectors are trained in a supervised way (Cao et al.,
2017). Unsupervised and self-supervised learning can compensate the need for expensive human annotations (Wang
et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019). Current state-ofthe-art methods for unsupervised keypoint discovery focus
mainly on dynamic entities in videos (Kulkarni et al., 2019;
Minderer et al., 2019). Namely, these methods are trained
to reconstruct differences between frames, not effectively
representing the scene’s structure, while not easily disambiguating occlusions or consistently representing abruptly
appearing/disappearing objects in a video.

1. Introduction
Humans are remarkable for their ability to form representations of essential visual entities and store information to
effectively learn downstream tasks from experience (Cooper,
1

Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität
Darmstadt, Germany 2 Hessian.AI 3 Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior (CMBB), Uni. Marburg and JLU Giessen. Correspondence
to: Ali Younes <ali.younes@tu-darmstadt.de>.

We introduce Maximum Information keypoiNTs (MINT),
an information-theoretic approach for unsupervised keypoint representation learning, treating keypoints as “transmitters” of prominent information in a video. Our proposed method relies on spatial information computed in
local neighborhoods (patches) around potential keypoints.
We argue that the image spatial entropy (ISE) (Brink, 1996),

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://sites.google.com/view/mint-kp

1

