From Noisy Fixed-Point Iterations to Private ADMM
for Centralized and Federated Learning

Edwige Cyffers 1 Aurelien Bellet 1 Debabrota Basu 1

Abstract

gradients of empirical risks are perturbed with Gaussian
noise. Algorithms like DP-SGD can be naturally extended
from the classic centralized setting, where a single trusted
curator holds the raw data, to federated and decentralized
scenarios that involve multiple agents who do not want to
share their local data (Geyer et al., 2017; McMahan et al.,
2018; Noble et al., 2022; Cyffers & Bellet, 2022).

We study differentially private (DP) machine
learning algorithms as instances of noisy fixedpoint iterations, in order to derive privacy and utility results from this well-studied framework. We
show that this new perspective recovers popular
private gradient-based methods like DP-SGD and
provides a principled way to design and analyze
new private optimization algorithms in a flexible
manner. Focusing on the widely-used Alternating Directions Method of Multipliers (ADMM)
method, we use our general framework to derive
novel private ADMM algorithms for centralized,
federated and fully decentralized learning. For
these three algorithms, we establish strong privacy guarantees leveraging privacy amplification
by iteration and by subsampling. Finally, we provide utility guarantees using a unified analysis
that exploits a recent linear convergence result for
noisy fixed-point iterations.

In this work, we revisit private ERM from the perspective of
fixed-point iterations (Bauschke & Combettes, 2011), which
compute fixed points of a function by iteratively applying a
non-expansive operator T . Fixed point iterations are wellstudied and widely applied in mathematical optimization,
automatic control, and signal processing. They provide a
unifying framework that encompasses many optimization
algorithms, from (proximal) gradient descent algorithms to
the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM),
and come with a rich theory (Combettes & Pesquet, 2021).
Specifically, we study a general noisy fixed-point iteration,
where Gaussian noise is added to the operator T at each step.
We also consider a (possibly randomized) block-coordinate
version, where the operator is applied only to a subset of
coordinates. As particular cases of our framework, we show
that we can recover DP-SGD and a recent coordinate-wise
variant (Mangold et al., 2022). We then prove a utility bound
for the iterates of our general framework by exploiting recent
linear convergence results from the fixed-point literature
(Combettes & Pesquet, 2019).

1. Introduction
Controlling the risk of privacy leakage in machine learning training and outputs has become of paramount importance in applications involving personal or confidential data.
This has drawn significant attention to the design of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) algorithms that satisfy
Differential Privacy (DP) (Chaudhuri et al., 2011). DP
is the standard for measuring the privacy leakage of datadependent computations. The most popular approaches to
private ERM are Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient
Descent (DP-SGD) (Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016)
and its variants (Talwar et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017; Zhou
et al., 2021; Mangold et al., 2022; Kairouz et al., 2021a;b).
DP-SGD is a first-order optimization algorithm, where the

With this general framework and results in place, we show
that we can design and analyze new private algorithms for
ERM in a principled manner. We focus on ADMM-type
algorithms, which are known for their effectiveness in
centralized and decentralized machine learning (Boyd et al.,
2011; Wei & Ozdaglar, 2012; 2013; Shi et al., 2014; Vanhaesebrouck et al., 2017; Tavara et al., 2022; Zhou & Li, 2022).
Based on a reformulation of ERM as a consensus problem
and the characterization of the ADMM iteration as a LionsMercier operator on post-infimal composition (Giselsson
et al., 2016), we derive private ADMM algorithms for
centralized, federated, and fully decentralized learning. In
contrast to previously proposed private ADMM algorithms
that build upon a duality interpretation and require ad-hoc
algorithmic modifications and customized theoretical anal-

1

Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille. Correspondence to: Edwige Cyffers
<edwige.cyffers@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

