TR0N: Translator Networks for 0-Shot Plug-and-Play Conditional Generation

Zhaoyan Liu * 1 2 NoÈel Vouitsis * 1 Satya Krishna Gorti 1 Jimmy Ba 2 3 Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem 1

Abstract
We propose TR0N, a highly general framework to
turn pre-trained unconditional generative models,
such as GANs and VAEs, into conditional models.
The conditioning can be highly arbitrary, and requires only a pre-trained auxiliary model. For example, we show how to turn unconditional models
into class-conditional ones with the help of a classifier, and also into text-to-image models by leveraging CLIP. TR0N learns a lightweight stochastic
mapping which ªtranslatesº between the space of
conditions and the latent space of the generative
model, in such a way that the generated latent
corresponds to a data sample satisfying the desired condition. The translated latent samples are
then further improved upon through Langevin dynamics, enabling us to obtain higher-quality data
samples. TR0N requires no training data nor finetuning, yet can achieve a zero-shot FID of 10.9
on MS-COCO, outperforming competing alternatives not only on this metric, but also in sampling
speed ± all while retaining a much higher level
of generality. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/layer6ai-labs/tr0n.

A painting of a fox in
impressionist style

A photo of a flaming
portal to an ancient
place rendered in unreal engine

A photo of a sunset over a desert landscape with sand dunes
and cacti

Muhammad Ali

Tinker Bell

A man with glasses,
long black hair with
sideburns and a goatee

Figure 1. Images generated by TR0N from corresponding text captions, obtained by finding adequate points on the latent space of a
pre-trained GAN. Neither fine-tuning nor training data are used.
Top row: BigGAN pre-trained on ImageNet. Bottom row: StyleGAN2 pre-trained on FFHQ.

bining the capabilities of these models in a plug-and-play
manner remains a generally open problem. Mechanisms
to achieve this task should ideally be modular and modelagnostic, such that one can easily swap out a model component for one of its counterparts (e.g. interchanging a GAN
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) for a VAE (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014), or swapping CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) for a new state-of-the-art text/image model).

1. Introduction
Large machine learning models have recently achieved remarkable success across various tasks (Brown et al., 2020;
Jia et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Rombach et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). Nonetheless, training such models requires massive computational resources.
Properly and efficiently leveraging existing large pre-trained
models is thus of paramount importance. Yet, tractably com-

In this work, we study conditional generation through the
lens of combining pre-trained models. Conditional generative models aim to learn a conditional distribution of
data given some conditioning variable c. They are typically trained from scratch on pairs of data with corresponding c (e.g. images x, with corresponding class labels or
text prompts fed through a language model c) (Mirza &
Osindero, 2014; Sohn et al., 2015). Our goal is to take
an arbitrary pre-trained unconditional pushforward generative model (Salmona et al., 2022; Ross et al., 2022) ± i.e.
a model G which transforms latent variables z sampled
from a prior p(z) to data samples x = G(z) ± and turn it
into a conditional model. To this end, we propose TR0N, a

*
Equal contribution 1 Layer 6 AI, Toronto, Canada 2 University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 3 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Zhaoyan Liu <zhaoyan@layer6.ai>,
NoÈel Vouitsis <noel@layer6.ai>, Satya Krishna Gorti
<satya@layer6.ai>,
Jimmy Ba <jba@cs.toronto.edu>,
Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem <gabriel@layer6.ai>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

