Difference of Submodular Minimization via DC Programming

Marwa El Halabi 1 George Orfanides 2 Tim Hoheisel 2

Abstract

discriminatively structured graphical models (Narasimhan
& Bilmes, 2005), and learning decision rule sets (Yang
et al., 2021). In fact, this problem is ubiquitous as any set
function can be expressed as a DS function, though finding
a DS decomposition has exponential complexity in general
(Narasimhan & Bilmes, 2005; Iyer & Bilmes, 2012).

Minimizing the difference of two submodular
(DS) functions is a problem that naturally occurs
in various machine learning problems. Although
it is well known that a DS problem can be equivalently formulated as the minimization of the difference of two convex (DC) functions, existing
algorithms do not fully exploit this connection.
A classical algorithm for DC problems is called
the DC algorithm (DCA). We introduce variants
of DCA and its complete form (CDCA) that we
apply to the DC program corresponding to DS
minimization. We extend existing convergence
properties of DCA, and connect them to convergence properties on the DS problem. Our results
on DCA match the theoretical guarantees satisfied by existing DS algorithms, while providing
a more complete characterization of convergence
properties. In the case of CDCA, we obtain a
stronger local minimality guarantee. Our numerical results show that our proposed algorithms outperform existing baselines on two applications:
speech corpus selection and feature selection.

Unlike submodular functions which can be minimized in
polynomial time, minimizing DS functions up to any constant factor multiplicative approximation requires exponential time, and obtaining any positive polynomial time computable multiplicative approximation is NP-Hard (Iyer &
Bilmes, 2012, Theorems 5.1 and 5.2). Even finding a local minimum (see Definition 2.1) of DS functions is PLS
complete (Iyer & Bilmes, 2012, Section 5.3).
DS minimization was first studied in (Narasimhan & Bilmes,
2005), who proposed the submodular-supermodular (SubSup) procedure; an algorithm inspired by the convexconcave procedure (Yuille & Rangarajan, 2001), which
monotonically reduces the objective function at every step
and converges to a local minimum. Iyer & Bilmes (2012) extended the work of (Narasimhan & Bilmes, 2005) by proposing two other algorithms, the supermodular-submodular
(SupSub) and the modular-modular (ModMod) procedures,
which have lower per-iteration cost than the SubSup method,
while satisfying the same theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction

The DS problem can be equivalently formulated as a difference of convex (DC) functions minimization problem
(see Section 2). DC programs are well studied problems
for which a classical popular algorithm is the DC algorithm
(DCA) (Pham Dinh & Le Thi, 1997; Pham Dinh & Souad,
1988). DCA has been successfully applied to a wide range of
non-convex optimization problems, and several algorithms
can be viewed as special cases of it, such as the convexconcave procedure, the expectation-maximization (Dempster et al., 1977), and the iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm (Chambolle et al., 1998); see (Le Thi & Pham Dinh,
2018) for an extensive survey on DCA.

We study the difference of submodular (DS) functions minimization problem
min F (X) := G(X) − H(X),

X⊆V

(1)

where G and H are normalized submodular functions (see
Section 2 for definitions). We denote the minimum of (1)
by F ? . Submodular functions are set functions that satisfy
a diminishing returns property, which naturally occurs in
a variety of machine learning applications. Many of these
applications involve DS minimization, such as feature selection, probabilistic inference (Iyer & Bilmes, 2012), learning

Existing DS algorithms, while inspired by DCA, do not
fully exploit this connection to DC programming. In this
paper, we apply DCA and its complete form (CDCA) to the
DC program equivalent to the DS problem. We establish
new connections between the two problems which allow
us to leverage convergence properties of DCA to obtain

1

Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University. Correspondence to: Marwa
El Halabi <marwa.elhalabi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

