Applied Online Algorithms with Heterogeneous Predictors

Jessica Maghakian 1 Russell Lee 2 Mohammad Hajiesmaili 2 Jian Li 3 Ramesh Sitaraman 2 4 Zhenhua Liu 1

Abstract

line algorithms, researchers are able to create data-driven algorithms that have theoretical worst-case guarantees. These
algorithms aim to optimally trade-off between consistency
(performance when predictions are accurate) and robustness
(performance when predictions are noisy). With proper calibration, these algorithms exploit high-quality predictions
and default to classical online decision making when predictions are noisy.

For many application domains, the integration
of machine learning (ML) models into decision
making is hindered by the poor explainability and
theoretical guarantees of black box models. Although the emerging area of algorithms with predictions offers a way to leverage ML while enjoying worst-case guarantees, existing work usually
assumes access to only one predictor. We demonstrate how to more effectively utilize historical
datasets and application domain knowledge by intentionally using predictors of different quantities.
By leveraging the heterogeneity in our predictors,
we are able to achieve improved performance,
explainability, and computational efficiency over
predictor-agnostic methods. Theoretical results
are supplemented by large-scale empirical evaluations with production data demonstrating the
success of our methods on optimization problems
occurring in large distributed computing systems.

A large gap still remains between the current algorithms with
predictions framework and practice. The algorithms with
predictions literature overwhelmingly consider access to one
prediction. Defaulting to the classical online assumption of
no information about the future when one prediction is inaccurate neglects the vast domain knowledge of practitioners.
Businesses typically have many different mathematical and
computational models to forecast quantities of interest that
can greatly improve algorithm performance.
Several recent papers (Anand et al., 2022; Dinitz et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2020) consider the setting of online algorithms
with multiple predictions. However, these works exclusively
consider multiple predictions of the same quantity. For
example, Dinitz et al. consider a portfolio of predictions
generated by different ML models that cover the hyperparameter space. Although the predictors are able to specialize
to different scenarios, there is no way to know a priori which
predictor will do well on the following problem instance,
thus requiring exploration to find the right choice.

1. Introduction
The recent rapid advancements in artificial intelligence (AI)
have the potential to reshape and transform industries worldwide. Yet barriers to complete AI adoption still remain.
The top concerns of companies include maintaining the integrity of their brand, customer trust, and meeting external
regulatory and compliance obligations (IBM, 2022). Black
box ML models alone are unable to provide the theoretical
guarantees and explainability required for trustworthy AI.

We propose an alternative approach of incorporating predictions of different quantities. The first predictor we introduce
is a parameter predictor that learns the correct value of
a tunable parameter of an online algorithm. The second
predictor is an input predictor that predicts the unknown
future inputs of the online algorithm in the form of short
look-ahead windows. We demonstrate that the two predictors have different theoretical properties and how to exploit
these differences for improved performance.

One promising solution comes from the recent area of algorithms with predictions (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii,
2022). By incorporating ML predictions into classical on1

Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, USA 2 Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences, UMass Amherst, Amherst,
MA, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, SUNY Binghamton, Binghamton, NY, USA 4 Akamai Tech,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Jessica Maghakian
<jessica.maghakian@stonybrook.edu>.

Our Contributions. We initiate the study of algorithms
with heterogeneous predictors and provide the first results
showing that multiple noisy predictors outperform one, even
in worst-case settings. Our approaches have better performance, explainability, and computational efficiency over
predictor-agnostic methods, and can even tackle real-world
challenges such as COVID-19 related distributional shifts.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

