Adaptive Whitening in Neural Populations with Gain-modulating Interneurons

Lyndon R. Duong * 1 David Lipshutz * 2 David J. Heeger 1 Dmitri B. Chklovskii 2 3 Eero P. Simoncelli 1 2

Abstract

vised feature learning (Coates et al., 2011). More recently,
self-supervised learning methods have used decorrelation
transformations such as whitening to prevent representational collapse (Ermolov et al., 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021;
Hua et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2022). While whitening has
mostly been used for training neural networks in the offline
setting, it is also of interest to develop adaptive (run-time)
variants that can adjust to dynamically changing input statistics with minimal changes to the network (e.g. Mohan et al.,
2021; Hu et al., 2022).

Statistical whitening transformations play a fundamental role in many computational systems, and
may also play an important role in biological sensory systems. Existing neural circuit models of
adaptive whitening operate by modifying synaptic
interactions; however, such modifications would
seem both too slow and insufficiently reversible.
Motivated by the extensive neuroscience literature
on gain modulation, we propose an alternative
model that adaptively whitens its responses by
modulating the gains of individual neurons. Starting from a novel whitening objective, we derive
an online algorithm that whitens its outputs by adjusting the marginal variances of an overcomplete
set of projections. We map the algorithm onto
a recurrent neural network with fixed synaptic
weights and gain-modulating interneurons. We
demonstrate numerically that sign-constraining
the gains improves robustness of the network to
ill-conditioned inputs, and a generalization of
the circuit achieves a form of local whitening in
convolutional populations, such as those found
throughout the visual or auditory systems.

Single neurons in early sensory areas of many nervous systems rapidly adjust to changes in input statistics by scaling their input-output gains (Adrian & Matthews, 1928).
This allows neurons to adaptively normalize the variance
of their outputs (Bonin et al., 2006; Nagel & Doupe, 2006),
maximizing information transmitted about sensory inputs
(Barlow, 1961; Laughlin, 1981; Fairhall et al., 2001). At the
neural population level, in addition to variance normalization, adaptive decorrelation and whitening transformations
have been observed across species and sensory modalities,
including: macaque retina (Atick & Redlich, 1992); cat primary visual cortex (Muller et al., 1999; Benucci et al., 2013);
and the olfactory bulbs of zebrafish (Friedrich, 2013) and
mice (Giridhar et al., 2011; Gschwend et al., 2015). These
population-level adaptations reduce redundancy in addition
to normalizing neuronal outputs, facilitating dynamic efficient multi-channel coding (Schwartz & Simoncelli, 2001;
Barlow & Foldiak, 1989). However, the mechanisms underlying such adaptive whitening transformations remain
unknown, and would seem to require coordinated synaptic adjustments amongst neurons, as opposed to the single
neuron case which relies only on gain rescaling.

1. Introduction
Statistical whitening transformations, in which multidimensional inputs are decorrelated and normalized to have
unit variance, are common in signal processing and machine learning systems. For example, they are integral to
many statistical factorization methods (Olshausen & Field,
1996; Bell & Sejnowski, 1996; Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000),
they provide beneficial preprocessing during neural network
training (Krizhevsky, 2009), and they can improve unsuper-

Here, we propose a novel recurrent network architecture for
online statistical whitening that exclusively relies on gain
modulation. Specifically, the primary contributions of our
study are as follows:

*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Neural Science, New York
University; 2 Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute; 3 Neuroscience Institute, NYU School of Medicine. Correspondence to: Lyndon R. Duong <lyndon.duong@nyu.edu>,
David Lipshutz <dlipshutz@flatironinstitute.org>.

1. We introduce a novel factorization of the (inverse)
whitening matrix, using an overcomplete, arbitrary,
but fixed basis, and a diagonal matrix with statistically
optimized entries. This is in contrast with the conventional factorization using the eigendecomposition of
the input covariance matrix.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

