QAS-Bench: Rethinking Quantum Architecture Search and A Benchmark

Xudong Lu 1 Kaisen Pan 1 Ge Yan 1 Jiaming Shan 1 Wenjie Wu 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

Grover algorithm (Grover, 1996) for database search and
Shor algorithm (Shor, 1994) for prime factorization.

Automatic quantum architecture search (QAS)
has been widely studied across disciplines with
different implications. In this paper, beyond a particular domain, we formulate the QAS problem
into two basic (and relatively even ideal) tasks: i)
arbitrary quantum circuit (QC) regeneration given
a target QC; ii) approximating an arbitrary unitary
(oracle). The latter can be connected to the setting
of various quantum machine learning tasks and
other QAS applications. Based on these two tasks,
we generate a public QAS benchmark including
900 random QCs and 400 random unitary matrices which is still missing in the literature. We
evaluate six baseline algorithms including brute
force search, simulated annealing, genetic algorithm, reinforcement learning, hybrid algorithm,
and differentiable algorithm as part of our benchmark. One characteristic of our proposed evaluation protocol on the basic tasks is that it deprives
the domain-specific designs and techniques as
used in existing QAS literature, making a unified
evaluation possible and focusing on the vanilla
search methods themselves without coupling with
domain prior. In fact, the unitary approximation
task could be algorithmically more difficult than
the specific problems as it needs to explore the
whole matrix space to fit the unitary. While specific tasks often only need to fit a partial observation of the unitary as the objective for search. Data
and code are available at https://github.
com/Lucky-Lance/QAS-Bench.

Especially with the arrival of the so-called Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era (Preskill, 2018),
more algorithms (Arute et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2018) are
proposed to explore quantum supremacy (Preskill, 2012) by
landing on a NISQ device. Designing a hardware-efficient
quantum circuit (QC) for a certain algorithm requires substantial human effort and takes a long time. Thus, lots of
quantum algorithms leave the oracle directly on the QCs,
which is a black box with the ability to yield certain solutions but the internal circuit structure is not clearly stated.
Therefore, a series of works have focused on how to automatically design a QC (Duong et al., 2022; He et al., 2022)
to ease the burden of manually designing QCs.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of automatically
designing QCs, namely QAS. The essence of searching for
a QC is to decide how to arrange different quantum gates
in the circuit. A QC is used to evolve a quantum system,
which can be described by a unitary matrix. Thus, QAS
can be mathematically defined as a unitary approximation
problem. The approximation of an arbitrary unitary is generally difficult (Nielsen & Chuang, 2002), since we need
exponentially many operations to generate an arbitrary state
of n qubits. Therefore, the unitary approximation is nonpolynomial in computational complexity, indicating that
there are no polynomial QAS algorithms.
Moreover, QAS has wide applications in quantum computing. Firstly, it can automatically design circuits, such
as quantum adders (Li et al., 2017) or quantum oracles in
quantum algorithms such as those in Grover algorithm and
Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) (Zhang et al., 2022).
Secondly, it can tackle quantum error correction in quantum
information (Rigby, 2021), which has been considered the
most important tool to exert quantum supremacy. Thirdly, it
is also capable of searching for VQE ansatze, which requires
optimizing both the architecture and the rotation parameters
at the same time. MaxCut in Combinatorial Optimization
(CO) (Guerreschi & Matsuura, 2019) and ground state energy estimation in quantum many-body problems (Barkoutsos et al., 2018) has received lots of attention. Last but not
least, QAS can search for the Parameterized Quantum Circuit (PQC) in numerous quantum neural networks (QNN)

1. Introduction
Quantum computing has shown its promising potential in
solving complex problems which are intractable for classical
computers, with successful quantum algorithms such as the
1
MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

