A Three-regime Model of Network Pruning

Yefan Zhou 1 2 Yaoqing Yang 3 Arin Chang 2 Michael W. Mahoney 1 2 4

Abstract

NNs often have improved memory and inference efficiencies, compared to the original “denser” NNs.

Recent work has highlighted the complex influence training hyperparameters, e.g., the number
of training epochs, can have on the prunability of
machine learning models. Perhaps surprisingly, a
systematic approach to predict precisely how adjusting a specific hyperparameter will affect prunability remains elusive. To address this gap, we
introduce a phenomenological model grounded
in the statistical mechanics of learning. Our approach uses temperature-like and load-like parameters to model the impact of neural network (NN)
training hyperparameters on pruning performance.
A key empirical result we identify is a sharp transition phenomenon: depending on the value of a
load-like parameter in the pruned model, increasing the value of a temperature-like parameter in
the pre-pruned model may either enhance or impair subsequent pruning performance. Based on
this transition, we build a three-regime model by
taxonomizing the global structure of the pruned
NN loss landscape. Our model reveals that the
dichotomous effect of high temperature is associated with transitions between distinct types of
global structures in the post-pruned model. Based
on our results, we present three case-studies: 1)
determining whether to increase or decrease a hyperparameter for improved pruning; 2) selecting
the best model to prune from a family of models;
and 3) tuning the hyperparameter of the Sharpness Aware Minimization method for better pruning performance.

A common approach to pruning (Lecun et al., 1989; Han
et al., 2015; Molchanov et al., 2017) involves adopting a
three-stage train-prune-retrain pipeline: 1) train a large or
over-parameterized dense model to some sort of convergence; 2) prune the dense model to obtain a sparse model;
and then 3) retrain the sparse model to recover its performance. A considerable amount of work has focused on
improving the sub-network performance in the (second)
pruning stage (Blalock et al., 2020) and the (third) retraining stage (Renda et al., 2020; Le & Hua, 2021). However,
there remains little guidance for the (first) stage of dense
model training, i.e., how to improve the prunability of the
original large model (Rosenfeld et al., 2021). Recent work
has shown that tuning optimization-related hyperparameters,
such as the number of training epochs (Li et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022) and the batch size (Barsbey
et al., 2021), can potentially benefit specific pruning methods. Despite these findings, a principled approach to predict
when and how adjusting a given hyperparameter during
the stage of dense model training will impact subsequent
pruning performance remains to be developed.
In this paper, we develop a simple operational model for NN
pruning, focusing on the optimal selection of hyperparameters, such as the number of training epochs, in the (first)
training stage. Our model is inspired by recent work in the
statistical mechanics of learning (Yang et al., 2021; Martin
& Mahoney, 2017; 2021b). In the statistical mechanics approach to learning, multiple qualitatively different “phases”
of behavior can arise in black-box Deep NNs. This concept
is explicitly illustrated by the Very Simple Deep Learning
(VSDL) model, proposed in Martin & Mahoney (2017).
Within the VSDL model, these phases and the sharp transitions between them can be identified on a two-dimensional
“phase” diagram, where the x and y axes represent load-like
and temperature-like parameters, respectively. Load-like
parameters characterize the relationship between the quantity and/or quality of data, relative to model size. This was
represented as label noise in training data by Martin & Mahoney (2017) and as width scaling by Yang et al. (2021).
Temperature-like parameters, on the other hand, characterize the magnitude of noise introduced during stochastic
training. This can be represented in terms of common hyper-

1. Introduction
A recently-popular approach to compressing large neural
networks (NNs) is to perform pruning, i.e., to remove unnecessary weights from a trained model. The resulting “sparser”
1
International Computer Science Institute, CA, USA
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 3 Dartmouth College,
NH, USA 4 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Yefan Zhou <yefan0726@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

