On the Stepwise Nature of Self-Supervised Learning

James B. Simon 1 2 Maksis Knutins 2 Liu Ziyin 3 Daniel Geisz 1 Abraham J. Fetterman 2 Joshua Albrecht 2

Abstract

Despite SSL’s simplicity, however, the field lacks a complete theoretical understanding of the paradigm. A promising place to start may be the fact that although there exist
many different self supervised loss functions, these variants all achieve rather similar performance.1 This similarity
suggests that there may exist basic commonalities in their
learning behavior which are as yet unidentified.

We present a simple picture of the training process of joint embedding self-supervised learning
methods. We find that these methods learn their
high-dimensional embeddings one dimension at
a time in a sequence of discrete, well-separated
steps. We arrive at this conclusion via the study
of a linearized model of Barlow Twins applicable to the case in which the trained network is
infinitely wide. We solve the training dynamics
of this model from small initialization, finding
that the model learns the top eigenmodes of a
certain contrastive kernel in a stepwise fashion,
and obtain a closed-form expression for the final
learned representations. Remarkably, we then see
the same stepwise learning phenomenon when
training deep ResNets using the Barlow Twins,
SimCLR, and VICReg losses. Our theory suggests that, just as kernel regression can be thought
of as a model of supervised learning, kernel PCA
may serve as a useful model of self-supervised
learning.

In this work, we propose a candidate for such a shared behavior. We present evidence that the high-dimensional embeddings of Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021), SimCLR
(Chen et al., 2020), and VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021) are
learned one dimension at a time in a series of discrete learning stages (see Figure 1). These embeddings are initially
low-rank and increase in rank by one as each dimension is
learned.
To reach this conclusion, we first study the Barlow Twins
loss (Zbontar et al., 2021) applied to a linear model. The
training of this model takes the form of a matrix factorization problem, and we present exact solutions to the training dynamics from small initialization. These solutions
reveal that representation learning occurs in discrete, wellseparated steps, each of which learns a top eigendirection
of a certain contrastive kernel which characterizes the spectral bias of the model on the dataset. We also present a
kernelization of our theory that allows its application to
generic kernel machines, a class which importantly includes
infinite-width neural networks.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has recently become a leading choice for representation learning using deep neural
networks. Joint embedding methods, a prominent class of
SSL methods, aim to ensure that any two “views” of the
same input — for example, two random crops, or an image and its caption — are assigned similar representations.
Such self-supervised approaches have yielded a bounty of
recent empirical breakthroughs across domains (Hjelm et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019; He et al., 2020;
Henaff, 2020; Chen & He, 2021; Radford et al., 2021; Caron
et al., 2021; Assran et al., 2022b)

Finally, we empirically examine the training of Barlow
Twins, SimCLR, and VICReg using ResNets with various
initializations and hyperparameters and in all cases clearly
observe the stepwise behavior predicted by our analytical
model. This behavior is most apparent upon small parameterwise initialization (Figures 1C,D and 2C-F) but persists
even in realistic configurations (Figure 3). In light of this
agreement, we suggest that SSL can be understood as a
sequential process of learning orthogonal scalar functions
in order of importance. This simple picture of SSL has the
potential to both provide a useful lens for understanding the
training behavior of self supervised networks and help guide

1
UC Berkeley 2 Generally Intelligent 3 University of Tokyo.
Correspondence to: James Simon <james.simon@berkeley.edu>.
Code to reproduce results available at https://gitlab.com/
generally-intelligent/ssl_dynamics.

1
For example, (Bardes et al., 2021) report that SimCLR, SwAV
(Caron et al., 2020), Barlow Twins, VICReg, and BYOL (Grill
et al., 2020) all score within a few percent of each other on ImageNet pretraining tasks.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the authors.

1

