Flexible Phase Dynamics for Bio-Plausible Contrastive Learning

Ezekiel Williams 1 2 Colin Bredenberg 1 2 Guillaume Lajoie 1 2

Abstract

training dynamics that restrict the kinds of biological systems that could implement this form of learning. Here, we
investigate alternative training dynamics for CL, to better
understand the breadth of systems capable of implementing
it.

Many learning algorithms used as normative models in neuroscience or as candidate approaches
for learning on neuromorphic chips learn by contrasting one set of network states with another.
These Contrastive Learning (CL) algorithms are
traditionally implemented with rigid, temporally
non-local, and periodic learning dynamics that
could limit the range of physical systems capable of harnessing CL. In this study, we build on
recent work exploring how CL might be implemented by biological or neurmorphic systems and
show that this form of learning can be made temporally local, and can still function even if many
of the dynamical requirements of standard training procedures are relaxed. Thanks to a set of
general theorems corroborated by numerical experiments across several CL models, our results
provide theoretical foundations for the study and
development of CL methods for biological and
neuromorphic neural networks.

CL learns representations by leveraging the statistical differences between positive samples (samples from the training
set) and negative samples (artificially or internally generated data). We restrict our study to the subclass of CL algorithms with a two-term gradient, where one term depends
on positive but not negative samples, and the other term on
negative but not positive. This two-term CL class comprises
a wide range of algorithms, including most algorithms of
interest to the neuroscience community. For example, the
Boltzmann machine (Ackley et al., 1985), equilibrium propagation (Scellier & Bengio, 2017), and energy based models
optimizing the negative log-likelihood (LeCun et al., 2006)
all fall within this subclass. Conversely, SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020) is an example of a non-two-term CL method.
Two-term CL algorithms have a periodic, biphasic time
course of learning. First, during the positive phase, the
model calculates internal states given a positive sample.
This is followed by a negative phase where neural responses
to a negative sample are computed. For example, in a Boltzmann machine (Ackley et al., 1985) the positive phase calculates network states conditioned on data while the negative
phase calculates internally generated states free from data
conditioning; in noise contrastive estimation, the positive
phase calculates network states in response to real data while
the negative phase calculates responses to noise (Gutmann
& Hyvärinen, 2010). Finally, network responses from each
phase are used to calculate the gradient and a single step of
gradient descent is taken before repeating the whole process
for the next learning iteration (Ackley et al., 1985; Scellier &
Bengio, 2017; Hinton, 2022) (Fig.1.A). As such, CL suffers
from constraints on training dynamics that restrict the set of
physical neural networks capable of running the algorithm.
In this work, we address four of these constraints and show
they can be considerably relaxed:

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning (CL) represents a powerful family of
algorithms for learning representations, spanning a broad
range of machine learning methodologies including generative and discriminative modelling, as well as supervised
and unsupervised learning. Broadly, CL can be divided into
equilibrium-based methods, that use a (stochastic) dynamical process to calculate internal network states, and nonequilibrium methods, that calculate internal states directly in
a single pass through the network. CL has been proposed as
a normative model for biological learning (Baldi & Pineda,
1991; Illing et al., 2021; Hinton et al., 1984; Scellier & Bengio, 2017; Cao et al., 2020), but requires highly structured
1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Universite de Montreal, Quebec, Canada 2 Mila, Quebec AI Institute, Quebec, Canada.
Correspondence to: Ezekiel
Williams <ezekiel.williams@mila.quebec>, Guillaume Lajoie
<g.lajoie@umontreal.ca>.

1. Temporal non-locality: the use of information from
past network states that is too old to be available to the
network without auxiliary memory mechanisms

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

