A Near-Optimal Algorithm for Safe Reinforcement Learning Under
Instantaneous Hard Constraints
Ming Shi 1 Yingbin Liang 1 Ness Shroff 1 2

Abstract

decision making problems are usually modelled as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP), where an online learner interacts
with an unknown environment sequentially to achieve a
large expected cumulative reward. Many RL algorithms that
do not consider any constraint (and hence are allowed to
freely explore any state-action pair) with sample-complexity
guarantees have been proposed in the literature (Azar et al.,
2017; Jin et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020;
Jia et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021b; He et al., 2022). Moreover, existing “safe” RL algorithms are usually designed
under the constraint that requires expected cumulative, i.e.,
not instantaneous, costs over all steps to be bounded (Yang
et al., 2019; Brantley et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2021; Paternain et al., 2022) (please see more related work in Section 1.2). Thus, practical scenarios where unsafe states and
actions must be avoided at each time/step are not captured.

In many applications of Reinforcement Learning (RL), it is critically important that the algorithm performs safely, such that instantaneous
hard constraints are satisfied at each step, and
unsafe states and actions are avoided. However,
existing algorithms for “safe” RL are often designed under constraints that either require expected cumulative costs to be bounded or assume
all states are safe. Thus, such algorithms could violate instantaneous hard constraints and traverse
unsafe states (and actions) in practice. Hence,
in this paper, we develop the first near-optimal
safe RL algorithm for episodic Markov Decision
Processes with unsafe states and actions under
instantaneous hard constraints and the √
linear mix3
ture model. It achieves a regret Õ( dH ∆c dK ) that
nearly matches the state-of-the-art regret in the
setting with only unsafe actions and that in the unconstrained setting, and is safe at each step, where
d is the feature-mapping dimension, K is the number of episodes, H is the episode length, and ∆c
is a safety-related parameter.
√ We also provide
a lower bound Ω̃(max{dH K, ∆H2 }), which inc
dicates that the dependency on ∆c is necessary.
Further, both our algorithm design and regret analysis involve several novel ideas, which may be of
independent interest.

Instantaneous hard constraints are important in many practical scenarios, and any unsafe states and actions (and transitions) should be avoided at each step. In safety-critical systems, violating such a constraint could result in catastrophic
consequences. For example, in power systems, it is wellknown that the states of blackouts (e.g., due to violating the
power-grid operation constraints) must be avoided (Amani
et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2022b). In autonomous driving, improper operations that could cause dangerous states, e.g.,
crashing, must be avoided (Amani et al., 2021; Vamvoudakis
et al., 2021). In robotics, even a single bad action could
damage the machines and any undesirable state of failure
must be avoided (Turchetta et al., 2016; Wachi et al., 2018).
Recently, instantaneous hard constraints have been studied
in theoretical machine learning. Specifically, Amani et al.
(2019) and Pacchiano et al. (2021) studied bandits with
linear instantaneous constraints that require a linear safety
value of the chosen action to be bounded at each step. However, it is well-known that bandits are only a very special
case of MDP. Amani et al. (2021) studied safe linear MDP
with linear instantaneous hard constraints. However, they
still assume that only the actions could be unsafe, and hence
unsafe states (and transitions) are still not considered. Intuitively, when there are only unsafe actions, any action will
always lead to a state in any future step that is safe. Then,
we could consider the safety at each step separately. Indeed,
the existing idea in such a setting is to estimate the safe

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been extensively studied
to improve the learning performance in sequential decisionmaking problems for machine learning applications. These
1

AI-EDGE Institute and Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Correspondence to: Ming
Shi <shi.1796@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

