Gradient-Free Structured Pruning with Unlabeled Data

Azade Nova 1 Hanjun Dai 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract

Hou et al., 2020; Sajjad et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2021a; Xia
et al., 2022), efficient architecture design (Kitaev et al.,
2020; Iandola et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2020b), neural architecture search (So et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2021; Yin et al., 2021), knowledge distillation (Sun et al.,
2020; Jiao et al., 2019; Sanh et al., 2019), quantization (Kim
et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2020; Zadeh et al., 2020; Zafrir
et al., 2019), and hardware-software co-design (Gu et al.,
2022; Ham et al., 2021).

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved
great success in solving difficult tasks across
many domains, but such success comes with a
high computation cost, and inference latency. As
developers and third parties customize these models, the need to provide efficient inference has
increased. Many efforts have attempted to reduce
inference cost through model compression techniques such as pruning and distillation. However,
these techniques either require labeled data, or are
time-consuming as they require the compressed
model to be retrained to regain accuracy. In this
paper, we propose a gradient-free structured pruning framework that uses only unlabeled data. An
evaluation on the GLUE and SQuAD benchmarks
using BERTBASE and DistilBERT illustrates the
effectiveness of the proposed approach. By only
using the weights of the pre-trained model and
unlabeled data, in a matter of a few minutes on
a single GPU, up to 40% of the original FLOP
count can be reduced with less than a 4% accuracy
loss across all tasks considered.

Among these techniques, structured pruning shows promising results in reducing model size, while also improving
inference time because the resulting model remains compatible with the underlying hardware. However, most existing
approaches are quite complex and require significant engineering effort to implement. Moreover, the process of
compression is time-consuming and requires retraining the
compressed model to regain accuracy. These limitations
make effective compression difficult to realize in practice.
Recently, Kwon et al. (2022) proposed a post-training pruning for Transformers that does not require any retraining
of the model. Even though this approach avoids expensive
retraining, it requires labeled data in the pruning pipeline.
LLMs mainly utilize unlabeled data for training and with
increased use of pre-trained LLMs by developers and third
parties, access to the labeled data is questionable. Especially with the popularity of in-context learning, where the
user only provides prompts, the purpose of the task is not
necessarily known at compression time. In this scenario,
none of the existing pruning techniques can be applied for
model compression since they all require labeled data. Even
though knowledge distillation (Sun et al., 2020; Jiao et al.,
2019; Sanh et al., 2019) trains a student model with unlabeled data, it still requires a large amount of unlabeled data
and is expensive to train. This motivates us to investigate
whether one can design a structured pruning method that
does not require retraining nor labeled data, while avoiding
adverse effects on performance.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made great strides
in solving difficult tasks across many domains, but this has
come at the cost of high parameter counts and significant
computational overhead. Developers and third parties can
now employ these trained models and create custom versions tailored to their particular applications. Customization
makes these models applicable to a wider variety of use
cases, but this, even more, highlights the need for efficient
inference models.
Many efforts have been being made to reduce computational
cost through model compression techniques specialized for
Transformers, including structured pruning (Xia et al., 2022;

In this work, we propose Kernelized Convex Masking (KCM), a gradient-free framework (Figure 1) that only
requires the trained model and sampled raw data to compress
the model. We introduce R2D2 as the core of this framework that combines two ranking techniques Representative
Ranking (R2) and Data-Driven (D2) to estimate the impor-

1
Google DeepMind 2 University of Alberta. Correspondence to:
Azade Nova <azade@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

