Identification of the Adversary from a Single Adversarial Example

Minhao Cheng 1 Rui Min 1 Haochen Sun 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2

Abstract

Multiple Users
Qu
er
y

Deep neural networks have been shown vulnerable to adversarial examples. Even though many
defense methods have been proposed to enhance
the robustness, it is still a long way toward providing an attack-free method to build a trustworthy
machine learning system. In this paper, instead
of enhancing the robustness, we take the investigator’s perspective and propose a new framework
to trace the first compromised model copy in a
forensic investigation manner. Specifically, we
focus on the following setting: the machine learning service provider provides model copies for a
set of customers. However, one of the customers
conducted adversarial attacks to fool the system.
Therefore, the investigator’s objective is to identify the first compromised copy by collecting and
analyzing evidence from only available adversarial examples. To make the tracing viable, we design a random mask watermarking mechanism to
differentiate adversarial examples from different
copies. First, we propose a tracing approach in
the data-limited case where the original example
is also available. Then, we design a data-free approach to identify the adversary without accessing
the original example. Finally, the effectiveness of
our proposed framework is evaluated by extensive
experiments with different model architectures,
adversarial attacks, and datasets. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
rmin2000/adv_tracing.git.

Service Provider

Identification

Qu
er
y

Attack

Adversarial Attack
Input
Attacker

𝑥 (Speed Limit) 𝑥$%&'

𝑥!"# (Stop Sign)

Black-Box Access
Attack
Model Copy

Figure 1. Illustration of the threat model where the malicious user
conducts adversarial attacks through model query and uses the
generated adversarial examples to attack other users’ copies.

That is, given a victim neural network model and a correctly
classified example, an adversarial attack aims to compute a
small perturbation such that the original example will be misclassified with this perturbation added. To enhance the robustness against attacks, many defense strategies have been
proposed (Madry et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Cheng
et al., 2020a). However, they suffer from poor scalability
and generalization on other attacks and trade-offs with test
accuracy on clean data, making the robust models hard to
deploy in real life. Therefore, in this paper, we turn our
focus on the aftermath of adversarial attacks, where we take
the forensic investigation to identify the first compromised
model copy for generating the adversarial attack. In this
paper, we show that given only a single adversarial example,
we could trace the source copy that the adversary based
for conducting the attack. As shown in Figure 1, we consider the following setting: a Machine Learning as a Service
(MLaaS) provider will provide online model query access
for a set of customers. The copy could also be distributed to
every customer locally if deployed in time-sensitive applications such as auto-pilot systems. The model architecture
and weight details are encrypted and hidden from the cus-

1. Introduction
It has been shown recently that machine learning algorithms,
especially deep neural networks, are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015).
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong 2 IBM
Research, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Minhao Cheng <minhaocheng@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

