Unearthing InSights into Mars:
Unsupervised Source Separation with Limited Data

Ali Siahkoohi 1 Rudy Morel 2 Maarten V. de Hoop 1 Erwan Allys 3 Grégory Sainton 4 Taichi Kawamura 4

Abstract
Source separation involves the ill-posed problem
of retrieving a set of source signals that have been
observed through a mixing operator. Solving this
problem requires prior knowledge, which is commonly incorporated by imposing regularity conditions on the source signals, or implicitly learned
through supervised or unsupervised methods from
existing data. While data-driven methods have
shown great promise in source separation, they
often require large amounts of data, which rarely
exists in planetary space missions. To address this
challenge, we propose an unsupervised source
separation scheme for domains with limited data
access that involves solving an optimization problem in the wavelet scattering covariance representation space—an interpretable, low-dimensional
representation of stationary processes. We present
a real-data example in which we remove transient, thermally-induced microtilts—known as
glitches—from data recorded by a seismometer
during NASA’s InSight mission on Mars. Thanks
to the wavelet scattering covariances’ ability to
capture non-Gaussian properties of stochastic processes, we are able to separate glitches using only
a few glitch-free data snippets.

Figure 1. Unsupervised separation of background noise, including
thermally induced microtilts (glitches), from a marsquake recorded
by the InSight lander’s seismometer on February 3, 2022 (InSight
Marsquake Service, 2023). Approximately 30 hours of raw data
from the U component, with no recorded marsquakes, were utilized for background noise separation without any explicit prior
knowledge of marsquakes or glitches. The horizontal axis represents the UTC time zone.

Khosravy et al., 2020), speech processing (Pedersen et al.,
2008; Chua et al., 2016; Grais et al., 2014), biomedical signal processing (Adali et al., 2015; Barriga et al., 2003; Hasan
et al., 2018) and geophysical data processing (Ibrahim &
Sacchi, 2014; Kumar et al., 2015; Scholz et al., 2020).
Source separation arises when multiple source signals of
interest are combined through a mixing operator. The goal
is to estimate the original sources with minimal prior knowledge of the mixing process or the source signals themselves.
This makes source separation a challenging problem, as the
number of sources is usually unknown, and the sources are
often non-Gaussian, nonstationary, and multiscale.

1. Introduction
Source separation is a problem of fundamental importance
in the field of signal processing, with a wide range of
applications in various domains such as telecommunications (Chevreuil & Loubaton, 2014; Gay & Benesty, 2012;
1

Department of Computational Applied Mathematics & Operations Research, Rice University 2 Département d’informatique de
l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France 3 Laboratoire
de Physique de l’École normale supérieure, ENS, Université PSL,
CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université Paris Cité, F-75005 Paris,
France 4 Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris. Correspondence
to: Ali Siahkoohi <alisk@rice.edu>.

Classical signal-processing based source separation methods (Cardoso, 1989; Jutten & Herault, 1991; Bingham &
Hyvärinen, 2000; Nandi & Zarzoso, 1996; Cardoso, 1998;
Jutten et al., 2004) while being extensively studied and well
understood, often make simplifying assumptions regard-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

