Sketch-Flip-Merge: Mergeable Sketches for Private Distinct Counting

Jonathan Hehir 1 2 Daniel Ting 3 Graham Cormode 3 4

Abstract

not only distributed computation, but also many rich aggregation possibilities from previously computed sketches. As
a result, modern data pipelines rely extensively on the performance and functionality of such cardinality sketches.

Data sketching is a critical tool for distinct counting, enabling multisets to be represented by compact summaries that admit fast cardinality estimates. Because sketches may be merged to summarize multiset unions, they are a basic building block in data warehouses. Although many
practical sketches for cardinality estimation exist,
none satisfy both privacy and mergeability constraints. We propose the first practical cardinality
sketches that are simultaneously mergeable, differentially private (DP), and have low empirical
errors. These introduce a novel randomized algorithm for performing logical operations on noisy
bits, a tight privacy analysis, and provably optimal
estimation. Our sketches dramatically outperform
existing theoretical solutions in simulations and
on real-world data.

Increasingly, privacy concerns constrain the operation of
data processing. Organizations demonstrating commitments
to preserving users’ privacy require that data collected from
individuals be subject to appropriate mitigations before being passed to downstream processing. Specifically, protections such as differential privacy are used to protect sensitive
data while still giving accurate query response.
Although sketching techniques may appear to offer protection by reducing data, it is well-known that sketching
alone does not automatically provide a privacy guarantee
(Desfontaines et al., 2019). The summaries—or even the
estimates calculated from them—can leak considerable information about whether the specific items belong to the
underlying set. Recently, it has been shown that the contents
of sketches do meet a privacy standard if the associated hash
functions are not known to the observer (Choi et al., 2020;
Smith et al., 2020; Dickens et al., 2022). However, it is not
plausible to assume secret hash functions when the computation is shared among multiple entities in a large scale
system. In particular, all participants must know the hash
when working with sketches that will be merged, and using
the same hash in multiple sketches generates correlated randomness that breaks the privacy guarantees. This creates
an important gap to make these high-throughput systems
private. Previous attempts to construct privacy-preserving
sketches (Pagh & Stausholm, 2021) do not offer practical
mergeable sketches as the errors are too large (Section 6).

1. Introduction
Many applications that model large volumes of data are
based on tracking cardinalities of events or observations.
Consequently, these applications make extensive use of data
sketches that support fast, approximate cardinality estimation (Cormode & Yi, 2020). For instance, approximate distinct counting is supported via variants of the HyperLogLog
(HLL) sketch (Flajolet et al., 2007; Heule et al., 2013) in
popular data management systems including Amazon Redshift, ClickHouse, Google BigQuery, Splunk, Presto, Redis,
and more. At the expense of a small estimation error, these
approximate methods drastically reduce the computational
cost of distinct counting to run in linear time, using only
bounded memory. An additional key feature of distinctcount sketches is the ability to merge two or more sketches
to obtain cardinality estimates over their union. This enables

In this work, we present the Sketch-Flip-Merge (SFM) summaries, a practical, mergeable, and provably private approach to distinct-count sketching. In particular, we produce
summaries that satisfy the strong definition of ε–differential
privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006; Dwork, 2008) even when
the hash function is known publicly. By attaching the privacy guarantee to the summary itself—not just the cardinality estimate—we may safely release summaries corresponding to sensitive multisets, enabling safe cardinality
estimation over any union of such sets using the privacypreserving summaries in lieu of the original sensitive data.

1
Department of Statistics, Penn State University, State College,
PA, USA 2 Work performed while at Meta. 3 Meta, Seattle, WA,
USA 4 University of Warwick, Coventry, UK. Correspondence to:
Daniel Ting <dting@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The key to our approach is to adapt the sketch of Flajolet
1

