Change is Hard: A Closer Look at Subpopulation Shift

Yuzhe Yang * 1 Haoran Zhang * 1 Dina Katabi 1 Marzyeh Ghassemi 1

Abstract

(Koh et al., 2021). In such settings, models may have high
overall performance but still perform poorly in rare subgroups (Hashimoto et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020).

Machine learning models often perform poorly on
subgroups that are underrepresented in the training data. Yet, little is understood on the variation
in mechanisms that cause subpopulation shifts,
and how algorithms generalize across such diverse shifts at scale. In this work, we provide a
fine-grained analysis of subpopulation shift. We
first propose a unified framework that dissects and
explains common shifts in subgroups. We then
establish a comprehensive benchmark of 20 stateof-the-art algorithms evaluated on 12 real-world
datasets in vision, language, and healthcare domains. With results obtained from training over
10,000 models, we reveal intriguing observations
for future progress in this space. First, existing algorithms only improve subgroup robustness over
certain types of shifts but not others. Moreover,
while current algorithms rely on group-annotated
validation data for model selection, we find that a
simple selection criterion based on worst-class accuracy is surprisingly effective even without any
group information. Finally, unlike existing works
that solely aim to improve worst-group accuracy
(WGA), we demonstrate the fundamental tradeoff between WGA and other important metrics,
highlighting the need to carefully choose testing
metrics. Code and data are available at: https:
//github.com/YyzHarry/SubpopBench.

A well-studied type of subpopulation shift occurs when data
contains spurious correlations (Geirhos et al., 2020) – noncausal relationships between the input and the label which
may shift in deployment (Simon, 1954). For example, image
classifiers frequently make use of non-robust features such
as image backgrounds (Xiao et al., 2016), textures (Geirhos
et al., 2018), and erroneous markings (DeGrave et al., 2021).
However, there has been little work in defining subpopulation shift in a holistic way, understanding when these
shifts happen, and how state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms
generalize under diverse and realistic shifts. Subpopulation shift can encompass a much wider array of underlying
mechanisms. First, different attributes in data often exhibit
skewed distributions, inevitably causing attribute imbalance
(Martinez et al., 2021). Moreover, certain labels can have
significantly fewer observations, where such long-tailed label distribution induces severe class imbalance (Liu et al.,
2019b). Finally, certain attributes may have no training data
at all, which motivates the need for attribute generalization
to unseen subpopulations (Santurkar et al., 2020).
In this work, we systematically investigate subpopulation
shift in realistic evaluation settings. We first formalize a
generic framework of subpopulation shift, which decomposes attribute and class to enable fine-grained analyses.
We demonstrate that this modeling covers and explains the
aforementioned common subgroup shifts, which are basic
units of building more complex shifts that arise in real data.
Using this framework, we can quantify the type and degree
of different shift components in each given dataset.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models frequently exhibit drops in performance under the presence of distribution shifts (QuinoneroCandela et al., 2008). Constructing machine learning models that are robust to these shifts is critical to the safe deployment of such models in the real-world (Amodei et al., 2016).
One ubiquitous type of distribution shift is subpopulation
shift, which is characterized by changes in the proportion
of some subpopulations between training and deployment

We establish a realistic and comprehensive benchmark of
subpopulation shift, consisting of 20 SOTA algorithms that
span different learning strategies and 12 real-world datasets
in vision, language, and healthcare domains. While existing
analysis on subpopulation shift either focus on a single shift
type, or have limited severity, our benchmark provides a
much larger set of datasets that cover different types of realistic subgroup shifts. Our experimental framework can be
easily extended to include new methods, shifts, and datasets.

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: Yuzhe
Yang <yuzhe@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our work also evaluates current methods across different
settings including attribute availability in training and/or
1

