Adaptively Weighted Data Augmentation Consistency Regularization for
Robust Optimization under Concept Shift

Yijun Dong * 1 Yuege Xie * 2 Rachel Ward 1 3

1

Abstract

Introduction

Modern machine learning is revolutionizing the field of medical imaging, especially in computer-aided diagnosis with
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. However, classical learning objectives like
empirical risk minimization (ERM) generally assume that
training samples are independently and identically (i.i.d.)
distributed, whereas real-world medical image data rarely
satisfy this assumption. Figure 1 instantiates a common
observation in medical image segmentation where the segmentation labels corresponding to different cross-sections of
the human body tend to have distinct proportions of labeled
(i.e., non-background) pixels, which is accurately reflected
by the evaluation of supervised cross-entropy loss during
training. We refer to this as the “information imbalance”
among samples, as opposed to the well-studied “class imbalance” (Wong et al., 2018; Taghanaki et al., 2019; Yeung
et al., 2022) among the numbers of segmentation labels
in different classes. Such information imbalance induces
distinct difficulty/paces of learning with the cross-entropy
loss for different samples (Wang et al., 2021b; Tullis &
Benjamin, 2011; Tang et al., 2018; Hacohen & Weinshall,
2019). Specifically, we say a sample is label-sparse when it
contains very few (if any) segmentation labels; in contrast,
a sample is label-dense when its segmentation labels are
prolific. Motivated by the information imbalance among
samples, we explore the following questions:

Concept shift is a prevailing problem in natural
tasks like medical image segmentation where samples usually come from different subpopulations
with variant correlations between features and labels. One common type of concept shift in medical image segmentation is the “information imbalance” between label-sparse samples with few (if
any) segmentation labels and label-dense samples
with plentiful labeled pixels. Existing distributionally robust algorithms have focused on adaptively
truncating/down-weighting the “less informative”
(i.e., label-sparse in our context) samples. To exploit data features of label-sparse samples more
efficiently, we propose an adaptively weighted
online optimization algorithm — AdaWAC— to
incorporate data augmentation consistency regularization in sample reweighting. Our method
introduces a set of trainable weights to balance the
supervised loss and unsupervised consistency regularization of each sample separately. At the saddle point of the underlying objective, the weights
assign label-dense samples to the supervised loss
and label-sparse samples to the unsupervised consistency regularization. We provide a convergence
guarantee by recasting the optimization as online
mirror descent on a saddle point problem. Our empirical results demonstrate that AdaWAC not only
enhances the segmentation performance and sample efficiency but also improves the robustness to
concept shift on various medical image segmentation tasks with different UNet-style backbones.

What is the effect of separation between sparse and dense
labels on segmentation?
Can we leverage such information imbalance to improve
the segmentation accuracy?
We formulate the mixture of label-sparse and label-dense
samples as a concept shift — a type of distribution shift in
the conditional distribution of labels given features P (y|x).
Coping with concept shifts, prior works have focused on
adaptively truncating (hard-thresholding) the empirical loss
associated with label-sparse samples. These include the
Trimmed Loss Estimator (Shen & Sanghavi, 2019), MKLSGD (Shah et al., 2020), Ordered SGD (Kawaguchi & Lu,
2020), and the quantile-based Kacmarz algorithm (Haddock
et al., 2022). Alternatively, another line of works (Wang

*

Equal contribution 1 Oden Institute, University of Texas at
Austin, TX, USA. 2 Snap Inc., CA, USA. (Work done at University
of Texas at Austin). 3 Department of Mathematics, University
of Texas at Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Yijun Dong
<ydong@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

