Learning Prescriptive ReLU Networks

Wei Sun 1 Asterios Tsiourvas 2

Abstract

not known. Besides the issue of missing counterfactuals,
another challenge of policy learning stems from the need for
interpretability - which is critical for adoption in practice.
Complex and opaque policies not only make implementation
cumbersome but also are difficult for humans to understand
and trust.

We study the problem of learning optimal policy
from a set of discrete treatment options using observational data. We propose a piecewise linear
neural network model that can balance strong prescriptive performance and interpretability, which
we refer to as the prescriptive ReLU network, or
P-ReLU. We show analytically that this model (i)
partitions the input space into disjoint polyhedra,
where all instances that belong to the same partition receive the same treatment, and (ii) can be
converted into an equivalent prescriptive tree with
hyperplane splits for interpretability. We demonstrate the flexibility of the P-ReLU network as
constraints can be easily incorporated with minor
modifications to the architecture. Through experiments, we validate the superior prescriptive accuracy of P-ReLU against competing benchmarks.
Lastly, we present examples of interpretable prescriptive trees extracted from trained P-ReLUs
using a real-world dataset, for both the unconstrained and constrained scenarios.

In recent years, there has been a stream of nascent research
focusing on learning interpretable optimal policy from data
in the form of prescriptive trees (Biggs et al., 2021; Amram
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022), since the tree structure is
visually easy to understand (Subramanian & Sun, 2023). In
contrast to standard decision trees for prediction tasks, prescriptive trees are constructed to provide policies that optimize a given objective (e.g., pricing strategies that maximize
revenue, medical treatment to minimize a certain symptom).
More specifically, all samples in a leaf node of a prescriptive
tree are prescribed a same treatment, and each path from the
root node to a leaf node corresponds to a policy. In particular,
Kallus (2017) and Bertsimas et al. (2019) propose an integrated approach whereby a counterfactual prediction model
is embedded within the tree-building algorithm, combining
the tasks of estimating the counterfactuals and learning the
optimal prescription policy in a single step. However, to
maintain tractability, the counterfactual model which needs
to be evaluated at every node of a tree is restricted to constant or linear functions. This limitation potentially leads
to significant model misspecification when the underlying
outcome function takes a more complex form.

1. Introduction
The problem of determining the best treatment option based
on an individual’s characteristics from data is a central problem across many domains, e.g., ad targeting (Li et al., 2010),
precision medicine (Ekins et al., 2019), and contextual pricing (Biggs et al., 2023). In many such settings, only observational data is available. That is, for each observation, we
have the features that describe the instance (e.g., a patient
or a customer), the treatment prescribed, and the outcome
for the chosen action. As its name suggests, the data are
collected passively and we do not control the historic administration of treatments. In particular, the counterfactuals,
i.e., outcomes associated with alternative treatments, are

The goal of this paper is to introduce a model which is
expressive enough to achieve superior prescriptive performance and can also be flexible to provide interpretable policy. We propose a neural network model with ReLU activation functions, which we refer to as the prescrptive ReLU
network or P-ReLU in short. Our key contributions are:
• We propose an integrated approach that estimates the
counterfactuals and learns the optimal policies simultaneously. We utilize a ReLU neural network that
can approximate any continuous function to model the
counterfactuals, instead of the constant or linear functions used in Kallus (2017) and Bertsimas et al. (2019).
Moreover, existing tree-based prescriptive models to
date partition the input space using axis-aligned splits.
P-ReLU networks partition the input space into general

1
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 2 Operations
Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Asterios Tsiourvas <atsiour@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

