Towards Quantum Machine Learning for Constrained Combinatorial
Optimization: a Quantum QAP Solver

Xinyu Ye 1 Ge Yan 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA)
(Farhi et al., 2014) is one of the best-known quantum heuristic algorithms on NISQ computers for solving quadratic
unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) problems. The
QAOA consists of two main components: a cost Hamiltonian that encodes the problem to be solved and a mixing
Hamiltonian that is used to explore the solution space. However, for quadratic constrained binary optimization such as
the quadratic assignment problem (QAP), it remains a relatively open problem in quantum computing. For example,
QAOA needs to add a soft constraint penalty to the objective, making a bounded violation of the constraints difficult
to guarantee, which is unfriendly for practical constraintsensitive scenarios. The Quantum Alternating Operator
Ansatz (Hadfield et al., 2019) was proposed to mitigate
this issue, which starts with a state in the constrained subspace and guarantees that the quantum state evolves in the
constrained space by designing a quantum circuit of mixer
Hamiltonians. Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz is
termed C-QAOA to distinguish it from QAOA in this paper.
Both QAOA and C-QAOA are problem-inspired ansatzes
that contain adjustable parameters. Nevertheless, each problem instance corresponds to different model structures and
optimal parameters, and finding them often requires timeconsuming classical optimizers or grid searches.

Combinatorial optimization (CO) on the graph is
a crucial but challenging research topic. Recent
quantum algorithms provide a new perspective
for solving CO problems and have the potential
to demonstrate quantum advantage. Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is a
well-known quantum heuristic for CO constructed
by a parametric quantum circuit. However, QAOA
is originally designed for unconstrained problems
and the circuit parameters and solutions are jointly
solved with time-consuming iterations. In this paper, we propose a novel quantum neural network
(QNN) for learning CO problems in a supervised
manner to achieve better and faster results. We focus on the Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP)
with matching constraints and the node permutation invariance property. To this end, a quantum
neural network called QAP-QNN is devised to
translate the QAP into a constrained vertex classification task. Moreover, we study two QAP
tasks: Graph Matching and Traveling Salesman
Problem on TorchQauntum simulators, and empirically show the effectiveness of our approach.

This paper lies in the intersection of quantum machine
learning (QML) and CO, for developing QML approaches
for solving CO problems, especially for constrained cases.
We develop a quantum network paradigm for constrained
CO, which could be regarded as a quantum counterpart
for the emerging paradigm for classic machine learning
for CO (Bengio et al., 2021). Our learning-based quantum
constrained CO solver is designed to bear the following
features: i) consisting of two separate phases for training
and inference: this is in contrast to variational quantum
eigensolver (VQE) (Peruzzo et al., 2014) and specifically
QAOA-like methods that adjust the trainable circuit parameters and find solution simultaneously. We believe such a
design has three merits. First, the circuit parameter training
and solution finding can be decoupled to make the optimization easier in each subtask; Second, more instances can be
utilized during offline training, which in fact provides a way
of utilizing the instances (with given solutions as supervi-

1. Introduction
Quantum computing attracts increasing attention (Arute
et al., 2019; Preskill, 2018), with the potential benefits from
the properties of quantum systems, e.g. superposition, interference, and entanglement. Quantum computing hardware
is also stepping into the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum
(NISQ) era, facilitating the near-term application of quantum computing in many fields, such as machine learning
(Biamonte et al., 2017) and combinatorial optimization (CO)
(Farhi et al., 2014).
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

