Traversing Between Modes in Function Space for Fast Ensembling

EungGu Yun * 1 2 Hyungi Lee * 1 Giung Nam * 1 Juho Lee 1 3

Abstract

ing runs reach different local optima, called modes, on the
loss surface (Fort et al., 2019). These parameters represent
a set of various functions that serve as an effective approximation for Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) (Wilson &
Izmailov, 2020).

Deep ensemble is a simple yet powerful way
to improve the performance of deep neural networks. Under this motivation, recent works on
mode connectivity have shown that parameters of
ensembles are connected by low-loss subspaces,
and one can efficiently collect ensemble parameters in those subspaces. While this provides
a way to efficiently train ensembles, for inference, multiple forward passes should still be executed using all the ensemble parameters, which
often becomes a serious bottleneck for real-world
deployment. In this work, we propose a novel
framework to reduce such costs. Given a lowloss subspace connecting two modes of a neural
network, we build an additional neural network
that predicts the output of the original neural network evaluated at a certain point in the low-loss
subspace. The additional neural network, which
we call a “bridge”, is a lightweight network that
takes minimal features from the original network
and predicts outputs for the low-loss subspace
without forward passes through the original network. We empirically demonstrate that we can
indeed train such bridge networks and significantly reduce inference costs with the help of
bridge networks.

An apparent drawback of DE is that it requires multiple
training runs. This cost can be huge especially for largescale settings for which parallel training is not feasible.
Garipov et al. (2018) and Draxler et al. (2018) showed that
the modes in the loss surface of a deep neural network are
connected by relatively simple low-dimensional subspaces
where every parameter in those subspaces retains low training error, and the parameters along those subspaces are
good candidates for ensembling. Based on this observation,
Garipov et al. (2018) and Huang et al. (2017) proposed algorithms to quickly construct deep ensembles without having to run multiple independent training runs.
While the fast ensembling methods based on mode connectivity reduce training costs, they do not address another
important drawback of DE; the inference cost. One should
still execute multiple forward passes using all the parameters collected for the ensemble, and this cost often becomes
critical for a real-world scenario, where the training is done
in a resource-abundant setting with plenty of computation
time, but for the deployment, the inference should be done
in a resource-limited environment. For such settings, reducing the inference cost is much more important than reducing the training cost.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a novel approach to scale up DE
by reducing the inference cost. We start from an assumption; if two modes in an ensemble are connected by a simple subspace, we can predict the outputs corresponding to
the parameters in the subspace using only the outputs computed from the modes. In other words, we can predict the
outputs evaluated in the subspace without having to forward the actual parameters in the subspace through the network. If this is indeed possible, for instance, given two
modes, we can approximate an ensemble of three models
consisting of parameters collected from three different locations (one from the subspace connecting two modes, and
two from each mode) with only two forward passes and a
small auxiliary forward pass.

Deep Ensemble (DE) (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) is a
simple algorithm to improve both the predictive accuracy
and the uncertainty calibration of deep neural networks,
where a neural network is trained multiple times using the
same data but with different random seeds. Due to this randomness, the parameters obtained from the multiple train*

Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, Korea 2 Saige Research, Seoul, Korea
3
AITRICS, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: EungGu Yun
<eunggu.yun@kaist.ac.kr>, Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We show that we can actually implement this idea using
1

