CataBEEM: Integrating Latent Interaction Categories in Node-wise Community
Detection Models for Network Data
Yuhua Zhang 1 Walter Dempsey 1

Abstract

mental health-related issues, where nodes represent users
and edges represent interactions among users. Another
example is gene co-expression networks where nodes represent genes and edges represent whether two genes are
co-expressed. Understanding network structures has become an increasingly important research topic in sociology,
biology, and disciplines where the data can be represented
as graphs.

Community detection is a fundamental task in
network analysis. Learning underlying network
structures has brought deep insights into the understanding of complex systems. While many
methods have focused on clustering nodes into
blocks, few accounts for the fact that interactions
may exhibit edge-level clustering, which we call
categories. Real network data often arise via a
series of interactions. Interactions in complex
systems can often be clustered into different categories and node-level community structures that
depend on the category. In this paper, we introduce a category-and-block edge exchangeable
model (CataBEEM) to study interaction networks
with joint latent interaction-level category and
node-level community structures. In particular,
the proposed method models the network from
the interaction process perspective and allows the
incorporation of prior knowledge from auxiliary
interaction-wise information. We derive an efficient variational inference algorithm that can be
applied to networks consisting of millions of interactions and provide the theoretical bound of
the misspecification rate. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in various simulation
settings and apply the method to TalkLife data, a
large-scale online peer-to-peer support network.
We show CataBEEM detects more temporally
consistent community structures and has better
predictions than other methods.

Real-world networks often arise from sequences of interactions. Conventional approaches proceed by analyzing
constructed graphs via traditional statistical network analysis (Goldenberg et al., 2010; Newman, 2012) that takes
a node-centric perspective where the node is the statistical unit. Network data arising from interaction processes,
however, benefit from the frameworks where the interaction
is the statistical unit. Edge-exchangeable models (Crane
& Dempsey, 2018; Dempsey et al., 2021) are built specifically to analyze datasets coming from such complex interaction processes. Compared to conventional approaches,
edge-exchangeable models reflect the empirical properties
of sparsity and power-law degree distributions observed in
real-world network data. While edge exchangeable frameworks are attractive, such models are inadequate to handle
latent interaction-level and node-level cluster structures.
In this paper, we focus on a fundamental problem in network science — community detection. Communities are
groups of nodes that connect more closely with each other
than others in the graph. In social network data, for example, communities can refer to user groups with common
interests (Bedi & Sharma, 2016). In the protein-protein interaction networks, communities are likely to be functional
modules within the cell (Rives & Galitski, 2003; Chen &
Yuan, 2006). The basic task of community detection is to
partition nodes into blocks that are more densely connected.
Numerous methods have been proposed to address this problem, including stochastic block models (SBM) (Holland
et al., 1983) and its extensions (Airoldi et al., 2008; Karrer
& Newman, 2011), modularity-based algorithms such as the
Newman-Girvan modularity (Newman, 2016), as well as
other approaches (Su et al., 2022). These methods are based
on a node-centric perspective. Recent work by (Zhang &
Dempsey, 2022) addresses node-level community detection
within the edge exchangeability framework.

1. Introduction
Network data is everywhere in our daily life. TalkLife, for
example, is an online peer support network that focuses on
1

Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, United States. Correspondence to: Yuhua Zhang
<zyuhua@umich.edu>, Walter Dempsey <wdem@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

