Detecting Adversarial Directions in Deep Reinforcement Learning to Make
Robust Decisions
Ezgi Korkmaz Jonah Brown-Cohen

Abstract

(2017); Kos & Song (2017) showed that the non-robustness
of neural networks to adversarial perturbations extends to
the deep reinforcement learning domain, where applications
such as autonomous driving, automatic financial trading or
healthcare decision making cannot tolerate such a vulnerability.

Learning in MDPs with highly complex state representations is currently possible due to multiple advancements in reinforcement learning algorithm design. However, this incline in complexity,
and furthermore the increase in the dimensions of
the observation came at the cost of volatility that
can be taken advantage of via adversarial attacks
(i.e. moving along worst-case directions in the
observation space). To solve this policy instability problem we propose a novel method to detect
the presence of these non-robust directions via
local quadratic approximation of the deep neural
policy loss. Our method provides a theoretical
basis for the fundamental cut-off between safe
observations and adversarial observations. Furthermore, our technique is computationally efficient, and does not depend on the methods used
to produce the worst-case directions. We conduct
extensive experiments in the Arcade Learning Environment with several different adversarial attack
techniques. Most significantly, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach even in the setting where non-robust directions are explicitly
optimized to circumvent our proposed method.

There has been a significant amount of effort in trying to
make deep neural networks robust to adversarial perturbations (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018; Pinto
et al., 2017). However, in this arms race it has been shown
that deep reinforcement learning policies learn adversarial
features independent from their worst-case (i.e. adversarial)
training techniques (Korkmaz, 2022). More intriguingly, a
line of work has focused on showing the inevitability of the
existence of adversarial directions, the cost of robust training on generalization, and the intrinsic difficulty of learning
robust models (Dohmatob, 2019; Mahloujifar et al., 2019;
Korkmaz, 2023; Gourdeau et al., 2019). Given that it may
not be possible to make DNNs completely robust to adversarial examples, a natural objective is to instead attempt to
detect the presence of adversarial manipulations.
In this paper we propose a novel identification method for
directions of volatility in the deep neural policy manifold.
Our study is the first one that focuses on detection of adversarial directions in the deep reinforcement learning neural
loss landscape. Our approach relies on differences in the
curvature of the neural policy in the neighborhood of an
adversarial observation when compared to a baseline state
observation. At a high level our method is based on the
intuition that while baseline states have neighborhoods determined by an optimization procedure intended to learn a
policy that works well across all states, each non-robust direction is the output of some local optimization in the neighborhood of one particular state. Our proposed method is
computationally efficient, requiring only one gradient computation and two policy evaluations, requires no training
that depends on the method used to compute the adversarial
direction, and is theoretically well-founded. Hence, our
study focuses on identification of non-robust directions and
makes the following contributions:

1. Introduction
Since Mnih et al. (2015) showed that deep neural networks
can be used to parameterize reinforcement learning policies,
there has been substantial growth in new algorithms and
applications for deep reinforcement learning. While this
progress has resulted in a variety of new capabilities for reinforcement learning agents, it has at the same time introduced
new challenges due to the volatility of deep neural networks
under imperceptible adversarial directions originally discovered by Szegedy et al. (2014). In particular, Huang et al.
Correspondence to:
mail@gmail.com>.

Ezgi Korkmaz <ezgikorkmaz-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• Our paper is the first to focus on identification of adversarial directions in the deep reinforcement learning
1

