SurProGenes: Survival Risk-Ordered Representation of Cancer Patients
and Genes for the Identification of Prognostic Genes

Junetae Kim * 1 Kyoungsuk Park * 1 Hanseok Jeong 2 Youngwook Kim 3 Jeongseon Kim 1 Sun-Young Kim 1

Abstract

field of cancer genomics (Raman et al., 2019; Tran et al.,
2022). The recent application of genomic, transcriptomic,
and proteomic technologies to the field has resulted in the
development of various genetic biomarkers associated with
increased mortality (Campbell et al., 2020; Docking et al.,
2021; Sundar et al., 2022). Accordingly, a more comprehensive understanding of the risks associated with individual
genes may inform treatment decisions and impact patient
outcomes.

Identifying prognostic genes associated with patient survival is an important goal in cancer genomics, as this information could inform treatment approaches and improve patient outcomes.
However, the identification of prognostic genes
is complicated by the high dimensionality of genetic data, which makes their identification computationally intensive. Furthermore, most cancer genomics studies lack appropriate low-risk
groups against which to compare. To address
these issues, we present a framework that identifies candidate prognostic genes by integrating
representation learning and statistical analysis approaches. Specifically, we propose a collaborative
filtering-derived mechanism to represent patients
in order of their survival risk, facilitating their dichotomization. We also propose a mechanism that
allows embedded gene vectors to be polarized on
the extremities of, or centered on, both reference
axes to facilitate recommendations. Restricting
our analysis to a few representative genes within
each cluster allowed for the efficient identification
of prognostic genes. Finally, we demonstrate the
potential of this proposed framework for identifying prognostic genes.

The identification of biomarkers is facilitated when there is a
clear dichotomy between high- and low-risk groups (Raman
et al., 2019). In practice, however, this dichotomy can be
difficult to achieve, because most cancer genomics studies
are performed exclusively on cancer populations and lack a
low-risk comparison group (i.e., normal subjects) (Suntsova
et al., 2019).
One approach to help rectify this limitation is to dichotomize
cancer patients into short- and long-term survivors based
on their median gene expression (Raman et al., 2019; Alves
et al., 2021), or the median hazard ratio (HR) of the Cox
proportional-hazards (CPH) model (Cai et al., 2019; Docking et al., 2021). However, this approach is limited as the
groups are divided equally under the strong assumption
that the dichotomy exists at these median values (DeCoster
et al., 2011; Altman & Royston, 2006). Other researchers
have attempted to cluster genes according to their molecular
patterns and then explore differences in the survival risks
of these gene clusters (Beer et al., 2002; Witkiewicz et al.,
2015). This approach is powerful, as it can group numerous
gene features to facilitate interpretation (Campbell et al.,
2020); however, its drawbacks are that it stratifies patients
based exclusively on genetic patterns while ignoring differences in survival risk in the underlying groups, and explores
the associations between gene clusters rather than those
between individual genes and mortality.

1. Introduction
Cancer remains a leading cause of death globally, and identifying prognostic biomarkers is an essential goal in the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Cancer AI & Digital
Health, Graduate School of Cancer Science and Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Seoul,
Seoul, Republic of Korea 3 Department of Cancer Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Cancer Science and Policy, National
Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Junetae Kim <lyjune0070@gmail.com>, Kyoungsuk Park
<bluemk00@gmail.com>.

Here, we propose a new framework1 that addresses these
issues. We dichotomize patients based on their survival risk
while recommending individual prognostic genes expressed
at statistically different levels between the resulting groups.
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The code is available at https://github.com/
JunetaeKim/SurProGenes.

1

