Learning to Decouple Complex Systems

Zihan Zhou 1 Tianshu Yu 1 2

Abstract

lection of slices at a different time from a unified system. A
series of sequential learning models fall into this category, including variants of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Cho
et al., 2014; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), neural differential equations (DEs) (Chen et al., 2018; Kidger et al.,
2020; Rusch & Mishra, 2021; Zhu et al., 2021) and spatial/temporal attention-based approaches (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Fan et al., 2019; Song et al., 2017). These variants fit
well into the scenarios agreeing with the aforementioned assumptions and are proved effective in learning or modeling
for relatively simple applications with clean data sources.

A complex system with cluttered observations
may be a coupled mixture of multiple simple subsystems corresponding to latent entities. Such
sub-systems may hold distinct dynamics in the
continuous-time domain; therein, complicated interactions between sub-systems also evolve over
time. This setting is fairly common in the real
world but has been less considered. In this paper, we propose a sequential learning approach
under this setting by decoupling a complex system for handling irregularly sampled and cluttered sequential observations. Such decoupling
brings about not only subsystems describing the
dynamics of each latent entity but also a metasystem capturing the interaction between entities
over time. Specifically, we argue that the metasystem evolving within a simplex is governed by
projected differential equations (ProjDEs). We
further analyze and provide neural-friendly projection operators in the context of Bregman divergence. Experimental results on synthetic and
real-world datasets show the advantages of our
approach when facing complex and cluttered sequential data compared to the state-of-the-art.

In the real world, a system may not only describe a single
and holistic entity but also consist of several distinguishable
interacting but simple subsystems, where each subsystem
corresponds to a physical entity. For example, we can think
of the movement of a solar system as the mixture of distinguishable subsystems of the sun and surrounding planets,
while interactions between these celestial bodies over time
are governed by the laws of gravity. Back centuries ago,
physicists and astronomers made enormous efforts to discover the rule of celestial movements from the records of every single body and eventually delivered the neat yet elegant
differential equations (DEs) depicting principles of moving bodies and interactions therein. Likewise, nowadays,
researchers also developed a series of machine learning models for sequential data with distinguishable partitions (Qin
et al., 2017). Two widely adopted strategies for learning the
interactions between subsystems are graph neural networks
(Iakovlev et al., 2021; Ha & Jeong, 2021; Kipf et al., 2018;
Yıldız et al., 2022; Xhonneux et al., 2020) and attention
mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2020; Goyal
et al., 2021), while the interactions are typically encoded
with “messages” between nodes and pair-wise “attention
scores”, respectively.

1. Introduction
Discovering hidden rules from sequential observations has
been an essential topic in machine learning, with a large
variety of applications such as physics simulation (SanchezGonzalez et al., 2020), autonomous driving (Diehl et al.,
2019), ECG analysis (Golany et al., 2021) and event analysis (Chen et al., 2021), to name a few. A standard scheme
is to consider sequential data at each timestamp to be holistic and homogeneous under some ideal assumptions (i.e.,
only the temporal behavior of one entity is involved in a
sequence), under which data/observation is treated as a col-

It is worth noting an even more difficult scenario:
• The data/observation is so cluttered that cannot be
readily distinguished into separate parts.

1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society. Correspondence to: Tianshu Yu <yutianshu@cuhk.edu.cn>.

This can be either due to the way of data collection (e.g.,
videos consisting of multiple objects) or because there are
no explicit physical entities originally (e.g., weather time
series). To tackle this, a fair assumption can be introduced
that complex observations can be decoupled into several

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

