Low Complexity Homeomorphic Projection to Ensure Neural-Network
Solution Feasibility for Optimization over (Non-)Convex Set

Enming Liang 1 Minghua Chen 1 Steven H. Low 2

Abstract

and incorporated into commercial solvers (e.g., Gurobi and
MOSEK) to solve various CO problems exactly or approximately. While widely successful, iterative algorithms can
still fail to solve challenging CO problems in real-time, limiting their usefulness in time-sensitive applications, such as
solving AC optimal power flow problems in real-time power
grid operations and semi-definite programming-based realtime scheduling and coding operations in modern wireless
communication systems.

There has been growing interest in employing
neural network (NN) to directly solve constrained
optimization problems with low run-time complexity. However, it is non-trivial to ensure NN
solutions strictly satisfying problem constraints
due to inherent NN prediction errors. Existing
feasibility-ensuring methods either are computationally expensive or lack performance guarantee.
In this paper, we propose homeomorphic projection as a low-complexity scheme to guarantee NN
solution feasibility for optimization over a general set homeomorphic to a unit ball, covering all
compact convex sets and certain classes of nonconvex sets. The idea is to (i) learn a minimum
distortion homeomorphic mapping between the
constraint set and a unit ball using an invertible
NN (INN), and then (ii) perform a simple bisection operation concerning the unit ball so that the
INN-mapped final solution is feasible with respect
to the constraint set with minor distortion-induced
optimality loss. We prove the feasibility guarantee and bound the optimality loss under mild
conditions. Simulation results, including those
for non-convex AC-OPF problems in power grid
operation, show that homeomorphic projection
outperforms existing methods in solution feasibility and run-time complexity, while achieving
similar optimality loss.

Recently, machine learning (ML) schemes have been developed for solving CO in real-time, including the end-to-end
(E2E) solution mapping (Kotary et al., 2021; Amos, 2022)
and the learning-to-optimize (L2O) iterative scheme (Khalil
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2021b). Boosted by the universal
approximation capacity of neural networks (NN) (Hornik
et al., 1989; Leshno et al., 1993), the end-to-end approaches
learn the mapping between the input parameters and highquality solutions of CO. After the training procedure, NN
directly outputs the solution in real-time, which is much
faster than iterative solvers. For example, researchers have
developed NN-based approaches for optimal power flow
(OPF) problems, where NN predicts the optimal power generation schemes based on real-time power demand (Pan
et al., 2019; Guha et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2020; Fioretto
et al., 2020; Zamzam & Baker, 2020; Donti et al., 2021).
However, it is non-trivial to ensure NN solution feasibility
with respect to the problem constraints, due to inherent NN
prediction errors. Existing feasibility-ensuring methods are
either computationally expensive or lacking performance
guarantees. See Sec. 2 for detailed discussions.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we develop homeomorphic projection (HP)
as a novel low-complexity approach to take an infeasible
NN solution and generate a feasible solution with bounded
optimality loss. We make the following contributions:

Constrained Optimization (CO) has tremendous applications
in various engineering domains, including supply chain,
transportation, power systems, and resource allocation. A
large number of iterative algorithms have been developed

▷ After presenting the optimization problem over a general
ball-homeomorphic set in Sec. 3, we propose an HP framework for ensuring NN solution feasibility in Secs. 4 and
5. The framework includes (i) training an invertible neural
network (INN) in an unsupervised manner to approximate
a minimum distortion homeomorphic (MDH) mapping between the constraint set and a unit ball, and (ii) performing

1

School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong. 2 Depts.
of EE and CMS, Caltech. Correspondence to: Minghua Chen
<minghua.chen@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

