Feature Expansion for Graph Neural Networks

Jiaqi Sun 1 Lin Zhang 2 Guangyi Chen 3 4 Peng Xu 5 Kun Zhang 3 4 Yujiu Yang 1

Abstract

social networks, transportation networks, protein interaction
networks, etc. (Fan et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020; Khoshraftar
& An, 2022). In this paper, we focus on node representation
learning, which is one of the most important tasks in this
line of research, where the key is to represent nodes in an
informative and structure-aware way.

Graph neural networks aim to learn representations for graph-structured data and show impressive performance, particularly in node classification. Recently, many methods have studied
the representations of GNNs from the perspective
of optimization goals and spectral graph theory.
However, the feature space that dominates representation learning has not been systematically
studied in graph neural networks. In this paper,
we propose to fill this gap by analyzing the feature
space of both spatial and spectral models. We decompose graph neural networks into determined
feature spaces and trainable weights, providing
the convenience of studying the feature space explicitly using matrix space analysis. In particular,
we theoretically find that the feature space tends
to be linearly correlated due to repeated aggregations. In this case, the feature space is bounded
by the poor representation of shared weights or
the limited dimensionality of node attributes in existing models, leading to poor performance. Motivated by these findings, we propose 1) feature
subspaces flattening and 2) structural principal
components to expand the feature space. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of our
proposed more comprehensive feature space, with
comparable inference time to the baseline, and
demonstrate its efficient convergence capability.

There are two different types of graph neural networks.
One is spatial, which aggregates information from neighboring nodes and updates the representation of the central
node. (Velickovic et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2020a). The spectral type, on the other hand, treats the
graph structure matrix, such as the Laplacian matrix, as a
transformation for the nodes’ attributes (signals) in the spectral domain (Defferrard et al., 2016; Chien et al., 2021; He
et al., 2021; 2022). The aim is to develop flexible functions
for the graph structure so that the signals of the nodes can
fit the labels appropriately.
Recently, several perspectives for analyzing GNN representations have emerged, such as general optimization functions, denoising frameworks, and spectral graph theory (Zhu
et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021; Balcilar et al., 2021). However, as a determinant of representation learning, feature
spaces have not been systematically studied for graph neural
networks. In general representation learning, performance
depends heavily on the construction of feature spaces with
accessible data (Bengio et al., 2013).
In this paper, we propose to fill this gap and investigate the
feature space for both spatial and spectral GNNs. Specifically, for theoretical investigations, we first abstract a linear
approximation of the GNNs following the studies (Wu et al.,
2019a; Xu et al., 2018; Wang & Zhang, 2022). Then, we decompose the GNN components with and without parameters
in the linear approximation, where the latter is considered
as a feature space built by node attributes and graph structure (e.g., adjacency or Laplacian matrices), and the former
denotes the learnable parameters to reweight the features.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown great potential
in learning representations of graph-structured data, such as
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China 2 International Digital Economy Academy,
China 3 Carnegie Mellon University, USA 4 Mohamed bin
Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 5 Chinese
University of Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to:
Yujiu Yang <yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Lin Zhang
<linzhang0529@gmail.com>.

Taking advantage of the convenience of decomposition, we
examine the feature space of current models. Motivated by
that GNNs are expected to fit arbitrary objective, a more
comprehensive feature space reflects better representability
without any assumption about the data distribution. However, we find theoretically that the feature subspaces of current GNNs are bounded by the weight-sharing mechanism

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

