Wrapped Cauchy Distributed Angular Softmax for Long-Tailed Visual
Recognition

Boran Han 1

Abstract

et al., 2016). However, most image recognition tasks
have been demonstrated on well-balanced datasets. In
contrast, most real-world data comes with an imbalanced
distribution: a few high-frequency classes contain many
training examples, while many low-frequency classes have
insufficient training examples. This scenario is referred to
as long-tailed recognition (Liu et al., 2019), and standard
methods trained with such datasets tend not to yield the
same performance as balanced ones (Liu et al., 2019; Lin
et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2021).

Addressing imbalanced or long-tailed data
is a major challenge in visual recognition
tasks due to disparities between training and
testing distributions and issues with data noise.
We propose the Wrapped Cauchy Distributed
Angular Softmax (WCDAS), a novel softmax
function that incorporates data-wise Gaussianbased kernels into the angular correlation
between feature representations and classifier
weights, effectively mitigating noise and sparse
sampling concerns. The class-wise distribution
of angular representation becomes a sum of
these kernels. Our theoretical analysis reveals
that the wrapped Cauchy distribution excels the
Gaussian distribution in approximating mixed
distributions.
Additionally, WCDAS uses
trainable concentration parameters to dynamically
adjust the compactness and margin of each class.
Empirical results confirm label-aware behavior
in these parameters and demonstrate WCDAS’s
superiority over other state-of-the-art softmaxbased methods in handling long-tailed visual
recognition across multiple benchmark datasets.
The code is public available.

Numerous studies have focused on long-tailed recognition
by attempting to re-balance the data distribution through
class-balanced sampling or class re-weighting (Han et al.,
2005; Kang et al., 2020; Kubát & Matwin, 1997; Huang
et al., 2016; 2020; Hong et al., 2023). However, they
may under-represent the majority class (Han et al., 2005;
Kang et al., 2020; Kubát & Matwin, 1997) or destabilized
the network during optimization (Huang et al., 2016;
2020). In addition to direct sampling, focal loss (Lin
et al., 2017) adopts loss function emphasizing samples
with larger loss value. However, it inevitably involves
hyperparameters tuning by cross-validation. An alternative
method is to adopt a label-aware correction via introducing
a class-wise generalization error bound, such as LabelDistribution-Aware Margin Loss (LDAM) (Cao et al., 2019)
and Balanced Meta-Softmax (BALMS) (Ren et al., 2020).
Cao, et. al. have proved that to improve the accuracy
in recognizing long-tailed distributed data, classes with
fewer training examples should have a higher generalization
error bound (Cao et al., 2019). However, both LDAM and
BALMS can be vulnerable when the number of examples
per class is unknown and constantly changing. Therefore,
further corrections are required for continuous training.
Meta-Weight-Net (Shu et al., 2019) and Equilibrium loss
(Feng et al., 2021) are developed for class re-weighting and
inter-class margin correction, which require no visibility to
the underlying data distribution. However, those methods
can either be subject to lengthy training time due to
the nature of meta-learning (Shu et al., 2019) or high
space complexity because of the memory module (Feng
et al., 2021). Lastly, using angular softmax, Kobayashi
has proposed applying von Mises-Fisher distribution for
compact feature space via a user-defined concentration

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks are the leading methods
for computer vision tasks, including visual recognition.
This strength is largely due to their robust representation
learning, a technique that simplifies target images into a
vector space with fewer dimensions. This crucial step is
facilitated by the penultimate layer and subsequently fed
into the final classifier, followed by a softmax function,
which calculates the probability of an input image being in
the j-th class: P (y = j | x) (Bridle, 1989; Goodfellow
1
Amazon Web Services, AI. Work done while at Shell..
Correspondence to: Boran Han <boranhan@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

