On the Generalization of Multi-modal Contrastive Learning

Qi Zhang * 1 Yifei Wang * 2 Yisen Wang 1 3

Abstract

shot and few-shot image classification. The core idea of
MMCL is rather simple, which aligns the samples of the
same image-text pairs together while pushing away other
unrelated samples in the latent feature space. However, it
remains not fully clear to us why matching multi-modal
pairs would benefit visual representation learning, and what
are the key factors that affect its downstream performance.

Multi-modal contrastive learning (MMCL) has
recently garnered considerable interest due to its
superior performance in visual tasks, achieved
by embedding multi-modal data, such as visuallanguage pairs. However, there still lack theoretical understandings of how MMCL extracts useful visual representation from multi-modal pairs,
and particularly, how MMCL outperforms previous approaches like self-supervised contrastive
learning (SSCL). In this paper, by drawing an
intrinsic connection between MMCL and asymmetric matrix factorization, we establish the first
generalization guarantees of MMCL for visual
downstream tasks. Based on this framework, we
further unify MMCL and SSCL by showing that
MMCL implicitly performs SSCL with (pseudo)
positive pairs induced by text pairs. Through this
unified perspective, we characterize the advantage
of MMCL by showing that text pairs induce more
semantically consistent and diverse positive pairs,
which, according to our analysis, provably benefit
downstream generalization. Inspired by this finding, we propose several methods to significantly
improve the downstream performance of SSCL
on ImageNet by leveraging multi-modal information. Code is available at https://github.
com/PKU-ML/CLIP-Help-SimCLR.

Meanwhile, another popular scenario for contrastive learning is self-supervised learning, which also obtains competitive performance recently (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021). Nevertheless, recent MMCL methods
(like CLIP) have shown significant advantages over its selfsupervised contrastive learning (SSCL) counterparts like
SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020). Existing theories of SSCL
(Saunshi et al., 2019; HaoChen et al., 2021; Wang & Isola,
2020) only establish the optimality of self-supervised representations on downstream tasks, and fail to characterize why
MMCL could outperform SSCL. Another major obstacle is
the generation process of data pairs. In particular, positive
pairs in SSCL are visual-only samples generated by random
data augmentations of the raw image; Instead, the positive pairs in MMCL are multi-modal (e.g., visual-language)
pairs directly provided by the dataset. Since existing SSCL
theories rely crucially on the assumption that data augmentations produce overlap between visual samples (Wang et al.,
2022; Saunshi et al., 2022), they cannot be directly applied
to MMCL that relies on multi-modal data pairs.
In this paper, we propose the first theoretical analysis on
the generalization ability of MMCL. To achieve this, we
establish an equivalence between the MMCL objective and
the asymmetric matrix factorization (AMF) of the multimodal co-occurrence matrix. Built upon this connection, we
characterize the ideal pretrained representations of MMCL
and its generalization bounds on visual and language downstream tasks, where the bounds are influenced by the properties of the multi-modal co-occurrence matrix, for example,
its singular value.

1. Introduction
Recently, multi-modal contrastive learning (MMCL), including CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and its variants (Li et al.,
2022b; Mu et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022), has achieved
impressive performance for visual representation learning,
and transfer well to various downstream tasks like zero*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking
University 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yisen Wang <yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

The established theoretical framework also allows us to characterize the difference between MMCL and SSCL under a
unified perspective. To be specific, we first formally unify
MMCL and SSL under the framework of uni-modal similarity graphs, where language pairs in MMCL can be regarded
as a special kind of data augmentation for generating pos-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

