Multiply Robust Off-policy Evaluation and Learning under Truncation by Death

Jianing Chu 1 Shu Yang 1 Wenbin Lu 1

Abstract

goal of OPE is to estimate the expected reward of a given
policy using historical data generated by a potentially different policy, while OPL aims to derive an optimal policy
that maximizes the expected reward based on the available
historical data. In contrast, OPE and OPL have also been
extensively studied under the counterfactual and potentialoutcome framework (Rubin, 2005). They are closely related
to a broad body of research on causal inference with observational data: OPE can be viewed as evaluating the expected
outcome of patients under a given treatment policy and
OPL is to identify the optimal treatment policy that yields
the greatest expected outcome in populations, known as the
value function (Zhang et al., 2012; Luedtke & Van Der Laan,
2016; Kitagawa & Tetenov, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021).

Typical off-policy evaluation (OPE) and offpolicy learning (OPL) are not well-defined problems under “truncation by death”, where the outcome of interest is not defined after some events,
such as death. The standard OPE no longer yields
consistent estimators, and the standard OPL results in suboptimal policies. In this paper, we
formulate OPE and OPL using principal stratification under “truncation by death”. We propose a survivor value function for a subpopulation whose outcomes are always defined regardless of treatment conditions. We establish a novel
identification strategy under principal ignorability,
and derive the semiparametric efficiency bound
of an OPE estimator. Then, we propose multiply robust estimators for OPE and OPL. We
show that the proposed estimators are consistent and asymptotically normal even with flexible semi/nonparametric models for nuisance functions approximation. Moreover, under mild rate
conditions of nuisance functions approximation,
the estimators achieve the semiparametric efficiency bound. Finally, we conduct experiments
to demonstrate the empirical performance of the
proposed estimators.

A variety of studies have revealed that the treatment effects
can vary significantly across different (sub)populations due
to covariate shift, unmeasured confounding and other reasons. These issues result in the generalization challenges
in both OPE and OPL. Standard OPE methods no longer
provide consistent value estimators, and estimated optimal
policies by standard OPL methods may be suboptimal to
certain (sub)populations (e.g. Lipkovich et al., 2017; VanderWeele et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2022). Consequently, there is
a pressing need to develop new OPE and OPL methods that
target different (sub)populations. Uehara et al. (2020); Mo
et al. (2021); Chu et al. (2023) focus on the generalization
of policy to new populations with covariate shift and the
use of weighting. Cui & Tchetgen Tchetgen (2021); Qiu
et al. (2021) both utilize instrumental variables to address
potential unmeasured confounding, and learn the optimal
policy in subpopulations with respect to compliance. However, all of these works consider the same outcome across
different (sub)populations. In many cases, decision-making
goals and outcomes of interest may also be different across
various (sub)populations.

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications of personalized decisionmaking, experimentation and exploration can be costly,
risky, or even unethical, such as healthcare (Qian & Murphy,
2011), education (Mandel et al., 2014), and e-commerce
(Swaminathan et al., 2017). This motivates the study of
off-policy evaluation (OPE) and off-policy learning (OPL)
in contextual bandits (Dudı́k et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2017)
and reinforcement learning (Jiang & Li, 2016; Munos et al.,
2016; Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kallus & Uehara, 2020). The

For example, in critical care, the primary goal of treatment
is to save the lives of seriously ill patients (i.e., decrease
mortality). With advancements in medicine, short-term mortality has been reduced in many clinical situations (Wunsch et al., 2010; Guérin et al., 2013). However, surviving
critical illness often comes at a cost, as many survivors experience worsened pain, cognition, physical function, and
mental health during and after treatment. To account for a
patient perspective, the significance of improving “patient-

1

Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Jianing Chu
<jchu3@ncsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

