CAB: Comprehensive Attention Benchmarking on Long Sequence Modeling

Jun Zhang * 1 Shuyang Jiang * 1 2 Jiangtao Feng 1 Lin Zheng 3 Lingpeng Kong 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformer has achieved great breakthroughs in natural
language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020), computer vision (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021b), speech processing (Schneider
et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2021), and biology (Jumper et al.,
2021; Brandes et al., 2022). A major drawback of the transformer architecture is its quadratic complexity in both time
and memory. The problem has been more evident with the
ever-increasing need in applying transformers for longer
sequence modeling in different domains.

Transformer has achieved remarkable success in
language, image, and speech processing. Recently, various efficient attention architectures
have been proposed to improve transformer’s efficiency while largely preserving its efficacy, especially in modeling long sequences. A widelyused benchmark to test these efficient methods’
capability on long-range modeling is the Long
Range Arena (LRA). However, LRA only focuses
on the standard bidirectional (or noncausal) self
attention, and completely ignores cross attentions
and unidirectional (or causal) attentions, which
are equally important to downstream applications.
In this paper, we propose Comprehensive Attention Benchmark (CAB) under a fine-grained attention taxonomy with four distinguishable attention patterns, namely, noncausal self, causal
self, noncausal cross, and causal cross attentions.
CAB collects seven real-world tasks from different research areas to evaluate efficient attentions
under the four attention patterns. Among these
tasks, CAB validates efficient attentions in eight
backbone networks to show their generalization
across neural architectures. We conduct exhaustive experiments to benchmark the performances
of nine widely-used efficient attention architectures designed with different philosophies on CAB.
Extensive experimental results also shed light on
the fundamental problems of efficient attentions,
such as efficiency length against vanilla attention,
performance consistency across attention patterns,
the benefit of attention mechanisms, and interpolation/extrapolation on long-context language
modeling.

Recent research on efficient attention mechanisms seeks to
respond to this problem by improving attention efficiency
while preserving efficacy (Wang et al., 2020; Kitaev et al.,
2019; Zaheer et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2020; Zheng
et al., 2022). The commonly adopted test bed for benchmarking efficient transformers in the context of processing long sequences, is the Long Range Arena (Tay et al.,
2020b; LRA), consisting of both synthetic probing tasks and
real-world tasks. However, all of these tasks focus on the
self attention setting, ignoring cross attention and causal
attention, which are equally important and often more challenging. In other words, the transformer model is only
used as a sequence encoder in LRA, while in real applications, cross attention is essential for conditionality modeling
tasks such as sequence-to-sequence (Bahdanau et al., 2015),
data-to-text (Dušek et al., 2020) and knowledge-enhanced
models (Liu et al., 2021a), and causal attention is critical for
causality modeling tasks such as text generation (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020), language modeling (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) and speech synthesis (Li et al., 2019a). Another potential drawback of LRA
as discovered by researchers recently, is that with proper
tuning, the performance gap between different transformer
variants in these tasks can be insignificant (Xiong et al.,
2022; Ivgi et al., 2022; Shaham et al., 2022), impairing its
effectiveness as a standard benchmark.

*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 3 The University of Hong Kong. Correspondence
to: Jiangtao Feng <jiangtaofeng0906@gmail.com>, Lingpeng
Kong <lpk@cs.hku.hk>.

To address these problems, we propose a comprehensive
attention benchmark (CAB) for long sequence modeling.
Above all, we present a fine-grained attention taxonomy,
considering attentive functionality on conditionality and
causality modeling. We present four patterns of attentions,
namely, noncausal self, causal self, noncausal cross, and

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

