Spatial-Temporal Graph Learning with Adversarial Contrastive Adaptation

Qianru Zhang 1 Chao Huang* 1 Lianghao Xia 1 Zheng Wang 2 Siuming Yiu 1 Ruihua Han 1

Abstract

city, which facilitates various spatial-temporal prediction
tasks such as crime forecasting for public security (Li et al.,
2022b), traffic flow prediction in intelligent transportation
systems (Pan et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020), and Pointof-Interest (POI) recommendation in location-based services (Zhou et al., 2019). One of the most promising solutions to this problem is the adoption of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Zhang et al., 2021a; Wu et al., 2022). These
GNN approaches model region correlations with message
passing over region graphs generated based on collected
spatial-temporal data, such as human mobility traces and
citywide traffic flow.

Spatial-temporal graph learning has emerged as
a promising solution for modeling structured
spatial-temporal data and learning region representations for various urban sensing tasks such
as crime forecasting and traffic flow prediction. However, most existing models are vulnerable to the quality of the generated region
graph due to the inaccurate graph-structured information aggregation schema. The ubiquitous
spatial-temporal data noise and incompleteness
in real-life scenarios pose challenges in generating high-quality region representations. To address this challenge, we propose a new spatialtemporal graph learning model (GraphST) for enabling effective self-supervised learning. Our proposed model is an adversarial contrastive learning
paradigm that automates the distillation of crucial multi-view self-supervised information for
robust spatial-temporal graph augmentation. We
empower GraphST to adaptively identify hard
samples for better self-supervision, enhancing
the representation discrimination ability and robustness. In addition, we introduce a cross-view
contrastive learning paradigm to model the interdependencies across view-specific region representations and preserve underlying relation heterogeneity. We demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed GraphST method in various spatialtemporal prediction tasks on real-life datasets. We
release our model implementation via the link:
https://github.com/HKUDS/GraphST.

Although spatial-temporal graph neural models are highly
effective, their reliance on the quality of the constructed
region graph presents significant challenges. The current
schema (Zhang et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2023) of embedding propagation and refinement along graph
structural connections is limited and often unable to capture the complexities of real-world urban environments.
Data noise and incompleteness are also common in spatialtemporal data analysis, which further undermines the quality
of the constructed region graph. For example, sensor readings may be lost or inaccurate (Yi et al., 2016), and human
mobility data from crowd sensors is frequently noisy (Feng
et al., 2019). In addition, spatially adjacent regions may not
be strongly correlated due to differences in urban function,
while similar regions may be far apart geographically (Zhou
et al., 2020). These factors contribute to the questionable
quality of region-wise connection graphs, making it difficult
to effectively perform spatial-temporal graph representation
learning in the presence of noise perturbation.
With the recent success of self-supervised learning in mitigating data scarcity and noise challenges, we draw inspiration to propose a spatial-temporap graph pre-training framework with effective data augmentation, by exploring the
following questions in model design.
• Q1: How can we offer self-supervised signals as spatialtemporal graph pre-training tasks?

1. Introduction
Spatial-temporal graph representation learning aims to provide a meaningful latent embedding for each region in a
1

The Univeristy of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Chao Huang
<chaohuang75@gmail.com>.

• Q2: How can we automatically identify hard samples
during contrastive learning to enhance model robustness?
• Q3: How can we model the inter-dependencies across
different region relation views?

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To address these challenges, we propose a novel model
1

