Compositional Exemplars for In-context Learning

Jiacheng Ye 1 2 Zhiyong Wu 2 Jiangtao Feng 2 Tao Yu 1 Lingpeng Kong 1

Abstract

language models (LMs; Brown et al. 2020). Given a limited
number of demonstration examples, in-context learning
imitates the human ability to leverage prior knowledge to
achieve the best generalization performance.

Large pretrained language models (LMs) have
shown impressive In-Context Learning (ICL)
ability, where the model learns to do an unseen
task via a prompt consisting of input-output
examples as the demonstration, without any
parameter updates. The performance of ICL is
highly dominated by the quality of the selected
in-context examples. However, previous selection
methods are mostly based on simple heuristics,
leading to sub-optimal performance. In this
work, we formulate in-context example selection
as a subset selection problem. We propose
CEIL (Compositional Exemplars for In-context
Learning), which is instantiated by Determinantal
Point Processes (DPPs) to model the interaction
between the given input and in-context examples,
and optimized through a carefully-designed contrastive learning objective to obtain preference
from LMs. We validate CEIL on 12 classification
and generation datasets from 7 distinct NLP tasks,
including sentiment analysis, paraphrase detection, natural language inference, commonsense
reasoning, open-domain question answering, code
generation, and semantic parsing. Extensive
experiments demonstrate not only the state-of-theart performance but also the transferability and
compositionality of CEIL, shedding new light
on in-context learning. Our code is released at
https://github.com/HKUNLP/icl-ceil.

However, such ability comes along with the robustness
issue: ICL is particularly sensitive to the selection of incontext examples, and different arrangements can result in
a performance deviation from close to random to near stateof-the-art (Rubin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2022). There have been a number of research attempts
over the past two years to select better in-context examples.
In particular, one prominent approach is to compare the
input with each individual example based on learning-free
heuristics (Liu et al., 2022) or learning-based metrics (Rubin
et al., 2022). Despite the improved performance, these
methods do not take into account the inter-relationship
between in-context examples. For instance, the ignorance of
redundancy of in-context examples can result in almost
identical examples, providing no additional supervision.
Searching for a compact set of in-context examples becomes
even more urgent as there is a hard limit for the prompt
length due to the backbone transformer architecture of LMs.
In this paper, we propose a general approach, named
CEIL (Compositional Exemplars for In-context Learning).
Instead of selecting each in-context example independently,
CEIL models the joint probability of the entire in-context
example set, and thus captures the inter-relationship between in-context examples. To model the joint probability
of a set given a specific input, we propose a novel model
based on the conditional determinantal point process (DPP;
Kulesza et al. 2012) that learns to select the most diverse yet
helpful in-context example set (§3.1). To take into account
the quality of a selected subset, a scoring function from a
language model is incorporated into the conditional DPP
to form a contrastive loss (§3.2). That way, our algorithm
maintains the polynomial time maximum a posteriori (MAP)
inference of DPP (Chen et al., 2018) so that the optimal
in-context example subset can be found effectively in the
inference stage (§3.3).

1. Introduction
An important goal of artificial intelligence is to develop
models that can generalize to unseen tasks. NLP community
made a major step towards this goal by discovering the
in-context learning (ICL) capability of large pre-trained
1
Department of Computer Science, The University of
Hong Kong 2 Shark-NLP, Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence to: Jiacheng Ye, Zhiyong Wu <carsonye@connect.hku.hk, whucs2013wzy@gmail.com>.

We validate our method by conducting extensive experiments on 12 classification and generation datasets from
7 distinct tasks, including sentiment analysis, paraphrase
detection, natural language inference, commonsense rea-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

