Revisiting Gradient Clipping:
Stochastic bias and tight convergence guarantees

Anastasia Koloskova * 1 Hadrien Hendrikx * 2 Sebastian U. Stich 3

Abstract

covers minimizing the empirical loss in machine learning
applications, where D represents the uniform distribution
over training datapoints, and fξ (x) is the loss of model x
on the datapoint ξ.

Gradient clipping is a popular modification to
standard (stochastic) gradient descent, at every iteration limiting the gradient norm to a certain
value c > 0. It is widely used for example
for stabilizing the training of deep learning models (Goodfellow et al., 2016), or for enforcing
differential privacy (Abadi et al., 2016). Despite
popularity and simplicity of the clipping mechanism, its convergence guarantees often require
specific values of c and strong noise assumptions.

We focus on gradient descent methods with gradient clipping for solving (1). Given a clipping radius c > 0, step-size
η > 0, and starting from a point x0 ∈ Rd the gradient clipping algorithm performs the following iterations:
xt+1 = xt − ηgt ,

with

gt = clipc (∇fξ (xt )) , (2)

where gt is a clipped stochastic gradient, and the clipping
operator is defined as


c
clipc (u) = min 1,
u,
for u ∈ Rd .
(3)
kuk

In this paper, we give convergence guarantees
that show precise dependence on arbitrary clipping thresholds c and show that our guarantees are
tight with both deterministic and stochastic gradients. In particular, we show that (i) for deterministic gradient descent, the clipping threshold only
affects the higher-order terms of convergence, (ii)
in the stochastic setting convergence to the true
optimum cannot be guaranteed under the standard
noise assumption, even under arbitrary small stepsizes. We give matching upper and lower bounds
for convergence of the gradient norm when running clipped SGD, and illustrate these results with
experiments.

Gradient clipping is widely used to stabilize the training of
neural networks, by preventing large occasional gradient
values from harming it (Goodfellow et al., 2016). This is
particularly useful for mitigating outliers in the training data,
and training recurrent models (Pascanu et al., 2012; 2013),
in which the noise can induce very large gradients.
Gradient clipping is also an essential part of privacypreserving machine learning. The widely-used Gaussian
Mechanism (Dwork & Roth, 2014) adds noise to the individual gradients to add uncertainty about their true value.
Yet, it requires the gradients to have bounded norms for the
privacy guarantees to hold. In practice, bounded gradients
are enforced through clipping (Abadi et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on solving general minimization problem
of the form

Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Switzerland 2 Inria Grenoble,
France (work done in part while at EPFL) 3 CISPA Helmholtz
Center for Information Security, Germany. Correspondence to:
Anastasia Koloskova <anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch>, Hadrien
Hendrikx <hadrien.hendrikx@inria.fr>.

Gradient clipping has already been widely studied, as we
detail in the next section. However, many works choose a
specific value for the clipping threshold c in order to guarantee convergence. This suggests that c should be carefully
tuned in practice, which is highly undesirable, in particular
since the clipping threshold might be dictated by other (e.g.,
privacy) concerns. Besides, most works impose strong assumptions on the stochastic gradient noise, through either
large batches (and thus small stochastic noise), angle conditions, or uniform boundedness of the norm, that might not
hold in practice.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we precisely characterize how the clipping
threshold c affects the convergence properties of clippedSGD for any clipping threshold c.

min {f (x) := Eξ∼D [fξ (x)]} ,

x∈Rd

(1)

where f is a possibly non-convex, and possibly stochastic
function. This setting covers many applications, e.g. it covers optimizing deterministic functions if fξ ≡ f ∀ξ. It also
*

1

