Learning Unnormalized Statistical Models via Compositional Optimization

Wei Jiang 1 Jiayu Qin 2 Lingyu Wu 1 Changyou Chen 2 Tianbao Yang 3 Lijun Zhang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
We investigate the problem of learning unnormalized statistical models. Suppose we observe a set of training samples
Dn = {x1 , . . . , xn } from an unknown probability density
function (pdf) pdata (x) and estimate this data pdf by

Learning unnormalized statistical models (e.g.,
energy-based models) is computationally challenging due to the complexity of handling the partition function. To eschew this complexity, noisecontrastive estimation (NCE) has been proposed
by formulating the objective as the logistic loss
of the real data and the artificial noise. However,
as found in previous works, NCE may perform
poorly in many tasks due to its flat loss landscape
and slow convergence. In this paper, we study a
direct approach for optimizing the negative loglikelihood of unnormalized models from the perspective of compositional optimization. To tackle
the partition function, a noise distribution is introduced such that the log partition function can be
written as a compositional function whose inner
function can be estimated with stochastic samples. Hence, the objective can be optimized by
stochastic compositional optimization algorithms.
Despite being a simple method, we demonstrate
that it is more favorable than NCE by (1) establishing a fast convergence rate and quantifying its
dependence on the noise distribution through the
variance of stochastic estimators; (2) developing
better results for one-dimensional Gaussian mean
estimation by showing our objective has a much
favorable loss landscape and hence our method enjoys faster convergence; (3) demonstrating better
performance on multiple applications, including
density estimation, out-of-distribution detection,
and real image generation.

p(x; θ) = R

p0 (x; θ)
,
p0 (x; θ)dx

(1)

where p0 (x; θ) is defined as an unnormalized model, and θ
denotes theR parameter that will be learnt to best fit the data.
The term p0 (x; θ)dx in equation (1) is called partition
function, which
is used to ensure the final model is normalR
ized, i.e., p(x; θ)dx = 1. By introducing the partition
function, we can use more flexible structures to represent
p0 (x; θ). Specifically, if we set p0 (x; θ) = ef0 (x;θ) , the
above formulation (1) reduces to the well-known energybased model (EBM) (LeCun et al., 2006):
p(x; θ) = R

ef0 (x;θ)
,
ef0 (x;θ) dx

which enjoys wide applications in machine learning (Du &
Mordatch, 2019; Yu et al., 2020; Grathwohl et al., 2020a).
To find the best parameter θ for the given model p0 (x; θ),
we can directly maximize the log-likelihood on the observed
training data, i.e., optimizing the objective L(θ), where
n

1X
[log p0 (xi ; θ)] + log
L(θ) = −
n i=1

Z

p0 (x; θ)dx. (2)

However,
the challenge is that the log partition function
R
log p0 (x; θ)dx and its gradient are difficult to calculate
exactly. To remedy this issue, prior works (Hinton, 2002;
Tieleman, 2008; Nijkamp et al., 2019a) resort to Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling (Christian P. Robert,
2004). Considering the gradient of loss L(θ), we have:

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, New York, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, USA. Correspondence to: Changyou
Chen <changyou@buffalo.edu>, Tianbao Yang <tianbaoyang@tamu.edu>, Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.




n 
∇p0 (x; θ)
1 X ∇p0 (xi ; θ)
∇L(θ) = −
+ Ex∼pθ
,
n i=1 p0 (xi ; θ)
p0 (x; θ)
where pθ denotes the pdf p(x, θ). To compute the second
term, previous literature applies a number of MCMC steps
to sample from pθ , and then calculates the estimated gradient. However, MCMC sampling is slow and unstable during

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

