Towards Understanding Generalization of Macro-AUC in Multi-label Learning

Guoqiang Wu 1 Chongxuan Li 2 Yilong Yin 1

Abstract

class-wise AUC measures, which is the focus of this paper.

Macro-AUC is the arithmetic mean of the classwise AUCs in multi-label learning and is commonly used in practice. However, its theoretical understanding is far lacking. Toward solving it, we characterize the generalization properties of various learning algorithms based on
the corresponding surrogate losses w.r.t. MacroAUC. We theoretically identify a critical factor
of the dataset affecting the generalization bounds:
the label-wise class imbalance. Our results on
the imbalance-aware error bounds show that the
widely-used univariate loss-based algorithm is
more sensitive to the label-wise class imbalance
than the proposed pairwise and reweighted lossbased ones, which probably implies its worse performance. Moreover, empirical results on various
datasets corroborate our theory findings. To establish it, technically, we propose a new (and more
general) McDiarmid-type concentration inequality, which may be of independent interest.

Macro-AUC (and many other measures) in MLC are discontinuous and non-convex, which makes that optimizing
them directly can lead to NP-hard problems (Arora & Barak,
2009). Thus, many surrogate losses are used in practice for
computational efficiency. Empirically, many surrogate lossbased learning algorithms are commonly evaluated in terms
of Macro-AUC, including the widely-used surrogate univariate loss-based algorithms (Boutell et al., 2004; Wu &
Zhu, 2020) that originally aim to optimize the Hamming
loss. Theoretically, however, the understanding is far lacking. To take a step towards solving it, this paper attempts to
formally answer the following question:
What is the learning guarantee of the widely-used surrogate univariate loss-based algorithms w.r.t. the MacroAUC?
To answer the above question, we propose an analytical
framework to characterize the generalization properties of
learning algorithms w.r.t. the Macro-AUC. Inspired by the
theory analyses, we also propose one pairwise surrogate
loss and one reweighted univariate loss for Macro-AUC.
Theoretically, we analyze the learning guarantees of algorithms with all three losses. We theoretically identify the
label-wise class imbalance, which is a factor of the dataset
in MLC (Tarekegn et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020b), plays
a critical role in these generalization bounds.

1. Introduction
Multi-Label Learning (MLC) (McCallum, 1999) is an important learning task in machine learning where each instance might be associated with multiple labels. It has
been widely applied in various areas, e.g., natural language processing (Schapire & Singer, 2000), computer
vision (Carneiro et al., 2007), and bioinformatics (Elisseeff & Weston, 2001). Due to the complexity of MLC
and the diverse demands of different scenarios, various
measures (Zhang & Zhou, 2014; Wu & Zhou, 2017) have
been developed for a comprehensive evaluation, e.g., Hamming loss, ranking loss, and subset accuracy. Among them,
Macro-AUC (Zhang & Zhou, 2014) is a widely-used measure in practice. Informally, it is the arithmetic mean of the

Specifically, the pairwise loss-based learning algorithm Apa
has a label-wise class
√imbalance-aware leaning guarantee
K
1
1
of O ( √n ( K ∑k=1 τ1k )) (see Table 1), where n is the
sample size, K is the label size, and τk ∈ [ n1 , 12 ] characterizes the k-th label class imbalance level. The smaller τk ,
the higher the imbalance level. In contrast, the widely-used
univariate loss-based √
algorithm Au1 has an error bound
K
1√
1
of O ( τ ∗ n ( K ∑k=1 τ1k )), where τS∗ = argmink∈[K] τk .
S
Thus, we can observe that Au1 is more sensitive to the labelwise class imbalance than Apa , which implies that Apa
would probably perform better than Au1 practically, especially when τ1∗ is large, which often occurs in real datasets
S
of MLC. Note that, computationally, Apa can lead to a complexity of O(n2 K), which is worse than Au1 (i.e., O(nK)),
and it can be prohibitively costly when the sample size n

1
School of Software, Shandong University 2 Gaoling School
of AI, Renmin University of China; Beijing Key Laboratory of
Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Guoqiang Wu <guoqiangwu@sdu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

