Nonlinear Advantage: Trained Networks Might Not Be As Complex as You
Think
Christian H.X. Ali Mehmeti-Göpel 1 Jan Disselhoff 1

Abstract

depth, improvements such as batch normalization (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015; Santurkar et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019) or
residual connections (He et al., 2015b) made the training of
networks with hundreds or even thousands of layers possible, and this did contribute to significant practical gains.

We perform an empirical study of the behaviour
of deep networks when fully linearizing some of
its feature channels through a sparsity prior on the
overall number of nonlinear units in the network.
In experiments on image classification and machine translation tasks, we investigate how much
we can simplify the network function towards linearity before performance collapses. First, we
observe a significant performance gap when reducing nonlinearity in the network function early
on as opposed to late in training, in-line with
recent observations on the time-evolution of the
data-dependent NTK. Second, we find that after
training, we are able to linearize a significant number of nonlinear units while maintaining a high
performance, indicating that much of a network’s
expressivity remains unused but helps gradient
descent in early stages of training. To characterize the depth of the resulting partially linearized
network, we introduce a measure called average
path length, representing the average number of
active nonlinearities encountered along a path in
the network graph. Under sparsity pressure, we
find that the remaining nonlinear units organize
into distinct structures, forming core-networks of
near constant effective depth and width, which in
turn depend on task difficulty.

From a theoretical perspective, a network’s depth (along
with its width) upper bounds the complexity of the function that it can represent (Bartlett et al., 2019) and therefore
upper bounds the network’s expressivity. Indeed, deeper networks tend to enhance performance (Tan & Le, 2019), but
gains seem to taper off and saturate with increasing depth.
Very deep networks are also known to be more difficult
to analyze (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019), more computationally
expensive to train or infer and suffer from numerous stability issues such as vanishing (Hochreiter, 1991), exploding
(Zhang et al., 2019) and shattering (Balduzzi et al., 2017)
gradients. Similar arguments can be made about layer width:
a sufficiently large network can memorize any given function (Cybenko, 1989), but under standard initialization and
training infinite width networks degrade to Gaussian processes (Jacot et al., 2018).
From a practical perspective, there are now many successful
recipes for creating networks of a prescribed depth, but it
is still difficult to understand – empirically or analytically –
how many nonlinear layers and features per layer are actually needed to solve a problem, and how effective a chosen
architecture actually is in exploiting its expressive potential in the sense of a deep stack of concatenated nonlinear
computations.
Our paper addresses this question from an empirical perspective: we use a simple setup that associates every nonlinear
unit with a cost at channel granularity, which can be raised
continuously, while simultaneously trying to maintain performance. As PReLU activations (He et al., 2015a) can be
used to interpolate continuously between a ReLU function
and a linear function (Ali Mehmeti-Göpel et al., 2021), we
replace each ReLU layer with channel-wise PReLU activations and regularize their slopes towards linearity. Such a
linearized feature channel therefore only forms linear combinations of existing feature channels, thereby not effectively
contributing to the nonlinear complexity of the network.
To measure the nonlinear complexity or ”effective depth”

1. Introduction
Deep learning as such is based on the idea that concatenations of (suitably chosen) nonlinear functions increase
expressivity so that complex pattern modeling and recognition problems can be solved. While initial approaches such
as AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) only used moderate
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Mainz, Germany. Correspondence to: Christian H.X. Ali Mehmeti-Göpel
<chalimeh@uni-mainz.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

