Multi-Fidelity Covariance Estimation in the Log-Euclidean Geometry

Aimee Maurais 1 Terrence Alsup 2 Benjamin Peherstorfer 2 Youssef Marzouk 1

Abstract
Σ̂n =

We introduce a multi-fidelity estimator of covariance matrices that employs the log-Euclidean geometry of the symmetric positive-definite manifold. The estimator fuses samples from a hierarchy of data sources of differing fidelities and
costs for variance reduction while guaranteeing
definiteness, in contrast with previous approaches.
The new estimator makes covariance estimation
tractable in applications where simulation or data
collection is expensive; to that end, we develop
an optimal sample allocation scheme that minimizes the mean-squared error of the estimator
given a fixed budget. Guaranteed definiteness is
crucial to metric learning, data assimilation, and
other downstream tasks. Evaluations of our approach using data from physical applications (heat
conduction, fluid dynamics) demonstrate more accurate metric learning and speedups of more than
one order of magnitude compared to benchmarks.

1 Xn
>
(yi − ȳ) (yi − ȳ) ,
i=1
n

(1)

where1 ȳ = E[y]. The mean-squared error (MSE) of the
estimator Σ̂n in the Euclidean metric, i.e., E[dF (Σ̂, Σ)2 ]
where dF (A, B) = kA − BkF and k·kF denotes the Frobenius norm, decays as O(1/n) if the samples are independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.). Furthermore, if Σ lies
in the space Sd++ of symmetric (strictly) positive definite
(SPD) d × d matrices, then the sample covariance matrix
Σ̂n is in Sd++ almost surely for n > d.
We are interested in situations where obtaining a realization
of y incurs a high cost c0 > 0 and thus straightforward
application of the Monte Carlo estimator (1) becomes computationally intractable. High sampling cost is a pervasive
issue in science and engineering, where sampling typically
corresponds to measuring the response of processes and systems that must be either numerically simulated or physically
observed. We note that there exist a wide range of techniques for covariance estimation in high dimensions (Bickel
& Levina, 2008; Ledoit & Wolf, 2012; Loh & Wainwright,
2012; Fan et al., 2011; Tsiligkaridis & Hero, 2013; Loh
& Bühlmann, 2014; Donoho et al., 2018). Our focus here
instead is on situations where drawing each sample incurs
high cost; see also the discussion in the Conclusions.

1. Introduction
Covariance estimation is a fundamental task for understanding the relationships between multiple features of data
points. It arises in a wide range of machine learning applications such as metric learning (Zadeh et al., 2016; Huang
et al., 2015), graphical models (Loh & Bühlmann, 2014;
Ravikumar et al., 2011), and classification (Hastie et al.,
2001), as well as in spatial statistics (Cressie, 2015) and in
science and engineering applications such as filtering and
data assimilation (Schillings & Stuart, 2017; Bergemann &
Reich, 2010; Law et al., 2015). The canonical Monte Carlo
approach to estimating the covariance matrix Σ = Cov[y]
of a random variable y with d components is to take n samples y1 , . . . , yn and compute the sample covariance matrix

Multi-fidelity estimation The opportunity that we exploit
is that in many applications there is a multi-fidelity hierarchy
of data sources from which correlated auxiliary samples can
be obtained; see Peherstorfer et al. (2018) for a survey.
Multi-fidelity approaches have found increasing utility in
machine learning—e.g., for optimization (Poloczek et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020), classification and
sequential learning (Marques et al., 2018; Gundersen et al.,
2021; Palizhati et al., 2022), and sampling (Cai & Adams,
2022; Prescott & Baker, 2020; Alsup et al., 2022).
Let (Ω, F, P) be a probability triple. In the multi-fidelity
setting, in addition to the original “high-fidelity” random
variable y ≡ y(0) : Ω → Rd generating the sample set
0
{y(0) (ωi )}ni=1
, one has access to a number of low-fidelity
surrogate random variables y(1) , . . . , y(`) : Ω → Rd
`
and obtains corresponding sets of samples {y(`) (ωi )}ni=1
,

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA USA
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY USA. Correspondence to: Aimee Maurais
<maurais@mit.edu>, Terrence Alsup <alsup@cims.nyu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
If the meanPof y is unknown, one can replace ȳ with the
sample mean n1 n
i=1 yi and normalize (1) with 1/(n − 1).

1

