Perturbation Analysis of Neural Collapse

Tom Tirer * 1 Haoxiang Huang * 2 Jonathan Niles-Weed 2

Abstract

using a large amount of labeled training data. The training
scheme of these networks often includes minimizing the
training loss beyond the zero training error point (Hoffer
et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2018; Belkin et al., 2019). In this
terminal phase of training, a “neural collapse” (NC) behavior has been empirically observed when using either crossentropy (CE) loss (Papyan et al., 2020) or mean squared
error (MSE) loss (Han et al., 2022).

Training deep neural networks for classification
often includes minimizing the training loss beyond the zero training error point. In this phase
of training, a “neural collapse” behavior has been
observed: the variability of features (outputs of
the penultimate layer) of within-class samples decreases and the mean features of different classes
approach a certain tight frame structure. Recent
works analyze this behavior via idealized unconstrained features models where all the minimizers
exhibit exact collapse. However, with practical
networks and datasets, the features typically do
not reach exact collapse, e.g., because deep layers
cannot arbitrarily modify intermediate features
that are far from being collapsed. In this paper,
we propose a richer model that can capture this
phenomenon by forcing the features to stay in
the vicinity of a predefined features matrix (e.g.,
intermediate features). We explore the model in
the small vicinity case via perturbation analysis
and establish results that cannot be obtained by
the previously studied models. For example, we
prove reduction in the within-class variability of
the optimized features compared to the predefined
input features (via analyzing gradient flow on the
“central-path” with minimal assumptions), analyze the minimizers in the near-collapse regime,
and provide insights on the effect of regularization
hyperparameters on the closeness to collapse. We
support our theory with experiments in practical
deep learning settings.

The NC behavior includes several simultaneous phenomena that evolve as the number of epochs grows. The first
phenomenon, dubbed NC1, is decrease in the variability of
the features (outputs of the penultimate layer) of training
samples from the same class. The second phenomenon,
dubbed NC2, is increasing similarity of the structure of
the inter-class features’ means (after subtracting the global
mean) to a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF). The third
phenomenon, dubbed NC3, is alignment of the last layer’s
weights with the inter-class features’ means. A consequence
of these phenomena is that the classifier’s decision rule
becomes similar to nearest class center in feature space.
Many recent works attempt to theoretically analyze the NC
behavior (Mixon et al., 2020; Lu & Steinerberger, 2022;
Wojtowytsch et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021;
Graf et al., 2021; Ergen & Pilanci, 2021; Ji et al., 2021;
Galanti et al., 2021; Tirer & Bruna, 2022; Zhou et al., 2022a;
Thrampoulidis et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022b; Kothapalli, 2023). The mathematical frameworks
are almost always based on variants of the unconstrained
features model (UFM), proposed by (Mixon et al., 2020),
which treats the (deepest) features of the training samples
as free optimization variables (disconnected from data or intermediate/shallow features). Typically, in these “idealized”
models all the minimizers exhibit “exact collapse” (i.e., their
within-class variability is exactly 0 and an exact simplex
ETF structure is demonstrated) provided that arbitrary (but
nonzero) level of regularization is used.

1. Introduction
Modern classification systems are typically based on deep
neural networks (DNNs), whose parameters are optimized

However, the features of DNNs are not free optimization
variables but outputs of predetermined architectures that get
training samples as input and have parameters (shared by
all the samples) that are hard to optimize. Thus, usually, the
deepest features demonstrate reduced “NC distance metrics”
(such as within-class variability) compared to features of
intermediate layers but do not exhibit convergence to an

*

Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, NY, US. Correspondence to: Tom
Tirer <tirer.tom@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

