S TRIDER NET: A Graph Reinforcement Learning Approach to Optimize Atomic
Structures on Rough Energy Landscapes

Vaibhav Bihani 1 Sahil Manchanda 2 Srikanth Sastry 3 Sayan Ranu 2 4 N. M. Anoop Krishnan 1 4

Abstract
Optimization of atomic structures presents a challenging problem, due to their highly rough and
non-convex energy landscape, with wide applications in the fields of drug design, materials discovery, and mechanics. Here, we present a graph
reinforcement learning approach, S TRIDER NET,
that learns a policy to displace the atoms towards
low energy configurations. We evaluate the performance of S TRIDER NET on three complex atomic
systems, namely, binary Lennard-Jones particles,
calcium silicate hydrates gel, and disordered silicon. We show that S TRIDER NET outperforms
all classical optimization algorithms and enables
the discovery of a lower energy minimum. In
addition, S TRIDER NET exhibits a higher rate
of reaching minima with energies, as confirmed
by the average over multiple realizations. Finally, we show that S TRIDER NET exhibits inductivity to unseen system sizes that are an order of magnitude different from the training system. All the codes and datasets are available at
https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/StriderNET.

Figure 1: Optimization of 100 atoms LJ system (Colorbar
shows node potential energy).

Specifically, materials discovery relies on finding stable
structures of atomic systems, such as new battery materials,
novel drugs, or ultralight super-hard materials, through efficient optimization (Xiang et al., 1995). These materials predicted through optimization are then verified and validated
through experiments and tests for industrial applications.
However, even for a given material having a few hundred
atoms, a large number of possible structures can be obtained
by allowing various configurational arrangements of the
atoms. For instance, Fig. 1 shows the structure of a 100atom Lennard-Jones system (detailed later), where the potential energy and positions of the atoms before and after optimization are shown. Extrapolation of previous work (Tsai &
Jordan, 1993) on simple atomic clusters suggests that a system containing 147 atoms can have as many as 1060 − 10259
minima. These possible configurations of the atomic network, represented by local minima in the energy landscape
separated by high energy barriers, make the optimization
problem extremely challenging (Wales et al., 2003).

1. Introduction and Related Work
Optimization of functions exhibiting non-convex landscapes
is a ubiquitous problem in several fields, such as the design
of mechanical structures (Mistakidis & Stavroulakis, 2013),
robotics and motion planning (Alonso-Mora et al., 2018;
Schwager et al., 2011), materials (Le & Winkler, 2016),
and biological systems (Yang et al., 2019), such as proteins.
1
Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi 3 Yardi School of AI, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi 4 Theoretical Sciences Unit and
School of Advanced Materials, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru. Correspondence to: NM
Anoop Krishnan <krishnan@iitd.ac.in>, Sayan Ranu <sayanranu@iitd.ac.in>.

Several classical approaches have been proposed for the
optimization of atomic structures. These include fast
inertial relaxation engine (FIRE) (Bitzek et al., 2006),
gradient-based approaches (Stillinger & LaViolette, 1986;
Leach, 2001), perturbation-based approaches (Wales &
Doye, 1997), Bayesian approaches (Gonzalez et al., 2015),
evolutionary algorithms (Daven et al., 1996), and learned
optimizers (Merchant et al., 2021). However, most of
these approaches present several drawbacks, namely, (i) a
significant number of iterations, (ii) carefully hand-crafted

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

