Beyond Homophily: Reconstructing Structure for Graph-agnostic Clustering

Erlin Pan 1 Zhao Kang 1 *

Abstract

pability, many clustering methods (Wang et al., 2019; Fan
et al., 2020) have achieved remarkable performance on homophilic graphs.
However, there are many heterophilic graphs in which most
of connected nodes belong to different classes (Pei et al.,
2020; Xie et al., 2023). Traditional GNNs learn representations via message passing mechanism under the assumption
of homophily (Fang et al., 2022). Facing heterophilic graphs,
previous approaches mainly suffer two limitations. On the
one hand, the local neighbors in a graph are nodes that are
proximally located, while nodes that are semantically similar might be far apart on heterophilic graph (Zhu et al.,
2020). Thus, existing techniques fail to capture long-range
information from distant nodes. On the other hand, they
don’t distinguish similar and dissimilar neighbors, which
carry different amounts of information. Learning a discriminative graph representation needs to pass diverse messages
between nodes on heterophilic graphs. Consequently, the
GNN-based methods performing well on homophilic graphs
produce unsatisfactory performance on heterophilic graphs
(Abu-El-Haija et al., 2019).
Numerous GNN methods have been proposed to deal with
heterophily. Some approaches expand neighbor fields, while
others refine the GNN architectures. The first class includes
exploring high-order information (Wang & Derr, 2021) and
mining more neighbors in other spaces (Wang et al., 2022).
The latter class aggregates message adaptively, like adaptive
filter (He et al., 2021; Luan et al., 2021; Wang & Zhang,
2022) and attention or weight mechanism (Bo et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2021). Moreover, several recent methods, like
(Bi et al., 2022) and (Topping et al., 2022), preprocess heterophily graphs to make them fit for GNNs.
Though the aforementioned methods improve the performance of GNNs on heterophilic graphs in some downstream
tasks, there exists two critical problems: 1) the training of
customized network, the learning of adaptive filter, and
graph rewiring (Bi et al., 2022) rely on labelled samples,
which makes them not be applicable to clustering task. 2)
GNNs embed the raw data into a single subspace, where the
coupling of attribute and topological structure aggravates
the adverse effect of heterophily. Any incorrect or incomplete in the attributes or structures would deteriorate the
quality of learned representations.
For unsupervised learning, the first and foremost challenge we face is that there is no labels for us to judge

Graph neural networks (GNNs) based methods
have achieved impressive performance on node
clustering task. However, they are designed on
the homophilic assumption of graph and clustering on heterophilic graph is overlooked. Due to
the lack of labels, it is impossible to first identify
a graph as homophilic or heterophilic before a
suitable GNN model can be found. Hence, clustering on real-world graph with various levels of
homophily poses a new challenge to the graph
research community. To fill this gap, we propose a novel graph clustering method, which contains three key components: graph reconstruction, a mixed filter, and dual graph clustering
network. To be graph-agnostic, we empirically
construct two graphs which are high homophily
and heterophily from each data. The mixed filter based on the new graphs extracts both lowfrequency and high-frequency information. To reduce the adverse coupling between node attribute
and topological structure, we separately map them
into two subspaces in dual graph clustering network. Extensive experiments on 11 benchmark
graphs demonstrate our promising performance.
In particular, our method dominates others on heterophilic graphs. The code is available at DGCN.

1. Introduction
Graphs are pervasive and have been widely used in numerous real-world scenarios, such as social networks, traffic
networks, and recommendation systems (Liu et al., 2021).
Graph clustering that groups nodes without the need of
human annotation is a fundamental yet challenging graph
analysis task (Zhang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022a). Based
on GNN’ powerful structure information exploitation ca*
Corresponding author 1 School of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Erlin Pan <wujisixsix6@gmail.com>, Zhao Kang < zkang@uestc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

