Momentum Ensures Convergence of SIGN SGD under Weaker Assumptions

Tao Sun∗ 1 Qingsong Wang∗ 2 Dongsheng Li 1 Bao Wang 2
where ξ t is the data sampled i.i.d. from the distribution
D in the t-th iteration, and γ > 0 is the learning rate (or
step size). In each iteration, SIGN SGD only uses the sign
information of the stochastic gradient, which reduces communication costs in each iteration. However, using the sign
operator leads to biased expectations and prevents convergence unless the batch size is increased or the gradient noise
is symmetric and unimodal (Bernstein et al., 2018a;b).

Abstract
Sign Stochastic Gradient Descent (SIGN SGD) is a
communication-efficient stochastic algorithm that
only uses the sign information of the stochastic
gradient to update the model’s weights. However,
the existing convergence theory of SIGN SGD either requires increasing batch sizes during training or assumes the gradient noise is symmetric
and unimodal. Error feedback has been used to
guarantee the convergence of SIGN SGD under
weaker assumptions at the cost of communication
overhead. This paper revisits the convergence of
SIGN SGD and proves that momentum can remedy SIGN SGD under weaker assumptions than
previous techniques; in particular, our convergence theory does not require the assumption of
bounded stochastic gradient or increased batch
size. Our results resonate with echoes of previous empirical results where, unlike SIGN SGD,
SIGN SGD with momentum maintains good performance even with small batch sizes. Another
new result is that SIGN SGD with momentum can
achieve an improved convergence rate when the
objective function is second-order smooth. We
further extend our theory to SIGN SGD with major
vote and federated learning.

The error feedback technique has been developed to address this issue and eliminate the need for large sampling
costs (Karimireddy et al., 2019). The error feedback technique is a variant of the momentum method, which has been
widely used for both theoretical and empirical improvements in optimization (Karimireddy et al., 2019; Lin et al.,
2018; Stich et al., 2018). The basic momentum scheme
for the SIGN SGD, i.e., SIGN SGD with Simple Momentum
(SIGN SGD-SIM), is shown in Algorithm 1. However, the
current convergence guarantees for SIGN SGD-SIM, as presented in (Bernstein et al., 2018a;b)1 , are established based
on the same assumptions as those for SIGN SGD.
Algorithm 1 SIGN SGD with SImple Momentum
(SIGN SGD-SIM)
Require: parameters γ > 0, 0 ≤ θ < 1
Initialization: x1 = 0, m0 = 0
for t = 1, 2, . . .
step 1: Sample ξ t ∼ D i.i.d and update
mt = θmt−1 + (1 − θ)∇f (xt ; ξ t )
step 2: xt+1 = xt − γSign(mt )
end for

1. Introduction
This paper considers the following optimization problem
arising from machine learning:
min f (x) := Eξ∼D f (x; ξ),

x∈Rd

Empirical performance of SIGN SGD and SIGN SGDSIM under different batch sizes. To investigate if the
simple momentum scheme can fix the convergence of
SIGN SGD, we conduct experiments on training ResNet110
from (He et al., 2016) for CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al.,
2009) classification using SIGN SGD and SIGN SGD-SIM
with various batch sizes. The momentum parameter is set
to 0.9 for SIGN SGD-SIM, and the other hyperparameters
are the same as SIGN SGD, as described in more detail in
Section 4.1. The experimental results are shown in Figure 1,
where both SIGN SGD and SIGN SGD-SIM achieve a testing accuracy of around 71%. As the batch size decreases,

(1)

where D is the data distribution. Bernstein et al. (2018a)
propose SIGN SGD, which solves the optimization problem
in (1) via the following iterations:
xt+1 = xt − γ Sign(∇f (xt ; ξ t )), for t ≥ 0,

(2)

*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Hunan, China. 2 University of Utah.
Correspondence to: Dongsheng Li < dsli@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

SIGN SGD-SIM is denoted as SIGNUM in their paper

