Performative Reinforcement Learning

Debmalya Mandal 1 Stelios Triantafyllou 1 Goran Radanovic 1

Abstract

have naturally led to the adoption of RL in many real-world
scenarios e.g. recommender systems (Aggarwal et al.), and
healthcare (Esteva et al., 2019). However, these critical domains often pose new challenges including the mismatch
between deployed policy and the target environment.

We introduce the framework of performative reinforcement learning where the policy chosen by the
learner affects the underlying reward and transition dynamics of the environment. Following the
recent literature on performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020), we introduce the concept of
performatively stable policy. We then consider
a regularized version of the reinforcement learning problem and show that repeatedly optimizing
this objective converges to a performatively stable policy under reasonable assumptions on the
transition dynamics. Our proof utilizes the dual
perspective of the reinforcement learning problem and may be of independent interest in analyzing the convergence of other algorithms with
decision-dependent environments. We then extend our results for the setting where the learner
just performs gradient ascent steps instead of fully
optimizing the objective, and for the setting where
the learner has access to a finite number of trajectories from the changed environment. For both the
settings, we leverage the dual formulation of performative reinforcement learning, and establish
convergence to a stable solution. Finally, through
extensive experiments on a grid-world environment, we demonstrate the dependence of convergence on various parameters e.g. regularization,
smoothness, and the number of samples.

Existing frameworks of reinforcement learning ignore the
fact that a deployed policy might change the underlying
environment (i.e., reward, or probability transition function,
or both). Such a mismatch between the deployed policy
and the environment often arises in practice. For example,
recommender systems often use contextual Markov decision process to model interaction with a user (Hansen et al.,
2020). In such a contextual MDP, the initial context/user
feature is drawn according a distribution, then the user interacts with the platform according to the context-specific
MDP. However, it has been repeatedly observed that such
recommender systems not only change the user demographics (i.e. distribution of contexts) but also how they interact
with the platforms (Chaney et al., 2018; Mansoury et al.,
2020). Our second example comes from autonomous vehicles (AV). Even if we ignore the multi-agent aspect of these
learning algorithms, a deployed AV might change how the
pedestrians, and other cars behave, and the resulting environment might be quite different from what the designers of
the AV had in mind (Nikolaidis et al., 2017a).
Recently, Perdomo et al. (2020) introduced the notion of
performative prediction, where the predictions made by a
classifier changes the data distribution. However, in the context of reinforcement learning, the situation is different as
the changing transition dynamics introduces additional complexities. If the underlying probability transition function
changes, then the class of feasible policies and/or models
changes with time. This implies that we need a framework
that is more general than the framework of performative
prediction, and can model policy-dependent outcomes in
reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, advances in reinforcement learning techniques enabled several breakthroughs in AI.
These milestones include AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017),
Pluribus (Brown & Sandholm, 2019), and AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019). Such success stories of reinforcement learning in multi-agent game playing environments

Our Contributions: In this paper, we introduce the notion
of performative reinforcement learning where the deployed
policy not only changes the reward vector but also the underlying transition probability function. We introduce the
notion of performatively stable policy and show under what
conditions various repeated retraining methods (e.g., policy optimization, gradient ascent etc.) converges to such a

1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbruecken, Germany. Correspondence to: Debmalya Mandal <dmandal@mpisws.org>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

