Domain Adaptation for Time Series Under Feature and Label Shifts
Newest version with inverted argument

Huan He 1 Owen Queen 1 Teddy Koker 2 Consuelo Cuevas 2 Theodoros Tsiligkaridis 2 Marinka Zitnik 1

Abstract

a)

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) enables
the transfer of models trained on source domains
to unlabeled target domains. However, transferring complex time series models presents challenges due to the dynamic temporal structure variations across domains. This leads to feature shifts
in the time and frequency representations. Additionally, the label distributions of tasks in the
source and target domains can differ significantly,
posing difficulties in addressing label shifts and
recognizing labels unique to the target domain.
Effectively transferring complex time series models remains a formidable problem. We present
R AINCOAT, the first model for both closed-set and
universal domain adaptation on complex time series. R AINCOAT addresses feature and label shifts
by considering both temporal and frequency features, aligning them across domains, and correcting for misalignments to facilitate the detection
of private labels. Additionally, R AINCOAT improves transferability by identifying label shifts in
target domains. Our experiments with 5 datasets
and 13 state-of-the-art UDA methods demonstrate
that R AINCOAT can improve transfer learning performance by up to 16.33% and can handle both
closed-set and universal domain adaptation.

Shift:

Time
Features

Frequency
Features

Yes

No

b)

Time-Frequency Latent Space

Prior Work
Alignment

Closed-Set DA in RAINCOAT
Common Source Classes

Common Target Classes

Private Source Class

Private Target Classes

RAINCOAT
Correction

UniDA in RAINCOAT
Class Prototypes

Figure 1. a) R AINCOAT captures domain-invariant frequency features under feature and label shifts. b) For Closed-Set DA, R AIN COAT aligns source and target domains for greater generalization.
For Universal DA, the correction step prioritizes target-specific
features to detect private target classes.

to the training data, even though it is often related (Koh et al.,
2021; Luo et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2013), meaning that latent representations do not generalize to test datasets drawn
from different underlying distributions, even if the differences between these distributions are minor. To overcome
these challenges, domain adaptation (DA) has emerged as
a set of techniques that allow adaptation to new target domains and reduce bias by leveraging unlabeled data in target
domains (Ganin et al., 2016; Long et al., 2015).

1. Introduction
Neural networks have demonstrated impressive performance
on time series datasets (Ravuri et al., 2021; Lundberg et al.,
2018). However, their performance deteriorates rapidly under domain shifts, making it challenging to deploy these
models in real-world scenarios (Zhang et al., 2022a;b). Domain shifts occur when the test distribution is not identical

Training models that can adapt to domain shifts is crucial for
robust, real-world deployment. For instance, for healthcare
time series, data collection methods vary widely across different clinical sites (domains) (Zhang et al., 2022c), leading
to shifts in the underlying features and labels. It is preferable
to train a model on a diverse dataset collected from multiple
clinics rather than training and applying individual models
on smaller, single-domain datasets for each clinic. Additionally, training a model that can detect unknown classes
in test data, such as patients with rare diseases (Alsentzer
et al., 2022), is advantageous for real-world implementa-

1

Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard University 2 Artificial Intelligence Technology, MIT Lincoln Laboratory. Correspondence to: Huan He, Theodoros Tsiligkaridis,
Marinka Zitnik <huan he@hms.harvard.edu, ttsili@ll.mit.edu,
marinka@hms.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

