RLSbench: Domain Adaptation Under Relaxed Label Shift

Saurabh Garg 1 Nick Erickson 2 James Sharpnack 2 Alex J. Smola 2 Sivaraman Balakrishnan 1
Zachary C. Lipton 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Real-world deployments of machine learning models are
typically characterized by distribution shift, where data encountered in production exhibits statistical differences from
the training data (Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Torralba
& Efros, 2011; Koh et al., 2021). Because continually labeling data can be prohibitively expensive, researchers have
focused on the unsupervised Domain Adaptation (DA) setting, where only labeled data from the source distribution
and unlabeled from the target distribution are available for
training. Absent further assumptions, the DA problem is
known to be underspecified (Ben-David et al., 2010b) and
thus no method is universally applicable.

Despite the emergence of principled methods for
domain adaptation under label shift, their sensitivity to shifts in class conditional distributions
is precariously under explored. Meanwhile, popular deep domain adaptation heuristics tend to
falter when faced with label proportions shifts.
While several papers modify these heuristics in
attempts to handle label proportions shifts, inconsistencies in evaluation standards, datasets, and
baselines make it difficult to gauge the current
best practices. In this paper, we introduce RLSBENCH, a large-scale benchmark for relaxed label
shift, consisting of ą500 distribution shift pairs
spanning vision, tabular, and language modalities,
with varying label proportions. Unlike existing
benchmarks, which primarily focus on shifts in
class-conditional ppx|yq, our benchmark also focuses on label marginal shifts. First, we assess
13 popular domain adaptation methods, demonstrating more widespread failures under label proportion shifts than were previously known. Next,
we develop an effective two-step meta-algorithm
that is compatible with most domain adaptation
heuristics: (i) pseudo-balance the data at each
epoch; and (ii) adjust the final classifier with target
label distribution estimate. The meta-algorithm
improves existing domain adaptation heuristics
under large label proportion shifts, often by 2–
10% accuracy points, while conferring minimal
effect (ă0.5%) when label proportions do not
shift. We hope that these findings and the availability of RLS BENCH will encourage researchers
to rigorously evaluate proposed methods in relaxed label shift settings. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/acmi-lab/
RLSbench.

Researchers have responded to these challenges in several
ways. One approach is to investigate structural assumptions under which DA problems are well-posed. Popular
examples include covariate shift and label shift, for which
identification strategies and principled methods exist whenever the source and target distributions have overlapping
support (Shimodaira, 2000; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Gretton
et al., 2009). For example, recent research on label shift has
produced effective methods that are applicable in deep learning regimes, yielding both consistent estimates of the target
label marginal and principled ways to update the resulting
classifier (Lipton et al., 2018; Alexandari et al., 2021; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019; Garg et al., 2020). However, such
assumptions are typically, to some degree, violated in practice. Even for archetypal cases like shift in disease prevalence, the label shift assumption can be violated. For example, over the course of the COVID-19 epidemic, changes in
disease positivity coincided with shifts in treatment protocols, the age distribution of the infected population, and the
genetic makeup of the virus itself.
A complementary line of research focuses on constructing benchmark datasets, in the hopes of finding heuristics for incorporating the unlabeled target data that result
in improvements on the kinds of problems that arise in
practice. Examples of such benchmarks include OfficeHome (Venkateswara et al., 2017), Domainnet (Peng et al.,
2019)), WILDS (Sagawa et al., 2021). However, most of
these benchmark datasets exhibit little shift in the label distribution ppyq (or none at all). Consequently, benchmark-

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon Web Services. Correspondence to: Saurabh Garg <sgarg2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

