MonoNeRF: Learning Generalizable NeRFs from Monocular Videos
without Camera Poses
Yang Fu 1 Ishan Misra 2 Xiaolong Wang 1
Input

Depth

Novel Views

Camera Trajectory

Figure 1: We learn a MonoNeRF from monocular videos that can be applied to depth estimation, novel view synthesis,
and camera pose estimation.

Abstract

//oasisyang.github.io/mononerf.

We propose a generalizable neural radiance fields
- MonoNeRF, that can be trained on large-scale
monocular videos of moving in static scenes
without any ground-truth annotations of depth
and camera poses. MonoNeRF follows an
Autoencoder-based architecture, where the encoder estimates the monocular depth and the camera pose, and the decoder constructs a Multiplane
NeRF representation based on the depth encoder
feature, and renders the input frames with the
estimated camera. The learning is supervised
by the reconstruction error. Once the model is
learned, it can be applied to multiple applications including depth estimation, camera pose estimation, and single-image novel view synthesis.
More qualitative results are available at: https:

1. Introduction
The Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have been successfully applied in many applications on not just view synthesis (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Martin-Brualla et al., 2021), but
also scene and object reconstruction (Wang et al., 2021a;
Yariv et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021), semantic understanding (Zhi et al., 2021) and robotics (Li et al., 2022; Simeonov
et al., 2022). While these results are encouraging, constructing NeRF requires accurate ground-truth camera poses
and the learned NeRF is specific to only one scene in most
cases. This usually takes a significant amount of time for
training and it also limits the applications in large-scale
unconstrained videos.
To accelerate the optimization process of NeRF, more recent
focus has been spent on learning generalizable NeRF (Yu
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) which is first
trained on a dataset with multiple scenes, and then fine-tuned
on each individual scene. The learning of a generalizable
representation provides a prior that not only accelerates the

1 University of California, San Diego 2 FAIR, Meta AI. Correspondence

to: Xiaolong Wang <xiw012@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright 2023 by the
author(s).

1

