Bi-directional Masks for Efficient N:M Sparse Training

Yuxin Zhang* 1 Yiting Luo* 1 Mingbao Lin 2 Yunshan Zhong 1 Jingjing Xie 1 Fei Chao 1 Rongrong Ji 1 3 4

Abstract
We focus on addressing the dense backward propagation issue for training efficiency of N:M finegrained sparsity that preserves at most N out
of M consecutive weights and achieves practical speedups supported by the N:M sparse tensor
core. Therefore, we present a novel method of Bidirectional Masks (Bi-Mask) with its two central
innovations in: 1) Separate sparse masks in the
two directions of forward and backward propagation to obtain training acceleration. It disentangles
the forward and backward weight sparsity and
overcomes the very dense gradient computation.
2) An efficient weight row permutation method
to maintain performance. It picks up the permutation candidate with the most eligible N:M weight
blocks in the backward to minimize the gradient
gap between traditional uni-directional masks and
our bi-directional masks. Compared with existing uni-directional scenario that applies a transposable mask and enables backward acceleration,
our Bi-Mask is experimentally demonstrated to
be more superior in performance. Also, our BiMask performs on par with or even better than
methods that fail to achieve backward acceleration. Project of this paper is available at https:
//github.com/zyxxmu/Bi-Mask.

(a) Vanilla N:M Mask

(b) Transposable N:M Mask
Figure 1. Comparison between vanilla N:M mask and transposable
N:M mask (2:4 case). The vanilla N:M mask (Zhou et al., 2021;
Nvidia, 2020) generates sparse weights with N:M property in rows,
leading to forward acceleration but remaining dense backward
propagation as the weight transposition operation impairs N:M
blocks. The transposable N:M mask (Hubara et al., 2021) generates sparse weights that have N:M property in both rows and
columns, leading to forward & backward acceleration. Both methods consider only one sparse mask.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed thriving deep neural networks (DNNs) in various machine learning applications (He
et al., 2016; 2017a; Girshick et al., 2014). In large part, the
prosperity is driven by increasing parameters and computa*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 2 Tencent Youtu Lab,
Shanghai, China 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 4 Pengcheng Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Rongrong Ji <rrji@xmu.edu.cn>, Rongrong Ji
<rrj@xmu.edu.cn>.

tions, which however, make DNN models too cumbersome
to be deployed on resource-constrained edge devices such
as cell phones and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. Therefore, the research community is sorely in need of technical
renovation to compress the DNNs (Hubara et al., 2016; Tan
& Le, 2019; Lin et al., 2020).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

By removing redundant network weights (LeCun et al.,
1989; Han et al., 2015; He et al., 2017b), network spar1

