Robust Satisficing MDPs

Haolin Ruan 1 Siyu Zhou 2 Zhi Chen 3 Chin Pang Ho 1

Abstract

ples, which may lead to non-negligible estimation deviation
(Mannor et al., 2007). Sometimes, these true parameters
themselves may be uncertain or even time-dependent, yet
they are mistreated as fixed ones in the modeling process
(Mannor et al., 2016; Suilen et al., 2022). Due to the sequential nature of MDPs, these estimation errors accumulate
quickly (Behzadian et al., 2021b; Xu & Mannor, 2009), and
so the output policies of MDPs could be disappointing in
practice.

Despite being a fundamental building block for reinforcement learning, Markov decision processes
(MDPs) often suffer from ambiguity in model parameters. Robust MDPs are proposed to overcome this challenge by optimizing the worstcase performance under ambiguity. While robust MDPs can provide reliable policies with limited data, their worst-case performances are often overly conservative, and so they do not offer practical insights into the actual performance
of these reliable policies. This paper proposes
robust satisficing MDPs (RSMDPs), where the
expected returns of feasible policies are softlyconstrained to achieve a user-specified target under ambiguity. We derive a tractable reformulation for RSMDPs and develop a first-order method
for solving large instances. Experimental results
demonstrate that RSMDPs can prescribe policies
to achieve their targets, which are much higher
than the optimal worst-case returns computed by
robust MDPs. Moreover, the average and percentile performances of our model are competitive among other models. We also demonstrate the
scalability of the proposed algorithm compared
with a state-of-the-art commercial solver.

As an encouraging framework to mitigate or resolve these
issues, a robust MDP (RMDP) assumes the uncertain reward
function and/or transition kernel to reside in an ambiguity
set, which includes the possible candidates of the unknown
true parameters with high confidence (Delgado et al., 2016;
Ghavamzadeh et al., 2016; Hanasusanto & Kuhn, 2013;
Petrik, 2012; Tamar et al., 2014; Xu & Mannor, 2006). By
optimizing against the most adversarial value within the
ambiguity set, RMDPs can provide policies that are robust
in practice (Auer et al., 2008; Goyal & Grand-Clement,
2022; Hansen et al., 2013; Ho et al., 2018; Iyengar, 2005;
Kaufman & Schaefer, 2013; Taleghan et al., 2015).
However, since RMDPs optimize the worst cases (which
probably are unusual in most cases), the optimized worstcase performances are often too pessimistic and do not offer
insights into the actual performance of the obtained policies. Moreover, one major drawback of using ambiguity sets
to account for parameter ambiguity in RMDPs (resp., DRMDPs) is that the model may perform poorly when the true
parameter (resp., true probability distribution of parameter)
is outside the ambiguity set, which could be catastrophic
in high-risk applications such as healthcare and robotics
(Brown et al., 2020). Another potential issue is the difficulty
of determining the right “size” of the ambiguity set: for
example, when using a Wasserstein ambiguity set (Derman
& Mannor, 2020; Yang, 2017), choosing an appropriate
size/radius that provides satisfying out-of-sample performances can be challenging (Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn,
2018).

1. Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) have emerged as a powerful modeling framework for sequential decision-making
problems under uncertainty (Ashok et al., 2019; Puterman,
2014; Sutton & Barto, 2018). Successful employments of
MDPs largely rely on the perfect estimation of model parameters (Petrik & Russel, 2019), which, unfortunately, is
not always the case. A common situation is when the true
parameters are estimated from a limited amount of sam1
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute
3
CUHK Business School, The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Chin Pang Ho <clint.ho@cityu.edu.hk>.
2

In this paper, we focus on the case of ambiguous transition
kernel and we propose a novel framework, named robust satisficing MDPs (RSMDPs), to handle the ambiguity. Robust
satisficing is an alternative framework of optimization under
uncertainty (Long et al., 2023). As opposed to RMDPs,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

