Achieving Hierarchy-Free Approximation for Bilevel Programs With
Equilibrium Constraints

Jiayang Li 1 Jing Yu 1 Boyi Liu 2 Yu Nie 1 Zhaoran Wang 2

Abstract

nomic or social system comprised of many self-interested
followers, who can be seen as playing a non-cooperative
game that converges to a Nash equilibrium (Dafermos, 1973;
Requate, 1993; Marcotte and Marquis, 1992; Labbé, Marcotte, and Savard, 1998; Ehtamo, Kitti, and Hämäläinen,
2002). More recently, motivated by such applications, developing efficient algorithms for solving bilevel programs with
equilibrium constraints has also emerged as an essential
topic in machine learning (Mguni, Jennings, Sison, Valcarcel Macua, Ceppi, and Munoz de Cote, 2019; Zheng, Trott,
Srinivasa, Naik, Gruesbeck, Parkes, and Socher, 2020; Liu,
Li, Yang, Wai, Hong, Nie, and Wang, 2022; Maheshwari,
Kulkarni, Wu, and Sastry, 2022).

In this paper, we develop an approximation
scheme for solving bilevel programs with equilibrium constraints, which are generally difficult
to solve. Among other things, calculating the
first-order derivative in such a problem requires
differentiation across the hierarchy, which is computationally intensive, if not prohibitive. To bypass the hierarchy, we propose to bound such
bilevel programs, equivalent to multiple-followers
Stackelberg games, with two new hierarchy-free
problems: a T -step Cournot game and a T -step
monopoly model. Since they are standard equilibrium or optimization problems, both can be
efficiently solved via first-order methods. Importantly, we show that the bounds provided by
these problems — the upper bound by the T -step
Cournot game and the lower bound by the T -step
monopoly model — can be made arbitrarily tight
by increasing the step parameter T for a wide
range of problems. We prove that a small T usually suffices under appropriate conditions to reach
an approximation acceptable for most practical
purposes. Eventually, the analytical insights are
highlighted through numerical examples.

In the optimization literature, a bilevel program with equilibrium constraints is often written as (Luo et al., 1996)
min

x∈X, y ∗ ∈Y

l(x, y ∗ ),

s.t. ⟨f (x, y ∗ ), y − y ∗ ⟩ ≥ 0,

(1)
∀y ∈ Y,

where X ⊆ Rm and Y ⊆ Rn are two convex set; l :
X × Y → R and f : X × Y → Rn are two continuously
differentiable functions. The lower-level problem in Problem (1) is a variational inequality (VI) problem, which is a
general formulation for many equilibrium problems (Scutari, Palomar, Facchinei, and Pang, 2010; Nagurney, 2013;
Parise and Ozdaglar, 2019). Problem (1) is well known
for its intractability. Indeed, it is NP-hard even when the
upper-level objective function is linear, and the lower-level
VI can be reduced to a linear program (LP) (Ben-Ayed and
Blair, 1990), leading to a so-called bilevel linear program
(Bialas, Karwan, and Shaw, 1980; Candler and Townsley,
1982; Bard and Falk, 1982).

1. Introduction
Many bilevel optimization problems arising from real-world
applications can be cast as a mathematical program whose
feasible region is defined by an equilibrium problem (Luo,
Pang, and Ralph, 1996; Outrata, Kocvara, Zowe, and Zowe,
1998). A typical example is a Stackelberg game concerning
a leader who aims to induce a desirable outcome in an eco-

When the lower level is not an LP, Problem (1) is usually
solved via first-order methods that strive to find good local
solutions (Colson, Marcotte, and Savard, 2007). Classical
algorithms in this category include basic gradient descent
(Friesz, Tobin, Cho, and Mehta, 1990), steepest descent
built on quadratic approximation (Luo et al., 1996), and the
penalty method (Aiyoshi and Shimizu, 1984). Applying
a gradient descent method requires differentiation through
the lower-level equilibrium problem, which is a challenging
computational task. In the literature, it is often accomplished
via implicit differentiation (ID), which requires inverting a

1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department of Industrial
Engineering and Management Science Engineering, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Yu (Marco)
Nie <y-nie@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

