Estimation Beyond Data Reweighting: Kernel Method of Moments

Heiner Kremer 1 Yassine Nemmour 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 2 Jia-Jie Zhu 3

Abstract

minimization since the corresponding first order conditions
imply that the expectation of the gradient of the loss function vanishes. A significantly harder problem is posed by
conditional moment restrictions (CMR), which restrict the
conditional expectation of the moment function. In this
case estimation effectively requires solving a continuum
of unconditional moment restrictions (Bierens, 1982). A
prominent CMR problem is instrumental variable (IV) regression (Newey & Powell, 2003), where the expectation
of the prediction residual conditioned on the instruments is
required to be zero. The CMR formulation of IV regression
is a powerful way to define estimators that avoid two-step
procedures as, e.g., in the common two-stage least squares
method (Angrist & Pischke, 2008). Other examples of CMR
problems include variants of double machine learning (Chernozhukov et al., 2016; 2017; 2018) and off-policy evaluation
in reinforcement learning (Xu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021;
Bennett & Kallus, 2020a; Bennett et al., 2021). Perhaps the
most popular approach to learning with moment restrictions
is the generalized method of moments (GMM) of Hansen
(1982), which recently gained popularity in machine learning (Lewis & Syrgkanis, 2018; Bennett & Kallus, 2020b).
GMM belongs to the wider family of generalized empirical
likelihood (GEL) estimators of Owen (1988; 1990); Qin &
Lawless (1994); Smith (1997). While moment restrictions
are imposed with respect to a population distribution, in
practice one usually only has access to an empirical sample
from this distribution. GEL estimators are based on simultaneously finding the model parameters and an approximation
of the population distribution by considering distributions
with minimal distance to the empirical distribution for which
the moment restrictions can be fulfilled exactly. The various
GEL estimators differ in the choice of φ-divergence used to
define this distance. In this context, the continuous updating
version of GMM (Hansen et al., 1996) can be interpreted as
a GEL estimator with χ2 -divergence. However, the use of
φ-divergences effectively restricts the set of candidate distributions to multinomial distributions on the empirical sample,
i.e., reweightings of the data, which can be a crude approximation especially in the low sample regime. In the present
work, we define the first method of moments estimator that
parts with this limitation by defining a GEL framework
based on a fundamentally different notion of distributional
distance, namely the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD).
This allows us to consider arbitrary candidate distributions

Moment restrictions and their conditional counterparts emerge in many areas of machine learning and statistics ranging from causal inference
to reinforcement learning. Estimators for these
tasks, generally called methods of moments, include the prominent generalized method of moments (GMM) which has recently gained attention in causal inference. GMM is a special case
of the broader family of empirical likelihood estimators which are based on approximating a population distribution by means of minimizing a φdivergence to an empirical distribution. However,
the use of φ-divergences effectively limits the
candidate distributions to reweightings of the data
samples. We lift this long-standing limitation and
provide a method of moments that goes beyond
data reweighting. This is achieved by defining
an empirical likelihood estimator based on maximum mean discrepancy which we term the kernel
method of moments (KMM). We provide a variant
of our estimator for conditional moment restrictions and show that it is asymptotically first-order
optimal for such problems. Finally, we show that
our method achieves competitive performance on
several conditional moment restriction tasks.

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning, statistics, causal inference and economics can be formulated as (conditional)
moment restrictions (Newey & Powell, 2003; Angrist & Pischke, 2008). Moment restrictions (MR) identify a parameter
of interest by restricting the expectation over a so-called
moment function to a fixed value. From a machine learning
perspective, moment restrictions subsume empirical risk
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, Switzerland 3 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics,
Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Heiner Kremer <hkremer@tue.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

