Tilted Sparse Additive Models

Yingjie Wang 1 2 Hong Chen 2 3 Weifeng Liu 1 Fengxiang He 4 5 Tieliang Gong 6 Youcheng Fu 2 Dacheng Tao 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Additive models (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1990; Stone, 1985),
as natural extensions of linear models, have drawn much
attention in high-dimensional data analysis due to their flexible representation and desirable interpretability. Let X be
the explanatory variable that takes values in a p-dimensional
metric space X and let Y be the corresponding real-valued
response in an output set Y. The most typical additive models were formulated by dividing the input space into p parts
directly, i.e., X = (X1 , ..., Xp ), Xj ∈ R, j ∈ {1, ..., p}. In
this setting, the hypothesis space can be stated as

Additive models have been burgeoning in data
analysis due to their flexible representation and
desirable interpretability. However, most existing
approaches are constructed under empirical risk
minimization (ERM), and thus perform poorly
in situations where average performance is not
a suitable criterion for the problems of interest,
e.g., data with complex non-Gaussian noise, imbalanced labels or both of them. In this paper, a
novel class of sparse additive models is proposed
under tilted empirical risk minimization (TERM),
which addresses the deficiencies in ERM by imposing tilted impact on individual losses, and is
flexibly capable of achieving a variety of learning objectives, e.g., variable selection, robust
estimation, imbalanced classification and multiobjective learning. On the theoretical side, a learning theory analysis which is centered around the
generalization bound and function approximation
error bound (under some specific data distributions) is conducted rigorously. On the practical
side, an accelerated optimization algorithm is designed by integrating Prox-SVRG and random
Fourier acceleration technique. The empirical assessments verify the competitive performance of
our approach on both synthetic and real data.

p
X

H = f : f (X) =
fj (Xj ), fj ∈ Hj ,
j=1

where X = (X1 , ..., Xp )T ∈ Rp , Xj ∈ Xj and Hj is
the component function space on Xj . Usually, the component hypothesis spaces Hj , j = 1, ..., p, can be reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) (Chen et al., 2017;
Kandasamy & Yu, 2016; Raskutti et al., 2012; Christmann
& Zhou, 2016), the space spanned by the orthogonal basis (Ravikumar et al., 2009; Meier et al., 2009; Huang
et al., 2010; Yin et al., 2012), and the space formed by
neural networks (Agarwal et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020).
Over the past decades, many studies concerning the theoretical as well as practical investigations of additive models
have been conductedP
under the empirical risk minimizan
tion (ERM) minf ∈H i=1 ℓ(f (xi ), yi ) (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1990; Stone, 1985; Ravikumar et al., 2009; Kandasamy
& Yu, 2016; Raskutti et al., 2012), where ℓ(·, ·) : R×R → R
is the loss function. The additive models are versatile by
assigning different loss functions, where the several usual
ones include the squared loss ℓ(f (x), y) = (f (x) − y)2
for regression (Ravikumar et al., 2009; Meier et al., 2009;
Huang et al., 2010; Raskutti et al., 2012; Yin et al., 2012;
Tan & Zhang, 2019), and the logistic loss (or hinge loss) for
classification (Ravikumar et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2017).

1
College of Control Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East China),Qingdao,China 2 College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China 3 Engineering
Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, Wuhan, China 4 JD Explore Academy, JD.com,
Inc., Beijing, China 5 Artificial Intelligence and its Applications
Institute, School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom 6 School of Computer Science and
Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China 7 The University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to: Hong Chen
<chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn>, Weifeng Liu <liuwf@upc.edu.cn>,
Fengxiang He <F.He@ed.ac.uk>.

However, most existing approaches are constructed under
empirical risk minimization (ERM), and perform poorly
in situations where average performance is not a suitable
criterion for the problems of interest, e.g., data with complex
non-Gaussian noise, imbalanced labels or both of them.
Although several works in relation to additive models have
been proposed to address the these problems by introducing

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

