Individually Fair Learning with One-Sided Feedback

Yahav Bechavod 1 Aaron Roth 2

Abstract

repayment history for applicants we approve for a loan—
not for those we deny. We only observe the success or lack
thereof for employees we hire, not for those that we pass on.
We only observe the college GPA for those applicants that
we admit to college, not to those we reject—and so on. In
all of these domains, fairness is a major concern in addition
to accuracy. Nevertheless, the majority of the literature on
fairness in machine learning does not account for this “onesided” feedback structure, operating either in a batch setting,
a full information online setting, or in a more standard bandit
learning setting. But when we make sequential decisions
with one-sided feedback, it is crucial to explicitely account
for the form of the feedback structure to avoid feedback
loops that may amplify and disguise historical bias.

We consider an online learning problem with onesided feedback, in which the learner is able to observe the true label only for positively predicted
instances. On each round, k instances arrive and
receive classification outcomes according to a randomized policy deployed by the learner, whose
goal is to maximize accuracy while deploying individually fair policies. We first present a novel
auditing scheme, capable of utilizing feedback
from dynamically-selected panels of multiple,
possibly inconsistent, auditors regarding fairness
violations. In particular, we show how our proposed auditing scheme allows for algorithmically
exploring the resulting accuracy-fairness frontier,
with no need for additional feedback from auditors. We then present an efficient reduction from
our problem of online learning with one-sided
feedback and a panel reporting fairness violations
to the contextual combinatorial semi-bandit problem (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2009; György et al.,
2007), allowing us to leverage algorithms for contextual combinatorial semi-bandits to establish
multi-criteria no regret guarantees in our setting,
simultaneously for accuracy and fairness. Our results eliminate two potential sources of bias from
prior work: the “hidden outcomes” that are not
available to an algorithm operating in the full information setting, and human biases that might be
present in any single human auditor, but can be
mitigated by selecting a well-chosen panel.

The bulk of the literature in algorithmic fairness also asks
for fairness on a group or aggregate level. A standard template for this approach is to select some statistical measure
of error (like false positive rate, false negative rates, or raw
error rates), a partition of the data into groups (often along
the lines of some “protected attribute”), and then to ask that
the statistical measure of error is approximately equalized
across the groups. Because these guarantees bind only over
averages over many people, they promise little to individuals, as initially pointed out by Dwork et al.’s “catalogue of
evils” (Dwork et al., 2012).
In an attempt to provide meaningful guarantees on an individual level, Dwork et al. (2012) introduced the notion
of individual fairness, which informally asks that “similar
individuals be treated similarly”. In their conception, this is
a Lipschitz constraint imposed on a randomized classifier,
and who is “similar” is defined by a task-specific similarity
metric. Pinning down such a metric is the major challenge
with using the framework of individual fairness. Gillen et al.
(2018) proposed that feedback could be elicited in an online
learning setting from a human auditor who “knows unfairness when she sees it” (and implicitly makes judgements
according to a similarity metric), but cannot enunciate a metric — she can only identify specific violations of the fairness
constraint. Recently, Bechavod et al. (2020) gave an algorithm for operating in this setting—with full information—
that was competitive with the optimal fair model, while
being able to learn not to violate the notion of individual
fairness underlying the feedback of a single auditor.

1. Introduction
When making many high stakes decisions about people,
we receive only one-sided feedback—often we are only
able to observe the outcome for people for whom we make
a favorable decision. For example, we only observe the
1

Hebrew University and University of Pennsylvania 2 University
of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Yahav Bechavod <yahav@seas.upenn.edu>, Aaron Roth <aaroth@cis.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

