ELSA: Efficient Label Shift Adaptation through the Lens of Semiparametric
Models
Qinglong Tian * 1 Xin Zhang * 2 Jiwei Zhao 3

Abstract

2008). Thus, the knowledge learned from the training data
may no longer be appropriate to make predictions directly
from the testing data. This motivates the study direction
called unsupervised domain adaptation (see Kouw & Loog
2021), which aims to address the distributional shift between
the source domain ps (x, y) (i.e., training data) and the target
domain pt (x, y) (i.e., testing data), where the subscript s
and t represent source and target domain respectively.

We study the domain adaptation problem with
label shift in this work. Under the label shift context, the marginal distribution of the label varies
across the training and testing datasets, while the
conditional distribution of features given the label is the same. Traditional label shift adaptation
methods either suffer from large estimation errors or require cumbersome post-prediction calibrations. To address these issues, we first propose a moment-matching framework for adapting
the label shift based on the geometry of the influence function. Under such a framework, we
propose a novel method named Efficient Label
Shift Adaptation (ELSA), in which the adaptation weights can be estimated by solving linear
systems.
Theoretically, the ELSA estimator is
√
n-consistent (n is the sample size of the source
data) and asymptotically normal. Empirically, we
show that ELSA can achieve state-of-the-art estimation performances without post-prediction calibrations, thus, gaining computational efficiency.

In this work, we focus on studying the case of label shift,
also known as prior probability shift (see Moreno-Torres
et al. 2012). The label shift refers to the phenomenon that
the marginal distributions of the labels differ in the source
and target domains ps (y) ̸= pt (y) though the conditional
distributions of features given the label are the same in both
domains ps (x|y) = pt (x|y). Label shift aligns with the
anticausal learning setting (see Storkey 2009) where the
label y is the cause and the features x are the effects. For
example, in the task of disease diagnostic, suppose the label
y indicates whether a person has been infected, and x are
the observed symptoms. It is reasonable to assume the
identical conditional distributions p(x|y), as the infectionon-symptoms mechanism should be the same. Consider
the source and target data are from two regions with and
without the corresponding prevention so that ps (y) ̸= pt (y).
Then with the same symptoms, people without prevention
are more likely to be infected by the disease compared to
those with good prevention (i.e., ps (y|x) ̸= pt (y|x)). Thus,
it is important to perform label shift adaptation to make the
trained predictive model applicable for the inference on the
target domain.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Traditional supervised learning assumes that the training
and testing data are from the same joint distribution p(x, y),
where x are the features, and y is the label. Therefore, we
can apply the predictive model from the training data to
do inferences on the testing data. However, in many realworld applications, the joint distribution p(x, y) may often
differ in the training and testing data, and this phenomenon
is called distributional shift (see Quinonero-Candela et al.

1.2. Problem Settings and Preparations
We first formally define the problem and notations. The
observable data consists of two parts: the labeled source
n
n+m
data {(xi , yi )}i=1 and unlabeled target data {xi }i=n+1 . A
generic notation ps (·) and pt (·) denotes distributions on the
source and target domain, respectively. The label y is a
k-class variable with support Y = {1, . . . , k} on the source
domain. The support on the target domain is a subset of Y,
which implies the testing data do not contain new classes
that are not in the training data. The features are denoted by
x ∈ Rp , and x could be high-dimensional vector.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Actuarial
Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada 2 Meta
Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA 3 Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,
USA. Correspondence to: Jiwei Zhao <jiwei.zhao@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

