Distribution Free Domain Generalization
Peifeng Tong 1 Wu Su 2 He Li 3 4 Jialin Ding 3 Haoxiang Zhan 3 Song Xi Chen 3 1

Abstract

both the source and target domains (Blanchard et al., 2021).
Studies have been proposed for the DG (Zhou et al., 2021;
Fan et al., 2021; Shu et al., 2021), such as the kernel based
domain invariant feature representation (Hu et al., 2020),
the meta learning framework (Balaji et al., 2018) and the
model selection or model average (Ye et al., 2021). See
Wang et al. (2022) and Zhou et al. (2022) for a review.

Accurate prediction of the out-of-distribution data
is desired for a learning algorithm. In domain
generalization, training data from source domains
tend to have different distributions from that of the
target domain, while the target data are absence
in the training process. We propose a Distribution
Free Domain Generalization (DFDG) procedure
for classification by conducting standardization
to avoid the dominance of a few domains in the
training process. The essence of the DFDG is
its reformulating the cross domain/class discrepancy by pairwise two sample test statistics, and
equally weights their importance or the covariance structures to avoid dominant domain/class.
A theoretical generalization bound is established
for the multi-class classification problem. The
DFDG is shown to offer a superior performance
in empirical studies with fewer hyperparameters,
which means faster and easier implementation.

Among the existed DG methods, we follow the kernel DG
methods (Muandet et al., 2013; Ghifary et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2020) for new development. These
methods first map data to a high dimensional reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and then construct metrics to
measure the cross domain and class discrepancy, followed
by a low dimensional feature representation that minimizes
the cross domain dissimilarity while keeping new features
with different classes well separated. The metrics are usually
constructed as variants of the maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012).
A common challenge with the DG is to counter the different
mean levels and the variation among the discrepancy measures of different domains in the training stage. A robust
DG procedure has to avoid domains with higher mean levels
or variations to dictate the feature selection as features much
influenced by the outlaying domains are doom to be weak in
domain generalization. Existing kernel DG methods have to
use more hyperparameters to balance the between-domain
discrepancy measures, which may reduce the generalization
ability of the methods.

1. Introduction
Domain generalization (DG) aims at transferring knowledge
from the source domains to the target domains without the
target data in the training process (Blanchard et al., 2011).
A major challenge of DG is that the source and target data
are not identically distributed. An algorithm trained from
the source domains tends to be less performing in the target
domain. DG is designed to attain robust performance in the
target domain.

We propose two standardization procedures which are designed to reduce the heterogeneity in the kernel DG discrepancy statistics among the domains by conducting mean and
variance adjustments. These standardizations are based on
asymptotic analysis ((12) and Proposition 1) on the pairwise
MMD statistics, which reduces the number of hyperparameters and speeds up the training process, and hence allows
more computation intensive classifier in the DG procedure.

Compared with the domain adaptation where the target data
are accessible in training to obtain a target specific predictor
(Long et al., 2015; Li et al., 2021), DG is designed for a
single global predictor or classifier that performs well in
1
Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2 Center for Big Data Research, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 3 School of Mathematical Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 4 Pazhou Lab,
Guangzhou 510330, China. Correspondence to: Song Xi Chen
<csx@gsm.pku.edu.cn>.

Specifically, we put forward a distribution-free DG (DFDG)
approach that provides a superior performance using fewer
hyperparameters, which is well suited for DG. We unify
the kernel DG methods as an optimization problem based
on pairwise two-sample test statistics with concise matrix
form in terms of the sandwich structure. Two distributionfree standardized metrics are proposed, one reweights the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

