An Information-Theoretic Analysis of Nonstationary Bandit Learning

Seungki Min 1 Daniel Russo 2

Abstract

by adapting their action selection as the environment evolves.
This requires continual learning from interaction and striking a judicious balance between exploration and exploitation. Uncertainty about the environment’s state cannot be
fully resolved before the state changes and this necessarily
manifests in suboptimal decisions. Strong performance is
impossible under adversarial forms of nonstationarity but
is possible in more benign environments. Why are A/B
testing, or recommender systems, widespread and effective
even though nonstationarity is a ubiquitous concern? Quantifying the impact different forms of nonstationarity have on
decision-quality is, unfortunately, quite subtle.

In nonstationary bandit learning problems, the
decision-maker must continually gather information and adapt their action selection as the latent
state of the environment evolves. In each time
period, some latent optimal action maximizes expected reward under the environment state. We
view the optimal action sequence as a stochastic process, and take an information-theoretic approach to analyze attainable performance. We
bound per-period regret in terms of the entropy
rate of the optimal action process. The bound
applies to a wide array of problems studied in the
literature and reflects the problem’s information
structure through its information-ratio.

Our contributions. We provide a novel informationtheoretic analysis that bounds the inherent degradation of
decision-quality in changing environments. Note that the
latent state evolution of the environment induces a latent
optimal action process — where the optimal action at any
time step is that one that maximizes expected reward conditioned on the current environment parameter. We bound
per-period regret in terms of the entropy-rate of the optimal
action process. The entropy rate of a stochastic process
is a fundamental concept in the theory of communications.
We use the entropy rate to measure the extent to which the
evolving state of the environment manifests in surprising
and erratic evolution of the optimal action process. Subsection 1.1 gives an example of nonstationarity, inspired
by A/B testing, in which the entropy rate of the parameter
process is large but the entropy rate of the action process is
small. We believe this distinction is essential.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of learning in interactive decisionmaking. Across a sequence of time periods, a decisionmaker selects actions, observes outcomes, and associates
these with rewards. They hope to earn high rewards, but this
may require investing in gathering information.
Most of the literature studies stationary environments —
where the likelihood of outcomes under an action is fixed
across time.1 Efficient algorithms limit costs required to
converge on optimal behavior. We study the design and
analysis of algorithms in nonstationary environments, where
converging on optimal behavior is impossible.

We enrich this result in two ways. First, we provide a matching lower bound. This exhibits a sequence of problems
with varying entropy rate under which no algorithm could
meaningfully outperform our upper bounds. Second, we
provide stylized upper bounds on the entropy rate, expressed
in terms of the number of changes in the optimal action or
the ‘effective time horizon’, a new notion introduced in this
paper. Combined with our general result, they give rise to
regret bounds that are rather interpretable and consistent
with the previous results in the literature.

In our model, the latent state of the environment in each time
period is encoded in a parameter vector. These parameters
are unobservable, but evolve according to a known stochastic process. The decision-maker hopes to earn high rewards
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST 2 Division of Decision Risk and
Operations, Columbia Business School.
Correspondence
to:
Seungki Min <skmin@kaist.ac.kr>, Daniel Russo
<djr2174@gsb.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
An alternative style of result lets the environment change, but
tries only to compete with the best fixed action in hindsight.

In addition to the problem’s entropy rate, our general bounds
depend on the algorithm’s information ratio. First introduced by Russo & Van Roy (2016), the information ratio
measures the per-period price an algorithm pays to acquire
1

