Statistical Indistinguishability of Learning Algorithms

Alkis Kalavasis 1 Amin Karbasi 2 3 Shay Moran 4 3 Grigoris Velegkas 2

Abstract

in major ML conferences such as the ICLR 2019 Reproducibility Challenge (Pineau et al., 2019) and the NeurIPS
2019 Reproducibility Program (Pineau et al., 2021).

When two different parties use the same learning
rule on their own data, how can we test whether
the distributions of the two outcomes are similar? In this paper, we study the similarity of outcomes of learning rules through the lens of the
Total Variation (TV) distance of distributions. We
say that a learning rule is TV indistinguishable
if the expected TV distance between the posterior distributions of its outputs, executed on two
training data sets drawn independently from the
same distribution, is small. We first investigate
the learnability of hypothesis classes using TV
indistinguishable learners. Our main results are
information-theoretic equivalences between TV
indistinguishability and existing algorithmic stability notions such as replicability and approximate differential privacy. Then, we provide statistical amplification and boosting algorithms for
TV indistinguishable learners.

Reproducibility of outcomes in scientific research is a necessary condition to ensure that the conclusions of the studies
reflect inherent properties of the underlying population and
are not an artifact of the methods that scientists used or
the random sample of the population that the study was
conducted on. In its simplest form, it requires that if two
different groups of researchers carry out an experiment using the same methodologies but different samples of the
same population, it better be the case that the two outcomes
of their studies are statistically indistinguishable. In this
paper, we investigate this notion in the context of ML (cf.
Definition 1.1), and characterize for which learning problems statistically indistinguishable learning algorithms exist.
Furthermore, we show how statistical indistinguishability,
as a property of learning algorithms, is naturally related to
various notions of algorithmic stability such as replicability
of experiments, and differential privacy.
While we mainly focus on the fundamental ML task of
binary classification to make the presentation easier to follow, many of our results extend to other statistical tasks (cf.
Appendix A.2). More formally, the objects of interest are
randomized learning rules A : (X × {0, 1})n → {0, 1}X .
These learning rules take as input a sequence S of n pairs
from X × {0, 1}, i.e., points from a domain X along with
their labels, and map them to a binary classifier in a randomized manner. We assume that this sequence S is generated i.i.d. from a distribution D on X × {0, 1}. We
denote by {0, 1}X the space of binary classifiers and by
A(S) the random variable that corresponds to the output
of A on input S 1 . We also adopt a more algorithmic viewpoint for A where we denote it as a deterministic mapping
(X × {0, 1})n × R → {0, 1}X , which takes as input a training set S of size n made of instance-label pairs and a random
string r ∼ R (we use R for both the probability space and
the distribution) corresponding to the algorithm’s internal
randomness, and outputs a hypothesis A(S, r) ∈ {0, 1}X .
Thus, A(S) corresponds to a random variable while A(S, r)
is a deterministic object. To make the distinction clear,

1. Introduction
Lack of replicability in experiments has been a major issue,
usually referred to as the reproducibility crisis, in many
scientific areas such as biology and chemistry. Indeed, the
results of a survey that appeared in Nature (Baker, 2016) are
very worrisome: more than 70% of the researchers that participated in it could not replicate other researchers’ experimental findings while over half of them were not able to even
replicate their own conclusions. In the past few years the
number of scientific publications in the Machine Learning
(ML) community has increased exponentially. Significant
concerns and questions regarding replicability have also recently been raised in the area of ML. This can be witnessed
by the establishment of various reproducibility challenges
1

Department of Computer Science, NTUA, Athens, Greece
Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven,
United States 3 Google Research 4 Department of Computer Science, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Alkis Kalavasis
<kalavasisalkis@mail.ntua.gr>.
2

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We identify with A(S) the posterior distribution of A on
input S when there is no confusion.

1

