Grounding Large Language Models in Interactive Environments
with Online Reinforcement Learning

Thomas Carta * 1 Clément Romac * 1 2 Thomas Wolf 2 Sylvain Lamprier 3 Olivier Sigaud 4
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 1

Abstract

et al., 2022). Recently, LLMs were shown to capture aspects
of the physical rules in our world, e.g. about space (Patel
& Pavlick, 2022), colors (Abdou et al., 2021) or even affordances between bodies and objects (Ahn et al., 2022). This
form of prior knowledge was exploited to suggest plans of
action to solve goals in robotics (Huang et al., 2022b; Ahn
et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022). However, LLMs are known
to suffer from a lack of grounding which prevents them from
properly dealing with the meaning of inter-related concepts
and their use for functional competence in interactive environments (Mahowald et al., 2023). Indeed, alignment between statistical structures in such LLMs and environments
can be very limited, or even sometimes entirely wrong. This
is partly due to 1) a training process (predicting next words)
that is not directly incentivized to solve problems in an environment, 2) lack of abilities to intervene in the environment
to identify causal structures; 3) lack in abilities to learn
based on data collected as a result of interacting with the
environment (Bender & Koller, 2020; Bisk et al., 2020).

Recent works successfully leveraged Large Language Models’ (LLM) abilities to capture abstract knowledge about world’s physics to solve
decision-making problems. Yet, the alignment
between LLMs’ knowledge and the environment
can be wrong and limit functional competence
due to lack of grounding. In this paper, we study
an approach (named GLAM) to achieve this alignment through functional grounding: we consider
an agent using an LLM as a policy that is progressively updated as the agent interacts with the environment, leveraging online Reinforcement Learning to improve its performance to solve goals. Using an interactive textual environment designed to
study higher-level forms of functional grounding,
and a set of spatial and navigation tasks, we study
several scientific questions: 1) Can LLMs boost
sample efficiency for online learning of various
RL tasks? 2) How can it boost different forms of
generalization? 3) What is the impact of online
learning? We study these questions by functionally grounding several variants (size, architecture)
of FLAN-T5.

In the literature, language grounding has referred to various related objectives (Thill et al., 2014). First, symbol
grounding can be formulated as the general problem of
connecting a symbol system (Harnad, 1990), internal to
an agent, to the environment, in such a way that internal
processing of these symbols can be used to to act appropriately in this environment. One dimension of this problem
is associating ”elementary” symbols, such as the names of
objects, with invariant structures in high-dimensional perceptual modalities such as vision (Cangelosi et al., 2010;
Wiriyathammabhum et al., 2016). Such a grounding, called
”direct grounding”, has been extensively studied in the past
leading to various efficient methods (Alayrac et al., 2022;
Radford et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2023), included in the context of robotic bodies (Cangelosi & Stramandinoli, 2018).
Another dimension is how to ground higher-order symbolic
tokens, or abstract concepts, into elementary symbols, often
through approaches such as distributional semantics (Harris, 1981; Boleda, 2019). This has been called ”grounding
transfer” (Cangelosi & Stramandinoli, 2018). Beyond such
mere associations, a key question about grounding is how
internal processes that manipulate symbols can model, predict and control external physical and social processes: they

1. Introduction
The recent rise of Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on massive text datasets in Natural Language Processing has led to models exhibiting impressive capabilities (e.g. natural language generation, question answering, reasoning, translation...) (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Scao
*

Equal contribution 1 Inria (Flowers), University of Bordeaux,
France 2 Hugging Face 3 Univ Angers, LERIA, SFR MATHSTIC,
F-49000 Angers, France 4 Sorbonne University, ISIR, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Thomas Carta <thomas.carta@inria.fr>,
Clément Romac <clement.romac@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

