Compositional Score Modeling for Simulation-Based Inference

Tomas Geffner 1 2 George Papamakarios 3 Andriy Mnih 3

Abstract

Simulators can be easily sampled from, but the distribution
over the outputs—the likelihood p(x|θ)—cannot be generally evaluated, as it is implicitly defined. This renders
standard inference algorithms that rely on likelihood evaluations, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or
variational inference, inapplicable. Instead, a family of inference methods that rely solely on simulations, known as
simulation-based inference (SBI), have been developed for
performing inference with these models (Beaumont, 2019).

Neural Posterior Estimation methods for
simulation-based inference can be ill-suited for
dealing with posterior distributions obtained by
conditioning on multiple observations, as they
tend to require a large number of simulator calls
to learn accurate approximations. In contrast,
Neural Likelihood Estimation methods can
handle multiple observations at inference time
after learning from individual observations,
but they rely on standard inference methods,
such as MCMC or variational inference, which
come with certain performance drawbacks. We
introduce a new method based on conditional
score modeling that enjoys the benefits of both
approaches. We model the scores of the (diffused)
posterior distributions induced by individual
observations, and introduce a way of combining
the learned scores to approximately sample from
the target posterior distribution. Our approach is
sample-efficient, can naturally aggregate multiple
observations at inference time, and avoids the
drawbacks of standard inference methods.

Approximate Bayesian Computation is a traditional SBI
method (Sisson et al., 2018). Its simplest form is based
on rejection sampling, while more advanced variants involve adaptations of MCMC (Marjoram et al., 2003) and
sequential Monte Carlo (Sisson et al., 2007; Del Moral et al.,
2012). While popular, these methods often require many
simulator calls to yield accurate approximations, which may
be problematic with expensive simulators. Thus, recent
work has focused on developing algorithms that yield good
approximations using a limited budget of simulator calls.
Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE) is a promising alternative
(Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al., 2017;
Chan et al., 2018). NPE methods train a conditional density
estimator q(θ|x1 , . . . , xn ) to approximate the target posterior, using a dataset built by sampling the prior p(θ) and
the simulator p(x|θ) multiple times. These methods have
shown good performance when approximating posteriors
p(θ|xo ) conditioned on a single observation xo (i.e. n = 1)
(Lueckmann et al., 2021). However, their efficiency decreases for multiple observations (n > 1), or when n is not
known a priori, as in such cases the simulator needs to be
called several times per setting of parameters θ to generate
each training case in the dataset, which is inefficient.

1. Introduction
Mechanistic simulators have been developed in a wide range
of scientific domains to model complex phenomena (Cranmer et al., 2020). Often, these simulators act as a black
box: they are controlled by parameters θ and can be simulated to produce a synthetic observation x. Typically, the
parameters θ need to be inferred from data. In this paper, we consider the Bayesian formulation of this problem: given a prior p(θ) and a set of i.i.d. observations
xo1 , . . . , xon , the goal is to approximate
the posterior disQn
tribution p(θ|xo1 , . . . , xon ) ∝ p(θ) i=1 p(xoi |θ).

Neural Likelihood Estimation (NLE) (Wood, 2010; Papamakarios et al., 2019; Lueckmann et al., 2019) is a natural
alternative when the goal is to approximate posteriors conditioned on multiple observations. NLE methods train a surrogate likelihood q(x|θ) using samples from p(x|θ). Then,
given observations xo1 , . . . , xon , inference is carried out using the surrogate likelihood by standard methods, typically
MCMC (Papamakarios et al., 2019; Lueckmann et al., 2019)
or variational inference (Wiqvist et al., 2021; Glöckler et al.,
2022). In contrast to NPE, NLE methods require a single
call to the simulator per training case, and can naturally

1
Work done during an internship at DeepMind. 2 University
of Massachusetts, Amherst. 3 DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Tomas Geffner <tgeffner@cs.umass.edu>, Andriy Mnih <andriy@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

