Learning Functional Distributions with Private Labels

Changlong Wu 1 Yifan Wang 1 Ananth Grama 1 Wojciech Szpankowski 1
ỹ T = {ỹ1 , · · · , ỹT } that are generated by adding noise to
y T . Note that in this case, clinical factors are not considered sensitive, and therefore features xT = {x1 , · · · , xT }
are revealed exactly. Our goal is to design a noisy process
that prevents inferring y T from (xT , ỹ T ) (i.e., one that prevents inference of true labels) while allowing us to learn the
underlying relationship even with the noisy labels.

Abstract
We study the problem of learning functional distributions in the presence of noise. A functional is
a map from the space of features to distributions
over a set of labels, and is often assumed to belong to a known class of hypotheses F. Features
are generated by a general random process and
labels are sampled independently from featuredependent distributions. In privacy sensitive applications, labels are passed through a noisy kernel. We consider online learning, where at each
time step, a predictor attempts to predict the actual (label) distribution given only the features
and noisy labels in prior steps. The performance
of the predictor is measured by the expected KLrisk that compares the predicted distributions to
the underlying truth. We show that
p the minimax
expected KL-risk is of order Θ̃( T log |F|) for
finite hypothesis class F and any non-trivial noise
level. We then extend this result to general infinite
classes via the concept of stochastic sequential
covering and provide matching lower and upper
bounds for a wide range of natural classes.

Our setup can be understood as an extension of the classical randomized response of surveying proposed by (Warner,
1965) to our functional scenario with additional features. We
model the functional dependency as a map p : X → ∆(Y).
We assume that the underlying true relationship comes from
a class of hypothesis F ⊂ ∆(Y)X , i.e., we consider the
well specified case. While our above clinical example represents a batch (supervised) learning scenario, in this paper
we consider a more general online learning case. This will
not only provide us with more general application scenarios (e.g., online advertisement) but also resolves the batch
learning as a special case.
Let p ∈ F be the underlying true mapping. We consider
the following online learning scenario that occurs over time
horizon of T steps. At each time t, Nature generates feature
xt and reveals it to a predictor. The predictor then makes a
prediction p̂t ∈ ∆(Y) based on the history observed thus
far, i.e., xt , ỹ t−1 . Nature then generates yt ∼ p(xt ) independently of all previous data and reveals a noisy label
ỹt = Kη (yt ) where Kη represents a noisy kernel (channel). The goal of the predictor is to minimize the following
expected KL-risk:
" T
#
X
t t−1
sup E
KL(p(xt ), p̂t (x , ỹ )) ,

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of finding how clinical factors (such
as age, gender, smoking history etc.) impact the probability
of manifesting various sequelaes after catching a disease.
We represent clinical factors as a set of features X , the outcomes (i.e., sequelaes) as a set of labels Y, and ∆(Y) as the
set of all probability distributions over Y. Our goal is to find
a mapping (a functional distribution) from X to ∆(Y) by
observing a set of sample-label pairs (x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xT , yT )
sampled from a group of real patients. We aim to recover
the true relationship (i.e., X → ∆(Y)) with minimal loss.
Since clinical data is sensitive, one typically does not reveal
them publicly, choosing instead to reveal perturbed labels

p∈F

t=1

Center for Science of Information, Department of Computer
Science, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Changlong Wu
<wuchangl@hawaii.edu>.

where KL is the KL-divergence and the expectation is over
all randomness involved in this process. By standard onlineto-batch conversion, any online predictor p̂ implies a batch
learner that achieves the same performance bound. See
Section 2 for more formal assertions. The goal of this paper
is to understand how the class F and the process generating
xT affect the expected KL-risk in the presence of the noisy
labels ỹ T .

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our contributions. We formulate the problem of learning functional distributions from noisy labels by allowing

1

1

