On the Relationship Between Explanation and Prediction: A Causal View

Amir-Hossein Karimi 1 2 3 Krikamol Muandet 4 Simon Kornblith 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 Been Kim 3

Abstract

to influence the model’s decision (Koh et al., 2020; Bau
et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022), but also to ensure that
models comply with regulatory requirements (Parliament
& of the European Union, 2016). However, Existing tools
for interpretability have however elicited criticisms, often
highlighting computational or qualitative user-study-based
evidence that explanations generated from these tools may
contain critical errors and must be used with care (PoursabziSangdeh et al., 2018; Chu et al., 2020; Adebayo et al., 2018;
Alqaraawi et al., 2020; Srinivas & Fleuret, 2021; Kindermans et al., 2019).

Being able to provide explanations for a model’s
decision has become a central requirement for
the development, deployment, and adoption of
machine learning models. However, we are yet
to understand what explanation methods can and
cannot do. How do upstream factors such as data,
model prediction, hyperparameters, and random
initialization influence downstream explanations?
While previous work raised concerns that explanations (E) may have little relationship with the prediction (Y ), there is a lack of conclusive study to
quantify this relationship. Our work borrows tools
from causal inference to systematically assay this
relationship. More specifically, we study the relationship between E and Y by measuring the treatment effect when intervening on their causal ancestors, i.e., on hyperparameters and inputs used
to generate saliency-based Es or Y s. Our results
suggest that the relationships between E and Y
is far from ideal. In fact, the gap between ‘ideal’
case only increase in higher-performing models–
models that are likely to be deployed. Our work is
a promising first step towards providing a quantitative measure of the relationship between E and
Y , which could also inform the future development of methods for E with a quantitative metric.

One focal point in many investigations is the relationship
between explanations (E) and predictions (Y ). In this work,
we seek to formalize this relationship, inspired by the common cause principle of Reichenbach (1956) that states that
if two variables are statistically dependent, there must be a
common cause influencing both of them, and this common
cause can be chosen such that it explains all the dependence.
We develop a measure of dependence via the Potential Outcomes framework (Rubin, 2005). Viewed through a lens
of causality, we evaluate the treatment effect of hyperparameters of the model, H (i.e., H taking on value h0 , the
counterfactual antecedent) on E and Y conditioned on a
particular instance x. In other words, by measuring the
treatment effect of each hyperparameter (e.g., choice of activation, initialization, training budget), we are measuring its
influence on E and Y , and in particular, how the influence
is different or similar in E and Y (Fig. 1; left). Furthermore,
under a careful evaluation, we tease apart the direct influence of H on E vs. its indirect influence mediated through
Y to better understand the flow of causation (Fig. 1; right).

1. Introduction and Related Work
Being able to provide explanations for a machine learning
(ML) model’s decision has become central to the development, deployment, and adoption of ML models. Explanations are important not only to help practitioners better understand the model’s underlying rationale to debug
models (Adebayo et al., 2022; Rieger et al., 2020) and

Why are hyperparameters considered treatments? Under a
fixed random seed, hyperparameters are arguably the only
reasonable causal ancestor of the model because they fully
determine the weights of the resulting model and the behavior thereof. They are also known to influence the inherent
tendencies/performances of the model. For example, models trained on completely different hyperparameters could
perform similarly under one metric (e.g., training loss), but
have completely different task-specific performance, e.g.,
fairness (D’Amour et al., 2020). One can also use the hyperparameters alone to predict the final performance of the
models (Unterthiner et al., 2020) or even use the model’s
weights to predict hyperparameters (Eilertsen et al., 2020).

This work was primarily conducted when the first author was
interning at Google Research. 1 MPI for Intelligent Systems 2 ETH
Zurich 3 Google Research, Brain Team 4 CISPA-Helmholtz Center for Information Security. Correspondence to: Amir-Hossein
Karimi <amir@tue.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

