MABe22: A Multi-Species Multi-Task Benchmark
for Learned Representations of Behavior

Jennifer J. Sun * 1 Markus Marks * 1 Andrew W. Ulmer 2 Dipam Chakraborty 3 Brian Geuther 4
Edward Hayes Heng Jia 5 Vivek Kumar 4 Sebastian Oleszko 6 Zachary Partridge 7 Milan Peelman 8
Alice Robie 9 Catherine E. Schretter 9 Keith Sheppard 4 Chao Sun 5 Param Uttarwar 10 Julian M. Wagner 1
Erik Werner 6 Joseph Parker 1 Pietro Perona 1 Yisong Yue 1 Kristin Branson 9 Ann Kennedy 2
Website: https://sites.google.com/view/computational-behavior/our-datasets/mabe2022-dataset

Abstract

Previous Video Datasets
Human Action Recognition
Animal Action Recognition

We introduce MABe22, a large-scale, multi-agent
video and trajectory benchmark to assess the quality of learned behavior representations. This
dataset is collected from a variety of biology
experiments, and includes triplets of interacting
mice (4.7 million frames video+pose tracking
data, 10 million frames pose only), symbiotic
beetle-ant interactions (10 million frames video
data), and groups of interacting flies (4.4 million frames of pose tracking data). Accompanying these data, we introduce a panel of reallife downstream analysis tasks to assess the quality of learned representations by evaluating how
well they preserve information about the experimental conditions (e.g. strain, time of day, optogenetic stimulation) and animal behavior. We
test multiple state-of-the-art self-supervised video
and trajectory representation learning methods to
demonstrate the use of our benchmark, revealing that methods developed using human action
datasets do not fully translate to animal datasets.
We hope that our benchmark and dataset encourage a broader exploration of behavior representation learning methods across species and settings.

Shaking Hands (Kuehne et al. 2011)

Eating (Ng. et al., 2022)

Animal Interaction Datasets (Ours)

Mouse Triplet
(Video)
8 tasks

Beetle Interactions
(Video)
14 tasks

Fruit Fly Group
(Trajectory)
50 tasks

Broad Task Types from Scientific Experiments
Light Cycle

Strain

Experimental
context tasks
Frame-by-frame
Expert-annotated
behaviors

…
Huddle

Chase

…

Figure 1. MABe22 consists of animal interactions in laboratory
experiments. We propose a dataset to benchmark representation learning methods that focus on multi-agent behavior. Our
benchmark includes a large video and trajectory library depicting
interactions of mice, beetles, ants, and fruit flies alongside a large
suite of downstream tasks to measure representation quality. Tasks
differ across model organisms and include the classification of
experimental conditions (e.g. species strain, light cycle, optogenetic activations, interaction duration) as well as expert-annotated
actions (e.g. chase, huddle, and sniffs for mice).

1. Introduction
The study of interacting agents is important for a range of
scientific and engineering applications, from designing safer

autonomous vehicles (Chang et al., 2019), to understanding player behavior in virtual worlds (Hofmann, 2019), to
uncovering the biological underpinnings of neurological disorders (Segalin et al., 2020; Wiltschko et al., 2020). Across
disciplines, there is a need for new techniques to characterize the structure of multi-agent behavior with greater precision, sensitivity, and detail. Traditionally, behavior analysis
models are trained with full supervision (Burgos-Artizzu

*

Equal contribution 1 Caltech 2 Northwestern University
AICrowd 4 JAX Labs 5 Zhejiang University 6 IRLAB Therapeutics 7 University of New South Wales 8 Ghent University
9
Janelia 10 Saarland University. Correspondence to: Ann Kennedy
<ann.kennedy@northwestern.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

