Optimal Convergence Rates for Agnostic Nyström Kernel Learning

Jian Li 1 Yong Liu 2 3 Weiping Wang 1

Abstract

is unfeasible in large-scale settings because of high computational and storage requirements. To overcome these
scalability issues, researchers improved kernel method with
accelerated techniques: distributed learning (Zhang et al.,
2015; Lin et al., 2017), Nyström approximation (Williams
& Seeger, 2001; Rudi et al., 2015) and random features
(Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Rudi & Rosasco, 2017) to alleviate
memory bottlenecks via low-rank approximation, as well
as stochastic and preconditioned extensions (Raskutti et al.,
2014; Lin & Rosasco, 2016) to improve computational efficiency via iterative solutions.

Nyström low-rank approximation has shown great
potential in processing large-scale kernel matrix
and neural networks. However, there lacks a
unified analysis for Nyström approximation, and
the asymptotical minimax optimality for Nyström
methods usually require a strict condition, assuming that the target regression lies exactly in the hypothesis space. In this paper, to tackle these problems, we provide a refined generalization analysis
for Nyström approximation in the agnostic setting, where the target regression may be out of the
hypothesis space. Specifically, we show Nyström
approximation can still achieve the capacitydependent optimal rates in the agnostic setting. To
this end, we first prove the capacity-dependent optimal guarantees of Nyström approximation with
the standard uniform sampling, which covers both
loss functions and applies to some agnostic settings. Then, using data-dependent sampling, for
example, leverage scores sampling, we derive the
capacity-dependent optimal rates that apply to the
whole range of the agnostic setting. To our best
knowledge, the capacity-dependent optimality for
the whole range of the agnostic setting is first
achieved and novel in Nyström approximation.

Recent theoretical works have extensively studied the statistical properties of kernel methods together with distributed
learning (Zhang et al., 2013; Guo et al., 2017a; Lin &
Cevher, 2020), Nyström approximation (Bach, 2013; Alaoui
& Mahoney, 2015; Rudi et al., 2015; 2017), random features
(Rudi & Rosasco, 2017; Sun et al., 2018; Li & Liu, 2023;
Liu et al., 2021; Li & Liu, 2023) and stochastic optimization
(Carratino et al., 2018; Lin & Cevher, 2018). Specifically,
the optimal theoretical guarantees for kernel ridge regression (KRR) (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007; Smale & Zhou,
2007) and its variants has attracted increasing attentions in
statistical learning, including Nyström approximation (Rudi
et al., 2015), Nyström approximation with stochastic optimization (Rudi et al., 2017), Nyström approximation with
data-dependent sampling (Rudi et al., 2018) and distributed
Nyström approximation (Li et al., 2023), respectively. These
optimal guarantees for KRR rely on a strict assumption that
the concept (the true regression) fρ lies in the hypothesis
space fρ ∈ H associated with the selected kernel. As shown
in Figure 1, since the joint distribution is unknown, it’s hard
to select a perfect kernel to guarantee the realistic setting
fρ ∈ H via prior knowledge or kernel selection. In practice,
as stated in PAC theories (Maass, 1994; Auer et al., 1995),
the selected kernel is usually imperfect but good enough to
approximate the true regression and thus leads to the agnostic learning fρ ∈
/ H. Therefore, the statistical guarantees in
the agnostic setting are of practical and theoretical interest
in the context of kernel methods.

1. Introduction
In statistical learning theory, only a limited number of inputoutput pairs can be observed from a fixed but unknown
distribution. As one of the most popular nonparametric
statistical approaches, the kernel method offers an elegant
paradigm and solid theoretical guarantees (Vapnik, 1999;
Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004; Li et al., 2022). Despite its excellent theoretical properties, the kernel method
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 3 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Yong Liu <liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn>.

Nyström methods sample landmarks to generate low-rank
approximation of large matrix. Remarkably, Nyström
method is not only used in kernel matrix approximation
but also has shown significant potentials in accelerating
complex neural network models, such as Nyströmformer

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

