Estimating the Contamination Factor’s Distribution in Unsupervised Anomaly
Detection
Lorenzo Perini 1 Paul-Christian Bürkner 2 Arto Klami 3

Abstract

Typically, anomaly detection is tackled from an unsupervised perspective (Maxion & Tan, 2000; Goldstein &
Uchida, 2016; Zong et al., 2018; Perini et al., 2020b; Han
et al., 2022) because labeled samples, especially anomalies,
may be expensive and difficult to acquire (e.g., you do not
want to voluntarily break the equipment simply to observe
anomalous behaviours), or simply rare (e.g., you may need
to inspect many samples before finding an anomalous one).
Unsupervised anomaly detectors exploit data-driven heuristic assumptions (e.g., anomalies are far away from normals)
to assign a real-valued score to each sample denoting how
anomalous it is. Using such anomaly scores enables ranking
the samples from most to least anomalous.

Anomaly detection methods identify examples
that do not follow the expected behaviour, typically in an unsupervised fashion, by assigning
real-valued anomaly scores to the examples based
on various heuristics. These scores need to be
transformed into actual predictions by thresholding so that the proportion of examples marked
as anomalies equals the expected proportion of
anomalies, called contamination factor. Unfortunately, there are no good methods for estimating
the contamination factor itself. We address this
need from a Bayesian perspective, introducing a
method for estimating the posterior distribution
of the contamination factor for a given unlabeled
dataset. We leverage several anomaly detectors to
capture the basic notion of anomalousness and estimate the contamination using a specific mixture
formulation. Empirically on 22 datasets, we show
that the estimated distribution is well-calibrated
and that setting the threshold using the posterior
mean improves the detectors’ performance over
several alternative methods.

Converting the anomaly scores into discrete predictions
would practically allow the user to flag the anomalies. Commonly, one sets a decision threshold and labels samples with
higher scores as anomalous and samples with lower scores
as normal. However, setting the threshold is a challenging
task as it cannot be tuned (e.g., by maximizing the model
performance) due to the absence of labels. One approach is
to set the threshold such that the proportion of scores above
it matches the dataset’s contamination factor γ, i.e. the
expected proportion of anomalies. If the ranking is correct
(that is, all anomalies are ranked before any normal instance)
then thresholding with exactly the correct γ correctly identifies all anomalies. However, in most of the real-world
scenarios the contamination factor is unknown.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection aims at automatically identifying samples that do not conform to the normal behaviour, according to some notion of normality (see e.g., Chandola et al.
(2009)). Anomalies are often indicative of critical events
such as intrusions in web networks (Malaiya et al., 2018),
failures in petroleum extraction (Martı́ et al., 2015), or breakdowns in wind and gas turbines (Zaher et al., 2009; Yan &
Yu, 2019). Such events have an associated high cost and
detecting them avoids wasting time and resources.

Estimating the contamination factor γ is challenging. Existing works provide an estimate by using either some normal
labels (Perini et al., 2020a) or domain knowledge (Perini
et al., 2022). Alternatively, one can directly threshold the
scores through statistical threshold estimators, and derive γ
as the proportion of scores higher than the threshold. For instance, the Modified Thompson Tau test thresholder (MTT)
finds the threshold through the modified Thompson Tau
test (Rengasamy et al., 2021), while the Inter-Quartile Region thresholder (IQR) uses the third quartile plus 1.5 times
the inter-quartile region (Bardet & Dimby, 2017). In Section 4 we provide a comprehensive list of estimators.

1

DTAI lab & Leuven.AI, Department of Computer Science,
KU Leuven, Belgium 2 Cluster of Excellence SimTech, University
of Stuttgart, Germany 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland. Correspondence to: Lorenzo Perini
<lorenzo.perini@kuleuven.be>.

Transforming the scores into predictions using an incorrect estimate of the contamination factor (or, equivalently,
an incorrect threshold) deteriorates the anomaly detector’s

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

