Differentiable Multi-Target Causal Bayesian Experimental Design

Panagiotis Tigas * 1 Yashas Annadani * 2 3 Desi R. Ivanova 4 Andrew Jesson 1 Yarin Gal 1 Adam Foster † 5
Stefan Bauer † 3 6 7

Abstract

experiments

We introduce a gradient-based approach for the
problem of Bayesian optimal experimental design to learn causal models in a batch setting —
a critical component for causal discovery from
finite data where interventions can be costly or
risky. Existing methods rely on greedy approximations to construct a batch of experiments while
using black-box methods to optimize over a single target-state pair to intervene with. In this
work, we completely dispose of the black-box optimization techniques and greedy heuristics and
instead propose a conceptually simple end-to-end
gradient-based optimization procedure to acquire
a set of optimal intervention target-state pairs.
Such a procedure enables parameterization of the
design space to efficiently optimize over a batch
of multi-target-state interventions, a setting which
has hitherto not been explored due to its complexity. We demonstrate that our proposed method
outperforms baselines and existing acquisition
strategies in both single-target and multi-target
settings across a number of synthetic datasets.

experimental
design

world

observational &
interventional data

posterior model
update

hypotheses
Figure 1: Causal Bayesian Experimental Design optimizes experiments that help disambiguate between competing causal hypotheses.

financial and ethical costs and risks involved in such experimentation, it is in the scientist’s interest to minimize the
number of batches required. This process is known as experimental design, and assuming that the question of interest
concerns discovering the causal structure of the system of
interest, the process is known as experimental design for
causal discovery. A Bayesian framework for this process has
been proposed in prior work (Tong & Koller, 2001; Murphy,
2001; Cho et al., 2016; Agrawal et al., 2019; Sussex et al.,
2021; Tigas et al., 2022; Toth et al., 2022) which typically
consists of updating an approximate posterior with past experimental data and using this updated posterior to compute
experiments that are maximally informative, as evaluated
by expected information gain—the objective of interest in
Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design (BOED) (Lindley,
1956; Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995).

1. Introduction
Imagine a scientist entering a wet lab to conduct experiments in order to discover the underlying causal relations
within the system of interest. The scientist first comes up
with some hypotheses, based on prior knowledge and past
observations. Then, based on the formed hypotheses, an
experimentation protocol to disambiguate between the competing hypotheses is devised. Additionally, because of the
*
Equal contribution ,† Equal supervision 1 OATML, University of Oxford 2 KTH Stockholm, Sweden 3 Helmholtz AI
4
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford 5 Microsoft Research 6 TU Munich 7 CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar. Correspondence to: Yashas Annadani <yashas.annadani@gmail.com>,
Panagiotis Tigas <ptigas@robots.ox.ac.uk>. Code available at:
https://github.com/yannadani/DiffCBED.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The problem of Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design
for Causal Discovery (BOECD) is hard; computing the
Bayesian posterior over Structural Causal Models (SCM)—
a common framework for capturing causal relationships—is
intractable. More importantly, the estimation and optimization of batch BOED objectives are computationally challenging, which has resulted in heuristics like the greedy
1

