Representer Point Selection for
Explaining Regularized High-dimensional Models

Che-Ping Tsai 1 Jiong Zhang 2 Hsiang-Fu Yu 2 Eli Chien 3 Cho-Jui Hsieh 2 4 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract

tion score, a classical technique is to compute the derivative
of the prediction score with respect to each training instance
using implicit function theory, an approach also known as
influence functions (Cook & Weisberg, 1980; Koh & Liang,
2017). However, computing the influence function requires
the inversion of the Hessian matrix, causing significant scalability issues when handling large models. To compute
sample-based explanations in an efficient manner, another
method called Representer Point Selection has been developed (Yeh et al., 2018). This method is based on the classical
representer theorem (Schölkopf et al., 2001), which states
that a regularized empirical risk minimizer over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) can be decomposed into
a linear combination of kernel functions evaluated on each
training sample. While functions parameterized with neural
networks do not necessarily lie in a pre-specified RKHS,
Yeh et al. (2018) propose to treat the last layer of a neural network as a linear machine and the remaining part as a
fixed feature encoder. Upon fine-tuning the last layer with ℓ2
regularization, the representer theorem can then be applied,
allowing us to obtain importance scores of the training data.
In this development, the use of ℓ2 regularization served as a
RKHS norm with respect to linear kernels, which was key
to recruiting the representer theorem.

We introduce a novel class of sample-based explanations we term high-dimensional representers,
that can be used to explain the predictions of a regularized high-dimensional model in terms of importance weights for each of the training samples.
Our workhorse is a novel representer theorem
for general regularized high-dimensional models,
which decomposes the model prediction in terms
of contributions from each of the training samples:
with positive (negative) values corresponding to
positive (negative) impact training samples to the
model’s prediction. We derive consequences for
the canonical instances of ℓ1 regularized sparse
models, and nuclear norm regularized low-rank
models. As a case study, we further investigate
the application of low-rank models in the context
of collaborative filtering, where we instantiate
high-dimensional representers for specific popular classes of models. Finally, we study the empirical performance of our proposed methods on
three real-world binary classification datasets and
two recommender system datasets. We also showcase the utility of high-dimensional representers
in explaining model recommendations.

However, ℓ2 regularizers are not always suitable for highdimensional models where the number of parameters might
even be larger than the number of samples, and where the
model parameters might lie in a lower dimensional subspace. In such settings, in order for the resulting estimators
to have strong statistical guarantees, it is often critical to
employ high-dimensional regularizations that encourage the
model parameter to lie in such lower-dimensional structured
subspaces (Negahban & Wainwright, 2011). Two canonical
instances of such high-dimensional regularizers include the
ℓ1 norm regularization that encourages parameter vectors to
have sparse structure, and the nuclear norm regularization
imposes low-rank structure on parameter matrices. The
caveat however is that these regularizations cannot typically
be cast as RKHS norms, and thus the classical representer
theorem does not apply. Therefore, it remains unclear how
to select representer points for high-dimensional models,
despite the widespread use of high-dimensional models in
practical applications such as compressed sensing (Donoho,

1. Introduction
Sample-based explanations aim to explain a machine learning model’s prediction by identifying the most influential
training samples that led to the prediction. This is usually
done by measuring the influence of each training sample on
the model’s prediction scores. The explanations not only
assist users in understanding the rationale behind the prediction, but also allow model designers to debug or de-bias the
training data (Kong et al., 2021; Thimonier et al., 2022).
To measure the impact of each training sample on the predic1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon, USA 3 University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 University of California, Los Angeles.
Correspondence to: Che-Ping Tsai <chepingt@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

