Adapting to game trees in zero-sum imperfect information games

Côme Fiegel 1 Pierre Ménard 2 Tadashi Kozuno 3 Rémi Munos 4 Vianney Perchet 1 5 Michal Valko 4

Abstract

playing. We therefore assume that the set of states controlled
by the player is partitioned into information sets, where an
information set is a set of states that are indistinguishable
to this player. As commonly assumed in game theory, we
suppose perfect recall (Kuhn, 1950): players remember their
previous moves, which implies that the space of information
sets has a tree structure.

Imperfect information games (IIG) are games in
which each player only partially observes the
current game state. We study how to learn εoptimal strategies in a zero-sum IIG through
self-play with trajectory feedback. We give a
e
problem-independent lower bound O(H(A
X +
2
BY )/ε ) on the required number of realizations
to learn these strategies with high probability,
where H is the length of the game, AX and
BY are the total number of actions for the two
players. We also propose two Follow the Regularized leader (FTRL) algorithms for this setting: Balanced FTRL which matches this lower
bound, but requires the knowledge of the information set structure beforehand to define the regularization; and Adaptive FTRL which needs
e 2 (AX + BY )/ε2 ) realizations without this
O(H
requirement by progressively adapting the regularization to the observations.

We focus more specifically on zero-sum games (what the
max-player gains is the opposite of the other, min-player)
and aim at devising algorithms that learn ε-optimal strategies (von Neumann, 1928). For this purpose, we actually
develop a unilateral algorithm that dictates to a single player
how to play over multiple realizations of the game called
episodes, each of the same length H, in order to minimize
the regret—the difference between the cumulative gain and
the gain of the best fixed strategy—against any sequence
of moves of the adversary. If both players follows such
an algorithm, we can then prove that their average strategy
becomes more precise over time. We especially want to
construct algorithms with a regret that scales as slowly as
possible with respect to the different game parameters.
For any information set x ∈ X , we define by Ax the number
of available actions at x, as two indistinguishable states must
have the same number of actions. The total number
P of actions of the max-player is then defined by AX = x∈X Ax .
Similarly, we let Y be the collection of information sets
of the min-player, B
Py the number of actions available at
y ∈ Y and BY = y∈Y By the total number of actions.
Meanwhile X and Y denote the number of information sets
for the max and min-players.

1. Introduction
In imperfect information games (IIG), players, upon taking
an action, may only have access to partial information about
the true current game state. This type of games allows for
the modelling of complex strategic behavior such as bluffing
(Koller & Pfeffer, 1995). In this work, in particular, we study
extensive-form two-players zero-sum IIGs.
The extensive-form of a game describes, which player is
playing and which actions are available, sequentially and
depending on the previous moves. It is typically represented
by a tree of depth H, where nodes are states that are controlled by one of the players that decides, based on each
player action, the next game states among its children.
Players can be uncertain about the true game state upon
1
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris, Palaiseau, France 2 ENS Lyon,
Lyon, France 3 Omron Sinic X, Tokyo, Japan 4 Deepmind, Paris,
France 5 CRITEO AI Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Côme
Fiegel <come.fiegel@normalesup.org>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Related work When the structure of the game, transition
probabilities and reward function are known beforehand,
several methods exist to approximate the optimal strategy.
A common approach is to reformulate the problem as a linear program that can be solved efficiently (Romanovsky,
1962; von Stengel, 1996; Koller et al., 1996). Some methods see it as a saddle-point problem and rely on first-order
optimization methods (Hoda et al., 2010; Kroer et al., 2015;
2018; 2020; Munos et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021). Other
common approaches try to locally minimize the regret at
each information set, e.g., counterfactual regret minimization (Zinkevich et al., 2007; Tammelin, 2014; Burch et al.,
2019).

