Data-Copying in Generative Models: A Formal Framework

Robi Bhattacharjee 1 Sanjoy Dasgupta 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract

when the training points are considerably closer on average
to the generated data points than to an independently drawn
test sample. Otherwise, if the training points are further
on average to the generated points than test, then there is
underfitting. They proposed a three sample test to detect
this kind of data-copying, and empirically showed that their
test had good performance.

There has been some recent interest in detecting and addressing memorization of training data
by deep neural networks. A formal framework
for memorization in generative models, called
“data-copying” was proposed by Meehan et. al
(2020). We build upon their work to show that
their framework may fail to detect certain kinds of
blatant memorization. Motivated by this and the
theory of non-parametric methods, we provide an
alternative definition of data-copying that applies
more locally. We provide a method to detect datacopying, and provably show that it works with
high probability when enough data is available.
We also provide lower bounds that characterize
the sample requirement for reliable detection.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have shown impressive performance. However, given how large, diverse, and uncurated
their training sets are, a big question is whether, how often,
and how closely they are memorizing their training data.
This question has been of considerable interest in generative
modeling (Lopez-Paz & Oquab, 2016; Xu et al., 2018) as
well as supervised learning (Brown et al., 2021; Feldman,
2020). However, a clean and formal definition of memorization that captures the numerous complex aspects of the
problem, particularly in the context of continuous data such
as images, has largely been elusive.

Figure 1. In this figure, the blue points are sampled from the halfmoons dataset (with Gaussian noise). The red points are sampled
from a generated distribution that is a mixture of (40 %) blatant
data copier (that outputs a random subset of the training set), and
(60 %) a noisy underfit version of halfmoons. Although the generated distribution is clearly doing some form of copying at points
x1 and x2 , detecting this is challenging because of the canceling
effect of the underfit points.

For generative models, (Meehan et al., 2020) proposed a
formal definition of memorization called “data-copying”,
and showed that it was orthogonal to various prior notions
of overfitting such as mode collapse (Thanh-Tung & Tran,
2020), mode dropping (Yazici et al., 2020), and precisionrecall (Sajjadi et al., 2018). Specifically, their definition
looks at three datasets – a training set, a set of generated
example, and an independent test set. Data-copying happens

However, despite its practical success, this method may not
capture even blatant cases of memorization. To see this,
consider the example illustrated in Figure 1, in which a generated model for the halfmoons dataset outputs one of its
training points with probability 0.4, and otherwise outputs a
random point from an underfit distribution. When the test
of (Meehan et al., 2020) is applied to this distribution, it is
unable to detect any form of data copying; the generated
samples drawn from the underfit distribution are sufficient to
cancel out the effect of the memorized examples. Nevertheless, this generative model is clearly an egregious memorizer

*
Equal contribution 1 UCSD. Correspondence to: Robi Bhattacharjee <rcbhatta@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

