Instrumental Variable Estimation of Average Partial Causal Effects

Yuta Kawakami 1 2 Manabu Kuroki 1 Jin Tian 2

Abstract

H

Instrumental variable (IV) analysis is a powerful tool widely used to elucidate causal relationships. We study the problem of estimating the
average partial causal effect (APCE) of a continuous treatment in an IV setting. Specifically, we
develop new methods for estimating APCE based
on a recent identification condition via an integral
equation. We develop two families of methods,
nonparametric and parametric - the former uses
the Picard iteration to solve the integral equation;
the latter parameterizes APCE using a linear basis
function model. We analyze the statistical and
computational properties of the proposed APCE
estimators and illustrate them on synthetic and
real-world data.

Z

X

Y

Figure 1: A causal graph representing the IV setting.

the causal relations are represented by structural equations
Y = fY (X, H, uY ) and X = fX (Z, H, uX ). Typical
assumptions include: the structure equations are linear (linearity); the structural equations are monotonic on certain
arguments (monotonicity); the influence of the IV on the
treatment is separable from that of the confounders, i.e.,
fX (Z, H, uX ) = fX1 (Z, uX ) + fX2 (H, uX ) (separability I); or the influence of the treatment on the outcome is separable from that of the confounders, i.e., fY (X, H, uY ) =
fY 1 (X, uY ) + fY 2 (H, uY ) (separability II). We note that
separability I is testable but separability II is not (Breusch
& Pagan, 1979; Su et al., 2015).

1. Introduction
Instrumental variable (IV) analysis is a powerful tool used
to elucidate causal relationships when a controlled experiment is not feasible or when a randomized experiment is
not able to successfully treat each unit (Imbens, 2014; Angrist & Krueger, 2001). For example, consider a study of
the effect of years of education (treatment variable X) on
monthly wages (outcome variable Y ) (Card, 1999; Angrist
& Krueger, 1991). Since researchers cannot force people
to attend or drop out of school, they use the mother’s years
of education (Z) as an instrumental variable with the understanding that the mother’s education affects the subject’s
education but has no direct influence on the subject’s wages.
This setting is represented by the causal graph in Fig. 1,
where H represents unmeasured confounders.

One of the most widely used methods for estimating causal
effects via IV is linear two-stage least squared (TSLS)
(Stock, 2001) which assumes linearity and separability I
and II. By contrast, the two-stage predictor substitution
(TSPS) method (Hausman, 1978; Terza et al., 2008) assumes separability I and II but is applicable for nonlinear
models. Methods not relying on the separability I assumption include the generalized method of moments (GMM)
(Hansen, 1982; Baum et al., 2003), the nonparametric twostage least squared estimator (NPTSLS) (Newey & Powell,
2003; Hartford et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2019), and the
nonparametric conditional quantile estimation (CQE) (Chernozhukov et al., 2007; Imbens & Newey, 2009; Chen et al.,
2014; Torgovitsky, 2015). GMM uses the semiparametric
estimation framework and requires separability II and the
probability distribution of the IV. NPTSLS requires separability II while CQE requires monotonicity of the function
fY (X, H, uY ) with respect to H. Both NPTSLS and CQE
solve integral equations to identify the effect of the treatment on the outcome. However, these integral equations are
ill-posed problems1 and lead to severe estimation difficul-

In general, further assumptions are needed to identify the
causal effect of the treatment on the outcome. Assume
1

Department of Mathematics, Physics, Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Yokohama National University, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, JAPAN 2 Department of Computer Science, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA. Correspondence to: Yuta Kawakami
<kawakami-yuta-yd@ynu.jp>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
A well-posed problem satisfies the following three properties
(Tikhonov et al., 1995): existence, uniqueness, and stability of the

1

