π-Tuning: Transferring Multimodal Foundation Models
with Optimal Multi-task Interpolation

Chengyue Wu 1 2 Teng Wang 1 2 Yixiao Ge 2 Zeyu Lu 3 Ruisong Zhou 4 Ying Shan 2 Ping Luo 1

Abstract
Foundation models have achieved great advances
in multi-task learning with a unified interface of
unimodal and multimodal tasks. However, the
potential of such multi-task learners has not been
exploited during transfer learning. In this work,
we present a universal parameter-efficient transfer learning method, termed Predict-Interpolate
Tuning (π-Tuning), for vision, language, and
vision-language tasks. It aggregates the parameters of lightweight task-specific experts learned
from similar tasks to aid the target downstream
task. The task similarities are predicted in a
unified modality-independent space, yielding a
scalable graph to demonstrate task relationships.
π-Tuning has several appealing benefits. First,
it flexibly explores both intra- and inter-modal
transferability between similar tasks to improve
the accuracy and robustness of transfer learning, especially in data-scarce scenarios. Second, it offers a systematical solution for transfer learning with multi-task prediction-and-theninterpolation, compatible with diverse types of
parameter-efficient experts, such as prompt and
adapter. Third, an extensive study of task-level
mutual benefits on 14 unimodal and 6 multimodal datasets shows that π-Tuning surpasses
fine-tuning and other parameter-efficient transfer
learning methods both in full-shot and low-shot
regimes. The task graph also enables an in-depth
interpretable analysis of task transferability across
modalities. The code will be available at https:

VL Tasks

Vision Tasks

Language Tasks

Figure 1. Heatmap of the predicted task similarities, composed of
both unimodal and multimodal tasks. Vision-language tasks are
more similar to vision tasks compared to language tasks. Best
viewed in color.

1. Introduction
With the development of Transformer architectures (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020),
foundation models (Cho et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2022) pre-trained with large-scale data are capable
of multiple tasks across modalities in a unified sequence-tosequence manner, taking one more step toward mimicking
the human brain. These foundation models are natural multitask learners with universal representation and I/O interfaces
for both unimodal and multimodal tasks. But unfortunately,
these properties have not been fully exploited in downstream
tasks, as few studies investigated how to properly transfer
these models.

//github.com/TencentARC/pi-Tuning.

1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University. Correspondence to: Yixiao Ge <yixiaoge@tencent.com>.

In this work, we tackle the problem of transfer learning of
multimodal foundation models with unified sequence-tosequence interfaces. Most of our experiments are based on
OFA (Wang et al., 2022), an open-source model, without

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

