Surrogate Model Extension (SME):
A Fast and Accurate Weight Update Attack on Federated Learning

Junyi Zhu 1 Ruicong Yao 2 Matthew B. Blaschko 1

Abstract

end (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021), which
is a framework for training a joint model built upon serverclient communication. A presumed strength of FL from the
perspective of privacy is that the network weights instead
of data are shared between the server and clients. However,
training data may still be extracted from the transmitted
weights due to their statistical dependence.

In Federated Learning (FL) and many other distributed training frameworks, collaborators can
hold their private data locally and only share the
network weights trained with the local data after
multiple iterations. Gradient inversion is a family of privacy attacks that recovers data from its
generated gradients. Seemingly, FL can provide
a degree of protection against gradient inversion
attacks on weight updates, since the gradient of
a single step is concealed by the accumulation
of gradients over multiple local iterations. In
this work, we propose a principled way to extend gradient inversion attacks to weight updates
in FL, thereby better exposing weaknesses in the
presumed privacy protection inherent in FL. In
particular, we propose a surrogate model method
based on the characteristic of two-dimensional
gradient flow and low-rank property of local updates. Our method largely boosts the ability
of gradient inversion attacks on weight updates
containing many iterations and achieves state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance. Additionally, our
method runs up to 100× faster than the SOTA
baseline in the common FL scenario. Our work
re-evaluates and highlights the privacy risk of
sharing network weights. Our code is available
at https://github.com/JunyiZhu-AI/
surrogate_model_extension.

Gradient inversion presents a way to reconstruct input data
from the gradient (Zhu et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020).
The reconstruction frequently has high fidelity, thus raising
alarms about the privacy risk of sharing network weights.
However, such methods assume that weights are shared at
every iteration, thus the gradient of a single update can be
constructed from server-client communications. In practice, communication overhead is a major bottleneck of collaborative training, especially for a wide range of applications of FL on edge devices. Therefore, FL frameworks
mostly require clients to train multiple epochs before sharing their updated weights. The gradient of a single step is
thus concealed by the accumulation of local iterations. An
existing attack on weight updates in FL is the simulation
method (Dimitrov et al., 2022), which emulates multiple
steps of gradient descent. However, such methods are computationally demanding and may not be possible to apply in
practice, providing the illusion of data protection.
In this work, we propose an extension of the gradient inversion method, which attacks weight updates of accumulated
local iterations in a principled way. In particular, we introduce a surrogate model, which is a model not necessarily
appearing during training. We take the surrogate model as a
basis and regard the reversed direction of the weight update
as the direction of the gradient of training data computed on
this surrogate model. We propose that an effective surrogate
model can be found as a linear combination of the weights
before and after local training, and identify that this is feasible due to the characteristic of two-dimensional gradient
flow and the low-rank property of local steps. Equipped
with this Surrogate Model Extension (SME), we can then
invert the weight update and reconstruct training data using
any gradient inversion method. Figure 1 illustrates the threat
model and working pipeline of our method SME.

1. Introduction
Privacy concerns arise from many areas. Therefore, datadriven technologies, e.g. machine learning, cannot solely
rely on a large data center, but also adapt to distributed
data scenarios. Federated Learning (FL) is proposed to this
1

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium 2 Statistics and Data Science,
Dept. Mathematics, KU Leuven, Belgium. Correspondence to:
Junyi Zhu <Junyi.Zhu@esat.kuleuven.be>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our contributions are summarized as: (i) We propose a
1

