Efficient Sequence Transduction by Jointly Predicting Tokens and Durations

Hainan Xu 1 Fei Jia 1 Somshubra Majumdar 1 He Huang 1 Shinji Watanabe 2 Boris Ginsburg 1

Abstract

encoder and decoder (AED) models (Chorowski et al., 2015;
Chan et al., 2016), Connectionist Temporal Classification
(CTC) (Graves et al., 2006), and Transducers (Graves, 2012).
Those models are commonly used in academia and industry,
and there exist open-source toolkits with efficient implementation for those methods, including ESPNet (Watanabe et al.,
2018), NeMo (Kuchaiev et al., 2019), Espresso (Wang et al.,
2019), SpeechBrain (Ravanelli et al., 2021) etc.

This paper introduces a novel Token-andDuration Transducer (TDT) architecture for
sequence-to-sequence tasks. TDT extends conventional RNN-Transducer architectures by jointly
predicting both a token and its duration, i.e. the
number of input frames covered by the emitted
token. This is achieved by using a joint network
with two outputs which are independently normalized to generate distributions over tokens and
durations. During inference, TDT models can
skip input frames guided by the predicted duration output, which makes them significantly faster
than conventional Transducers which process the
encoder output frame by frame. TDT models
achieve both better accuracy and significantly
faster inference than conventional Transducers
on different sequence transduction tasks. TDT
models for Speech Recognition achieve better accuracy and up to 2.82X faster inference than conventional Transducers. TDT models for Speech
Translation achieve an absolute gain of over 1
BLEU on the MUST-C test compared with conventional Transducers, and its inference is 2.27X
faster. In Speech Intent Classification and Slot
Filling tasks, TDT models improve the intent accuracy by up to over 1% (absolute) over conventional Transducers, while running up to 1.28X
faster. Our implementation of the TDT model
will be open-sourced with the NeMo (https:
//github.com/NVIDIA/NeMo) toolkit.

This paper focuses on Transducer models. There have been
a significant number of works that improve different aspects
of the original Transducer (Graves, 2012). For example,
the original LSTM encoder of transducer models has been
replaced with Transformers (Tian et al., 2019; Yeh et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2020), Contextnet (Han et al., 2020) and
Conformers (Gulati et al., 2020). Decoders for transducers
are well-investigated as well, e.g. (Ghodsi et al., 2020) used
stateless decoders instead LSTM decoders; (Shrivastava
et al., 2021) proposed Echo State Networks and showed that
a decoder with random parameters could perform as well as
a well-trained decoder. The loss function of Transducers has
also been an active research area. FastEmit (Yu et al., 2021)
introduces biases in the gradient update of the transducer
loss to reduce latency. Multi-blank Transducers (Xu et al.,
2022) introduce a generalized Transducer architecture and
loss function with big blank symbols that cover multiple
frames of the input.
RNN-Ts have achieved impressive accuracy in speech tasks,
but the auto-regressive decoding makes their inference computationally costly. To alleviate this issue, we propose a new
Transducer architecture that jointly predicts a token and its
duration. The predicted token duration can direct the model
decoding algorithm to skip frames during inference. We
call it a TDT (Token-and-Duration Transducer) model. The
primary contributions of this paper are:

1. Introduction
Over the past years, automatic speech recognition (ASR)
models have undergone shifts from conventional hybrid
models (Jelinek, 1998; Woodland et al., 1994; Povey et al.,
2011) to end-to-end ASR models, including attention-based

1. A novel Token-and-Duration Transducer (TDT) architecture that jointly predicts a token and its duration.
2. An extension of the forward-backward algorithm to
derive the analytical solution of the gradients of the
TDT model. We also derive gradients of pre-softmax
logits for the token prediction inspired by Transducer
function-merging (Li et al., 2019).

1
NVIDIA, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Hainan Xu <hainanx@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

3. TDT models achieve better accuracy and significant
1

