Deep Regression Unlearning

Ayush K Tarun * 1 Vikram S Chundawat * 1 Murari Mandal 2 Mohan Kankanhalli 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

With the introduction of data protection and privacy regulations, it has become crucial to remove
the lineage of data on demand from a machine
learning (ML) model. In the last few years, there
have been notable developments in machine
unlearning to remove the information of certain
training data efficiently and effectively from ML
models. In this work, we explore unlearning
for the regression problem, particularly in deep
learning models. Unlearning in classification and
simple linear regression has been considerably
investigated. However, unlearning in deep
regression models largely remains an untouched
problem till now. In this work, we introduce deep
regression unlearning methods that generalize
well and are robust to privacy attacks. We
propose the Blindspot unlearning method which
uses a novel weight optimization process. A
randomly initialized model, partially exposed
to the retain samples and a copy of the original
model are used together to selectively imprint
knowledge about the data that we wish to keep
and scrub off the information of the data we
wish to forget. We also propose a Gaussian fine
tuning method for regression unlearning. The
existing unlearning metrics for classification are
not directly applicable to regression unlearning.
Therefore, we adapt these metrics for the
regression setting. We conduct regression unlearning experiments for computer vision, natural
language processing and forecasting applications.
Our methods show excellent performance for
all these datasets across all the metrics. Source
code:
https://github.com/ayu987/
deep-regression-unlearning

Data is an essential asset of any organization and it has
opened up a new frontier for countries to flex their technological and economic muscle. Governments across the globe
have taken cognizance of the importance of data privacy
and protection. The data protection law, European Union
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR) (Voigt
& Von dem Bussche, 2017), introduced in the European
Union has changed the way companies handle personal data.
Similarly, in USA, the California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA) (Goldman, 2020) has been introduced in California
to protect the privacy of users and give them more control
over the use of their data. The introduction of these rules
have engendered a set of changes in the way organizations
collect, store, analyze, and use personal data collected from
citizens. In particular, all users are given the right to be
forgotten under these data protection regulations. The EU
GDPR necessitates prior consent by the user to collect their
data. The CCPA allows the company to collect user data
by default. However, the user may request for removal of
his/her data at any point in time. A company is obligated
to remove the data pertaining to a user upon receiving a
request for deletion.
In case of simple aggregation and storage of data, it is easy to
remove the data from the company’s databases. However, a
machine learning (ML) model trained on such personal data
essentially creates a new type of data which is an indirect
representation of the original data. The enforcement of the
right to be forgotten on such ML models will help control
the analytical use of data through ML algorithms that do not
strictly fall under the purview of traditional understanding of
data privacy. However, the removal of indirectly represented
information from ML models is a non-trivial problem. A
typical machine learning algorithm learns about the data by
observing a large number of data samples. The information
about the data is encoded in the weights of the ML model.
This means the model weights contain information about
the data. Any request for removal of information about a
particular data or set of data would require manipulating
the set of weights in the model. In a general ML setting,
the model is trained using the training dataset. After the
model is optimized via some learning method, it is used for
inference in the downstream application. Upon receipt of a
data removal request, the information pertaining to the for-

*

Equal contribution 1 Mavvex Labs, India 2 School of Computer Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology
Bhubaneswar, India 3 School of Computing, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Murari Mandal <murari.nus@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

