Reduce, Reuse, Recycle: Compositional Generation with Energy-Based
Diffusion Models and MCMC
Yilun Du 1 Conor Durkan 2 Robin Strudel 2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1 Sander Dieleman 2 Rob Fergus 2
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 2 Arnaud Doucet 2 Will Grathwohl 2

Abstract

2020; Brock et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020). These models
now serve as powerful priors for downstream applications
such as code generation (Li et al., 2022), text-to-image generation (Saharia et al., 2022), question-answering (Brown
et al., 2020) and many more. However, to fit these complex
data, generative models have grown inexorably larger (requiring 10’s or even 100’s of billions of parameters) (Kaplan
et al., 2020) and require datasets containing non-negligible
fractions of the entire internet, making it costly and difficult
to train and or finetune such models. Despite this, some of
the most compelling applications of large generative models
do not rely on finetuning. For example, prompting (Brown
et al., 2020) has been a successful strategy to selectively
extract insights from large models. In this paper, we explore an alternative to finetuning and prompting, through
which we may repurpose the underlying prior learned by
generative models for downstream tasks.

Since their introduction, diffusion models have
quickly become the prevailing approach to generative modeling in many domains. They can be
interpreted as learning the gradients of a timevarying sequence of log-probability density functions. This interpretation has motivated classifierbased and classifier-free guidance as methods
for post-hoc control of diffusion models. In this
work, we build upon these ideas using the scorebased interpretation of diffusion models, and explore alternative ways to condition, modify, and
reuse diffusion models for tasks involving compositional generation and guidance. In particular, we investigate why certain types of composition fail using current techniques and present
a number of solutions. We conclude that the
sampler (not the model) is responsible for this
failure and propose new samplers, inspired by
MCMC, which enable successful compositional
generation. Further, we propose an energy-based
parameterization of diffusion models which enables the use of new compositional operators and
more sophisticated, Metropolis-corrected samplers. Intriguingly we find these samplers lead
to notable improvements in compositional generation across a wide set of problems such as
classifier-guided ImageNet modeling and compositional text-to-image generation. Project webpage: https://energy-based-model.
github.io/reduce-reuse-recycle/.

1

Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020) are a recently popular approach
to generative modeling which have demonstrated a favorable combination of scalability, sample quality, and loglikelihood. A key feature of diffusion models is the ability
for their sampling to be “guided” after training. This involves combining the pre-trained Diffusion Model pθ (x)
with a predictive model pθ (y|x) to generate samples from
pθ (x|y). This predictive model can be either explicitly defined (such as a pre-trained classifier) (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) or an implicit predictive
model defined through the combination of a conditional
and unconditional generative model (Ho & Salimans, 2022).
These forms of conditioning are particularly appealing (especially the former) as they allow us to reuse pre-trained
generative models for many downstream applications, beyond those considered at training time.

Introduction

These conditioning methods are a form of model composition, i.e. combining probabilistic models together to create
new models. Compositional models have a long history back
to early work on Mixtures-Of-Experts (Jacobs et al., 1991)
and Product-Of-Experts models (Hinton, 2002; Mayraz &
Hinton, 2000). Here, many simple models or predictors
were combined to increase their capacity. Much of this early
work on model composition was done in the context of

In recent years, tremendous progress has been made in generative modeling across a variety of domains (Brown et al.,
1
MIT 2 Google Deepmind. Correspondence to: Yilun Du
<yilundu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

