Sequential Multi-Dimensional Self-Supervised Learning for Clinical Time Series

Aniruddh Raghu 1 Payal Chandak 2 Ridwan Alam 1 John Guttag 1 Collin M. Stultz 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In clinical settings such as the intensive care unit (ICU),
patients are closely monitored and consequently generate
a profusion of time series data. This rich data contains significant physiological information about a patient’s state
and progression over time (Johnson et al., 2016). As a result, there have been many efforts to study representation
learning and pre-training on these data, particularly using
self-supervised learning (SSL) strategies, with the goal of
using the pre-trained models for various downstream predictive tasks (McDermott et al., 2021; Weatherhead et al.,
2022; Tonekaboni et al., 2021; Yèche et al., 2021; Tipirneni
& Reddy, 2022).

Self-supervised learning (SSL) for clinical time
series data has received significant attention in
recent literature, since these data are highly rich
and provide important information about a patient’s physiological state. However, most existing SSL methods for clinical time series are limited in that they are designed for unimodal time
series, such as a sequence of structured features
(e.g., lab values and vitals signs) or an individual high-dimensional physiological signal (e.g.,
an electrocardiogram). These existing methods
cannot be readily extended to model time series
that exhibit multimodality, with structured features and high-dimensional data being recorded
at each timestep in the sequence. In this work, we
address this gap and propose a new SSL method
— Sequential Multi-Dimensional SSL — where a
SSL loss is applied both at the level of the entire
sequence and at the level of the individual highdimensional data points in the sequence in order
to better capture information at both scales. Our
strategy is agnostic to the specific form of loss
function used at each level – it can be contrastive,
as in SimCLR, or non-contrastive, as in VICReg.
We evaluate our method on two real-world clinical
datasets, where the time series contains sequences
of (1) high-frequency electrocardiograms and (2)
structured data from lab values and vitals signs.
Our experimental results indicate that pre-training
with our method and then fine-tuning on downstream tasks improves performance over baselines
on both datasets, and in several settings, can lead
to improvements across different self-supervised
loss functions.

Although these works develop effective strategies to model
clinical time series data, they focus only on unimodal time
series, such as a sequence of structured features alone, or
an individual high dimensional physiological signal. In reality however, data originating from a patient’s encounter
is significantly more complex, containing multimodal data
recorded at regular intervals. As an example, a given patient may have two very different types of data recorded
hourly: (1) high-frequency physiological signals (e.g., an
electrocardiogram recorded at 240 Hz); and (2) structured
data from labs and vitals signs. These modalities provide
complementary information about a patient’s physiological
state. Extending existing SSL methods to operate on these
time series is challenging, since they do not deal with sequences of high-dimensional data, and do not contend with
the multimodal data stream.
In this paper, we take steps towards addressing this gap and
outline an approach for self-supervised pre-training on these
complex clinical time series. We propose a SSL strategy
where we jointly optimize two SSL losses to better capture
structure in the data. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We formalize the problem of self-supervised learning
(SSL) on trajectories, our abstraction of a multimodal
time series that contains complex, high-dimensional data
recorded at each timestep in the sequence.
2. We outline a new SSL method, Sequential MultiDimensional Self-Supervised Learning (SMD SSL), for
trajectories. Motivated by the structure of trajectories,
SMD SSL incorporates two losses: (1) a component
SSL loss on the level of individual high dimensional

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA 2 Harvard-MIT Program in Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Aniruddh Raghu
<araghu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

