Uncertainty Estimation by Fisher Information-based Evidential Deep Learning

Danruo Deng 1 2 Guangyong Chen 3 Yang Yu 1 2 Furui Liu 3 Pheng-Ann Heng 1 2

Abstract

Predictive uncertainty is quite diverse and can be divided
into data uncertainty, model uncertainty, and distributional
uncertainty (Gal, 2016; Malinin & Gales, 2018). Data uncertainty, or aleatoric uncertainty, is caused by the natural
complexity of the data, such as class overlap and label noise.
Model uncertainty, or epistemic uncertainty, measures the
uncertainty in estimating model parameters given training
data. Model and data uncertainty are sometimes referred to
as reducible and irreducible uncertainty, respectively, since
model uncertainty can be reduced with more training data,
while data uncertainty cannot. Distributional uncertainty
arises from a distribution mismatch between the training
and test distributions, i.e., the test data is out-of-distribution
(OOD) (Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008). Quantifying the
different uncertainty is obviously a key factor that makes
deep learning reliable.

Uncertainty estimation is a key factor that makes
deep learning reliable in practical applications.
Recently proposed evidential neural networks explicitly account for different uncertainties by treating the network’s outputs as evidence to parameterize the Dirichlet distribution, and achieve impressive performance in uncertainty estimation.
However, for high data uncertainty samples but
annotated with the one-hot label, the evidencelearning process for those mislabeled classes is
over-penalized and remains hindered. To address
this problem, we propose a novel method, Fisher
Information-based Evidential Deep Learning (IEDL). In particular, we introduce Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) to measure the informativeness
of evidence carried by each sample, according to
which we can dynamically reweight the objective
loss terms to make the network more focus on
the representation learning of uncertain classes.
The generalization ability of our network is further improved by optimizing the PAC-Bayesian
bound. As demonstrated empirically, our proposed method consistently outperforms traditional
EDL-related algorithms in multiple uncertainty
estimation tasks, especially in the more challenging few-shot classification settings.

Softmax is the most widely used normalization function
that maps the continuous activations of the output layer to
a probability distribution. However, Softmax is notorious
for inflating the probabilities of predicted classes (Szegedy
et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2017; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020).
Some methods calibrate network predictions to improve
the reliability of uncertainty estimation (Guo et al., 2017;
Liang et al., 2018). However, these methods can still not
distinguish between different types of uncertainty, which
seriously limits the practical usage of deep learning in challenging domains without enough training samples. Recently
notable progress has been made in estimating uncertainty in
DNNs. One class of methods stems from Bayesian neural
networks, which quantify uncertainty by learning a posterior over weights (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Ritter et al.,
2018; Kristiadi et al., 2022). Other methods often combine
predictions from several independently trained networks to
estimate statistics for class probability distributions (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Zaidi et al., 2021). However, these
approaches still cannot distinguish distributional uncertainty
from other uncertainties (Malinin & Gales, 2018).

1. Introduction
Uncertainty estimation is crucial not only for safety decisionmaking in high-risk domains such as medical image analysis
(Seeböck et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2020) and autonomous
vehicle control (Feng et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2019), but
also in the general fields where data is highly heterogeneous
or scarcely annotated (Gal et al., 2017; Ablain et al., 2019).
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Zhejiang Lab. Correspondence to: Guangyong Chen <gychen@zhejianglab.com>.

To address this limitation, Dirichlet-based uncertainty models quantify different types of uncertainty by modeling the
output as the concentration parameters of a Dirichlet distribution (Malinin & Gales, 2018; 2019; Nandy et al., 2020;
Charpentier et al., 2020). Evidential deep learning (EDL)
(Sensoy et al., 2018) adopts Dirichlet distribution and treats
the output as evidence to quantify belief mass and uncer-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

