Towards Controlled Data Augmentations for Active Learning

Jianan Yang 1 Haobo Wang 1 Sai Wu 1 Gang Chen 1 Junbo Zhao 1

Abstract

Wu et al., 2021). By decomposing the learning loop into
several cycles that alternatively accumulate valuable data
samples and update the model, AL attains much-lowered
sample complexity but comparable performance compared
to its supervised counterpart. Owing to this efficacy, active
learning is widely used in real-world applications and ML
productions (Bhattacharjee et al., 2017; Feng et al., 2019;
Hussein et al., 2016). In spite of its meritorious practicality,
active learning often suffers from unreliable data acquisition, especially from the early stages. Notably, the models
obtained around the early stages are generally raw and undeveloped due to the insufficient data curated and sparse
supervision signal being consumed.

The mission of active learning is to identify
the most valuable data samples, thus attaining
decent performance with much fewer samples.
The data augmentation techniques seem straightforward yet promising to enhance active learning by extending the exploration of the input
space, which helps locate more valuable samples. In this work, we thoroughly study the coupling of data augmentation and active learning,
thereby proposing Controllable Augmentation
ManiPulator for Active Learning. In contrast
to the few prior works that touched on this
line, CAMPAL emphasizes a purposeful, tighten,
and better-controlled integration of data augmentation into active learning in three folds: (i)carefully designed augmentation policies applied
separately on labeled and unlabeled data pools;
(ii)-controlled and quantifiably optimizable augmentation strengths; (iii)-full and flexible coverage for most (if not all) active learning schemes.
Theories are proposed and associated with the
development of key components in CAMPAL.
Through extensive empirical experiments, we
bring the performance of active learning methods
to a new level: an absolute performance boost
of 16.99% on CIFAR-10 and 12.25% on SVHN
with 1,000 annotated samples. Codes are available at https://github.com/jnzju/CAMPAL.

While this problem can probably be mitigated after adequate
cycles are conducted, we argue that the problems at the
early stages of AL cannot be overlooked. Indeed, few works
have resorted to data augmentation techniques to generate
additional data examples for active learning, e.g. GANbased (Tran et al., 2019) and STN-based (Kim et al., 2021b)
methods. In this work, we take a further step in investigating
the role of data augmentation for AL.
To begin with, we provide a straightforward quantitative
observation in Figure 1. The setup of these results is rather
simple: we directly apply vanilla data augmentation (DA)
operations, such as flipping and rotation, to data samples
and stack them to increase the augmentation strengths. We
may conclude from these scores as follows. First, the augmentations (loosely) integrated into AL have led to surprisingly enhanced results, albeit their simple designs. Secondly and perhaps more important, the same augmentation
policy facilitated on different data pools manifests notably
different impacts. As shown in Figure 1, the labeled and
unlabeled data pools achieve the best performance at different levels of augmentation strengths. To incorporate DA
into AL schemes, the augmentation ought to serve different objectives on the labeled/unlabeled pools. In particular,
the labeled pool favors label-preserving augmentation in
order to obtain a reliable classifier, when the unlabeled pool
may require relatively more aggressive augmentations to
maximally gauge the unexplored distribution. Noted, this
observation has not been investigated by prior works (Wei
et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021b).

1. Introduction
The acquisition of labeled data serves as a foundation for
the remarkable successes of deep supervised learning over
the last decade, which also incurs great monetary and time
costs. Active learning (AL) is a pivotal learning paradigm
that puts the data acquisition process into the loop of learning (Settles, 2009; Zhang et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021a;
1

Department of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Junbo Zhao
<j.zhao@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Motivated by it, we propose Controllable Augmentation

1

