DRCFS: Doubly Robust Causal Feature Selection

Francesco Quinzan∗ † 1 Ashkan Soleymani∗ 2 Patrick Jaillet 2 Cristian R. Rojas 3 Stefan Bauer 4 5

Abstract

relevant variables and removing nuisance factors, feature
selection allows us to build models that are simple, interpretable, and more robust (Yu et al., 2020; Janzing et al.,
2020). Moreover, in many applications in science and industry, we are not only interested in predictive features but
we also aim to identify causal relationships between them
(Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Murphy, 2001).

Knowing the features of a complex system that
are highly relevant to a particular target variable
is of fundamental interest in many areas of science. Existing approaches are often limited to
linear settings, sometimes lack guarantees, and in
most cases, do not scale to the problem at hand,
in particular to images. We propose DRCFS, a
doubly robust feature selection method for identifying the causal features even in nonlinear and
high dimensional settings. We provide theoretical guarantees, illustrate necessary conditions for
our assumptions, and perform extensive experiments across a wide range of simulated and semisynthetic datasets. DRCFS significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods, selecting
robust features even in challenging highly nonlinear and high-dimensional problems.

Knowing the causal structure allows one to understand the
potential effects of interventions on a system of interest,
spanning various fields such as economics (Varian, 2016),
biology (Hu et al., 2018), medicine (Mehrjou et al., 2021;
Lv et al., 2021), software engineering (Siebert, 2022), agriculture (Tsoumas et al., 2022), and climate research (Runge
et al., 2019). In general, it is impractical to infer the underlying causal graph solely from observational data, and in
some cases, it may even be infeasible (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes
et al., 2000; Chickering et al., 2004; Maclaren & Nicholson,
2019). Often, the focus is on specific target variables, such
as stock returns in trading, genes associated with a specific
phenotype or disease, or reduction of CO2 emissions in environmental studies, rather than all the interactions between
the many variables affecting the underlying system.

1. Introduction
We study the fundamental problem of causal feature selection for non-linear models. That is, consider a set of features
X = {X1 , . . . , Xm }, and an outcome Y specified with an
additive-noise model on some of the features (Hoyer et al.,
2008; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Peters et al., 2014):

Capturing the causal relationships between different features
and a particular target variable is highly non-trivial in practice. Existing approaches for causal feature selection often
make unrealistic assumptions on the data generating process
(DGP), or they simply do not scale to the problem at hand
in terms of computational efficiency (Yu et al., 2020) and/or
statistical efficiency (Yu et al., 2021). Moreover, many of
these approaches have only limited theoretical guarantees,
and they have only been evaluated on noiseless data, far
from the needs of practitioners in industry and science (Kira
& Rendell, 1992; Guyon, 2008).

Axiom (A) Y = f (Pa(Y )) + ε,
for a subset Pa(Y ) ⊆ X and posterior additive noise ε. Our
goal is to identify the set of relevant features Pa(Y ) from
observations. Feature selection is an important cornerstone
of high-dimensional data analysis (Liu & Motoda, 2007;
Bolón-Canedo et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Butcher & Smith,
2020), especially in data-rich settings. By including only
∗

To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel, doubly
robust causal feature selection method (DRCFS) that significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches,
especially in non-linear, noisy, and data-sparse settings. Our
contributions are as follows:

†

Equal contribution This work was initiated and partially
done while the author was employed at KTH Royal Institute of
Technology 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford 2 Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems (LIDS),
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 KTH Royal Institute of
Technology 4 TU Munich 5 Helmholtz Munich. Correspondence to:
Francesco Quinzan <quinzan@kth.se>.

• We propose DRCFS, a novel method for doubly robust
feature selection, even in non-linear and high dimensional settings. In particular, our approach has guarantees for realistic cases, when there are cycles or hidden
confounders between the features (see Figure 1).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

