Bandit Online Linear Optimization with Hints and Queries

Aditya Bhaskara 1 Ashok Cutkosky 2 Ravi Kumar 3 Manish Purohit 3

Abstract

rithm gets to see the cost vector and in the more challenging
bandit feedback setting, only the loss but not the cost vector
is visible to the algorithm. OLO is well-studied in √
both
these settings, and the optimal regret is known to be Θ( T )
for both (Abernethy et al., 2008).

We study variants of the online linear optimization (OLO) problem with bandit feedback, where
the algorithm has access to external information
about the unknown cost vector. Our motivation
is the recent body of work on using such “hints”
towards improving regret bounds for OLO problems in the full-information setting. Unlike in the
full-information OLO setting, with bandit feedback, we first show that one √
cannot improve the
standard regret bounds of Õ( T ) by using hints,
even if they are always well-correlated with the
cost vector. In contrast, if the algorithm is empowered to issue queries and if all the responses are
correct, then we show O(log T ) regret is achievable. We then show how to make this result more
robust—when some of the query responses can
be adversarial—by using a little feedback on the
quality of the responses.

A substantial body of √
research aims to understand variants of OLO where the T regret bound can be improved,
ideally, to log T . A promising such variant is the use of
“hints”: before the algorithm plays a vector, it receives a hint.
There have been recent results achieving logarithmic regret
for OLO, even when each hint is only mildly correlated
(i.e., “good”) with the yet to appear cost vector (Hazan &
Megiddo, 2007; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013; Dekel et al.,
2017; Bhaskara et al., 2020). These algorithms are also
robust, namely, their regret gracefully degrades with the
number of time steps in which the hints are “bad”
√ and in
the limit when all hints are bad, the regret is O( T ). An
important detail is that these hint-based algorithms operate
in the full-information setting and crucially depend on the
availability of the cost vector. This poses a natural question:
are there hint-based algorithms for bandit OLO and how
much hints can help with reducing the regret in this case?

1. Introduction

In this paper we study this question. Our first result is somewhat surprising and strong: we show that having
√access to
good hints is insufficient to obtain better than Õ( T ) regret
for bandit OLO; furthermore, this negative result holds even
in two dimensions when the domain is simply the unit ball!
This is in stark contrast with the logarithmic regret that is
possible in the analogous full-information setting, dashing
any hopes of taking advantage of hints for bandit OLO.
The proof is based on constructing a pair of distributions
on the plane and arguing that no low-regret algorithm can
distinguish them (Section 3).

Online linear optimization (OLO) is an elegant abstraction
that captures the essence of many online decision making problems (Zinkevich, 2003; Hazan, 2016). Informally
speaking, it is a T -round game between an algorithm and
an adversary that is played over a convex domain. In each
time step the algorithm first plays a vector after which an
adversary replies with a cost vector; the loss at this time step
is the inner product of the cost and the played vectors. The
algorithm’s performance, called regret, is measured as the
difference between the total loss incurred by the algorithm
and that of an algorithm that plays the best single vector
in hindsight at all time steps. There are two popular OLO
settings: in the full-information feedback setting, the algo-

Necessitated by this lower bound, we turn our attention to a
different yet natural way of obtaining hints, namely, answers
to queries. In this model, the algorithm can actively query
the correlation (inner product) of a point of its choice with
the cost vector before playing. We present such an algorithm
that obtains logarithmic regret even if the query points are
chosen at random. The main intuition behind the result
is that a good response to a random query can be used to
provide an unbiased estimate of the cost vector; in addition
it can also be used to construct a proxy hint for the algorithm.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA 2 Boston University, Boston, MA, USA 3 Google
Research, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Aditya Bhaskara <bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com>, Ashok Cutkosky
<ashok@cutkosky.com>, Ravi Kumar <ravi.k53@gmail.com>,
Manish Purohit <mpurohit@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

