GLOBE-CE: A Translation Based Approach for
Global Counterfactual Explanations

Dan Ley * 1 Saumitra Mishra 2 Daniele Magazzeni 2

Abstract

(e.g., automated credit decisioning). Recent years have witnessed a surge of subsequent research, identifying desirable
properties of CEs (Wachter et al., 2018; Barocas et al., 2020;
Venkatasubramanian & Alfano, 2020), developing the methods to model those properties (Poyiadzi et al., 2020; Ustun
et al., 2019; Mothilal et al., 2020; Pawelczyk et al., 2021),
and understanding the weaknesses and vulnerabilities of the
proposed methods (Dominguez-Olmedo et al., 2021; Slack
et al., 2021; Upadhyay et al., 2021; Pawelczyk et al., 2022).
Importantly, efforts thus far have largely centered around
generating explanations for individual inputs.

Counterfactual explanations have been widely
studied in explainability, with a range of application dependent methods prominent in fairness, recourse and model understanding. The major shortcoming associated with these methods, however,
is their inability to provide explanations beyond
the local or instance-level. While many works
touch upon the notion of a global explanation,
typically suggesting to aggregate masses of local
explanations in the hope of ascertaining global
properties, few provide frameworks that are both
reliable and computationally tractable. Meanwhile, practitioners are requesting more efficient
and interactive explainability tools. We take this
opportunity to propose Global & Efficient Counterfactual Explanations (GLOBE-CE), a flexible
framework that tackles the reliability and scalability issues associated with current state-of-the-art,
particularly on higher dimensional datasets and
in the presence of continuous features. Furthermore, we provide a unique mathematical analysis
of categorical feature translations, utilising it in
our method. Experimental evaluation with publicly available datasets and user studies demonstrate that GLOBE-CE performs significantly better than the current state-of-the-art across multiple
metrics (e.g., speed, reliability).

Such analyses can vet local model behaviour, though it is
seldom obvious that any of the resulting insights would generalise globally. A local CE for a specific sample cannot
represent the bias of the entire model i.e. it may suggest
that a model is not biased against a protected attribute (e.g.,
race, gender), despite net biases existing. A potential way to
gain such insights is to aggregate local explanations (Lundberg et al., 2020; Pedreschi et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2021),
but since the generation of CEs is generally computationally expensive, it is not evident that such an approach would
scale well or lead to reliable conclusions about a model’s behaviour. Be it during training or post-hoc evaluation, global
understanding ought to underpin the development of ML
models prior to deployment, and reliability and efficiency
play important roles therein. We seek to address this in the
context of global counterfactual explanations (GCEs).
We define a GCE to be a global direction along which a
group of inputs may travel to alter their predictions. In prior
work, GCEs simply took the same form as CEs, with the
only difference being that a GCE should be applied to an
entire group of inputs. Unfortunately, such a formulation,
though instinctive, fails to overcome the trade-off between
coverage and cost. Our relaxed objective, where each GCE
represents just the translation direction, successfully overcomes this limitation. Figure 1 demonstrates how individual
inputs are endowed with variable magnitude, or cost, for
one particular global counterfactual direction. Additionally,
for reference, we distinguish counterfactuals (the altered inputs) from counterfactual explanations (any representation
of the change required, e.g., increase salary by $5k, or “If
status is 3, Then change status to 1”, etc.).

1. Introduction
Counterfactual explanations (CEs) construct input perturbations that result in desired predictions from machine learning
(ML) models (Verma et al., 2020; Karimi et al., 2020; Stepin
et al., 2021). A key benefit of these explanations is their ability to offer recourse to affected individuals in certain settings
*

Work done as an intern with J.P. Morgan AI Research 1 Harvard
University 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research. Correspondence to: Dan
Ley <dley@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

