UMD: Unsupervised Model Detection for X2X Backdoor Attacks
Zhen Xiang 1 Zidi Xiong 1 Bo Li 1

Abstract
Backdoor (Trojan) attack is a common threat to
deep neural networks, where samples from one or
more source classes embedded with a backdoor
trigger will be misclassified to adversarial target
classes. Existing methods for detecting whether
a classifier is backdoor attacked are mostly designed for attacks with a single adversarial target
(e.g., all-to-one attack). To the best of our knowledge, without supervision, no existing methods
can effectively address the more general X2X attack with an arbitrary number of source classes,
each paired with an arbitrary target class. In this
paper, we propose UMD, the first Unsupervised
Model Detection method that effectively detects
X2X backdoor attacks via a joint inference of the
adversarial (source, target) class pairs. In particular, we first define a novel transferability statistic
to measure and select a subset of putative backdoor class pairs based on a proposed clustering approach. Then, these selected class pairs are jointly
assessed based on an aggregation of their reverseengineered trigger size for detection inference,
using a robust and unsupervised anomaly detector
we proposed. We conduct comprehensive evaluations on CIFAR-10, GTSRB, and Imagenette
dataset, and show that our unsupervised UMD outperforms SOTA detectors (even with supervision)
by 17%, 4%, and 8%, respectively, in terms of the
detection accuracy against diverse X2X attacks.
We also show the strong detection performance
of UMD against several strong adaptive attacks.

Figure 1. Outline of UMD: 1
⃝ reverse-engineer a trigger for each
2 compute TR for all ordered pair of class
class pair (Sec. 4.1.1); ⃝
pairs (Sec. 4.1.1); 3
⃝ select a subset of putative backdoor class
4 inspect the selected pairs by
pairs based on TR (Sec. 4.2.1); ⃝
unsupervised anomaly detection on trigger statistics (Sec. 4.2.2).

class; while samples without the trigger will be correctly
classified (Gu et al., 2019). Typically, a backdoor attack
is launched by poisoning the training set of the classifier
(Chen et al., 2017; Turner et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2020; Nguyen & Tran, 2021; Li et al., 2021b).
Recently, many approaches have been proposed to detect
whether a trained classifier is backdoor attacked without access to the training set or any benign models for supervision
(e.g. to set a detection threshold) (Chen et al., 2019; Guo
et al., 2019; Xiang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Dong
et al., 2021; NeurIPS, 2022). These methods mainly fall
into either a family of reverse-engineering-based detectors
(REDs) or a category of meta-classification-based detectors
(MCDs). Typically, REDs reverse-engineer putative triggers
for anomaly detection (Wang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019),
while MCDs train a binary meta classifier on a large number
of shadow classifiers with and without attack for detection
(Xu et al., 2021). These detectors are effective against the
classical backdoor attack, but they may be bypassed by more
advanced backdoor attacks recently proposed to defeat them
(Nguyen & Tran, 2020; Peng et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep neural networks in many applications, they are vulnerable to adversarial attacks such
as backdoor (Trojan) attacks (Miller et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2022a). A classical backdoor attack is usually specified by
one or more source classes, a target class, and a backdoor
trigger, such that test samples from any source class embedded with the trigger will be misclassified to the target

In this paper, we consider X2X backdoor attacks, which
refer to a broad family of backdoor attacks with an arbitrary
number of source classes, each assigned with an arbitrary
target class. Thus, the X2X attack includes many popular
attack types such as the “all-to-one” attack, “X-to-one” attack (Shen et al., 2021), “one-to-one” attack (Tran et al.,
2018), and “all-to-all” attack (Gu et al., 2019). Unlike other

1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Zhen Xiang <zxiangaa@illinois.edu>, Bo Li
<lbo@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

