Graph Switching Dynamical Systems

Yongtuo Liu 1 Sara Magliacane 1 2 Miltiadis Kofinas 1 Efstratios Gavves 1

Abstract

cells, a crucial type of immune cell, into different subtypes
with different roles after interacting with certain pathogens.

Dynamical systems with complex behaviours, e.g.
immune system cells interacting with a pathogen,
are commonly modelled by splitting the behaviour
into different regimes, or modes, each with simpler dynamics, and then learning the switching
behaviour from one mode to another. Switching Dynamical Systems (SDS) are a powerful
tool that automatically discovers these modes and
mode-switching behaviour from time series data.
While effective, these methods focus on independent objects, where the modes of one object are
independent of the modes of the other objects.
In this paper, we focus on the more general interacting object setting for switching dynamical
systems, where the per-object dynamics also depends on an unknown and dynamically changing
subset of other objects and their modes. To this
end, we propose a novel graph-based approach
for switching dynamical systems, GRAph Switching dynamical Systems (GRASS), in which we
use a dynamic graph to characterize interactions
between objects and learn both intra-object and
inter-object mode-switching behaviour. We introduce two new datasets for this setting, a synthesized ODE-driven particles dataset and a realworld Salsa Couple Dancing dataset. Experiments
show that GRASS can consistently outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods.

A common way of modelling complex behaviour, e.g. represented by a discontinuous function, is by considering it
as a sequence of simpler modes, e.g. represented by a set
of smooth functions. For example, the behaviour of a ball
bouncing on the floor can be represented by two simple
modes of falling and bouncing back. In many cases, the
challenge is to identify the mode at each time point based on
observations. The state-of-the-art approaches for this task
are Switching Linear Dynamical Systems (SLDS) (Ackerson & Fu, 1970; Ghahramani & Hinton, 2000; Oh et al.,
2005) and their non-linear extensions, e.g. Switching Nonlinear Dynamical Systems (SNLDS) (Dong et al., 2020) and
REDSDS (Ansari et al., 2021). While effective, these approaches either model the mode of a single object, including
modelling different objects as a “super object” (Dong et al.,
2020; Glaser et al., 2020), or assume independent objects,
i.e. they model the mode of each object as independent from
the others, e.g. dancing bees in (Ansari et al., 2021).
In this paper, we focus on the more general setting in which
there are multiple interacting objects, and in which the
mode of an object can be influenced by the mode of the
other objects. This is a more realistic setting for modelling many real-world systems, from crowds of people,
to groups of immune cells and swarms. For this setting, we
propose GRAph Switching dynamical Systems (GRASS)
(described at high level in Fig. 1), a framework that learns a
dynamic graph to model interactions between objects and
their modes across time, and can be combined with previously developed independent-objects switching dynamical
systems methods. To evaluate this new setting, we also
propose two new datasets for benchmarking interacting object systems: a synthetic ODE-driven Particle dataset, and a
Salsa Couple Dancing dataset, inspired by real-world benchmarks (Dong et al., 2020). Experiments show that GRASS
outperforms the baselines and identifies mode-switching
behaviors with higher accuracy and fewer switching errors.

1. Introduction
Complex time series are pervasive both in daily life and
scientific research, usually consisting of sophisticated
behaviours and interactions between entities or objects
(Pavlovic et al., 2000; Shi et al., 2021). Consider for example emotion contagion in a crowd and how it might affect the
crowd dynamics (Xu et al., 2021), or the differentiation of T
1
University of Amsterdam 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to: Yongtuo Liu <y.liu6@uva.nl>.

2. Multi Object Switching Dynamical Systems
We start from a collection of time series of observations
1:N
y := y1:T
for T time steps and N objects. The N objects
move and their motions can be categorized to one out of K

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

