Online Platt Scaling with Calibeating

Chirag Gupta 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1

Abstract

is to use held-out data to learn a low-complexity mapping
m : r0, 1s Ñ r0, 1s so that mpf p¨qq retains the good properties of f —accuracy, AUROC, sharpness—as much as
possible, but is better calibrated than f .

We present an online post-hoc calibration method,
called Online Platt Scaling (OPS), which combines the Platt scaling technique with online
logistic regression. We demonstrate that OPS
smoothly adapts between i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. settings with distribution drift. Further, in scenarios
where the best Platt scaling model is itself miscalibrated, we enhance OPS by incorporating a
recently developed technique called calibeating
to make it more robust. Theoretically, our resulting OPS+calibeating method is guaranteed to be
calibrated for adversarial outcome sequences. Empirically, it is effective on a range of synthetic and
real-world datasets, with and without distribution
drifts, achieving superior performance without hyperparameter tuning. Finally, we extend all OPS
ideas to the beta scaling method.

1

The focus of this paper is on a recalibration method proposed
by Platt (1999), commonly known as Platt scaling (PS). The
PS mapping m is a sigmoid transform over f parameterized
by two scalars pa, bq P R2 :
ma,b pf pxqq :“ sigmoidpa ¨ logitpf pxqq ` bq.

Here logitpzq “ logpz{1´zq and sigmoidpzq “ 1{1`e´z
are inverses. Thus m1,0 is the identity mapping. Figure 1a has additional illustrative ma,b plots; these are easily
interpreted—if f is overconfident, that is if f pxq values are
skewed towards 0 or 1, we can pick a P p0, 1q to improve
calibration; if f is underconfident, we can pick a ą 1; if f
is systematically biased towards 0 (or 1), we can pick b ą 0
(or b ă 0). The counter-intuitive choice a ă 0 can also
make sense if f ’s predictions oppose reality (perhaps due
to a distribution shift). The parameters pa, bq are typically
set as those that minimize log-loss over calibration data
or equivalently maximize log-likelihood under the model
iid
yi „ Bernoullipma,b pf pxi qqq, on the held-out data.

Introduction

In the past two decades, there has been significant interest in the ML community on post-hoc calibration of ML
classifiers (Zadrozny and Elkan, 2002; Niculescu-Mizil and
Caruana, 2005; Guo et al., 2017). Consider a pretrained
classifier f : X Ñ r0, 1s that produces scores in r0, 1s for
covariates in X . Suppose f is used to make probabilistic predictions for a sequence of points pxt , yt qTt“1 where
yt P t0, 1u. Informally, f is said to be calibrated (Dawid,
1982) if the predictions made by f match the empirically
observed frequencies when those predictions are made:
for all p P r0, 1s, Averagetyt : f pxt q « pu « p.

(2)

Although a myriad of recalibration methods now exist, PS
remains an empirically strong baseline. In particular, PS is
effective when few samples are available for recalibration
(Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana, 2005; Gupta and Ramdas,
2021). Scaling before subsequent binning has emerged as
a useful methodology (Kumar et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2020). Multiclass adaptations of PS, called temperature,
vector, and matrix scaling have become popular (Guo et al.,
2017). Being a parametric method, however, PS comprises
a limited family of post-hoc corrections—for instance, since
ma,b is always a monotonic transform, PS must fail even for
i.i.d. data for some data-generating distributions (see Gupta
et al. (2020) for a formal proof). Furthermore, we are interested in going beyond i.i.d. data to data with drifting/shifting
distribution. This brings us to our first question,

(1)

In practice, for well-trained f , larger scores f pxq indicate
higher likelihoods of y “ 1, so that f does well for accuracy or a ranking score like AUROC. Yet we often find
that f does not satisfy (some formalized version of) condition (1). The goal of post-hoc calibration, or recalibration,
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA. Correspondence to: Chirag Gupta <chiragg@cmu.edu, chiragpvg@gmail.com>.

(Q1) Can PS be extended to handle shifting
or drifting data distributions?

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A separate view of calibration that pre-dates the ML posthoc calibration literature is the online adversarial calibration
1

