Towards Understanding Ensemble Distillation in Federated Learning

Sejun Park 1 Kihun Hong 1 Ganguk Hwang 1

Abstract

Recently, Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017)
has been proposed as a solution to resolve data shortage and
data privacy preservation. Even though various FL algorithms (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020a; Yurochkin
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2021) have been proposed, most of them usually
iteratively conduct the following procedure in training. (i)
A server distributes a global model to clients for updating their local models and then each client trains its local
model using its local dataset. (ii) The clients send their
trained local models (or gradients) to the server and the
server aggregates them to update the global model. Such
approaches obviously improve the performance of the local models while protecting data privacy, but sometimes
performance improvement is not significantly sufficient to
be applied for real world problems. Moreover, they have
some restrictions in local training. For example, most of
FL algorithms require that all local models be the same
model (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020a), parts of a
global model (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2022),
approximations of a global model (Diao et al., 2021; Yao
et al., 2021), or derived models from a meta model (Fallah
et al., 2020; Shamsian et al., 2021). Such restrictions do
not matter in a server-centric (i.e. server provider-centric)
learning framework. However, in a client-centric training
environment where most training strategies are led by individual clients, they severely matter. Note that local model
architectures may also need to be protected as local data.

Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative machine learning paradigm for data privacy preservation. Recently, a knowledge distillation (KD)
based information sharing approach in FL, which
conducts ensemble distillation on an unlabeled
public dataset, has been proposed. However, despite its experimental success and usefulness, the
theoretical analysis of the KD based approach has
not been satisfactorily conducted. In this work,
we build a theoretical foundation of the ensemble distillation framework in federated learning
from the perspective of kernel ridge regression
(KRR). In this end, we propose a KD based FL
algorithm for KRR models which is related with
some existing KD based FL algorithms, and analyze our algorithm theoretically. We show that our
algorithm makes local prediction models as much
powerful as the centralized KRR model (which is
a KRR model trained by all of local datasets) in
terms of the convergence rate of the generalization
error if the unlabeled public dataset is sufficiently
large. We also provide experimental results to verify our theoretical results on ensemble distillation
in federated learning.

1. Introduction

To overcome the above restrictions, knowledge distillation
(KD) (Hinton et al., 2015) based FL algorithms have been
proposed (Mora et al., 2022). Some of them improve the
effectiveness of the FL algorithms by conducting knowledge
distillation in addition to the existing FL algorithms (Lin
et al., 2020b; Zhu et al., 2021). Some others use knowledge
distillation as a main information sharing method, which can
be applied to a client-centric training environment, instead
of parameter sharing (Li & Wang, 2019; Cho et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2021). In these methods, they assume that
there exists an unlabeled public dataset or an unlabeled
data generator in a server or a shared data storage that all
clients can access. So, the knowledge of all local models
can be obtained in the server via the predictions of the
local models on the unlabeled public dataset. Then the
server combines the knowledge through a weighted average

Despite the rapid development of machine learning algorithms (Bochkovskiy et al., 2020; Nichol et al., 2022; Brown
et al., 2020), the performance of machines still heavily depends on the size of the training dataset. However, due to
the hassle of data processing, manpower and time resources
are excessively consumed to obtain data, especially labeled
data, in supervised learning. Moreover, most of data is inaccessible for training a prediction model due to data privacy
preservation in general.
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Ganguk Hwang <guhwang@kaist.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

