CO-BED: Information-Theoretic Contextual Optimization via Bayesian
Experimental Design

Desi R. Ivanova 1 † Joel Jennings 2 Tom Rainforth 1 Cheng Zhang 2 Adam Foster 2

Abstract

graphics, preferences, and past engagements with the brand.
The ultimate goal is to maximize revenue, but this first requires us to gather data and learn about customers’ behavior.

We formalize the problem of contextual optimization through the lens of Bayesian experimental
design and propose CO-BED—a general, modelagnostic framework for designing contextual experiments using information-theoretic principles.
After formulating a suitable information-based
objective, we employ black-box variational methods to simultaneously estimate it and optimize the
designs in a single stochastic gradient scheme. In
addition, to accommodate discrete actions within
our framework, we propose leveraging continuous
relaxation schemes, which can naturally be integrated into our variational objective. As a result,
CO-BED provides a general and automated solution to a wide range of contextual optimization
problems. We illustrate its effectiveness in a number of experiments, where CO-BED demonstrates
competitive performance even when compared to
bespoke, model-specific alternatives.

We consider a problem setting where we first gather data in
an experimentation stage that consists of performing actions
on a number of different contexts in parallel. At the end
of the experiment, data is collected and used to inform a
strategy that is then deployed (without additional feedback).
The success of the first stage is judged on the performance
of the deployed strategy: better data in the first phase should
lead to better decisions and lower regret at deployment time.
Making best use of resources in the data gathering stage necessitates experimental design: we want to gather as much
useful information as possible for our downstream decisionmaking in the deployment phase. Our first contribution
is to formalize this using an information-theoretic form
of Bayesian experimental design (BED, Lindley, 1956;
Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995; MacKay, 1992), thereby providing a highly principled framework for choosing designs
(or actions) to be optimally informative.
Unfortunately, information-theoretic BED approaches have
not previously been applied in the CO setting, or indeed
with contextual information more generally. Moreover,
while substantial recent progress has been made in underlying computational challenges of information-theoretic
BED (Foster et al., 2019; Kleinegesse & Gutmann, 2020;
Foster et al., 2020; Ivanova et al., 2021), this has generally
focused on targeting information gain in model parameters,
rather than the contextual optima we are interested in.

1. Introduction
Contextual optimization (CO) is an important problem that
arises in a wide range of applications, such as drug design
(Krause & Ong, 2011), nuclear fusion (Char et al., 2019;
Chung et al., 2020), and robotics (Deisenroth et al., 2014;
Kupcsik et al., 2017). The goal in such scenarios is to
maximize a context-dependent reward function by assigning
optimal actions to different contexts.

Targeting information gain in optima has separately been
considered in the Bayesian optimization (BO) literature,
where it is commonly referred to as entropy search (ES,
Hennig & Schuler, 2012; Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014;
Wang & Jegelka, 2017). However, these approaches have
not been applied in contextual settings, and their usage
has been heavily dependent on exploiting model-specific
properties to make the required computations tractable; they
cannot be directly applied in more general settings.

A concrete example of this problem is a personalized marketing campaign. Here different actions, such as sending
marketing materials or discounts for products, are chosen
based on context information such as customers’ demo†

Work partially conducted during an internship at Microsoft Research Cambridge. 1 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to:
Desi R Ivanova <desi.ivanova@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Adam Foster
<adam.e.foster@microsoft.com>.

In this paper, we propose using an information-theoretic
BED approach to CO and introduce CO-BED—a general,
model-agnostic framework for designing large-scale con-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

