The Monge Gap: A Regularizer to Learn All Transport Maps

Théo Uscidda 1 Marco Cuturi 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
At the core of many machine learning challenges lies the
problem of learning a map T : Rd → Rd that is able to
push-forward a probability measure µ into another, ν, i.e.,
T ♯µ = ν. If one were given paired samples (xi , yi ), the
task would amount to a simple regression, easily solved by
minimizing an averaged risk c(T (xi ), yi ). In many applications, however, only unmatched samples (x1 , . . . , xn ) from
µ and (y1 , . . . , ym ) from ν are provided, requiring a distributional approach to estimate T . When the input measure
µ is simple and closed-form (e.g. Gaussian, or uniform),
likelihood-based methods can be used, notably normalizing
flows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015), GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) or even diffusion models (Song et al., 2020).

Optimal transport (OT) theory has been used
in machine learning to study and characterize
maps that can push-forward efficiently a probability measure onto another. Recent works have
drawn inspiration from Brenier’s theorem, which
states that when the ground cost is the squaredEuclidean distance, the “best” map to morph a
continuous measure in P(Rd ) into another must
be the gradient of a convex function. To exploit
that result, Makkuva et al. (2020); Korotin et al.
(2020) consider maps T = ∇fθ , where fθ is an
input convex neural network (ICNN), as defined
by Amos et al. (2017), and fit θ with SGD using
samples. Despite their mathematical elegance, fitting OT maps with ICNNs raises many challenges,
due notably to the many constraints imposed on
θ; the need to approximate the conjugate of fθ ; or
the limitation that they only work for the squaredEuclidean cost. More generally, we question the
relevance of using Brenier’s result, which only applies to densities, to constrain the architecture of
candidate maps fitted on samples. Motivated by
these limitations, we propose a radically different
approach to estimating OT maps: Given a cost c
and a reference measure ρ, we introduce a regularizer, the Monge gap Mcρ (T ) of a map T . That
gap quantifies how far a map T deviates from the
ideal properties we expect from a c-OT map. In
practice, we drop all architecture requirements
for T and simply minimize a distance (e.g., the
Sinkhorn divergence) between T ♯µ and ν, regularized by Mcρ (T ). We study Mcρ and show
how our simple pipeline significantly outperforms
other baselines in practice.

Optimal Transport and the Brenier Story. When both
measures are complex and can only be accessed through
samples, finding a good map T poses extra challenges. This
is the case, e.g., in domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2016;
2017) or in genomics (Schiebinger et al., 2019). Optimal
transport (OT) theory (Santambrogio, 2015) has emerged
as a prime contender for that task (Peyré and Cuturi, 2019).
We focus in this work on neural OT solvers, where T is
parameterized as a neural network. That area has been
largely shaped by Brenier’s theorem, which states that when
the cost is the squared-Euclidean distance, OT maps should
follow the gradients of a convex potential. Leveraging that
result,Makkuva et al. (2020); Korotin et al. (2020) provided
a blueprint to use input convex neural networks (ICNN)
for OT estimation, which was later exploited in various
applications, notably genomics Bunne et al. (2021).
On the limitations of ICNNs for OT. While the theory motivating ICNN solvers for OT is compelling, their
practical implementation runs into many challenges (Korotin et al., 2021): some of their parameters must be nonnegative, initialization them, although the subject of ongoing
research (Korotin et al., 2020; Bunne et al., 2022a), is still
poorly understood, and training them requires approximating a convex conjugate with a min-max formulation (Amos,
2022). On a more fundamental level, the ICNN approach
may not be as sound as it seems: while Brenier (1987)’s
argument is valid when the input measure µ is a density,
that result does not hold for sample measures. One might
therefore question the relevance of imposing the double re-

1
CREST, ENSAE 2 Apple. Correspondence to: Théo Uscidda
<theo.uscidda@ensae.fr>, Marco Cuturi <cuturi@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

