Reasons for the Superiority of Stochastic Estimators over Deterministic Ones:
Robustness, Consistency and Perceptual Quality

Guy Ohayon 1 Theo Adrai 1 Michael Elad 1 Tomer Michaeli 2

Abstract

algorithms, which started to receive notable attention in recent years (Lugmayr et al., 2021; 2022; Bahat & Michaeli,
2020; Ohayon et al., 2021; Kawar et al., 2022; 2021b;a;
Saharia et al., 2021; Kadkhodaie & Simoncelli, 2021; Song
& Ermon, 2019), instead sample from a distribution conditioned on the degraded input. Yet, beyond their core ability
to explore the space of possible solutions, the advantages of
stochastic methods over deterministic ones are still unclear.
For instance, a fundamental mystery is whether stochastic
restoration algorithms are theoretically superior to deterministic ones in terms of the achievable perceptual quality,
the robustness to adversarial attacks, and the faithfulness of
the results to the measurements (a property we refer to as
consistency).

Stochastic restoration algorithms allow to explore
the space of solutions that correspond to the degraded input. In this paper we reveal additional
fundamental advantages of stochastic methods
over deterministic ones, which further motivate
their use. First, we prove that any restoration
algorithm that attains perfect perceptual quality
and whose outputs are consistent with the input
must be a posterior sampler, and is thus required
to be stochastic. Second, we illustrate that while
deterministic restoration algorithms may attain
high perceptual quality, this can be achieved only
by filling up the space of all possible source images using an extremely sensitive mapping, which
makes them highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Indeed, we show that enforcing deterministic models to be robust to such attacks profoundly
hinders their perceptual quality, while robustifying stochastic models hardly influences their perceptual quality, and improves their output variability. These findings provide a motivation to foster
progress in stochastic restoration methods, paving
the way to better recovery algorithms.

In this paper we provide novel justifications for using
stochastic restoration methods. First, we show that any estimator that generates consistent restorations and attains perfect perceptual quality must be sampling from the posterior
distribution. An immediate, yet significant, consequence
is that if a deterministic restoration algorithm is consistent
then it cannot attain perfect perceptual quality1 . Somewhat
strangely, despite this theoretical limitation, deterministic
restoration algorithms are known to be able to attain high
perceptual quality, or at least produce images with high precision (Wang et al., 2018; Blau & Michaeli, 2018; Ledig
et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018b;b; Zhao et al., 2021; Yi et al.,
2020). While this may seem as a contradiction, we argue
that it is not. We show empirically that, in order to cope with
the lack of output diversity, such deterministic estimators
adopt an erratic2 output behavior in an attempt to “fill up”
the space of all possible natural images, so as to minimize
the distance between the distribution of their outputs and the
distribution of natural images. As a result, such estimators
are highly sensitive to small changes in their input. Indeed,

1. Introduction
Image restoration has a central role in imaging sciences, enabling much of the imaging revolution we see today. Modern restoration methods allow to squeeze out ever fantastic
quality from ever smaller sensors (e.g. on mobile devices),
which are prone to severe noise, blur, limited resolution,
and color degradations. Traditionally, most image restoration algorithms were deterministic: providing one restored
image for a given degraded input. Stochastic restoration

1

Unless the posterior assigns nonzero probability to only one
reconstruction for every input, in which case the inverse problem
is non-ambiguous and it is possible to restore images with zero
error.
2
By erratic we mean that the restoration algorithm is not robust
to an input adversarial attack: a small, unnoticeable change in the
input degraded image may lead to an unreasonably large change in
the output estimated image. I.e., the value of Equation (5) is too
high.

1
Faculty of Computer Science, Technion, Haifa, Israel
Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion,
Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to: Guy Ohayon <ohayonguy@campus.technion.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

