Efficient Bound of Lipschitz Constant for Convolutional Layers
by Gram Iteration

Blaise Delattre 1 2 Quentin Barthélemy 1 Alexandre Araujo 3 Alexandre Allauzen 2 4

Abstract

while implementation exists (Fazlyab et al., 2019; Latorre
et al., 2020) their prohibitive computational cost inhibits
their use for deep learning training.

Since the control of the Lipschitz constant has a
great impact on the training stability, generalization, and robustness of neural networks, the estimation of this value is nowadays a real scientific
challenge. In this paper we introduce a precise,
fast, and differentiable upper bound for the spectral norm of convolutional layers using circulant
matrix theory and a new alternative to the Power
iteration. Called the Gram iteration, our approach
exhibits a superlinear convergence. First, we show
through a comprehensive set of experiments that
our approach outperforms other state-of-the-art
methods in terms of precision, computational cost,
and scalability. Then, it proves highly effective
for the Lipschitz regularization of convolutional
neural networks, with competitive results against
concurrent approaches.

To efficiently constrain or regularize the Lipschitz constant,
researchers have focused on individual layers. In fact, due
to the composition property, the product of the Lipschitz of
each layer is a (loose) upper bound of the global Lipschitz
of the network. By considering the ℓ2 -norm, the Lipschitz
for each linear transformation reduces to the spectral norm
and is equal to the largest singular value of its weight matrix.
Efficient iterative methods, called power method or power
iteration, for computing the spectral norm have existed for
decades with many variants (Golub et al., 2000).
For convolution neural networks, several approaches have
been proposed to efficiently estimate this largest singular
value of convolutional layers. Ryu et al. (2019) and Farnia et al. (2019) rely on a power iteration approach where
the convolution is treated as a linear operator that performs
the matrix-vector product. To trade speed for precision,
only one iteration is carried out. Other works have leveraged the structure of convolution (i.e. Toeplitz or circular
structure) and the Fourier transform to devise exact but computationally expensive methods (Sedghi et al., 2019; Bibi
et al., 2019) or efficient upper bounds for the largest singular
value (Singla et al., 2021; Araujo et al., 2021; Yi, 2021).

1. Introduction
Since the landmark result of convolutional neural networks
on computer vision tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), researchers have tried to develop various methods and techniques to improve the training stability, generalization, and
robustness of neural networks. Recent work has shown that
the Lipschitz constant of the network, which is a measure
of regularity (Virmaux & Scaman, 2018), can be tied to all
of these properties (Bartlett et al., 2017; Yoshida & Miyato, 2017; Tsuzuku et al., 2018). Indeed, controlling this
constant facilitates training by avoiding exploding gradients, improves generalization on unseen data, and makes
networks more robust against adversarial attacks. Unfortunately, computing the Lipschitz constant of a neural network
is an NP-hard problem (Virmaux & Scaman, 2018), and

In this paper, we build upon recent approaches to introduce
an efficient procedure for estimating a bound on the Lipschitz constant of convolutional layers. Precise and fast, this
bound scales nicely with convolution parameters (the kernel
size, channel, and input spatial dimensions). The procedure is based on Gram iteration, a new iterative method to
compute the largest singular value with super-linear convergence. Furthermore, our estimate is guaranteed to be a strict
upper bound at each iteration. In contrast, methods based on
power iteration have no such guarantees and can provide a
harmful lower bound. After presenting the background and
theoretical results of our contribution, we perform an extensive set of experiments to demonstrate the superiority of our
method over all previous concurrent approaches. Finally, we
demonstrate the usefulness of our method on Lipschitz regularization and show that we can achieve similar accuracy
while being more stable.

1
FOXSTREAM, Vaulx-en-Velin, France 2 Miles Team, LAMSADE, Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL University, Paris, France
3
New York University 4 ESPCI PSL, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Blaise Delattre <blaise.delattre@dauphine.eu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

