Multi-task Hierarchical Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Jiayu Chen 1 Dipesh Tamboli 2 Tian Lan 3 Vaneet Aggarwal 1 2 4

Abstract

strations and is especially effective for problems where it’s
difficult to discover task solutions autonomously through
Reinforcement Learning (RL). To train a general-purpose
agent, Multi-task/Meta Imitation Learning (MIL) algorithms
(Finn et al., 2017b; Deisenroth et al., 2014; Singh et al.,
2020) have been proposed to learn a parameterized policy
that is a function of both the current observation and the
task and is capable of performing a range of tasks following
a particular distribution. The key insight of these algorithms
is that the successful control for one task can be informative
for other related tasks. However, a critical challenge for
them is to acquire enough data for the agent to generalize
broadly across tasks. Typically, a large number of demonstrations are required for each task in that distribution, and
the required amount increases with task difficulty. Moreover, the learned multi-task policy cannot be transferred to
tasks out of that distribution (Yu et al., 2019; Ghasemipour
et al., 2019), which limits its general use.

Multi-task Imitation Learning (MIL) aims to train
a policy capable of performing a distribution of
tasks based on multi-task expert demonstrations,
which is essential for general-purpose robots. Existing MIL algorithms suffer from low data efficiency and poor performance on complex longhorizontal tasks. We develop Multi-task Hierarchical Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning (MH-AIRL) to learn hierarchically-structured
multi-task policies, which is more beneficial for
compositional tasks with long horizons and has
higher expert data efficiency through identifying
and transferring reusable basic skills across tasks.
To realize this, MH-AIRL effectively synthesizes
context-based multi-task learning, AIRL (an IL
approach), and hierarchical policy learning. Further, MH-AIRL can be adopted to demonstrations
without the task or skill annotations (i.e., stateaction pairs only) which are more accessible in
practice. Theoretical justifications are provided
for each module of MH-AIRL, and evaluations on
challenging multi-task settings demonstrate superior performance and transferability of the multitask policies learned with MH-AIRL as compared
to SOTA MIL baselines.

Hierarchical Imitation Learning (HIL) has the potential
to reduce the required demonstrations. In HIL, the agent
learns a two-level policy, which can be modeled with the
option framework (Sutton et al., 1999), from the expert
data. Specifically, the low-level policies (i.e., skills) are
designated to accomplish certain subtasks in a complex
task, while the high-level policy is for scheduling the switch
among the skills to solve the entire task. For multi-task
settings, learning a hierarchical policy enables the agent
to identify basic skills that can be useful in solving a distribution of tasks and to transfer them across tasks during
training. In this case, each skill can be trained with demonstrations from different tasks rather than limited to a single
one, and, with the shared skills, an agent mainly needs to
update its high-level policy rather than learning an entire policy for each task. The expert data efficiency is significantly
improved since demonstrations among different tasks are
reused for learning skills and the burden of multi-task policy
learning becomes lower. Further, in RL and IL, hierarchies
exhibit a number of benefits, including better performance
on long-horizontal complex tasks (Florensa et al., 2017;
Jing et al., 2021) and the possibility of skill transfer between
distinct tasks (Andreas et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
The generalist robot, which can autonomously perform a
wide range of tasks, is one of the essential targets of robotic
learning. As an important approach, Imitation Learning (IL)
enables the agent to learn policies based on expert demon1
School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA 2 Elmore Family School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 47907, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, George Washington University, Washington DC 20052,
USA 4 Department of Computer Science and AI Initiative, King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955,
KSA. Correspondence to: Jiayu Chen <chen3686@purdue.edu>.

In this paper, we propose MH-AIRL to introduce hierarchies
to MIL. As discussed above, such hierarchies can improve
expert data efficiency so that the agent can achieve supe-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

