On Preemption and Learning in Stochastic Scheduling

Nadav Merlis * 1 Hugo Richard * 1 2 Flore Sentenac * 1 Corentin Odic 1 Mathieu Molina 1 3 Vianney Perchet 1 2

Abstract

tion. This model approximates many real-world scenarios.
For example, when scheduling patients for surgery, patients
may be grouped by expected procedure time (Magerlein
& Martin, 1978). The model is also relevant in computing
problems, where jobs with similar features are expected to
have a similar processing time (Li et al., 2006). Lastly, in
calendar learning, where an agent advises the user on how
to organize its day based on the tasks to be done, similar
tasks can be assumed to have a similar duration (White &
Hassan Awadallah, 2019).

We study single-machine scheduling of jobs, each
belonging to a job type that determines its duration distribution. We start by analyzing the scenario where the type characteristics are known
and then move to two learning scenarios where
the types are unknown: non-preemptive problems,
where each started job must be completed before
moving to another job; and preemptive problems,
where job execution can be paused in the favor of
moving to a different job. In both cases, we design algorithms that achieve sublinear excess cost,
compared to the performance with known types,
and prove lower bounds for the non-preemptive
case. Notably, we demonstrate, both theoretically
and through simulations, how preemptive algorithms can greatly outperform non-preemptive
ones when the durations of different job types
are far from one another, a phenomenon that does
not occur when the type durations are known.

In practice, when encountering a new scheduling task, we
usually know the type of each job, but have little-to-no
information on the expected duration under each type. Then,
the scheduling algorithm must learn the characteristics of
each type to be able to utilize this information. This must be
done concurrently with the scheduling of tasks, which poses
an extra challenge – to be useful, learning must be done as
early as possible; however, wrong scheduling allocation at
the beginning delays all jobs and causes large penalties.
In this work, we show how learning can be efficiently done
in scheduling problems with job types, characterized by
exponential distributions, in two different settings – the nonpreemptive setting, where once a job started running, it must
be completed, and the preemptive setting, where jobs can
be put on hold. We present two algorithms in each setting
and show that the preemptive setting has a clear advantage
when the type durations have to be learned. This comes in
contrast to the case of known types, where under reasonable
assumptions, the optimal algorithm is non-preemptive.

1. Introduction
Single Machine Scheduling is a longstanding problem with
many variants and applications (Pinedo, 2012). In this problem, a set of N jobs must be processed on one machine,
each of a different ‘size’ – processing time required for its
completion. An algorithm is a policy assigning jobs to the
machine, and performance is usually measured by flow time
– the sum of the times when jobs have finished. If one has
access to the size of each job, then scheduling the jobs by
increasing size is optimal (Schrage, 1968). Unfortunately,
for most applications, this knowledge is unavailable; yet,
oftentimes, some structure or knowledge on the jobs can
still be leveraged.

While our algorithms resemble classic bandit methods, the
scheduling objective requires different analysis approaches.
In particular, in the context of scheduling, the quality of an
algorithm is measured by the ordering of jobs. In stark contrast, regret-minimization objectives measure the number
of plays from each arm (job type). Indeed, in scheduling
problems, the number of pulls from each job type is always
the same – by the end of the interaction, we would finish all
the jobs of all types. Thus, both our algorithmic design and
analysis will be comparative – focus on the number of jobs
evaluations from a bad type before the completion of jobs
of a good type.

In this paper, we focus on scheduling problems where jobs
are grouped by types that determine their duration distribu*

1
Equal contribution
ENSAE, Paris 2 Criteo, Paris
Inria, France.
Correspondence to: Nadav Merlis <nadav.merlis@ensae.fr>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our contributions are as follows. (1) We present the scheduling setting with unknown job types. (2) We analyze the
1

