SAAL: Sharpness-Aware Active Learning

Yoon-Yeong Kim * 1 Youngjae Cho * 2 JoonHo Jang 2 Byeonghu Na 2 Yeongmin Kim 2 Kyungwoo Song 3
Wanmo Kang 2 Il-Chul Moon 2 4

Abstract

tions, which aims at the efficient use of the limited budget
for annotations from oracle (Cohn et al., 1996). This efficient usage is a difficult challenge because the value of data
instance needs to be anticipated without any supervision in
prior to the oracle query (Dasgupta & Hsu, 2008).

While deep neural networks play significant roles
in many research areas, they are also prone to
overfitting problems under limited data instances.
To overcome overfitting, this paper introduces
the first active learning method to incorporate
the sharpness of loss space into the acquisition
function. Specifically, our proposed method,
Sharpness-Aware Active Learning (SAAL), constructs its acquisition function by selecting unlabeled instances whose perturbed loss becomes
maximum. Unlike the Sharpness-Aware learning
with fully-labeled datasets, we design a pseudolabeling mechanism to anticipate the perturbed
loss w.r.t. the ground-truth label, which we provide the theoretical bound for the optimization.
We conduct experiments on various benchmark
datasets for vision-based tasks in image classification, object detection, and domain adaptive
semantic segmentation. The experimental results confirm that SAAL outperforms the baselines by selecting instances that have the potentially maximal perturbation on the loss. The
code is available at https://github.com/
YoonyeongKim/SAAL.

This paper proposes a new active learning algorithm, named
Sharpness-Aware Active Learning (SAAL), that proposes
an acquisition function by reducing the potential sharpness
of loss surface after learning an instance, which is an acquisition candidate. While we are inspired by Sharpness-Aware
Minimization, or SAM (Foret et al., 2020), which minimizes
the maximally perturbed loss of training datasets for the flat
loss surface, the adaptation of SAM to active learning requires anticipation of the sharpness without a label on a data
instance. Therefore, we utilize pseudo-labels predicted by
the current classifier.
This utilization of pseudo-labels calls for theoretical investigations, so we show that pseudo-labeling becomes the lower
bound of the maximally perturbed loss w.r.t. ground-truth
label, so such utilization can be a part of acquisition functions. Also, we theoretically derive the upper bound of the
proposed acquisition score of SAAL, which includes the
loss, the norm of gradients, and the first eigenvalue of loss
Hessian matrix. Among the three terms of the upper bound,
the loss and the gradient terms are widely used acquisition
score for active learning, which captures the model change
by acquiring the instance (Yoo & Kweon, 2019; Ash et al.,
2020; Settles et al., 2007). Meanwhile, the first eigenvalue,
which is newly considered by SAAL, is connected to the
loss sharpness (Keskar et al., 2017), and this added term is
related to the generalization of the model. We summarize
our contributions in three aspects.

1. Introduction
A large-scale dataset is important because its wide coverage in the data space provides the generalization capability (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002). If a deep learning model
is trained with only a few data instances, the flexibility of
the learning model becomes prone to overfitting (Keskar
et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017). To overcome this problem of small datasets, active learning has been developed to
iteratively select key data instances through acquisition func-

• SAAL is the first active learning framework to consider
the loss sharpness in its acquisition function.

*
Equal contribution 1 Agency for Defense Development, AI
Autonomy Technology Center (ADD, AIA Center) 2 KAIST, South
Korea 3 Yonsei University, South Korea 4 Summary.AI. Correspondence to: Il-Chul Moon <icmoon@kaist.ac.kr>.

• We prove the theoretic bound of the acquisition score
by utilizing the pseudo-label in SAAL.
• SAAL performs better than baseline models in various
benchmarks and tasks.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

