Near-Minimax-Optimal Risk-Sensitive
Reinforcement Learning with CVaR

Kaiwen Wang 1 2 Nathan Kallus 2 Wen Sun 1

Abstract

Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) is a popular coherent measure of risk (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000; Filippi
et al., 2020). For a random return X (where higher is better), the CVaR with risk tolerance τ ∈ (0, 1] is defined as

In this paper, we study risk-sensitive Reinforcement Learning (RL), focusing on the objective
of Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) with risk
tolerance τ . Starting with multi-arm bandits
(MABs),
√ we show the minimax CVaR regret rate
is Ω( τ −1 AK), where A is the number of actions and K is the number of episodes, and that
it is achieved by an Upper Confidence Bound algorithm with a novel Bernstein bonus. For online RL in tabular Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs),
√ we show a minimax regret lower bound
of Ω( τ −1 SAK) (with normalized cumulative
rewards), where S is the number of states, and
we propose a novel bonus-driven Value Iteration
procedure. We show that our
√ algorithm achieves
e τ −1 SAK) under a
the optimal regret of O(
continuity assumption and in√general attains a
e −1 SAK), which is
near-optimal regret of O(τ
minimax-optimal for constant τ . This improves
on the best available bounds. By discretizing rewards appropriately, our algorithms are computationally efficient.

+

CVaRτ (X) := supb∈R (b − τ −1 E[(b − X) ]),

(1)

where x+ = max(x, 0). CVaRτ (X) is the average outcome among the worst τ -percent of cases, and when X is
continuous this exactly corresponds to those less than or
equal to the τ -th quantile (Acerbi & Tasche, 2002), i.e.,
†
CVaRτ (X) = E[X | X ≤ FX
(τ )],

(2)

†
(τ ) = inf{x : FX (x) ≥ τ } is the τ -th quantile
where FX
of X, a.k.a. the Value at Risk (VaR). A high risk tolerance τ = 1 recovers the risk-neutral expectation, i.e.,
CVaR1 (X) = EX. As τ decreases, CVaRτ models the
worst-case outcome, i.e., limτ →0 CVaRτ (X) = ess inf X.
In the CVaR RL model we consider, X is the return of a
policy, so our objective captures the tail-risk of the returns
distribution. Another motivating perspective is that CVaR
RL is equivalent to the robust MDP model, i.e., expected
value under worst-case perturbation of the transition kernel (Chow et al., 2015). Thus, CVaR RL is an attractive
alterantive to vanilla RL in safety-critical applications.

In this paper, we provide algorithms with state-of-theart regret guarantees for tabular, online decision making
with the CVaR objective. To start, we prove tight lower
bounds on the expected CVaR regret (formalized in Section 2) for both multi-arm bandit (MAB) and RL problems.
We then propose B ERNSTEIN -UCB, an Upper Confidence
Bound (UCB) algorithm with a novel bonus constructed
using Bernstein’s inequality, and we prove it is minimaxoptimal1 . Compared to Brown-UCB (Tamkin et al., 2019),
B ERNSTEIN -UCB is minimax-optimal in general, without
requiring reward distributions to be continuous.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is the
canonical framework for sequential decision making under
uncertainty, with applications in personalizing recommendations (Bottou et al., 2013), robotics (Rajeswaran et al.,
2017), healthcare (Murphy, 2003) and education (Singla
et al., 2021). In vanilla RL, the objective is to maximize
the average of returns, the cumulative rewards collected by
the policy. As RL is increasingly applied in consequential
settings, it is often necessary to account for risk beyond
solely optimizing for the average.

We then turn to tabular RL with the CVaR objective. We
propose CVaR-UCBVI, a novel bonus-driven Value Iteration (VI) algorithm in an augmented MDP. The augmented

1

Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Operations Research
and Information Engineering, Cornell Tech. Correspondence to:
Kaiwen Wang <https://kaiwenw.github.io>.

1
Following Azar et al. (2017), we say an algorithm is minimax
optimal if its regret matches (up to log terms) our novel minimax
lower bound, in all problem parameters. Sometimes, this is also
referred to as “nearly-minimax-optimal” (Zhou et al., 2021a).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

