Contextual Reliability: When Different Features Matter in Different Contexts

Gaurav Ghosal * 1 Amrith Setlur * 2 Daniel S. Brown 3 Anca D. Dragan 1 Aditi Raghunathan 2

Abstract
Deep neural networks often fail catastrophically
by relying on spurious correlations. Most prior
work assumes a clear dichotomy into spurious
and reliable features; however, this is often unrealistic. For example, most of the time we do
not want an autonomous car to simply copy the
speed of surrounding cars—we don’t want our
car to run a red light if a neighboring car does so.
However, we cannot simply enforce invariance to
next-lane speed, since it could provide valuable
information about an unobservable pedestrian at
a crosswalk. Thus, universally ignoring features
that are sometimes (but not always) reliable can
lead to non-robust performance. We formalize
a new setting called contextual reliability which
accounts for the fact that the “right” features to
use may vary depending on the context. We propose and analyze a two-stage framework called
Explicit Non-spurious feature Prediction (ENP)
which first identifies the relevant features to use
for a given context, then trains a model to rely
exclusively on these features. Our work theoretically and empirically demonstrates the advantages
of ENP over existing methods and provides new
benchmarks for contextual reliability.

We argue that such a neat delineation of features as “nonspurious” and “spurious” is often unrealistic. As an example,
consider autonomous driving. In some cases, it can be dangerous to rely on the speed of cars in the neighboring lane.
A neighboring car running a red light should not cause the
agent to dangerously run a red light as well, and a neighboring car slowing to turn left should not cause an agent going
straight to slow down. At a crosswalk, however, the braking of a neighboring car carries evidence of an unobserved
pedestrian and should be treated as a cause for stopping.
Thus, we observe that neighboring-lane speed cannot be
globally treated either as spurious or non-spurious, it must
be used or ignored depending on the context. Similarly,
image backgrounds are often considered spurious in prior
robustness research. However, we contend that there are
contexts where the background is useful and should not be
ignored, for example, when the foreground is occluded or
ambiguous. In fact, humans often use the background to
identify objects in such situations (Torralba, 2003).
In this work, we propose and study contextual reliability, a
new setting that better captures the above nuances of realworld settings. We assume that the data comes from different latent contexts, each of which has a potentially different
designation of spurious and non-spurious features. Thus, in
contrast to prior settings, the optimal robust predictor might
need to rely on different features in different contexts.

1. Introduction

How to improve contextual reliability? The predominant approach to improving robustness enforces invariance across
a fixed set of spurious features (Muandet et al., 2013; Blanchard et al., 2011; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020; Rosenfeld
et al., 2021) but such a set need not exist in our setting.
The alternative active learning approaches do not require a
predefined set of features, but actively source maximally uncertain data with the hope of breaking spurious correlations.
These approaches also fail to address contextual reliability
due to poor uncertainty estimates when different features are
spurious across different contexts. Finally, robust optimization based approaches also fail to control for performance
across multiple contexts without explicit information about
the latent contexts of different training points. This suggests
that we need some additional information about the latent
context in order to improve contextual reliability.

Despite remarkable performance on benchmarks, deep neural networks often fail catastrophically when deployed under slightly different conditions than they were trained on.
Such failures are commonly attributed to the model relying
on “spurious” features (e.g., background) rather than “nonspurious” features that remain reliably predictive even for
out of distribution inputs. Prior work has focused on learning models that rely exclusively on non-spurious features.
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley 2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 University of Utah. Correspondence
to: Gaurav Ghosal <gauravrghosal@berkeley.edu>, Amrith Setlur
<asetlur@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

