HyperTuning: Toward Adapting Large
Language Models without Back-propagation

Jason Phang 1 2 Yi Mao 3 Pengcheng He 3 Weizhu Chen 3

Abstract

tuned models when sufficient training data is available.

Fine-tuning large language models for different
tasks can be costly and inefficient, and even methods that reduce the number of tuned parameters
still require full gradient-based optimization. We
propose HyperTuning, a novel approach to model
adaptation that uses a hypermodel to generate
task-specific parameters for a fixed downstream
model. We demonstrate a simple setup for hypertuning with HyperT5, a T5-based hypermodel that
produces soft prefixes or LoRA parameters for a
frozen T5 model from few-shot examples. We
train HyperT5 in two stages: first, hyperpretraining with a modified conditional language modeling objective that trains a hypermodel to generate parameters; second, multi-task fine-tuning
(MTF) on a large number of diverse language
tasks. We evaluate HyperT5 on P3, MetaICL and
Super-NaturalInstructions datasets, and show that
it can effectively generate parameters for unseen
tasks. Moreover, we show that using hypermodelgenerated parameters as initializations for further
parameter-efficient fine-tuning improves performance. HyperTuning can thus be a flexible and
efficient way to leverage large language models
for diverse downstream applications.

To reduce the computational and memory overhead of finetuning LMs, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have been proposed, such as adapters (Houlsby et al.,
2019), prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021), and prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021). These methods update only a
small subset of (possibly new) parameters of the LM, and
have achieved competitive performance with full fine-tuning
(Ding et al., 2022). However, PEFT methods still require full
back-propagation through the LM during training, which is
computationally expensive and memory intensive. Given
that (1) only a small number of parameters need to be updated to adapt an LM to a given task, and (2) very large LMs
have demonstrated strong in-context learning capabilities
on a forward pass, we hypothesize that it is possible to train
a separate model to perform the optimization or adaptation
procedure entirely using only a forward pass.
To avoid the costly computation of back-propagating
through the LM to produce parameter updates, especially for
thousands or millions of iterations during training, we propose a new paradigm of hypertuning: using a hypermodel
to adapt a downstream LM to a desired application. As a
concrete proof of concept, we explore a simple setup where
hypermodels take as input a set of few-shot examples from
a given task, and output the PEFT parameters corresponding
to that task in a single forward pass.
To demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, we train
HyperT5: a set of T5-based hypermodels that output soft
prefixes (Li & Liang, 2021) or LoRA parameters (Hu et al.,
2022), to be incorporated into a frozen downstream T5 LM.
To train HyperT5, we introduce a two-stage procedure for
training hypermodels: hyperpretraining, where we adapt
a pretrained LM to generate PEFT parameters via a modified language modeling objective, followed by multi-task
fine-tuning (MTF) the hypermodel. HyperT5 models can
take few-shot examples from unseen tasks and generate the
corresponding PEFT parameters, allowing us to adapt a
downstream LM without back-propagation. We show that
hypertuning is effective on P3, Super-NaturalInstructions
and MetaICL datasets. Furthermore, we show that when
the hypermodel-generated parameters are used as initializations for further parameter-efficient fine-tuning, they achieve

1. Introduction
While language models (LMs) have achieved remarkable
capabilities with increasing model size (Brown et al., 2020),
fine-tuning them on specific downstream tasks introduces
significant engineering challenges and computational costs.
Although large models can perform zero-shot, instructionprompted, and few-shot learning (Sanh et al., 2022; Wei
et al., 2022), they are usually outperformed by fully fine*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, New York University, NY, USA 2 EleutherAI 3 Microsoft Azure AI, WA, USA.
Correspondence to: Jason phang <jasonphang@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

