Bayesian Reparameterization of Reward-Conditioned
Reinforcement Learning with Energy-based Models

Wenhao Ding * 1 Tong Che * 2 Ding Zhao 1 Marco Pavone 2 3

Abstract

generated data (Mnih et al., 2013; Akkaya et al., 2019;
Kiran et al., 2021). RL algorithms can be divided into two
classes in terms of data usage: on-policy RL (Schulman
et al., 2017; 2015) algorithms have to be trained on data
that the current policy learner generates, while off-policy
RL algorithms (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al., 2015)
can be trained on data that is generated by some different
policies. It is a common belief that off-policy algorithms are
more sample efficient than on-policy algorithms (Prudencio
et al., 2022).

Recently, reward-conditioned reinforcement
learning (RCRL) has gained popularity due to
its simplicity, flexibility, and off-policy nature.
However, we will show that current RCRL
approaches are fundamentally limited and fail
to address two critical challenges of RCRL –
improving generalization on high reward-to-go
(RTG) inputs, and avoiding out-of-distribution
(OOD) RTG queries during testing time. To
address these challenges when training vanilla
RCRL architectures, we propose Bayesian
Reparameterized RCRL (BR-RCRL), a novel set
of inductive biases for RCRL inspired by Bayes’
theorem. BR-RCRL removes a core obstacle
preventing vanilla RCRL from generalizing on
high RTG inputs – a tendency that the model
treats different RTG inputs as independent values,
which we term “RTG Independence”. BR-RCRL
also allows us to design an accompanying
adaptive inference method, which maximizes
total returns while avoiding OOD queries that
yield unpredictable behaviors in vanilla RCRL
methods. We show that BR-RCRL achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the Gym-Mujoco
and Atari offline RL benchmarks, improving
upon vanilla RCRL by up to 11%.

One recent proposed off-policy RL paradigm is rewardconditioned reinforcement learning (RCRL) (Kumar et al.,
2019b; Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021; Srivastava et al.,
2019; Ajay et al., 2022), which transforms the RL problem
into a conditional sequence modeling problem. The general
idea of RCRL is straightforward: we train an RTG (rewardto-go)-conditioned generative model using off-policy data
and then set a target RTG when we roll out the policy during
training to collect more data (Kumar et al., 2019b) or during
testing (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021). RCRL has
gained popularity due to its conceptual simplicity, flexibility, and off-policy nature. Moreover, its usage allows us
to leverage powerful neural architectures (e.g., Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)) and large generative models (e.g.,
diffusion models (Yang et al., 2022) or masked language
models (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019)), which have been a
massive success in other parts of artificial intelligence, such
as natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Ramesh et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

Vanilla RCRL paradigms treat RTGs as standard inputs in
addition to the states and actions of the neural network. This
design choice makes it easy to employ modern architectures
such as Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). However, this
practice, although plausible, has largely ignored the central
challenge of RCRL. Training the RCRL model optimizes a
policy to fit a dataset or data buffer. However, during policy
rollout, we usually want to set a high target RTG in the hope
that the model can achieve higher performance than the
generating policy of the dataset. In other words, the central
challenge of RCRL methods is to achieve generalization
from low-return regions to high-return regions of the state

Reinforcement learning (RL) aims at learning policies to
maximize cumulative rewards by trial and error (Sutton
et al., 1998). It was shown that when combined with deep
neural networks, deep RL is able to learn powerful policies for complex decision-making tasks using only self*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, US 2 NVIDIA Research, Santa Clara, CA, US 3 Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, US. Correspondence to: Wenhao Ding
<wenhaod@andrew.cmu.edu>, Tong Che <tongc@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

