Communication-Efficient Federated Hypergradient Computation
via Aggregated Iterative Differentiation

Peiyao Xiao 1 Kaiyi Ji 1

Abstract

reinforcement learning (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999; Hong
et al., 2020), adversarial learning (Zhang et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2021a), signal processing (Kunapuli et al., 2008) and
AI-aware communication networks (Ji & Ying, 2023). Existing studies on bilevel optimization have mainly focused
on the single-machine scenario. However, due to computational challenges such as the second-order hypergradient
computation and the increasing scale of problem models
(e.g., deep neural networks), learning on a single machine
turns out to be inefficient and unscalable. In addition, data
privacy has also arisen as a critical concern in the singlemachine setting recently (McMahan et al., 2017). These
challenges have greatly motivated the recent development of
federated bilevel optimization, with emerging applications
such as federated meta-learning (Tarzanagh et al., 2022),
hyperparameter tuning for federated learning (Huang et al.,
2022), resource allocation over edges (Ji & Ying, 2022) and
graph-aided federated learning (Xing et al., 2022) etc.

Federated bilevel optimization has attracted increasing attention due to emerging machine learning and communication applications. The biggest
challenge lies in computing the gradient of the
upper-level objective function (i.e., hypergradient)
in the federated setting due to the nonlinear and
distributed construction of a series of global Hessian matrices. In this paper, we propose a novel
communication-efficient federated hypergradient
estimator via aggregated iterative differentiation
(AggITD). AggITD is simple to implement and
significantly reduces the communication cost by
conducting the federated hypergradient estimation and the lower-level optimization simultaneously. We show that the proposed AggITD-based
algorithm achieves the same sample complexity
as existing approximate implicit differentiation
(AID)-based approaches with much fewer communication rounds in the presence of data heterogeneity. Our results also shed light on the
great advantage of ITD over AID in the federated/distributed hypergradient estimation. This
differs from the comparison in the non-distributed
bilevel optimization, where ITD is less efficient
than AID. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
the great effectiveness and communication efficiency of the proposed method.

Mathematically, federated bilevel optimization takes the
following formulation with m clients.
m

min

x∈Rd1

f (x) =

1 X
∗
fi (x, y(x)
)
m i=1
m

∗
subject to y(x)
∈ arg min
y∈Rd2

1 X
gi (x, y),
m i=1

(1)

where the upper- and lower-level functions fi (x, y) =
Eξi Fi (x, y; ξi ) and gi (x, y) = Eζi Gi (x, y; ζi ) for each
client i are jointly continuously differentiable. To efficiently
solve the distributed nested problem in Equation (1), the
biggest challenge lies in computing the gradient of the upperlevel objective, i.e., the hypergradient ∇f (x), due to the
approximation of a global Hessian inverse matrix and the
client drift induced by the data heterogeneity (Karimireddy
et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2019). To overcome these issues,
existing approaches all focus on the AID-based federated
hypergradient estimation (Huang et al., 2022; Tarzanagh
et al., 2022). However, the AID-based approaches naturally
contain two consecutive loops at each outer iteration, each
of which contains a large number of communication rounds,
for minimizing the lower-level objective and constructing
the federated hypergradient estimate, separately, as shown
in the left illustration in Figure 1. This heavily complicates

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization has drawn significant attention from
the machine learning (ML) community due to its wide applications in ML including meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017;
Rajeswaran et al., 2019), automated hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018; Feurer & Hutter, 2019),
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
at Buffalo, Baffalo, USA. Correspondence to: Kaiyi Ji <kaiyiji@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

