Flash: Concept Drift Adaptation in Federated Learning

Kunjal Panchal 1 Sunav Choudhary 2 Subrata Mitra 2 Koyel Mukherjee 2 Somdeb Sarkhel 3 Saayan Mitra 3
Hui Guan 1

Abstract

du Terrail et al., 2022) and IoT (Dara et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022) where data privacy is of paramount importance.

In Federated Learning (FL), adaptive optimization
is an effective approach to addressing the statistical heterogeneity issue but cannot adapt quickly
to concept drifts. In this work, we propose a novel
adaptive optimizer called F LASH that simultaneously addresses both statistical heterogeneity and
the concept drift issues. The fundamental insight
is that a concept drift can be detected based on
the magnitude of parameter updates that are required to fit the global model to each participating client’s local data distribution. F LASH uses
a two-pronged approach that synergizes clientside early-stopping training to facilitate detection
of concept drifts and the server-side drift-aware
adaptive optimization to effectively adjust effective learning rate. We theoretically prove that
F LASH matches the convergence rate of state-ofthe-art adaptive optimizers and further empirically
evaluate the efficacy of F LASH on a variety of FL
benchmarks using different concept drift settings.

Adaptive optimization is an effective approach to addressing
the statistical heterogeneity issue in FL, where one client’s
data distribution could be different from another client. As
participating clients are different from one round to another, statistical heterogeneity causes differences in data
distributions across rounds, leading to convergence problems (Karimireddy et al., 2020). Adaptive optimizers such
as F EDYOGI and F EDA DAM (Reddi et al., 2021) use adaptive learning rates which incorporate knowledge of past
rounds to perform more informed model updates. They successfully smooth the updates applied to the global model
and improve the convergence in FL.
Problem. Existing adaptive optimization approaches, however, cannot adapt quickly to concept drift, another practical issue faced by deploying FL in real-world applications yet largely overlooked in the literature. A concept
drift happens when the participating clients change their
class conditional distributions due to phenomena like seasonality effects, geographic biases, diurnal patterns, and
change in users’ habits (Kairouz et al., 2021; Canonaco
et al., 2021). For example, the use of the term “corona”
would generate different outputs pre- and post-pandemic.
Formally, the classP
conditional distribution before concept
drift, P(y | x) = c∈C qc Pc (y | x), is different from the
distribution after concept drift, P ′ (y | x), where qc is weight
of cth client, C is a set of available client for a particular
round in FL, and (x, y) are data samples.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed machine learning paradigm where edge devices
(called “clients”) jointly train a machine learning (ML)
model while keeping the training data on their devices. FL
has cross-device and cross-silo settings (Wu et al., 2022).
In cross-device FL, which is our primary focus, a server
picks a small fraction of clients from available clients to
train an ML model (called “global model”) on their local
data at each round. The server then aggregates the trained
models from the participating clients to update the global
model. As the server does not have access to clients’ data,
FL is inherently privacy-preserving and has been applied
in many industries such as health care (Loftus et al., 2022;

Adapting quickly to a concept drift requires a large adaptive learning rate to adjust global model parameters so
that updated parameters can fit new conditional distribution P ′ (y | x). But existing adaptive optimizers often result
in a relatively small effective learning rate towards an optimum despite a concept drift. Without loss of generality,
existing adaptive optimizers update model parameters us(r)
(r)
(r−1)
(r−1)
ing wg = wg
+ ηg √ m(r) , where wg
are global
v

1

University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA 2 Adobe Research,
Bangalore, India 3 Adobe Research, San Jose, USA. Correspondence to: Kunjal Panchal <kpanchal@umass.edu>.

+τ

model parameters at round r − 1, and m(r) and v (r) are the
estimates of first and second moments of the gradients at
η
round r. We refer to √ (r)g
as the effective learning rate
v +τ
of a parameter, which is the learning rate ηg scaled by the
inverse of the second moments of the gradients. The second

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

