CHiLS: Zero-Shot Image Classification with Hierarchical Label Sets

Zachary Novack 1 Julian McAuley 1 Zachary Lipton 2 Saurabh Garg 2

Abstract

Wortsman et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2021;
Pham et al., 2021; Cho et al., 2022; Pratt et al., 2022). These
models, e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia
et al., 2021), learn to map images and captions into shared
embedding spaces such that images are close in embedding
space to their corresponding captions but far from randomly
sampled captions. The resulting models can then be used
to assess the relative compatibility of a given image with
an arbitrary set of textual “prompts”. Radford et al. (2021)
observed that by inserting each class name directly within
a natural language prompt, one can then use CLIP embeddings to perform zero-shot image classification with high
success rates (Radford et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021b).

Open vocabulary models (e.g. CLIP) have shown
strong performance on zero-shot classification
through their ability generate embeddings for each
class based on their (natural language) names.
Prior work has focused on improving the accuracy
of these models through prompt engineering or
by incorporating a small amount of labeled downstream data (via finetuning). However, there has
been little focus on improving the richness of the
class names themselves, which can pose issues
when class labels are coarsely-defined and are
uninformative. We propose Classification with
Hierarchical Label Sets (or CHiLS), an alternative strategy for zero-shot classification specifically designed for datasets with implicit semantic hierarchies. CHiLS proceeds in three steps:
(i) for each class, produce a set of subclasses, using either existing label hierarchies or by querying GPT-3; (ii) perform the standard zero-shot
CLIP procedure as though these subclasses were
the labels of interest; (iii) map the predicted subclass back to its parent to produce the final prediction. Across numerous datasets with underlying hierarchical structure, CHiLS leads to improved accuracy in situations both with and without ground-truth hierarchical information. CHiLS
is simple to implement within existing zero-shot
pipelines and requires no additional training cost.
Code is available at: https://github.com/
acmi-lab/CHILS.

Despite the documented successes, the current interest in
open vocabulary models poses a new question: How should
we represent our classes for a given problem in natural
language? As class names are now part of the predictive
pipeline (as opposed to mostly an afterthought in traditional
scenarios) for models like CLIP in the zero-shot setting,
CLIP’s performance is now directly tied to the descriptiveness of the class “prompts” (Santurkar et al., 2022). While
there is a growing body of work on improving the quality of
the prompts into which class names are embedded (Radford
et al., 2021; Pratt et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b;a; Huang
et al., 2022), surprisingly little attention has been paid to
improving the richness of the class names themselves. This
can be particularly crucial in cases where datasets may contain a rich underlying structure but have uninformative class
labels. Consider, for an example, the class “large man-made
outdoor things” in the CIFAR20 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009),
which includes “bridges” and “roads” but also “castles” and
“skyscrapers” (see Section 4 for a more in-depth analysis).
In this paper, we introduce a new method to tackle zeroshot classification with CLIP models for classification tasks
with coarsely-defined class labels. We refer to our method
as Classification with Hierarchical Label Sets (CHiLS for
short). Our method utilizes a hierarchical map to convert
each class into a list of subclasses, performs standard CLIP
zero-shot prediction across the union set of all subclasses,
and finally uses the inverse mapping to convert the subclass
prediction to the requisite superclass. We additionally include a reweighting step wherein we leverage the raw superclass probabilities in order to make our method robust to lessconfident predictions at the superclass and subclass level.

1. Introduction
There has been a recent growth of interest in the capabilities
of pretrained open vocabulary models (Radford et al., 2021;
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California - San Diego 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence
to: Zachary Novack <znovack@ucsd.edu>, Saurabh Garg
<sgarg2@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

