Enforcing Hard Constraints with Soft Barriers:
Safe Reinforcement Learning in Unknown Stochastic Environments

Yixuan Wang 1 Simon Sinong Zhan 2 Ruochen Jiao 1 Zhilu Wang 1 Wanxin Jin 3 Zhuoran Yang 4
Zhaoran Wang 1 Chao Huang 5 Qi Zhu 1

Abstract

2018), robots (Zhao et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2023), and
cyber-physical systems like smart buildings (Wei et al.,
2017; Xu et al., 2021a; 2022), by maximizing a cumulative reward objective as the optimization goal. However,
real-world safety-critical applications, such as autonomous
cars (Liu et al., 2022; 2023b;a), still hesitate to adopt RL
policies due to safety concerns. In particular, when the environment is stochastic and unknown (Zhu et al., 2020; 2021),
these applications often have hard safety chance constraints
that require the probability of the system state not reaching
certain specified unsafe regions above a threshold, e.g., autonomous cars not deviating into adjacent lanes or UAVs not
colliding with trees. It is very challenging to learn a policy
via RL that can meet such hard safety chance constraints.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has long grappled
with the issue of ensuring agent safety in unpredictable and stochastic environments, particularly under hard constraints that require the system state not to reach unsafe regions. Conventional safe RL methods such as those based on the
Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP)
paradigm formulate safety violations in a cost
function and try to constrain the expectation of
cumulative cost under a threshold. However, it is
often difficult to effectively capture and enforce
hard reachability-based safety constraints indirectly with such constraints on safety violation
cost. In this work, we leverage the notion of barrier function to explicitly encode the hard safety
chance constraints, and as the environment is unknown, relax them to our design of generativemodel-based soft barrier functions. Based on
such soft barriers, we propose a novel safe RL approach with bi-level optimization that can jointly
learn the unknown environment and optimize the
control policy, while effectively avoiding the unsafe region with safety probability optimization.
Experiments on a set of examples demonstrate
that our approach can effectively enforce hard
safety chance constraints and significantly outperform CMDP-based baseline methods in system
safe rates measured via simulations.

In the literature, the Constrained Markov Decision Process
(CMDP) (Altman, 1999) is a popular paradigm for addressing RL safety. Common CMDP-based methods encode
safety constraints through a cost function of safety violations, and reduce the policy search space to where the
expectation of cumulative discounted cost is less than a
threshold. Various RL algorithms are proposed to adaptively solve CMDP through the primal-dual approach for
the Lagrangian problem of CMDP. However, it is often hard
for CMDP-based methods to enforce reachability-based
hard safety chance constraints (i.e., the probability bound
of the system state not reaching unsafe regions) with the
indirect constraints on the expectation of cumulative cost.
In particular, while reachability-based safety constraints are
defined on the system state at the time point level (i.e., each
point on the trajectory,), the CMDP constraints only enforce
the cumulative behavior in expectation at the trajectory level.
In other words, the cost penalty on the system visiting the
unsafe regions at a certain time point may be offset by the
low cost at other times. There is a recent CMDP approach
addressing hard safety constraints by using the indicator
function for encoding failure probability (Wagener et al.,
2021), but it requires a safe backup policy for intervention,
which is difficult to achieve in unknown environments. Safe
exploration with hard safety constraints has also been studied in (Wachi et al., 2018; Turchetta et al., 2016; Moldovan
& Abbeel, 2012). However, these works focus on discrete
state and action spaces where the hard safety constraints are

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promising successes in learning complex policies for games (Silver et al.,
1
Northwestern University, USA 2 University of California,
Berkeley, USA 3 University of Pennsylvania, USA 4 Yale University,
USA 5 University of Liverpool, UK. Correspondence to: Yixuan
Wang <yixuanwang2024@u.northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

