Controllable Neural Symbolic Regression

Tommaso Bendinelli * 1 Luca Biggio * 1 2 Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny 3 4

Abstract

2022) and fundamental physics (Schmidt and Lipson, 2009;
Vaddireddy et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022; Cranmer et al.,
2020; Hernandez et al., 2019; Udrescu and Tegmark, 2020).
The goal of SR is to gain a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms of physical systems rather than trying
to fit the data exactly, which can be affected by measurement
errors. SR accomplishes this by converting input numerical
data into compact and low-complexity representations in
the form of symbolic mathematical expressions.
Researchers in natural sciences frequently rely on prior
knowledge and analogies to comprehend novel systems and
predict their behavior. When studying specific physical phenomena, scientists might anticipate particular constants or
symmetries to appear in the mathematical laws describing
the data. For instance, in astrophysics, the gravitational
constant has a significant impact on determining the scale of
interactions between celestial bodies, while in fluid dynamics, the Reynolds number denotes the relative significance
of inertial and viscous forces. Thus, it is crucial to prioritize
expressions that contain such constants while employing
symbolic regression techniques, as they conform better to
the physics laws governing the data. Access to a part of
the underlying ground-truth system equation is also a common assumption made in the system identification literature
where the physical laws are known up to a few parameters
(Brunton et al., 2016; Kaheman et al., 2020). In our work,
we will refer to the assumptions made by the SR practitioner
about the underlying symbolic expression as hypotheses.
These hypotheses may be incomplete or partially incorrect
and can be used in any form to restrict the search space. If a
hypothesis is true, we will name it privileged information.

In symbolic regression, the goal is to find an analytical expression that accurately fits experimental
data with the minimal use of mathematical symbols such as operators, variables, and constants.
However, the combinatorial space of possible expressions can make it challenging for traditional
evolutionary algorithms to find the correct expression in a reasonable amount of time. To address
this issue, Neural Symbolic Regression (NSR) algorithms have been developed that can quickly
identify patterns in the data and generate analytical expressions. However, these methods, in their
current form, lack the capability to incorporate
user-defined prior knowledge, which is often required in natural sciences and engineering fields.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel
neural symbolic regression method, named Neural
Symbolic Regression with Hypothesis (NSRwH)
that enables the explicit incorporation of assumptions about the expected structure of the groundtruth expression into the prediction process. Our
experiments demonstrate that the proposed conditioned deep learning model outperforms its unconditioned counterparts in terms of accuracy while
also providing control over the predicted expression structure.

1. Introduction
Symbolic Regression (SR) is a method that searches over
the space of analytical expressions E to find the best fit
for experimental data by balancing the need to minimize
expression complexity with maximizing accuracy. Unlike
over-parametrized methods such as decision trees and neural networks, SR produces human-readable expressions that
can provide valuable insights in fields such as material science (Wang et al., 2019; Kabliman et al., 2021; Ma et al.,

Related work and background
Genetic Programming. Searching for a satisfactory analytical expression is a hard optimization problem, traditionally tackled using genetic programming (GP) algorithms.
These methods work by i) defining a class of programs,
represented in SR as tree structures where nodes are unary
(e.g. cos, exp) or binary operators (e.g. add, mul) and
leaves are variables and constants (e.g. x1 , 3.14) and ii)
evolving a population of analytical expressions through selection, mutation, and crossovers. Being a greedy search
approach, GP algorithms are prone to falling into local minima, and extensive exploration leads to relatively large run

*

Equal contribution 1 CSEM SA, Alpnach 2 ETH Zürich 3 Meta
AI Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR. Correspondence to: Tommaso Bendinelli <tommaso.bendinelli@csem.ch>.
4

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

