Provable Dynamic Fusion for Low-Quality Multimodal Data

Qingyang Zhang 1 Haitao Wu 1 Changqing Zhang 1 2 Qinghua Hu 1 2
Huazhu Fu 3 Joey Tianyi Zhou 3 4 Xi Peng 5

Abstract

medical diagnosis and treatment (Qiu et al., 2022; Acosta
et al., 2022). Intuitively, fusing information from different
modalities offers the possibility of exploring cross-modal
correlation and gaining better performance. However, conventional fusion methods have largely overlooked the unreliable quality of multimodal data. In real-world settings,
the quality of different modalities usually varies due to unexpected environmental issues. Some recent studies have
shown both empirically and theoretically that multimodal
fusion may fail on low-quality multimodal data, e.g., imbalanced (Wang et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2022), noisy or even corrupted (Huang et al., 2021b) multimodal data. Empirically, it is recognized that multimodal
models cannot always outperform unimodal models especially in a high noise (Scheunders & De Backer, 2007;
Eitel et al., 2015; Silva et al., 2022) or imbalanced modality
quality (Wu et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2022) regime. Theoretically, the previous study proves that the advantages of
multimodal learning may vanish under the setting of limited data volume (Huang et al., 2021a) which implies the
exploitation of cross-modal relationship is not a free lunch.
To fully release the value of each modality and mitigate
the influence of low-quality multimodal data, introducing
dynamic fusion mechanism emerges as a promising way to
obtain reliable predictions. As a concrete example, previous work (Guan et al., 2019) proposes a dynamic weighting mechanism to depict illumination condition of scenes.
By introducing dynamics, they can integrate reliable cues
from multi-spectral data for around-the-clock applications
(e.g., pedestrian detection in security surveillance and autonomous driving). Dynamic fusion has been used in diverse
real-world multimodal applications, including multimodal
classification (Han et al., 2021; Geng et al., 2021; Han et al.,
2022b), regression (Ma et al., 2021), object detection (Li
et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2022b) and
semantic segmentation (Tian et al., 2020). While dynamic
multimodal fusion shows excellent power in practice, theoretical understanding is notably lack in this field with the following fundamental open problem: Can we realize reliable
multimodal fusion in practice with theoretical guarantee?

The inherent challenge of multimodal fusion is to
precisely capture the cross-modal correlation and
flexibly conduct cross-modal interaction. To fully
release the value of each modality and mitigate
the influence of low-quality multimodal data, dynamic multimodal fusion emerges as a promising
learning paradigm. Despite its widespread use,
theoretical justifications in this field are still notably lacking. Can we design a provably robust
multimodal fusion method? This paper provides
theoretical understandings to answer this question
under a most popular multimodal fusion framework from the generalization perspective. We
proceed to reveal that several uncertainty estimation solutions are naturally available to achieve
robust multimodal fusion. Then a novel multimodal fusion framework termed Quality-aware
Multimodal Fusion (QMF) is proposed, which
can improve the performance in terms of classification accuracy and model robustness. Extensive
experimental results on multiple benchmarks can
support our findings.

1. Introduction
Our perception of the world is based on multiple modalities,
e.g., touch, sight, hearing, smell and taste. With the development of sensory technology, we can easily collect diverse
forms of data for analysis. For example, multi-sensor in
autonomous driving and wearable electrical devices (Xiao
et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2022), or various examinations in
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China 2 Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 3 Institute of High Performance Computing
(IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),
Singapore 4 Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 5 College
of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Changqing Zhang <zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn>.

This paper tries to shed light upon the theoretical advantage
and criterion of robust multimodal fusion. Following previous works in multimodal learning theory (Huang et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

