Trapdoor Normalization with Irreversible Ownership Verification

Hanwen Liu 1 Zhenyu Weng 2 Yuesheng Zhu 2 Yadong Mu 1

Abstract

Over recent years, deep model watermarks (Liu et al., 2021a)
serve as a promising way for model ownership protection.
By embedding the specific signature into deep models in the
training phase, ownership can be verified when the signature
is detected from the suspicious model. Pioneer approaches
tried to hide ownership information in the model weights
(Uchida et al., 2017) or prediction results (Adi et al., 2018).
However, these methods are proved to be vulnerable to the
so-called ambiguity attack, which is the central concern of
this research work. The term refers to the scenario in which
the adversary deliberately forges watermarks using adversarial knowledge, thereby making the ownership doubtful since
multiple watermarks can now pass the verification. To defeat
ambiguity attacks, passport-based methods (Fan et al., 2019;
2022; Zhang et al., 2020) build a correlation between model
classification fidelity and the present watermark (i.e., a passport image in this case). Specifically, the original passport
is transformed as a part of model parameters that are trained
alternatively with other model parameters, to deal with verification and deployment scenarios respectively. During
verification, the parameters of the corresponding position
will be replaced by those generated by the original passport.
Once the adversary forges a fake passport, the ownership
cannot be falsely claimed since the fake passport will result
in deteriorated model fidelity due to incorrect parameters.

This paper introduces a deep model watermark with an irreversible ownership verification
scheme: Trapdoor Normalization (TdN), inspired
by the trapdoor function in traditional cryptography. To protect intellectual property within deep
models, the proposed method is able to embed
ownership information into normalization layers during training. We argue and empirically
validate that relevant methods are vulnerable to
ambiguity attacks, where the forged watermarks
can cast ambiguity over the ownership verification. The primary trait that distinguishes this work
from previous ones, is its design of a bidirectional
connection between watermarks and deep models. Thereby, TdN enables an irreversible ownership verification scheme that is difficult for the
adversary to compromise. In this way, the proposed TdN can effectively defeat ambiguity attacks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed method is not only superior to previous state-of-the-art methods in robustness, but
also has better efficiency.

1. Introduction

We argue that current passport-based methods are not robust to ambiguity attacks if the adversary has access to the
original passport, where the adversary can forge a fake passport using the knowledge about the original one to pass the
verification. In the potentially huge parameter space, the adversary can maximize the discrimination between the forged
passport and the original one, while keeping the original
model fidelity. Optimized from the original passport, the
forged passport will look different and generate a set of
alternative parameters to pass the fidelity evaluation. For
ambiguity robustness, we find that it is insufficient to only
build the correlation between the model and the passport,
only from a feed-forward direction, as previous works did
(Fan et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). To tackle it, this paper
proposes a conceptually simple yet effective watermarking
method, namely Trapdoor Normalization (TdN), for deep
model ownership protection. The fundamental spirit of TdN
is inspired by the trapdoor function in traditional cryptography (Diffie & Hellman, 1976), where it is extremely difficult

With the increasing demand for deep learning applications,
deep neural networks are becoming increasingly larger and
more complex (Brown et al., 2020; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022), which spurs
more investment in computing resources and data collection.
On the one hand, deep models are regarded as a form of
valuable assets. On the other hand, when leaked (or stolen)
and under some unexpected malicious use or abuse, deep
models may cause serious privacy and security issues (Krishna et al., 2020; Choquette-Choo et al., 2021; Yu et al.,
2022). Thus an emerging primary concern in its modern
development relates to the need for ownership protection.
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University 2 School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking
University. Correspondence to: Yadong Mu <myd@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

