PromptBoosting: Black-Box Text Classification with Ten Forward Passes

Bairu Hou 1 Joe O’Connor 2 Jacob Andreas 3 Shiyu Chang 1 Yang Zhang 4

Abstract

sequence, called a prompt, to the input to a pre-trained LM,
which will thereby be repurposed for a given downstream
task. Compared to standard fine-tuning, prompt-based learning is much more parameter-efficient.

We describe P ROMPT B OOSTING, a queryefficient procedure for building a text classifier
from a neural language model (LM) without access to the LM’s parameters, gradients, or hidden
representations. This form of “black-box” classifier training has become increasingly important
as the cost of training and inference in large-scale
LMs has grown. But existing black-box LM classifier learning approaches are themselves computationally inefficient, typically specializing LMs
to the target task by searching in a large space
of (discrete or continuous) prompts using zerothorder optimization methods. Instead of directly
optimizing in prompt space, P ROMPT B OOSTING
obtains a small pool of prompts via a gradientfree approach, and then constructs a large pool
of weak learners by pairing these prompts with
different elements of the LM’s output distribution.
These weak learners are then ensembled using
the A DA B OOST algorithm. The entire learning
process requires only a small number of forward
passes per batch and no backward pass. Experiments show that P ROMPT B OOSTING achieves
state-of-the-art performance in multiple blackbox few-shot classification tasks, and matches
or outperforms full fine-tuning in both few-shot
and standard learning paradigms, while training
10x faster than existing black-box methods.Codes
are available at https://github.com/
UCSB-NLP-Chang/PromptBoosting.

Most prompt-based learning methods require searching for
the optimal prompt for the downstream task. When gradient information of the pre-trained LM is available, such
optimization can easily be performed by standard gradientbased methods (Liu et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021; Lester
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022). However,
in many real-world scenarios, the parameters, gradient, or
hidden representations of the LMs are not accessible, a.k.a.
the black-box tuning setting, which makes gradient-based
prompt learning very challenging (Sun et al., 2022b).
To tackle the challenges, the most common existing blackbox solution is to resort to gradient-free optimization techniques to search for the optimal prompt, such as the zerothorder gradient approximation (Sun et al., 2022b; Diao
et al., 2022) and reinforcement learning-guided optimization (Deng et al., 2022). However, these methods would
require a large number of queries to the LMs, which, considering the ever-growing size and computation cost of the
pre-trained LMs, is highly inefficient and could lead to large
approximation errors.
In this paper, we propose P ROMPT B OOSTING, a novel
black-box prompt learning approach which does not rely on
searching an optimal prompt and can thus drastically improve the computational efficiency over the existing methods. Figure 1 illustrates the pipeline of P ROMPT B OOSTING . Specifically, rather than optimizing over the prompts,
P ROMPT B OOSTING constructs a small pool of prompts via
a gradient-free approach. These prompts are sub-optimal
because they are not optimized for any downstream tasks.
Then, P ROMPT B OOSTING creates a large pool of weak
learners by pairing each prompt with different elements of
the LM’s output distribution, which is commonly known as
the verbalizer. Finally, these weak learners are ensembled
using the A DA B OOST algorithm, where the optimization in
each iteration is performed only over the verbalizer, not the
prompt. The entire process only needs to evaluate the LM’s
output with each of the prompts, so it only involves a small
number of forward passes per batch and no backward pass.

1. Introduction
Prompt-based learning has emerged as an effective method
to adapt pre-trained language models (LMs) for downstream
natural language processing (NLP) tasks. A typical promptlearning paradigm involves appending a specially-designed
1

UC Santa Barbara 2 UC Los Angeles 3 MIT CSAIL 4 MITIBM Watson AI Lab.
Correspondence to: Bairu Hou
<bairu@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We evaluated our method on a number of downstream
1

