One-Step Estimator for Permuted Sparse Recovery
Hang Zhang
Amazon
410 Terry Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
hagzhang@amazon.com

Ping Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
pinli@linkedin.com

Abstract

Zhang et al., 2018; Slawski et al., 2020; 2019; Zhang et al.,
2019; Fang and Li, 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Zhang and Li,
2023). In this paper, we consider the canonical model, i.e.,
a linear sensing relation with permuted labels:

This paper considers the unlabeled sparse recovery under multiple measurements, i.e., Y =
⇧\ XB\ + W, where Y 2 Rn⇥m , ⇧\ 2
Rn⇥n , X 2 Rn⇥p , B\ 2 Rp⇥m , W 2 Rn⇥m
represents the observations, missing (or incomplete) correspondence information, sensing matrix, sparse signals, and additive sensing noise,
respectively. Different from the previous works
on multiple measurements (m > 1) which all
focus on the sufficient samples regime, namely,
n > p, we consider a sparse matrix B\ and investigate the insufficient samples regime (i.e., n ⌧ p)
for the first time. To begin with, we establish the
lower bound on the sample number and signalto-noise ratio (SNR) for the correct permutation
recovery. Then, we present a simple yet effective
estimator. Under mild conditions, we show that
our estimator can restore the correct correspondence information with high probability. Numerical experiments are presented to corroborate our
theoretical claims.

Y = ⇧\ XB\ + W,
where Y 2 Rn⇥m is the sensing result, ⇧\ 2 Rn⇥n is
an unknown permutation matrix, X 2 Rn⇥p is the design
(sensing) matrix, B\ 2 Rp⇥m represents the sparse signals
of interest, and W 2 Rn⇥m denotes the additive noise.
Assuming the signal B\ is a sparse signal, to put more
specifically, each column of B\ is k-sparse, we would like
to (i) study the statistical limits of the permutation recovery
under this scenario, e.g., the minimum sample number n
and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR); and (ii) propose a practical
estimator that can efficiently recover the permutation once
the minimum requirements are met. To begin with, we
briefly review the previous works.
Related Works. The study of permuted linear regression
has a long history that can at least date back to DeGroot
and Goel (1976; 1980); Goel (1975); Bai and Hsing (2005).
Recent interest in this area start from Unnikrishnan et al.
(2015). Focusing on the noiseless case W = 0 with single
measurement (m = 1), Unnikrishnan et al. (2015) establish
the necessary condition n 2p for the permutation recovery
if B\ is an arbitrary vector residing within the linear space
Rp . Later, Pananjady et al. (2018) extend the analysis to the
noisy scenario. They showed the minimum SNR should be
at least the order of ⌦(nc ), where c > 0 is some positive
constant. Numerical experiments suggest c is within the
region [4, 5]. Other works such as Hsu et al. (2017); Abid
et al. (2017); Slawski and Ben-David (2019); Tsakiris et al.
(2020); Haghighatshoar and Caire (2018) also focus on this
regime and obtain the same answer. In Emiya et al. (2014),
the setting with a sparse signal B\ is first studied. However,
only empirical investigation is conducted without rigorous
theoretical analysis. In the first work with theoretical analysis (Zhang and Li, 2021), both the statistical limits and
practical estimators with almost optimal performance are
presented for the permutation recovery. Peng et al. (2021)
study the problem from the viewpoint of algebraic geometry.

1. Introduction
In recent years, linear regression with permuted correspondence has received increasing attention due to its wide applications in the field of machine learning, signal processing,
and statistics. Among all these applications, two most prominent examples are (i) linkage record, which merges two
datasets of the same objects into one comprehensive dataset;
and (ii) data de-anonymization, which infers the hidden
labels of private data with the help of public datasets. Apart
from these two applications, other applications include correspondence estimation between pose and estimation in
graphics; time-domain sampling in the presence of clock
jitter; multi-target tracking; unsupervised data alignment,
etc (Pananjady et al., 2018; Slawski and Ben-David, 2019;
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

