Conditional Tree Matching for Inference-Time Adaptation of Tree Prediction
Models
Harshit Varma 1 Abhijeet Awasthi 1 Sunita Sarawagi 1

Abstract

In tasks like semantic parsing, where the predicted y is a
tree, designing a sound conditional scoring function raises
several challenges. The score should be structure-aware, for
example, it should satisfy topological constraints imposed
by the tree, or reward preserving of tree edges. For efficient
training, the scoring function should be differentiable and
computationally efficient for scoring several candidates for
a given x. Further, the match of a tree y with another yc has
to be carefully conditioned on corresponding input text x
and xc respectively. Otherwise, the score may not be useful
for promoting the prediction of the correct y as against
several other incorrect y′ , which may be more similar to
some case yc .

We present CT REE OT, a convergent, differentiable algorithm for matching two trees when each
tree is conditioned on some input. Such conditional tree matching is useful for light-weight,
few-shot adaptation of tree prediction models
without parameter fine-tuning. CT REE OT includes an alignment algorithm that extends the
popular Sinkhorn algorithm for matching tree
nodes while supporting constraints on tree edges.
The algorithm involves alternating between matrix rescaling and message passing updates, and
can be efficiently expressed as GPU tensor operations. The second part of CT REE OT is finegrained relevance-based reweighting of nodes that
makes the match scores useful for prediction tasks.
We demonstrate the usefulness of CT REE OT for
cross-schema adaptation of Text-to-SQL, a popular semantic parsing task. We show that compared
to state-of-the-art methods, we achieve significant
increase in adaptation accuracy.

A standard approach is to assign to each tree y a contextual
embedding conditioned on its input x, and use vector similarity to match them (Awasthi et al., 2023). This approach,
we will show, is too coarse-grained since it collapses an entire tree into a fixed dimensional vector. Many methods have
been proposed for fine-grained node-level alignment-based
differentiable matching of graphs, but they are not designed
for conditional matching. Also, most earlier methods coembed the two graphs compared (Li et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2021), and are not suitable when the cross product of
number of cases and candidate trees is large.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose an efficient, differentiable,
structure-aware, convergent, conditional tree matching
method called CT REE OT. Our method first independently
assigns embeddings to each node for each tree that is contextualized on the input x and other nodes of the tree. We
then align nodes of the two trees using a differentiable,
convergent algorithm by designing an extension of the wellknown set-based Sinkhorn algorithm for trees. Existing algorithms that regularize the Sinkhorn method with graph constraints (Titouan et al., 2019), do not guarantee convergence,
unlike our extension. Further, we show that x-contextual
embeddings alone fail to provide precise conditional scoring. We design a node-level relevance scoring model, that
when weighted with the alignment scores, provides more
discriminating conditional match scores. We provide an implementation of the algorithm in terms of tensor operations
that can be efficiently executed on GPUs. Thus, we provide
a convergent tree matching layer that can be integrated in a
deep network.

Recently, memory-based methods have been established as
a promising approach for inference time adaptation with a
few related examples (cases) in tasks like translation (Khandelwal et al., 2021; 2020), semantic parsing (Pasupat et al.,
2021; Gupta et al., 2021; Awasthi et al., 2023), and gaming (Atzeni et al., 2022). Given an input text x, and a
few related labeled cases C = {(x̃1 , ỹ1 ), . . . , (x̃C , ỹC )},
memory-based methods typically assign a match score
for a proposed prediction y for input x over each case
(x̃c , ỹc ) ∈ C. The match score after suitable pooling over
all cases and the prediction model should score the correct
prediction higher than incorrect candidate predictions.
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT) Bombay. Correspondence to: Harshit
Varma, Sunita Sarawagi <{harshitvarma, sunita}@cse.iitb.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

