ReDi: Efficient Learning-Free Diffusion Inference via Trajectory Retrieval

Kexun Zhang 1 Xianjun Yang 1 William Yang Wang 1 Lei Li 1

Abstract
Diffusion models show promising generation capability for a variety of data. Despite their high
generation quality, the inference for diffusion
models is still time-consuming due to the numerous sampling iterations required. To accelerate
the inference, we propose R E D I, a simple yet
learning-free Retrieval-based Diffusion sampling
framework. From a precomputed knowledge base,
R E D I retrieves a trajectory similar to the partially
generated trajectory at an early stage of generation, skips a large portion of intermediate steps,
and continues sampling from a later step in the
retrieved trajectory. We theoretically prove that
the generation performance of R E D I is guaranteed. Our experiments demonstrate that R E D I
improves the model inference efficiency by 2×
speedup. Furthermore, R E D I is able to generalize
well in zero-shot cross-domain image genreation
such as image stylization. The code and demo for
R E D I is available at https://github.com/
zkx06111/ReDiffusion.

Figure 1. Diffusion Inference (upper) and R E D I Inference (lower).
R E D I reduces the number of function estimations (NFEs) during
inference by skipping several intermediate sampling steps. The
overhead brought by R E D I is minimal compared to the cost it
reduced.

erage to run on an NVIDIA 1080Ti, where improving the
efficiency of diffusion model inference is crucial.
Previous studies on improving the efficiency of diffusion
model inference can be categorized into two types, learningbased ones, and learning-free ones. Learning-based samplers (Salimans & Ho, 2021; Meng et al., 2022; Lam et al.,
2022; Watson et al., 2021; Kim & Ye, 2022) require additional training to reduce the number of sampling steps.
However, their training is expensive, especially for large
diffusion models like Stable Diffusion. In contrast, learningfree samplers do not require training, and are, therefore,
applicable to more scenarios. In this paper, we focus on
learning-free approaches to speed up inference.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models are changing the way people create content. Among them, diffusion models have shown
great capability in a variety of applications including image synthesis (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021),
speech synthesis (Liu et al., 2021a), and point cloud generation (Zhou et al., 2021). Latent diffusion models (Rombach
et al., 2022) such as Stable Diffusion are able to generate
high-quality images given text prompts. However, the basic
sampler for diffusion models proposed by Ho et al. (2020)
requires a large number of function estimations (NFEs) during inference, making the generation process rather slow.
For example, the basic sampler takes 336 seconds on av-

Existing efficient learning-free samplers for diffusion (Liu
et al., 2021b; Lu et al., 2022a;b; Zhang & Chen, 2022; Karras et al., 2022) all try to find a more accurate numerical
solver for the diffusion ODE (Song et al., 2021), but they do
not utilize its sensitivity. The sensitivity of ODEs suggests
that under certain conditions, a small perturbation in the
initial value does not change the solution too much (Khalil,
2002). This observation motivates the assumption that a previously generated trajectory - if close enough to the current
trajectory - can serve as an estimate for it.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Kexun Zhang
<kexun@ucsb.edu>.

In this paper, we propose R E D I, a learning-free sampling
framework based on trajectory retrieval. Figure 1 illustrates
the original full diffusion inference and the R E D I inference.
Given a pre-trained diffusion model, R E D I does not modify
its weights or train new modules. Instead, we fix the model

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

